
Developing a trade plan and sticking to it are the two main ingredients of trading
discipline. If I were to name the one defining characteristic of successful traders, it wouldn’t
be technical analysis skill, gut instinct, or aggressiveness — though they’re all important.
Nope, it would be trading discipline. Traders who follow a disciplined approach are the
ones who survive year after year and market cycle after market cycle. They can even be
wrong more often than right and still make money because they follow a disciplined
approach. Yet establishing and maintaining trading discipline is an elusive goal for many
traders.

Taking the emotion out of trading
If the key to successful trading is a disciplined approach — developing a trading plan and sticking
to it — why is it so hard for many traders to practice trading discipline? The answer is complex,
but it usually boils down to a simple case of human emotions getting the better of them.
I may be dating myself here a bit, but I remember an episode of the TV sitcom M*A*S*H, in which
Hawkeye Pierce (Alan Alda) observes that the three basic human emotions are greed, fear, and
greed. Certainly, that’s the case in financial market trading. When it comes to trading in any
market, don’t underestimate the power of emotions to distract and disrupt.

So exactly how do you take the emotion out of trading? The simple answer is: You can’t. As
long as your heart is pumping and your synapses are firing, emotions are going to be flowing.
And truth be told, the emotional highs of trading are one of the reasons people are drawn to it
in the first place. There’s no rush quite like putting on a successful trade and taking some
money out of the market. So just accept that you’re going to be experiencing some pretty
intense emotions when you’re trading.
The longer answer is that because you can’t block out the emotions, the best you can hope to
achieve is an understanding of where the emotions are coming from, recognizing them when they
hit, and limiting their impact on your trading. It’s a lot easier said than done, but keep in mind
some of the following, and you may find you’re better able to keep your emotions in check:
Focus on the pips and not the dollars and cents. Don’t be distracted by the exact amount
of money won or lost in a trade. Instead, focus on where prices are and how they’re
behaving. The market has no idea what your trade size is and how much you’re making or
losing, but it does know where the current price is.
It’s not about being right or wrong; it’s about making money. At the end of the day, the
market doesn’t care if you were right or wrong, and neither should you. The only true
measure of trading success is dollars and cents.

You’re going to lose in a fair number of trades. No trader is right 100 percent of the
time. Taking losses is as much a part of the routine as taking profits. You can still be
successful over time with a solid risk-management plan.
The market is not out to get you. The market is going to do what it does whether you’re
involved in it or not, so don’t take your trading results personally. Interpret them
professionally, just as you would the results of any other business venture.

Managing your expectations
Currency trading is a relatively new opportunity for individual traders, and a lot of people have no
frame of reference about what to expect when it comes to price movements. A frequent question
asked by newcomers is “How much can I expect to make on this trade?” Whoa, Nelly. Talk about
a loaded question.

Financial markets are not bank ATMs, and the forex market is certainly no exception. There
are a lot of people speculating on which way various currency pairs are going to move; some
of those people are going to be right, and some are going to be wrong. Some may also be
right for a moment but suddenly end up on the wrong side of equation.
Before you get involved with trading currencies, you need to have a healthy sense of what to
expect when it comes to trading outcomes. Many people choose to focus only on the upside
prospects of currency trading, like the view expressed in that loaded question earlier. But losses
are part of trading, too. Even the biggest and best traders have losing trades on a regular basis.

One of the keys to establishing trading discipline is to first accept that losses are inevitable.
The second step is to dedicate yourself to keeping those losses as small as possible. Most
experienced traders will tell you the hardest part of trading is keeping the money you’ve
made and not giving it back to the market.

Imagining realistic profit-and-loss scenarios
The trading style that you decide to pursue will dictate the relative size of profits and losses that
you can expect to experience. If you’re trading on a short- to medium-term basis, look at average
daily trading ranges to get a good idea of what to expect.
The average daily trading range is a mathematical average of each day’s trading range (high to
low) over a specified period. Keep in mind that this figure is just a statistical average — there
will be days with larger ranges and days with narrower ranges. Also, average daily ranges will
vary significantly by currency pair.

But the average daily trading range covers a full 24-hour trading session and tends to overstate
what short- and medium-term traders can expect from intraday trading ranges. Generally speaking,
you’re better off anticipating more modest price movements of 30 to 80 pips rather than aiming for
the home-run ball.
And no matter what any infomercial tells you, you’re not going to retire based on any single trade.
The key is to hit singles and stay in the game.

Balancing risk versus reward
Trading is all about taking on risk to generate profits. So one question is frequently posed: “How
much should I risk in any given trade?” There is no easy answer to that question. Some trading
books advise people to use a risk/reward ratio, like 2:1, meaning that if you risk $100 on a trade,
you should aim to make $200 to justify the risk. Others counsel to never risk more than a fixed
percentage of your trading account on any single trade. It’s all a bit formulaic, if you ask me, and it
also has no relation to the reality of the markets.

A better way to think about risk and reward is to look at each trade opportunity on its own
and assess the outcomes based on technical analysis. This approach has the virtue of being as
dynamic as the market, allowing you to exploit trade opportunities according to prevailing
market conditions.
Another factor to consider in balancing risk and reward is the use of leverage (see Chapter 13). In
online currency trading, generous leverage ratios of 50:1 or 100:1 are typically available. The
higher the leverage ratio, the larger position you can trade based on your margin. But leverage is a
double-edged sword because it amplifies profits and losses.

The key here is to limit your overall leverage utilization so you’re not putting all your eggs
in one basket. If you open the largest position available based on your margin, you’ll have
very little cushion left in case of adverse price movements. It may seem sexy to trade as large
a position as possible, but whoever said prudent, risk-aware trading was supposed to be
sexy? Keep your feet on the ground, and don’t lose your head in the clouds of leverage.

Keeping your ammunition dry
The margin you’re required to post with your forex broker is the basis for all your trading. The
amount of margin you put up will determine how large a position you can hold and for how long
(in pips) if the market moves against you. Unless you just won the lottery, your margin collateral is
a precious, finite resource, so you have to use it sparingly.

If Hamlet were alive today and trading currencies, his famous soliloquy might begin “To trade or
not to trade?” One of the biggest mistakes traders make is known as overtrading. Overtrading
typically refers to trading too often in the market or trading too many positions at once. Both forms
suggest a lack of discipline, and sound more like throwing darts at a board and hoping something
sticks.
Keeping your ammunition dry refers to staying out of the market, watching and waiting, and
picking your trades more selectively.

Opportunity lost or opportunity cost?
One of the more popular market aphorisms is “You’ve got to be in it to win it.” Though it’s
obviously a truism, I would counter that trading discretion is the better part of trading valor.
Holding open positions not only exposes you to market risk, but can also cost you market
opportunities.
After you enter a position, your available margin is reduced, which in turn lowers the amount of
new positions you can establish. If you’re routinely involved in the market because you don’t want
to miss out on the next big move, you actually run the risk of missing out on the next big move
because you may not have enough available margin to support a new position for the big move.

Don’t be afraid about missing out on some trade opportunities. No one ever catches all the
moves. Instead, focus on your market analysis and pinpoint the next well-defined trading
opportunity. (I look at spotting trade setups in Chapter 12.)

Thinking clearly while you still can
Another virtue of trading less frequently is that your market outlook is not skewed by any of the
emotional entanglements that come with open positions. If you ask a trader who’s long EUR/USD
what he thinks of EUR/USD, surprise, surprise — he’s going to tell you he thinks it’s going up.
That’s called talking your book.
But being out of the market, or being square, allows you to step back and analyze market
developments with a clear perspective. That’s when you can spot opportunities more clearly and
develop an effective trade strategy to exploit them. All too soon, you’ll be on to your next trade,
and the emotional roller coaster will start all over again.

Chapter 11

Cutting the Fog with Technical Analysis
In This Chapter
Understanding what technical analysis is and isn’t
Identifying support and resistance
Using momentum the right way
Spotting important chart patterns
Saying that there is a lot of information to absorb in the forex market is an understatement of major
proportions. To help make sense of all the information, a lot of which can be just noise — the fog
of the market — professional traders focus on the one piece of information that is not subject to
dispute or opinion: prices.
The field of technical analysis is huge, and there’s no way I can cover it in its entirety in this
single chapter. Literally hundreds of books have been written on technical analysis in general, as
well as on specific approaches (such as the Elliott wave principle or candlestick analysis). In
Chapter 20, I suggest several of my favorite books on technical analysis as additional reading. I
strongly urge you to supplement the material in this chapter with further in-depth study.
In this chapter, I give you as rich a slice of the technical cake as possible, covering the main
elements of technical analysis as they apply to the forex market. What’s more, I approach it from a
trader’s perspective, focusing on the technical tools and approaches that I’ve found most useful in
my own currency trading, as well as what it means for trade strategies and spotting trade setups.
That approach may get me in trouble with some technical purists out there, but, hey, that’s what
makes a market — a difference of opinion.

The Philosophy of Technical Analysis
Calling technical analysis a philosophy is probably a bit of a stretch, but plenty of technical
traders are almost cultish in their devotion to it. More than anything, technical analysis is a
subjective approach aimed at bringing a sense of order to seemingly random price movements.
Traders use technical analysis to identify trade opportunities, refine their trading strategies (entry
and exit levels), and manage their market risk.

Personally, I like to use fundamentals to guide my overall view of market direction, and
refine that with technical analysis to identify entry and exit points for specific trades. But not
infrequently, technical analysis will suggest a trade opportunity all by itself, even though it
may be counter to my fundamental outlook (see the Tips in the “Candlestick patterns” section
later in this chapter for more).

What is technical analysis?
In a nutshell, technical analysis is the study of historical price movements to predict future price
movements. You’re probably familiar with the standard disclaimer that “past performance is no
guarantee of future results,” a statement that tends to call into question the validity of using past
price data to forecast future price developments.
But technical analysis is able to get beyond those concerns based on two main considerations:
Markets are made up of humans. Human psychology and investing behavior haven’t
changed very much over the years, whether it’s the Dutch tulip frenzy of the 1600s, the
dot-com bubble of the 1990s, or the real estate bubbles of the last decade. The emotional
forces that dictate buying and selling decisions are reflected in historical price patterns
that appear over and over in all manner of financial markets. As long as humans are still
making the decisions (or are writing the programs for the computers that make the
decisions), you’ll be able to look at past behavior as a guide to what is likely to happen in
the future.
Technical analysis is widely practiced in all markets. This is the self-fulfilling-prophecy
aspect of technical analysis. The greater the number of traders who focus on technical
analysis, the more likely their actions will reflect the interpretations of technical analysis,
reinforcing the impact of that analysis. Believe me when I say that professional currency
traders who do not practice some form of technical analysis are a rarity.

What technical analysis is not
Despite its name, technical analysis is not some engineer-designed, surefire, guaranteed
method of market analysis. There are no such methods, period. Technical analysis involves a
high degree of subjectivity where individual interpretations can vary significantly. Two
technical traders looking at the same currency chart could reach opposite conclusions about
the course of future prices. What’s more, they could both be right, depending on their timing
and specific strategies.
Technical analysis requires a great deal of patience, practice, and experimentation based on

individual preferences and circumstances. Short-term traders focusing on the next few minutes and
hours find certain tools and approaches more helpful than long-term traders do. Longer-term
traders looking at multiday or multiweek trades use other tools and indicators entirely. Certain
technical approaches work better in some currency pairs than others. Overall market conditions of
volatility and liquidity also influence which technical approach works best. The key is to develop
your own approach based on your particular circumstances — time frame, risk appetite, discipline
(see Chapter 10 for more on this).

No single, magical technical indicator or approach always works. Be careful about
becoming too reliant on any single indicator. A particular indicator may yield excellent
signals in certain market environments but fail when market conditions begin to change. I
suggest becoming familiar with several different approaches and indicators, using them to
cross-check each other depending on market conditions. (I look at this idea in the “Waiting
for confirmation” section, later in this chapter.)

Forms of technical analysis
Technical analysis can be broken down into three main approaches:
Chart analysis: Visual inspection of price charts to identify price trends, ranges, support,
and resistance levels. (I look at chart analysis in “The Art of Technical Analysis,” later in
this chapter.)
Pattern recognition: Identifies chart formations or patterns that provide specific
predictive signals, such as a reversal or a breakout. (I show you some of the most common
traditional chart patterns and candlestick formations in the “Recognizing chart formations”
section, later in this chapter.)
Momentum and trend analysis: Looks at the rate of change of prices for indications of
market sentiment regarding the price movement. Trend indicators seek to determine the
presence of a trend and its strength. (I look at these indicators in “The Science of
Technical Analysis,” later in this chapter.)

Finding support and resistance
One of the basic building blocks of technical analysis is the concept of support and resistance:
Support: A price level where buying interest overwhelms selling interest, causing a price
decline to stop, bottom out, or pause. Think of support as a floor for prices in a
downmove.
Resistance: The opposite of support. Resistance is where selling interest materializes

and slows or overpowers buying interest, causing prices to peak, stall, or pause in a price
rally. Think of resistance as the ceiling in a price advance.
Support and resistance levels are identified based on prior price action, such as highs and lows
and short-term (minutes to hours) consolidation or congestion zones (where prices get all stopped
up and can’t move one way or the other for a period of time). Support and resistance can also be
determined by drawing trend lines. Still other forms of support and resistance come from
Fibonacci retracement levels, Ichimoku lines, and moving averages, which I save for later in this
chapter. Figure 11-1 shows some basic support and resistance levels from sloping and horizontal
trend lines drawn off key highs and lows.

Figure 11-1:
Trend lines
drawn off key
highs and
lows can be
used to
identify
important
support and
resistance
levels as well
as illuminating
unfolding
pattern
formations.

One of the key concepts of support and resistance is that after a support or resistance level
is broken, it shifts direction. In other words, after a support level is broken in a move to the
downside, it becomes resistance in subsequent price attempts to rally. After a resistance
level is broken to the upside, it may later act as support for further price gains.

Not all support and resistance are created equal

Support and resistance come in all shapes and sizes. Some support or resistance levels are
stronger or weaker than others, and technical analysts typically refer to support as either minor or
major. But those terms are subjective and difficult to quantify with any precision.

The best way to get a handle on the relative strength of a support or resistance level is to
view it in the context of time and price significance.
The longer the time frame of the price point, the greater its significance. A weekly
high/low is more important than a daily high/low, which is more important than an hourly
high/low, and so on, down the time scale.
Trend-line strength is also a function of time frame and durability. A trend line based
on daily charts tends to be stronger than a trend line based on hourly prices. A trend line
that dates back six months has greater significance than one that’s only a week or two old.
Also, the more often a trend line is tested (meaning, prices touch the trend line but do not
break through it, or break through it only very briefly and by small amounts), the more
valid it is.
The strength of support or resistance levels during a retracement depends on the
strength of the support or resistance during the prior directional move. A retracement
refers to a price movement in the opposite direction of a previous price advance or
decline. The distance that prices reverse, or retrace, is called a retracement. For
example, trend lines that were support in a downmove will act as resistance in any
retracement higher. The strength of the trend-line support on the way down, such as how
many attempts were needed to break below it, will give a good indication of its likely
strength as resistance in the retracement.

Support and resistance are made to be broken
I don’t want to leave you with the impression that support and resistance levels are immutable
forces in the market that are never challenged or broken. Just the opposite: Forex markets spend
much of the time testing support or resistance levels, looking for the weak side in which to push
prices.
Different trading styles focus on different types of support and resistance:
Tests and breaks of short-term support or resistance levels are the meat and
potatoes of intra-day trading. Short-term traders focus on the nearest support or
resistance levels (for example, 5- or 15-minute or hourly highs/lows and trend lines) as
guides to the immediate direction of prices.
Tests and breaks of longer-term support and resistance levels are the fuel that fires
longer-term trends or defines medium-term ranges. Medium- to longer-term traders

typically focus on longer-term support or resistance levels, such as daily/weekly
highs/lows, and trend lines drawn off them, to guide their trading.

One of the keys to assessing the significance of a break of support or resistance levels is the
strength of follow-through that occurs after the level is broken. Follow-through is the price
action that takes place after technical support or resistance is broken. After resistance is
broken, for example, prices should accelerate higher as shorts who sold in front of the
resistance buy back their positions and new buyers enter the market, because resistance has
been surpassed. The amount of follow-through buying or selling that materializes, or fails to
materialize, after the break of a technical support or resistance level is an important
indication of the strength of the underlying move.

Waiting for confirmation
I was tempted to title this section “Looking for confirmation,” but I thought that sounded too
proactive in the sense that if you go looking for something on a chart, odds are you can find it and
rationalize it as confirmation. The more disciplined approach involves waiting for confirmation,
letting market prices provide you with unambiguous signs of a change in direction or break of a
chart pattern.
Confirmation refers to price movements that verify, or confirm, a technical observation that
suggests a particular outcome. For example, certain chart patterns are useful predictors of a
potential reversal in price direction. But note that the starting point in this case is that prices are
moving in a trend or steady direction. Blindly following a pattern that suggests that a trend is about
to end is very risky. After all, the trend is your friend, so why would you take the risk of going
against the trend?
