
P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

247

where in the business cycle Switzerland finds itself. Fast growth often is
perceived as inflationary while low (or negative) growth indicates a recessionary or weak economy.
Balance of Payments Balance of payments is the collective term for
the accounts of Swiss transactions with the rest of the world. The current
account is the balance of trade plus services portion. Balance of payments
is an important indicator for Swiss traders as Switzerland has always kept
a strong current account balance. Any changes to the current account, positive or negative, could see substantial flows.
Production Index (Industrial Production) The production index
is a quarterly measure of the change in the volume of industrial production
(or physical output by producers).
Retail Sales Switzerland’s retail sales report is released on a monthly
basis 40 days after the reference month. The data is an important indicator
of consumer spending habits and is not seasonally adjusted.

CURRENCY PROFILE: JAPANESE
YEN (JPY)
Broad Economic Overview
Japan is the third largest economy in the world with GDP valued at over
US$4.2 trillion in 2006 (behind the United States and the entire Eurozone
or EMU). It is the second largest single economy. The country is also one
of the world’s largest exporters and is responsible for over $500 billion in
exports per year. Manufacturing and exports of products such as electronics and cars are the signature drivers of the economy, accounting for nearly
20 percent of GDP. This has resulted in a consistent trade surplus, which
creates an inherent demand for the Japanese yen, despite severe structural
deficiencies. Aside from being an exporter, Japan is also a large importer
of raw materials for the production of goods. The primary trade partners
for Japan in terms of both imports and exports are the United States and
China. China’s inexpensive goods have helped the country capture a larger
share of Japan’s import market. It is becoming an increasingly important
trade partner, and has even surpassed the United States to become Japan’s
largest source of imports in 2003.
Leading Export Markets
1. United States
2. China

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

248

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

3. South Korea
4. Taiwan
5. Hong Kong

Leading Import Sources
1. China
2. United States
3. South Korea
4. Australia
5. Taiwan

Japan’s Bubble Burst
Understanding the Japanese economy first involves understanding what
led to the Japanese bubble and its subsequent burst.
In the 1980s, Japan’s financial market was one of the most attractive
markets for international investors seeking investment opportunities in
Asia. It had the most developed capital markets in the region, and its banking system was considered to be one of the strongest in the world. At the
time, the country was experiencing above-trend economic growth and near
zero inflation. This resulted in rapid growth expectations, boosted asset
prices, and rapid credit expansion, leading to the development of an asset bubble. Between 1990 and 1997, the asset bubble collapsed, inducing a
US$10 trillion fall in asset prices, with the fall in real estate prices accounting for nearly 65 percent of the total decline, which is worth two years of
national output. This fall in asset prices sparked a banking crisis in Japan.
It began in the early 1990s and then developed into a full-blown systemic
crisis in 1997 following the failure of a number of high-profile financial institutions. Many of these banks and financial institutions had extended loans
to the builders and real estate developers at the height of the asset bubble
in the 1980s, with the land as the collateral. A number of these developers
defaulted after the asset bubble collapse, leaving the country’s banks saddled with bad debt and collateral worth sometimes 60 to 80 percent less
than when the loans were taken out. Due to the large size of these banking institutions and their role in corporate funding, the crisis had profound
effects on both the Japanese economy and the global economy. Enormous
bad debts, falling stock prices, and a collapsing real estate sector have crippled the Japanese economy for almost two decades.
In addition to the banking crisis, Japan also has the highest debt level
of all of the industrialized countries, at over 140 percent of GDP. As a
result of the country’s deteriorating fiscal position and rising public debt,
the country experienced over 10 years of stagnation. With this high debt

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

249

burden, Japan still stands at risk of a liquidity crisis. The banking sector
has become highly dependent on a government bailout. As a result, the
Japanese yen is very sensitive to political developments and to any words
in speeches by government officials that may indicate potential changes
in monetary and fiscal policy, attempted bailout proposals, and any other
rumors.

Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Bank
of Japan
The Bank of Japan (BOJ) is the key monetary policy making body in Japan.
In 1998, the Japanese government passed laws giving the BOJ operational
independence from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and complete control
over monetary policy. However, despite the government’s attempts to decentralize decision making, the MOF still remains in charge of foreign exchange policy. The BOJ is responsible for executing all official Japanese
foreign exchange transactions at the direction of the MOF. The Bank of
Japan’s Policy Board consists of the BOJ governor, two deputy governors, and six other members. Monetary policy meetings are held twice a
month with briefings and press releases provided immediately. The BOJ
also publishes a Monthly Report issued by the Policy Board and a Monthly
Economic Report. These reports are important to watch for changes in
BOJ sentiment and signals of new monetary or fiscal policy measures,
as the government is constantly trying to develop initiatives to stimulate
growth.
The MOF and the BOJ are very important institutions that both have
the ability to impact currency movements. Since the MOF is the director of
foreign exchange interventions, it is important to watch and keep abreast
of the comments made from MOF officials. Being an export-driven economy, the government tends to favor a weaker Japanese yen. Therefore, if
the Japanese yen appreciates significantly or too rapidly against the dollar, members of the BOJ and MOF will become increasingly vocal about
their concerns or disapproval in regard to the current level or movements
in the Japanese yen. These comments do tend to be market movers, but
it is important to note that if government officials flood the market with
comments and no action, the market would start to become immune to
these comments. However, the MOF and BOJ do have a lengthy history
of interventions in the currency markets to actively manipulate the JPY
in Japan’s best interests; therefore, their comments cannot be completely
disregarded. The most popular tool that the BOJ uses to control monetary
policy is open market operations.
Open Market Operations These activities are focused on controlling
the uncollateralized overnight call rate. The Bank of Japan has maintained

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

250

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

a zero interest rate policy for some time now, which means that the Bank
of Japan cannot further decrease this rate to stimulate growth, consumption, or liquidity. Therefore in order to maintain zero interest rates, the
BOJ has to manipulate liquidity through open market operations, targeting zero interest on the overnight call rate. It manipulates liquidity by the
outright buying or selling of bills, repos, or Japanese government bonds.
A repo transaction involves a cash taker (borrower) selling securities to a
cash provider (lender), while agreeing to repurchase securities of the same
type and quantity at a later date. This structure is similar to a secured loan,
whereby the cash taker must pay the cash provider interest. These repo
transactions tend to have very short maturities ranging from one day to a
few weeks.
In terms of fiscal policy, the Bank of Japan continues to consider a
number of methods to deal with its nonperforming loans. This includes inflation targeting, nationalizing a portion of private banks, and repackaging
the banks’ bad debt and selling it at a discount. No policies have been decided upon, but the government is aggressively considering all of these and
other alternatives.

Important Characteristics of the Japanese Yen
r Proxy for Asian strength/weakness.
Japan tends to be seen as a proxy for broad Asian strength because
the country has the largest GDP in Asia. With the most developed capital markets, Japan was once the primary destination for all investors
who wanted access into the region. Japan also conducts a significant
amount of trade with its Asian partners. As a result, economic problems or political instability in Japan tend to spill over into the other
Asian countries. However, this spillover is not one-sided. Economic or
political problems in other Asian economies can also have dramatic impacts on the Japanese economy and hence movements in the Japanese
yen. For example, North Korean political instability poses a great risk
to Japan and the Japanese yen since of the G-7 nations Japan has the
strongest ties to North Korea.
r Bank of Japan intervention practices.
The BOJ and MOF are very active participants in the FX markets.
That is, they have a lengthy history of entering the FX markets if they
are dissatisfied with the current JPY level. As Japan is a very political
economy, with close ties between government officials and principals
of large private institutions, the MOF has a very narrow segment in
mind when it decides to depreciate a strong JPY. Since the BOJ is
such an active participant, it is very much in tune with the market’s
movements and other participants. Periodically the BOJ receives

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

251

information on large hedge fund positions from banks and is likely
to intervene when speculators are on the other side of the market,
allowing them to get the most bang for the buck. There are typically
three main factors behind BOJ and MOF intervention:
Amount of appreciation/depreciation in JPY. Intervention has
historically occurred when the yen moves by seven or more yen
in less than six weeks. Using the USD/JPY as a barometer, 7 yen
would be equivalent to 700 pips, which would represent a move
from 117.00 to 125.00. (See Figure 12.5.)
2. Current USD/JPY rate. Historically, only 11 percent of all BOJ
interventions to counter a strong JPY have occurred above the
115 level.
3. Speculative positions. In order to maximize the impact of intervention, the BOJ and MOF will intervene when market participants hold positions in the opposite direction. Traders can find a
gauge for the positions of market participants by viewing the International Monetary Market (IMM) positions from the CFTC web
site at www.cftc.gov.
1.

r JPY movements are sensitive to time.
JPY crosses can become very active toward the end of the
Japanese fiscal year (March 31), as exporters repatriate their dollardenominated assets. This is particularly important for Japanese banks
because they need to rebuild their balance sheets to meet Financial Services Authority (FSA) guidelines, which require the banks to

FIGURE 12.5 USD/JPY Five-Year Chart
(Source: www.eSignal.com)

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

252

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

mark to market their security holdings. In anticipation of the need
for repatriation-related purchases of the Japanese yen, speculators frequently also bid the yen higher in an attempt to take advantage of this
increased inflow. As a result, following fiscal year-end, the Japanese
yen tends to have a bias toward depreciation as speculators close their
positions.
Aside from the fiscal year-end, time is also a factor on a day-to-day
basis. Unlike traders in London or New York who typically have lunch
at their trading desk, Japanese traders tend to take hourlong lunches
between 10 and 11 p.m. EST, leaving only a junior trader in the office.
Therefore, the Japanese lunchtime can be volatile, as the market gets
very illiquid. Aside from that time frame, the JPY tends to move in a
fairly orderly way during Japanese and London hours, unless breaking
announcements or government official comments are made or surprising economic data is released. During U.S. hours, however, the JPY
tends to have higher volatility, as U.S. traders are actively taking both
USD and JPY positions.
r Banking stocks are widely watched.
Since the crux of Japan’s economic crisis stems from the nonperforming loan (NPL) problems of the Japanese banks, banking
sector stocks are closely watched by FX market participants. Any
threat of default by these banks, disappointing earnings, or further
reports of significant NPLs can indicate even deeper problems for the
economy. Therefore, bank stock movements can lead movements in
the Japanese yen.
r Carry trade effects.
The popularity of carry trades has increased in recent years, as
investors are actively seeking high-yielding assets. With the Japanese
yen having the lowest interest rate of all industrialized countries, it is
the primary currency sold or borrowed in carry trades. The most popular carry trade currencies included GBP/JPY, AUD/JPY, NZD/JPY, and
even USD/JPY. Carry traders would go short the Japanese yen against
the higher-yielding currencies. Therefore reversal of carry trades as
a result of spread narrowing would actually be beneficial for the
Japanese yen, as the reversal process would involve purchasing the
yen against the other currencies.

Important Economic Indicators for Japan
All of the following economic indicators are important for Japan. However,
since Japan is a manufacturing-oriented economy, it is important to pay
particular attention to numbers from the manufacturing sector.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

253

Gross Domestic Product Gross domestic product is a broad measure
of the total production and consumption of goods and services measured
over quarterly and yearly periods in Japan. GDP is measured by adding
total expenditures by households, businesses, government, and net foreign
purchases. The GDP price deflator is used to convert output measured at
current prices into constant-dollar GDP. Preliminary reports are the most
significant for FX market participants.
Tankan Survey The Tankan is a short-term economic survey of
Japanese enterprises published four times a year. The survey includes
more than 9,000 enterprises, which are divided into four major groups:
large, small, and medium-sized as well as principal enterprises. The survey
gives an overall impression of the business climate in Japan and is widely
watched and anticipated by foreign exchange market participants.
Balance of Payments Balance of payments information gives investors insight into Japan’s international economic transactions that include goods, services, investment income, and capital flows. The current
account side of BOJ is most often used as a good gauge of international
trade. Figures are released both monthly and semiannually.
Employment Employment figures are reported on a monthly basis by
the Management and Coordination Agency of Japan. The employment release is a measure of the number of jobs and unemployment rate for the
country as a whole. The data is obtained through a statistical survey of the
current labor force. This release is a closely watched economic indicator
because of its timeliness and its importance as a leading indicator of economic activity.
Industrial Production The industrial production (IP) index measures
trends in the output of Japanese manufacturing, mining, and utilities
companies. Output refers to the total quantity of items produced. The
index covers the production of goods for domestic sales in Japan and for
export. It excludes production in the agriculture, construction, transportation, communication, trade, finance, and service industries; government
output; and imports. The IP index is then developed by weighting each
component according to its relative importance during the base period.
Investors feel IP and inventory accumulation have strong correlations
with total output and can give good insight into the current state of the
economy.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

254

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

CURRENCY PROFILE: AUSTRALIAN
DOLLAR (AUD)
Broad Economic Overview
Australia is the fifth largest country in terms of GDP in the Asia-Pacific region. Its gross domestic product was approximately US$674 billion in 2006.
Although its economy is relatively small, on a per capita basis it is comparable to many industrialized Western European countries. Australia has a
service-oriented economy with close to 79 percent of GDP coming from
industries such as finance, property, and business services. However, the
country has a trade deficit, with manufacturing dominating the country’s
exporting activities. Rural and mineral exports account for over 60 percent
of all manufacturing exports. As a result, the economy is highly sensitive
to changes in commodity prices. The breakdowns of Australia’s most important trading partners are important because downturns or rapid growth
in Australia’s largest trade partners will impact demand for the country’s
imports and exports.
Largest Export Markets
1. Japan
2. European Union
3. China
4. ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations)
5. Republic of Korea
6. United States

Largest Import Sources
1. European Union
2. ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations)
3. China
4. United States

Japan and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) are
the leading importers of Australian goods. The ASEAN includes Brunei,
Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, and Vietnam. Therefore, it may be logical to assume that the
Australian economy is highly sensitive to the performance of the countries
in the Asian-Pacific region. However, during the Asian crisis, Australia grew

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

255

at an average rate of 4.7 percent per year from 1997 to 1999 despite the
fact that Asia is the central destination for the bulk of Australian exports.
Australia was able to maintain strength as a result of the country’s sound
foundation of strong domestic consumption. As a result, the economy has
been able to withstand past crises. Consumption has been on a steady rise
since the 1980s. Therefore consumer consumption is an important indicator to watch during times of global economic slowdown for signals of the
slowdown’s spillover effects onto Australia’s domestic consumption.

Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—Reserve
Bank of Australia
The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) is the central bank of Australia. The
monetary policy committee within the central bank consists of the governor (chairman), the deputy governor (vice chairman), secretary to the
treasurer, and six independent members appointed by the government.
Changes on monetary policy are based on consensus within the committee.
Central Bank’s Goals The RBA’s charter states that the mandate
of the Reserve Bank Board is to focus monetary and banking policy on
ensuring:

r The stability of the currency of Australia.
r The maintenance of full employment in Australia.
r The economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia.
In order to achieve these objectives, the government has set an informal consumer price inflation target of 2 to 3 percent per year. The RBA
believes that the key to long-term sustainable growth in the economy is to
control inflation, which would preserve the value of money. In addition,
an inflation target provides a discipline for monetary policy making and
guidelines for private sector inflation expectations. This also increases the
transparency of the bank’s activities. Should inflation or inflation expectations exceed the 2 to 3 percent target, traders should know that it would
raise red flags at the RBA and prompt the central bank to favor a tighter
monetary policy—in other words, further rate hikes.
Monetary policy decisions involve setting the interest rate on overnight
loans in the money market. Other interest rates in the economy are influenced by this interest rate to varying degrees, so that the behavior of borrowers and lenders in the financial markets is affected by monetary policy
(though not only by monetary policy). Through these channels, monetary
policy affects the economy in pursuit of the goals outlined earlier.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

256

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

Cash Rate This is the RBA’s target rate for open market operations.
The cash rate is the rate charged on overnight loans between financial intermediaries. As a result, the cash rate should have a close relationship
with the prevailing money market interest rates. Changes in monetary policy directly impact the interest rate structure of the financial system, and
also impact sentiment in a currency. The chart in Figure 12.6 graphs the
AUD/USD against the interest rate differential between Australia and the
United States. Broadly speaking, there is a clear positive correlation between the interest rate differential and the movement in the currency. That
is, between 1990 and 1994 Australia aggressively cut interest rates from
a high of 17 percent to 4.75 percent, leading to a sharp decline in the
AUD/USD. A different scenario was seen between 2000 and 2004. At the
time, Australia was raising interest rates while the United States was cutting interest rates. This divergence in monetary policies led to a very strong
rally in the AUD/USD over the next five years. (See Figure 12.7.)
Maintaining the Cash Rate: Open Market Operations The focus
of daily open market operations is to keep the cash rate close to the target by managing money market liquidity provided to commercial banks. If
the Reserve Bank wishes to decrease the cash rate, it would increase the
AUD/USD vs. Interest Rate Defferential
1.00
