
of the city granted him a military guard, to be stationed day and night before his door, to
keep order. The anticipations of Cagliostro were realised. The rich were struck with
admiration of his charity and benevolence, and impressed with a full conviction of his
marvellous powers. The sale of the elixir went on admirably. His saloons were thronged
with wealthy dupes who came to purchase immortality. Beauty, that would endure for
centuries, was the attraction for the fair sex; health and strength for the same period were
the baits held out to the other. His charming Countess in the meantime brought grist to
the mill, by telling fortunes and casting nativities, or granting attendant sylphs to any
ladies who would pay sufficiently for their services. What was still better, as tending to
keep up the credit of her husband, she gave the most magnificent parties in Bordeaux.
But as at Strasbourg the popular delusion lasted for a few months only, and burned itself
out; Cagliostro forgot, in the intoxication of success, that there was a limit to quackery,
which once passed, inspired distrust. When he pretended to call spirits from the tomb,
people became incredulous. He was accused of being an enemy to religion - of denying
Christ, and of being the Wandering Jew. He despised these rumours as long as they were
confined to a few; but when they spread over the town -- when he received no more fees - when his parties were abandoned, and his acquaintance turned away when they met him
in the street, he thought it high time to shift his quarters.
He was by this time wearied of the provinces, and turned his thoughts to the capital. On
his arrival, he announced himself as the restorer of Egyptian Freemasonry and the
founder of a new philosophy. He immediately made his way into the best society by
means of his friend the Cardinal de Rohan. His success as a magician was quite
extraordinary: the most considerable persons of the time visited him. He boasted of being
able, like the Rosicrucians, to converse with the elementary spirits; to invoke the mighty
dead from the grave, to transmute metals, and to discover occult things, by means of the
special protection of God towards him. Like Dr. Dee, he summoned the angels to reveal
the future; and they appeared, and conversed with him in crystals and under glass bells.
[See the Abbe Fiard, and "Anecdotes of the Reign of Louis XVI." p. 400.] "There was
hardly," says the Biographie des Contemporains, "a fine lady in Paris who would not sup
with the shade of Lucretius in the apartments of Cagliostro -- a military officer who
would not discuss the art of war with Cesar, Hannibal, or Alexander; or an advocate or
counsellor who would not argue legal points with the ghost of Cicero." These interviews
with the departed were very expensive; for, as Cagliostro said, the dead would not rise for
nothing. The Countess, as usual, exercised all her ingenuity to support her husband's
credit. She was a great favourite with her own sex; to many a delighted and wondering
auditory of whom she detailed the marvellous powers of Cagliostro. She said he could
render himself invisible, traverse the world with the rapidity of thought, and be in several
places at the same time. ["Biographie des Contemporains," article "Cagliostro." See also
"Histoire de la Magie en France," par M. Jules Garinet, p. 284.]
He had not been long at Paris before he became involved in the celebrated affair of the
Queen's necklace. His friend, the Cardinal de Rohan, enamoured of the charms of Marie
Antoinette, was in sore distress at her coldness, and the displeasure she had so often
manifested against him. There was at that time a lady, named La Motte, in the service of

the Queen, of whom the Cardinal was foolish enough to make a confidant. Madame de la
Motte, in return, endeavoured to make a tool of the Cardinal, and succeeded but too well
in her projects. In her capacity of chamber-woman, or lady of honour to the Queen, she
was present at an interview between her Majesty and M. Boehmer, a wealthy jeweller of
Paris, when the latter offered for sale a magnificent diamond necklace, valued at
1,600,000 francs, or about 64,000 pounds sterling. The Queen admired it greatly, but
dismissed the jeweller, with the expression of her regret that she was too poor to purchase
it. Madame de la Motte formed a plan to get this costly ornament into her own
possession, and determined to make the Cardinal de Rohan the instrument by which to
effect it. She therefore sought an interview with him, and pretending to sympathise in his
grief for the Queen's displeasure, told him she knew a way by which he might be restored
to favour. She then mentioned the necklace, and the sorrow of the Queen that she could
not afford to buy it. The Cardinal, who was as wealthy as he was foolish, immediately
offered to purchase the necklace, and make a present of it to the Queen. Madame de la
Motte told him by no means to do so, as he would thereby offend her Majesty. His plan
would be to induce the jeweller to give her Majesty credit, and accept her promissory
note for the amount at a certain date, to be hereafter agreed upon. The Cardinal readily
agreed to the proposal, and instructed the jeweller to draw up an agreement, and he would
procure the Queen's signature. He placed this in the hands of Madame de la Motte, who
returned it shortly afterwards, with the words, "Bon, bon - approuve -- Marie Antoinette,"
written in the margin. She told him at the same time that the Queen was highly pleased
with his conduct in the matter, and would appoint a meeting with him in the gardens of
Versailles, when she would present him with a flower, as a token of her regard. The
Cardinal showed the forged document to the jeweller, obtained the necklace, and
delivered it into the hands of Madame de la Motte. So far all was well. Her next object
was to satisfy the Cardinal, who awaited impatiently the promised interview with his
royal mistress. There was at that time in Paris a young woman named D'Oliva, noted for
her resemblance to the Queen; and Madame de la Motte, on the promise of a handsome
reward, found no difficulty in persuading her to personate Marie Antoinette, and meet the
Cardinal de Rohan at the evening twilight in the gardens of Versailles. The meeting took
place accordingly. The Cardinal was deceived by the uncertain light, the great
resemblance of the counterfeit, and his own hopes; and having received the flower from
Mademoiselle D'Oliva, went home with a lighter heart than had beat in his bosom for
many a day. [The enemies of the unfortunate Queen of France, when the progress of the
Revolution embittered their animosity against her. maintained that she was really a party
in this transaction; that she, and not Mademoiselle D'Oliva, met the Cardinal and
rewarded him with the flower; and that the story above related was merely concocted
between her, La Motte, and others to cheat the jeweller of his 1,600,000 francs.]
In the course of time the forgery of the Queen's signature was discovered. Boehmer the
jeweller immediately named the Cardinal de Rohan and Madame de la Motte as the
persons with whom he had negotiated, and they were both arrested and thrown into the
Bastille. La Motte was subjected to a rigorous examination, and the disclosures she made
implicating Cagliostro, he was seized, along with his wife, and also sent to the Bastille, A
story involving so much scandal necessarily excited great curiosity. Nothing was to be
heard of in Paris but the Queen's necklace, with surmises of the guilt or innocence of the

several parties implicated. The husband of Madame de la Motte escaped to England, and
in the opinion of many took the necklace with him, and there disposed of it to different
jewellers in small quantities at a time. But Madame de la Motte insisted that she had
entrusted it to Cagliostro, who had seized and taken it to pieces, to "swell the treasures of
his immense unequalled fortune." She spoke of him as "an empiric, a mean alchymist, a
dreamer on the philosopher's stone, a false prophet, a profaner of the true worship, the
self-dubbed Count Cagliostro!" She further said that he originally conceived the project
of ruining the Cardinal de Rohan; that he persuaded her, by the exercise of some magic
influence over her mind, to aid and abet the scheme; and that he was a robber, a swindler,
and a sorcerer!
After all the accused parties had remained for upwards of six months in the Bastille, the
trial commenced. The depositions of the witnesses having been heard, Cagliostro, as the
principal culprit, was first called upon for his defence. He was listened to with the most
breathless attention. He put himself into a theatrical attitude, and thus began:-- "I am
oppressed! -- I am accused! -- I am calumniated! Have I deserved this fate? I descend into
my conscience, and I there find the peace that men refuse me! I have travelled a great
deal -- I am known over all Europe, and a great part of Asia and Africa. I have
everywhere shown myself the friend of my fellow-creatures. My knowledge, my time,
my fortune have ever been employed in the relief of distress! I have studied and practised
medicine, but I have never degraded that most noble and most consoling of arts by
mercenary speculations of any kind. Though always giving, and never receiving, I have
preserved my independence. I have even carried my delicacy so far as to refuse the
favours of kings. I have given gratuitously my remedies and my advice to the rich: the
poor have received from me both remedies and money. I have never contracted any debts,
and my manners are pure and uncorrupted." After much more self-laudation of the same
kind, he went on to complain of the great hardships he had endured in being separated for
so many months from his innocent and loving wife, who, as he was given to understand,
had been detained in the Bastille, and perhaps chained in an unwholesome dungeon. He
denied unequivocally that he had the necklace, or that he had ever seen it; and to silence
the rumours and accusations against him, which his own secrecy with regard to the events
of his life had perhaps originated, he expressed himself ready to satisfy the curiosity of
the public, and to give a plain and full account of his career. He then told a romantic and
incredible tale, which imposed upon no one. He said he neither knew the place of his
birth nor the name of his parents, but that he spent his infancy in Medina in Arabia, and
was brought up under the name of Acharat. He lived in the palace of the Great Muphti in
that city, and always had three servants to wait upon him, besides his preceptor, named
Althotas. This Althotas was very fond of him, and told him that his father and mother,
who were Christians and nobles, died when he was three months old, and left him in the
care of the Muphti. He could never, he said, ascertain their names, for whenever he asked
Althotas the question, he was told that it would be dangerous for him to know. Some
incautious expressions dropped by his preceptor gave him reason to think they were from
Malta. At the age of twelve he began his travels, and learned the various languages of the
East. He remained three years in Mecca, where the Cherif, or governor, showed him so
much kindness, and spoke to him so tenderly and affectionately, that he sometimes
thought that personage was his father. He quitted this good man with tears in his eyes,

and never saw him afterwards; but he was convinced that he was, even at that moment,
indebted to his care for all the advantages he enjoyed. Whenever he arrived in any city,
either of Europe or Asia, he found an account opened for him at the principal bankers' or
merchants'. He could draw upon them to the amount of thousands and hundreds of
thousands; and no questions were ever asked beyond his name. He had only to mention
the word Acharat, and all his wants were supplied. He firmly believed that the Cherif of
Mecca was the friend to whom all was owing. This was the secret of his wealth, and he
had no occasion to resort to swindling for a livelihood. It was not worth his while to steal
a diamond necklace when he had wealth enough to purchase as many as he pleased, and
more magnificent ones than had ever been worn by a Queen of France. As to the other
charges brought against him by Madame de la Motte, he had but a short answer to give.
She had called him an empiric. He was not unfamiliar with the word. If it meant a man
who, without being a physician, had some knowledge of medicine, and took no fees -who cured both rich and poor, and took no money from either, he confessed that he was
such a man, that he was an empiric. She had also called him a mean alchymist. Whether
he were an alchymist or not, the epithet mean could only be applied to those who begged
and cringed, and he had never done either. As regarded his being a dreamer about the
philosopher's stone, whatever his opinions upon that subject might be, he had been silent,
and had never troubled the public with his dreams. Then, as to his being a false prophet,
he had not always been so; for he had prophesied to the Cardinal de Rohan that Madame
de la Motte would prove a dangerous woman, and the result had verified the prediction.
He denied that he was a profaner of the true worship, or that he had ever striven to bring
religion into contempt; on the contrary, he respected every man's religion, and never
meddled with it. He also denied that he was a Rosicrucian, or that he had ever pretended
to be three hundred years of age, or to have had one man in his service for a hundred and
fifty years. In conclusion, he said every statement that Madame de la Motte had made
regarding him was false, and that she was mentiris impudentissime, which two words he
begged her counsel to translate for her, as it was not polite to tell her so in French.
Such was the substance of his extraordinary answer to the charges against him; an answer
which convinced those who were before doubtful that he was one of the most impudent
impostors that had ever run the career of deception. Counsel were then heard on behalf of
the Cardinal de Rohan and Madame de la Motte. It appearing clearly that the Cardinal
was himself the dupe of a vile conspiracy; and there being no evidence against
Cagliostro, they were both acquitted. Madame de la Motte was found guilty, and
sentenced to be publicly whipped, and branded with a hot iron on the back.
Cagliostro and his wife were then discharged from custody. On applying to the officers of
the Bastille for the papers and effects which had been seized at his lodgings, he found
that many of them had been abstracted. He thereupon brought an action against them for
the recovery of his MSS. and a small portion of the powder of transmutation. Before the
affair could be decided, he received orders to quit Paris within four-and-twenty hours.
Fearing that if he were once more inclosed in the dungeons of the Bastille he should
never see daylight again, he took his departure immediately and proceeded to England.
On his arrival in London he made the acquaintance of the notorious Lord George Gordon,
who espoused his cause warmly, and inserted a letter in the public papers, animadverting

upon the conduct of the Queen of France in the affair of the necklace, and asserting that
she was really the guilty party. For this letter Lord George was exposed to a prosecution
at the instance of the French Ambassador - found guilty of libel, and sentenced to fine
and a long imprisonment.
Cagliostro and the Countess afterwards travelled in Italy, where they were arrested by the
Papal Government in 1789, and condemned to death. The charges against him were, that
he was a freemason, a heretic, and a sorcerer. This unjustifiable sentence was afterwards
commuted into one of perpetual imprisonment in the Castle of St. Angelo. His wife was
allowed to escape severer punishment by immuring herself in a nunnery. Cagliostro did
not long survive. The loss of liberty preyed upon his mind -- accumulated misfortunes
had injured his health and broken his spirit, and he died early in 1790. His fate may have
been no better than he deserved, but it is impossible not to feel that his sentence for the
crimes assigned was utterly disgraceful to the government that pronounced it.

PRESENT STATE OF ALCHYMY.
We have now finished the list of the persons who have most distinguished themselves in
this foolish and unprofitable pursuit. Among them are men of all ranks, characters, and
conditions; the truthseeking, but erring philosopher; the ambitious prince and the needy
noble, who have believed in it; as well as the designing charlatan, who has not believed in
it, but has merely made the pretension to it the means of cheating his fellows, and living
upon their credulity. One or more of all these classes will be found in the foregoing
pages. It will be seen, from the record of their lives, that the delusion, humiliating as it
was to human intellect, was not altogether without its uses. Men, in striving to gain too
much, do not always overreach themselves: if they cannot arrive at the inaccessible
mountain-top, they may, perhaps, get half way towards it, and pick up some scraps of
wisdom and knowledge on the road. The useful science of chemistry is not a little
indebted to its spurious brother of alchymy. Many valuable discoveries have been made
in that search for the impossible, which might otherwise have been hidden for centuries
yet to come. Roger Bacon, in searching for the philosopher's stone, discovered
gunpowder, a still more extraordinary substance. Van Helmont, in the same pursuit,
discovered the properties of gas; Geber made discoveries in chemistry which were
equally important; and Paracelsus, amidst his perpetual visions of the transmutation of
metals, found that mercury was a remedy for one of the most odious and excruciating of
all the diseases that afflict humanity.
In our day, no mention is made in Europe of any new devotees of the science. The belief
in witchcraft, which is scarcely more absurd, still lingers in the popular mind: but none
are so credulous as to believe that any elixir could make man live for centuries, or turn all
our iron and pewter into gold. Alchymy, in Europe, may be said to be wholly exploded;
but in the East it still flourishes in as great repute as ever. Recent travellers make constant
mention of it, especially in China, Hindostan, Persia, Tartary, Egypt, and Arabia.

BOOK II.
FORTUNE TELLING.
And men still grope t' anticipate
The cabinet designs of Fate;
Apply to wizards to foresee
What shall and what shall never be.
-- Hudibras, part iii. canto 3.
In accordance with the plan laid down in the introduction to this volume, we proceed to
the consideration of the follies into which men have been led by their eager desire to
pierce the thick darkness of futurity. God himself, for his own wise purposes, has more
than once undrawn the impenetrable veil which shrouds those awful secrets; and, for
purposes just as wise, he has decreed that, except in these instances, ignorance shall be
our lot for ever. It is happy for man that he does not know what the morrow is to bring
forth; but, unaware of this great blessing, he has, in all ages of the world, presumptuously
endeavoured to trace the events of unborn centuries, and anticipate the march of time. He
has reduced this presumption into a study. He has divided it into sciences and systems
without number, employing his whole life in the vain pursuit. Upon no subject has it been
so easy to deceive the world as upon this. In every breast the curiosity exists in a greater
or less degree, and can only be conquered by a long course of self-examination, and a
firm reliance that the future would not be hidden from our sight, if it were right that we
should be acquainted with it.
An undue opinion of our own importance in the scale of creation is at the bottom of all
our unwarrantable notions in this respect. How flattering to the pride of man to think that
the stars in their courses watch over him, and typify, by their movements and aspects, the
joys or the sorrows that await him! He, less in proportion to the universe than the all but
invisible insects that feed in myriads on a summer's leaf, are to this great globe itself,
fondly imagines that eternal worlds were chiefly created to prognosticate his fate. How
we should pity the arrogance of the worm that crawls at our feet, if we knew that it also
desired to know the secrets of futurity, and imagined that meteors shot athwart the sky to
warn it that a tom-tit was hovering near to gobble it up; that storms and earthquakes, the
revolutions of empires, or the fall of mighty monarchs, only happened to, predict its birth,
its progress, and its decay! Not a whit less presuming has man shown himself; not a whit
less arrogant are the sciences, so called, of astrology, augury, necromancy, geomancy,
palmistry, and divination of every kind.
Leaving out of view the oracles of pagan antiquity and religious predictions in general,
and confining ourselves solely to the persons who, in modern times, have made
themselves most conspicuous in foretelling the future, we shall find that the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries were the golden age of these impostors. Many of them have been
already mentioned in their character of alchymists. The union of the two pretensions is
not at all surprising. It was to be expected that those who assumed a power so
preposterous as that of prolonging the life of man for several centuries, should pretend, at

the same time, to foretell the events which were to mark that preternatural span of
existence. The world would as readily believe that they had discovered all secrets, as that
they had only discovered one. The most celebrated astrologers of Europe, three centuries
ago, were alchymists. Agrippa, Paracelsus, Dr. Dee, and the Rosicrucians, all laid as
much stress upon their knowledge of the days to come, as upon their pretended
possession of the philosopher's stone and the elixir of life. In their time, ideas of the
wonderful, the diabolical, and the supernatural, were rifer than ever they were before.
The devil or the stars were universally believed to meddle constantly in the affairs of
men; and both were to be consulted with proper ceremonies. Those who were of a
melancholy and gloomy temperament betook themselves to necromancy and sorcery;
those more cheerful and aspiring, devoted themselves to astrology. The latter science was
encouraged by all the monarchs and governments of that age. In England, from the time
of Elizabeth to that of William and Mary, judicial astrology was in high repute. During
that period flourished Drs. Dee, Lamb, and Forman; with Lilly, Booker, Gadbury, Evans,
and scores of nameless impostors in every considerable town and village in the country,
who made it their business to cast nativities, aid in the recovery of stolen goods,
prognosticate happy or unhappy marriages, predict whether journeys would be
prosperous, and note lucky moments for the commencement of any enterprise, from the
setting up of a cobler's shop to the marching of an army. Men who, to use the words of
Butler, did
"Deal in Destiny's dark counsel, And sage opinion of the moon sell; To whom all people
far and near On deep importance did repair, When brass and pewter pots did stray, And
linen slunk out of the way."
In Lilly's Memoirs of his Life and Times, there are many notices of the inferior quacks
who then abounded, and upon whom he pretended to look down with supreme contempt;
not because they were astrologers, but because they debased that noble art by taking fees
for the recovery of stolen property. From Butler's Hudibras and its curious notes, we may
learn what immense numbers of these fellows lived upon the credulity of mankind in that
age of witchcraft and diablerie. Even in our day how great is the reputation enjoyed by
the almanac-makers, who assume the name of Francis Moore. But in the time of Charles
I. and the Commonwealth, the most learned, the most noble, and the most conspicuous
characters did not hesitate to consult astrologers in the most open manner. Lilly, whom
Butler has immortalized under the name of Sydrophel, relates, that he proposed to write a
work called "An Introduction to Astrology," in which he would satisfy the whole
kingdom of the lawfulness of that art. Many of the soldiers were for it, he says, and many
of the Independent party, and abundance of worthy men in the House of Commons, his
assured friends, and able to take his part against the Presbyterians, who would have
silenced his predictions if they could. He afterwards carried his plan into execution, and
when his book was published, went with another astrologer named Booker to the
headquarters of the parliamentary army at Windsor, where they were welcomed and
feasted in the garden where General Fairfax lodged. They were afterwards introduced to
the general, who received them very kindly, and made allusion to some of their
predictions. He hoped their art was lawful and agreeable to God's word; but he did not
understand it himself. He did not doubt, however, that the two astrologers feared God,
