
CHAPTER 3
Price Alternation Principle
So far, we have covered the Trend Continuity Principle and the Momentum Principle that underscore
price behavior. These help build a foundation for why we expect certain price moves in the future,
which provides an edge to use for entering and exiting low-risk trades. In this chapter, we will
discuss the third foundation principle of price behavior, which is described as the Price Alternation
Principle. This principle covers the periods of time a stock is trading in a sideways trading range as
opposed to a persistent up or down trend on the charts.
While separate from the trend continuity and momentum principles, the price alternation principle
helps us to understand range alternation between contraction phases and expansion phases in the price
structure. After all, you've almost certainly heard that price on charts can travel in three types of
trends: up, down, or sideways. Most traders discover that the easiest opportunities for profits come
from up or down trending moves. In fact, many traders gain steady profits during up-trending periods
but then lose money consistently as a stock devolves into a lengthy sideways trend.
This chapter will explain how to recognize and position yourself within the context of a trading
range on the charts. We will learn how to identify horizontal support and resistance price lines, how
to trade within them, and what to do when price breaks free of its trading range. Finally, the Price
Alternation Principle lays the foundation for all the price breakout trading strategies you will employ
as a trader.

DEFINING THE PRINCIPLE
The Price Alternation Principle simply states that price alternates between two distinct phases: range
contraction and range expansion. One could also define these phases as a trend phase and an antitrend phase. The two separate phases help us discern what indicators to emphasize and which to
ignore, as certain indicators are better suited for a sideways range-bound or a trending range
expansion environment. This principle explains why some indicators work well for a period of time
and then generate a string of losing trades, which new traders often report as being one of the most
frustrating aspects of trading. It answers the question “Why does a particular indicator work really
well for me and then all the sudden generate a string of constant losses?”

PRICE ALTERNATION PRINCIPLE
Price alternates between the states of range expansion and range contraction.
Range Contraction: When price has formed a sideways compression phase that either takes the form of a
rectangle with clearly defined horizontal trendline boundaries or a triangle pattern with converging trendlines.
Range Expansion: When price breaks outside the boundaries of a range and enters a period of sustained upward
or downward movement, characterized with a momentum impulse or directional trend movement.

The price alternation principle addresses those periods between directional trend moves in price
where a market or stock consolidates a recent directional trend move into a temporary or lengthy
sideways correction phase, where price is said to digest or consolidate after a recent directional
move.
It is helpful to think of the principle in terms of using the current phase to anticipate the next change
in price. Recall that the momentum principle states that if price and momentum form a higher high
together, then we can expect a higher high in price yet to come after an immediate pullback. Similarly,
by monitoring the current price structure, we can then anticipate the next likely move in price
according to this principle. If price is in a contraction phase with clear trendlines right now, then we
can expect a price range breakout to develop soon in the future to carry price in a sustained
directional move—up or down—once price breaks outside of these price trendline boundaries. Such
an expectation creates an edge that allows us to anticipate and then place price breakout trades from
range compression environments, such as trading triangle, rectangle, or other specific price pattern
breakouts. This principle underscores the logic of trading triangle and rectangle pattern breakouts
which we will discuss in Chapter 5 on specific price patterns.
First, let us formally define the two states of price behavior before we see examples of the concept.

PRICE CONTRACTION PHASE
As we begin our discussion on the price alternation principle, let us first start with describing the
state of price consolidation. Throughout the discussion, we will use the words contraction and
consolidation interchangeably to mean a period of low volatility, low range price movement. A
market in consolidation contains clearly defined boundaries of support and resistance price levels,
which are easily identified by hand-drawn price trendlines. In fact, the best indicator you can use to
highlight support and resistance during a trading range period is self-drawn price trendlines.
You don't need complex mathematics or indicators to reveal important reference levels on the chart.
Price areas that have held as key support or resistance in the past often hold as future support or
resistance levels, and these should be obvious but they can be obscured by numerous indicators on the
price chart itself.
Figure 3.1 shows the three terms you need to know when describing a market in a consolidation
phase.
FIGURE 3.1 Definitions Used in Describing a Consolidation Phase

Figure 3.1 is a pure price chart that emphasizes how to label the three main points of reference in a
trading range or price consolidation. As we will see from the example in Figure 3.2, $54.00 per share
represents the upper resistance line, the price where buyers and sellers deem price to be expensive;
$52.00 represents the fair value or midpoint price where buyers and sellers agree that the price is
fair; and $48.00 represents the lower support line where buyers and sellers generally agree that price
is cheap, or a bargain to buy because it is beneath the agreed fair value price.
FIGURE 3.2 ERTS During a Clear Consolidation Phase in 2007

PRICE CONSOLIDATION PHASE
There are several terms used to define the price consolidation phase, including the upper resistance line, the midpoint or fair
value line, and the lower support line.
Upper Resistance Line: The higher resistance trendline at which buyers and sellers deem the price to be too
expensive to purchase, which is usually where buyers take profits and refuse to pay a higher price to acquire more
shares and sellers enter new short-sale positions in anticipation of price declining to the fair value line or lower.
Midpoint or Fair Value Line: The average price between the upper resistance line and lower support line where
buyers and sellers agree on the current price of a share of stock. This price represents equilibrium or balance
between buyers and sellers and is considered a reasonable price to use as a reference for what is cheap or
expensive.
Lower Support Line: The lower support trendline at which buyers and sellers deem the price to be inexpensive,
cheap, or under fair value. This is often the price where buyers will step into the market to purchase shares and
short sellers will buy back to cover short positions with the expectation that price will return again to the fair value
line or higher.

Figure 3.2 shows us the actual stock price chart and the context surrounding the labeled trading
range or price consolidation that formed through most of 2007 in Electronic Arts (ERTS).
In this example, we see price in a clear expansion or directional trend phase during the latter part of
2006 that then devolves into a sideways trading range throughout the majority of 2007. By April
2007, the boundaries between buyers and sellers become clear as to what market participants deem
expensive and cheap in terms of buying and selling shares of ERTS. The chart is also a good
representation of the price alternation principle, in that a phase of range contraction or compression
follows a phase of price range expansion, or directional trend movement.
Once you observe two tests of a trendline, it is often safe to draw a trendline and extend that line
into the future. By March 2007, we could observe three quick tests (touches) of the $54.00-per-share

level, along with three tests of the $48.00-per-share level, which defined a potential trading range
with established reference boundaries for the upper resistance and lower support boundaries. As long
as price remains within these horizontal trendlines, traders can take advantage of these boundaries by
buying as price tests the lower support trendline and then selling, or aggressively selling short, as
price rises to the upper resistance line. That is the most common strategy a trader uses when trading
within the confines of a trading range or price consolidation phase.
In general, a trader would place a stop-loss order slightly beyond the upper or lower trendline,
giving a bit of breathing room for sudden breaks outside the barrier that fail to sustain an actual
breakout move. This happened a few times when price broke down from the $48.00 level, only to rise
back into the trading range in what traders call a “bear trap.” A bear trap occurs when price breaks
down through a known reference support level, but then almost immediately rises back within the
confines of the trading range, thus trapping those traders who established a short-sale position on the
suspected breakout. Similarly, a bull trap occurs when price slightly breaks above the upper
resistance line and returns back under the horizontal trendline.
If one strategy is to trade within the confines of the price consolidation boundaries, then what might
be the alternate strategy once a trader recognizes a clear trading range phase exists? The alternate
strategy is to wait in anticipation of a breakout and enter a position on a clean breakout from the
trading range boundary, in anticipation of the second stage of the price alternation principle: a price
expansion phase.

PRICE EXPANSION PHASE
We can expect a range expansion phase to follow a range consolidation phase. As traders, we look to
make the quickest profit most efficiently, and price breakouts, or price-range expansion plays, often
accomplish this goal of being in the market (a trade) the shortest amount of time to capture the largest
price move available.
Established price trading ranges contain well-defined boundaries where traders generally agree on
reference prices that are fair, expensive, or cheap. Traders know where to enter a position, where to
sell it, and where to place a stop in the event that a range breakout move occurs to take price outside
the trading range. In essence, these boundaries become self-fulfilling prophecies that create the
expected moves up off of support or down from overhead resistance.
In a range expansion phase, traders lose these easily defined reference areas and become uncertain
as to whether to enter a new position for a profit, take an old position off for a loss, or stand aside
and wait for a better entry. Traders often report that they cannot buy a breakout move because they
feel they are chasing the move, which means they feel uncomfortable buying a new price extreme
because they suspect the exact moment they enter a position will be the moment the market movement
will reverse, trapping them suddenly with a losing position. Unfortunately, they stand on the sidelines
without a position as price continues higher and higher as they watch the move expand beyond where
they thought price would travel.
It is very important to make this distinction: in a trading range, range boundaries are well-defined
and traders can plan positions logically, while in a range expansion breakout phase, logic escapes
them and emotion takes over as participants no longer have the comfort of clean reference levels to
guide their trading decisions.

A market in expansion continues to expand until buyers and sellers reach a new equilibrium in price
and then establish new boundaries or reference levels as to what is expensive or cheap in reference to
the new equilibrium. It's helpful to define range compression phases as states of equilibrium between
buyers and sellers and range expansion phases as states of disequilibrium or uncertainty. Think back
to the physics of motion when describing prices in motion and the balance, or imbalance, between
buyers and sellers as being the impulse that drives prices of stocks higher and lower over time. A
market with a higher supply/demand imbalance will develop a larger range expansion move than one
with a smaller imbalance.
The key point to remember as you understand the concept is that range contraction phases reflect
stable boundaries of low volatility, while price expansion phases reflect uncertain boundaries and
high volatility. Figure 3.3 shows us what happened to Sears Holdings (SHLD) in mid-2007 after a
rising price consolidation phase gave rise to a sharp price expansion phase to the downside.
FIGURE 3.3 Range Expansion and Contraction Phases in Sears Holdings Daily 2007

Note that price contraction phases in a stock do not have to take the form of perfect horizontal
boundaries. The fair value price, and thus the upper and lower trendline price boundaries, can rise or
fall over time in an angled direction (slope) as the market participants determine what represents the
fair value price trendline. In the case of triangles, which we will see in Chapter 5, the fair value line
remains constant while the upper and lower trendlines converge toward the fair value price trendline
or midpoint.
From October 2006 to June 2007, Sears Holdings (SHLD) maintained a rising consolidation phase
on its daily chart as drawn in Figure 3.3 with the upper resistance line rising over time from $185.00
to $195.00 and the lower support line rising over time from $170.00 to $180.00. With the exception
of a few price spikes outside of these boundaries, buyers and sellers contained the stock price

between these two lines during a range consolidation phase after the large price expansion move from
$135.00 to $180.00 per share from July to October 2006. Remember, price alternates between
periods of range expansion and contraction, as you can see in the daily chart.
Buyers and sellers had the stable reference lines to guide their trading decisions until price firmly
broke down from the rising support line at the $180.00-per-share level in June 2007. When price
breaks outside of established trendlines, buyers and sellers lose their concept or anchor of what is
cheap or expensive. Price can fall rapidly in a range expansion environment as buyers and sellers
seek to establish equilibrium, and sometimes that equilibrium will be at a much lower price. In this
case, price fell from $180.00 in June 2007 to $130.00 per share in August 2007 as buyers and sellers
then began to establish another trading range or equilibrium environment at the $137.00-per-share
level. Notice the large price gap in July 2007 that accompanied the range expansion move to the
downside and the higher volatility environment of the range expansion impulse move down.
Surprise economic news or announcements often serve as the catalyst that drives price outside these
boundaries and triggers a range expansion move from a sudden supply/demand imbalance. Remember
our discussion on Newton's Laws of Motion in Chapter 2, where the first law stated that an object at
rest tends to stay at rest until another object or force acts upon it. We can relate laws of motion to
price motion by defining a trading range as prices being in a state of rest or equilibrium and any force,
be it a news event, earning surprise, or any market-moving event that affects buyers’ and sellers’
perception of fair value, as being the catalyst to set prices in motion in a range breakout expansion
phase. We then tie in the second law of motion, defined as the Momentum Principle in Chapter 2, to
help us conceptualize a market in motion and how a market moves in the same (trend) direction until
another force, often revealed through momentum divergences, slows the move until buyers and sellers
find another equilibrium price zone which then gives rise to a new trading range consolidation phase
at a higher or lower level.
It is vitally important to understand how these concepts give rise to price movement which then
gives us specific expectations about the next likely move in price, and thus enter, manage, and exit
positions with a solid conceptual framework that underlies our trades. We will discuss how to use
this concept to set up trades in later chapters, but for now, understand the logic behind price
consolidation phases and price expansion phases.
Here is another example to highlight the concept of range consolidation and expansion, as seen in
Figure 3.4 of eBay's (EBAY) daily chart from 2009.
FIGURE 3.4 Range Expansion and Contraction Phases in eBay Daily 2009

Starting with the transition into 2009, we see a descending range consolidation phase between
buyers and sellers of eBay stock with the trendlines and fair value area drawn. Price then breaks to
the upside in a sharp and quick range expansion move, including two daily price gaps, in April 2009.
Participants then form a small trading range or consolidation phase—which resembles an island—
from May to July, and then buyers overtook sellers in another sudden range expansion impulse move
up, including a large gap in July. Buyers and sellers then find equilibrium or fair value at $21.00 per
share with the upper resistance line residing just above $24.00 per share and the lower support line
resting at the $22.00-per-share level. This trading range continued from August 2009 to March 2010,
at which point buyers again overtook sellers in another sharp range expansion impulse move to the
$28.00-per-share level in March 2010.
The chart of eBay reveals that price in expansion phases can be volatile periods comprised of
overnight gaps as buyers and sellers struggle to find value without the help of established boundaries.
A range expansion phase changes the parameters of what is cheap or expensive. For example, in early
2009, $14.00 per share reflected an expensive price for buyers of eBay stock. However, after a range
expansion phase a few months later, buyers and sellers agreed that $16.00 per share was cheap and
beneath fair value. That definition itself changed after the sharp expansion in July, at which point the
former upper resistance line at $18.00 was now deemed well beneath the new price level defined as
cheap: $22.00 per share.
The quest to find value can be violent, with large range expansion days and overnight gaps as a
market enters a feedback loop, which is the next concept we will discuss to help us understand
sudden price moves that occur in a stock. But before we define feedback loops, let's take a step back
and define how buyers and sellers interact to move prices.

VIEWING THE MARKET AS BUYERS AND
SELLERS
While there certainly are a myriad of forces that act upon a stock, it can be helpful to narrow down
those forces—market participants from hedge funds, mutual funds, swing traders, day traders, longterm investors, retirement account investors, professionals, and amateurs—into the broader categories
of buyers and sellers. Throughout this discussion, I will use the terms “buyer” and “bull”
interchangeably to mean an individual (or fund) that purchases shares in anticipation of a future
upward move, just as I will use the term “seller” and “bear” interchangeably to mean an individual
(or fund) who wishes to sell shares already purchased or to bet on a price decline through the activity
of short selling in hopes of buying back a stock at a lower price.
If we oversimplify the market into buyers and sellers, we arrive at the following concepts or broad
labels for market participants. A buyer, or a bull, purchases shares in hopes that the price of the stock
will be higher in the future so that he or she can sell those shares at a higher price for a profit. The
individual will also sell the purchased shares at a loss if the price of the stock falls beyond where he
or she is comfortable holding on to the position, perhaps at a predetermined stop-loss price. Thus, we
can think of a buyer today as a future seller.
On the other hand, traders sell-short a stock at a price today that they hope to be able to buy back to
cover the borrowed shares they sold short at a profit in the future.
Buyer
A person who buys shares of stock in the hopes that the share price will rise. A buyer can also be defined as a future
seller.
Seller
A person who sells stocks that are already purchased, hopefully at a profit, but also potentially at a loss if the value has
declined.
Short seller
A person who sells stock short, borrowing shares, in the hopes that price will decline so as to buy back the shares at a
lower price for a profit. A short-seller will also be forced to ‘buy to cover’ if price rises unexpectedly. Thus, a short seller
can also be defined as a future buyer.

Short-sellers hope to profit from declines in stock prices. Thus, we can classify a short seller today
as a future buyer. A short seller will buy back borrowed shares at a profit if the share price declines
in the future, or will also be forced to buy back the shares to cover the short position at a loss if the
price of the stock rises to the predetermined stop-loss price, or if the broker issues a margin call for
the borrowed shares.
We can then separate actions from intentions to further understand how prices move and how
market participants affect the price of stocks. A new buyer willingly buys shares of a stock, hoping
price will rise so he or she can sell it in the future for a profit An old buyer willingly sells the shares
purchased previously if the price of the stock rose and the buyer is taking profits, perhaps at a
predetermined price target. On the other hand, an old buyer unwillingly, or forcefully, must sell his or
her shares at a loss in the event that the price of the stock has declined beyond the predetermined
stop-loss price, or when the pain of loss is greater than the hope of the position recovering if the
individual has let the stock fall beyond the predetermined stop-loss price. Two buyers may sell their
shares at the same price, though one may sell happily with a profit while the other sells unhappily

with a loss.
A new short seller willingly initiates a new short-sell position when he or she believes that the
price of a stock will decline in the future, and if so, the short seller willingly buys back the borrowed
shares at a profit. On the other hand, if the price of the stock rises either beyond the predetermined
stop-loss price, or beyond the pain threshold where the individual can no longer bear the pain of
losing money if price has moved far beyond an established stop-loss price, then the old short seller
will be forced buy back shares unwillingly to cover the borrowed shares at a loss.
A trader has leeway about where to enter a position, and can do so after great deliberation, perhaps
only when all signals align. If the trader feels the stars do not align on the chart, then no one will force
the trader into a position. Traders are far less likely to panic into a position than they are to panic out
of a position, and you can use this knowledge to your advantage if you can identify this behavior on
the price charts: it is critical to make this distinction.
While traders will likely enter at different levels when they believe everything is perfect timing for
a position, most traders tend to cluster their stop-loss orders together at the same price level,
especially within the context of a sideways trading range. In the event that a market enters this cluster
of stop losses that affect traders positioned the wrong way, a sudden impulse burst may occur to ignite
a price breakout of a trading range, creating a feedback loop, forcing one group of traders to rush for
the exits as another group rushes to enter new positions for the developing breakout.
