
229




17

Banks

BANKS POSSESS AN enviable spot in the global economy. They're the funnel
in the capital formation process and the engine that keeps the car humming.
Without banks, corporations would struggle to scrounge up money to ex-
pand, and consumers would face a near-insurmountable obstacle in their
quest to buy a home or to profitably save and invest. Because the service that
banks provide is so vital to long-term economic growth, the banking industry
is almost certain to grow in line with the world’s total output, no matter
which sector generates the greatest need for capital. Whether the demand for
money comes from an industry such as technology or pharmaceuticals or
consumers incessant demand for housing, banks will benefit.

The banking business model is simple. Banks receive money from depos-
itors and the capital markets and lend to borrowers, profiting from the dif-
ference, or spread, Ifa bank borrows money froma depositor at 4 percent and
lends it out at 6 percent, the bank has earned a 2 percent spread, which is
called net interest income. Most banks also make money from basic fees and

other services, which is usually referred to as noninterest income. Combine net

Craig Woker and Richard McCaffery with Pat Dorsey.


2139)

BANKS

interest income and noninterest income to get net revenues, a view of the
bank’s top line. That’s the banking model.

Banks have a number of inherent strengths that help create a competitive
advantage. By assembling large, diverse portfolios of loans, banks reduce their
risks and pass some of the resulting savings along to all borrowers, thus low-
ering the cost of capital in the marketplace compared with what it would be
if borrowers and lenders worked directly with one another. This unique ad-
vantage forms one of the bases for a strong and lasting economic moat for the
banking industry.

In addition, the federal government has all but given the keys to the lig-
uidity kingdom to banks by essentially subsidizing the banking industry. The
federal government guarantees well over half of the banking industry's liabili-
ties (via FDIC insurance), and banks can turn to the Federal Reserve as a
lender of last resort if they're caught in a short-term liquidity crunch. These
implicit subsidies, which other corporations don’t have, allow banks to effec-
tively borrow at below-market rates. They also make the banking industry the
lowest cost, safest producer of liquidity in the world. The low cost of borrow-
ing—combined with the advantage banks haye on the lending side—allows
banks to earn attractive returns on their spread.

That said, because many banks enjoy these advantages, we think there are
few that truly have wide economic moats. Money is a commodity, after all,
and financial products are generic. So what makes one bank better than an-
other? There isn’t a formula, but throughout this chapter, we'll show you
what to look for. Here are a few examples of wide-moat banks with different

strategies:

> Citigroup uses its worldwide geographic reach and deep product bench
to increase revenues and diversify its risk exposure, which allows it to per-
form well in even difficult environments.

> Wells Fargo is an expert at attracting deposits, which are a key source of
lower cost funds, and it has a deeply ingrained sales culture that drives

revenues,

‘Investing: The Collected Works of Martin L. Leibowitz, edited by Frank J. Fabozzi (McGraw-Hill,
1991).


MANAGING CREDIT RISK

> Fifth Third has an aggressive sales culture, a low-risk loan philosophy,

and a sharp focus on costs.

It's All about Risk
Whether a financial institution specializes in making commercial loans or
consumer loans, the heart and soul of banking is centered on one thing: risk
management. Banks accept three types of risk: (1) credit, (2) liquidity, and
(3) interest rate, and they get paid to take on this risk. Borrowers and lenders
pay banks through interest or fees because they are unwilling to manage the
risk on their own, or because banks can do it more cheaply.

But just as their advantage lies in mitigating others’ risk, banks’ greatest
strength—the ability to earn a premium for managing credit and interest rate
risk—can quickly become their greatest weakness if, for example, loan losses

grow faster than expected.

Managing Credit Risk
Credit risk is a core part of the lending business. Investors can get a sense of
a bank’s credit quality by examining its balance sheet, loan categories,
trends in nonperforming loans and charge-off rates, as well as manage-
ment’s lending philosophy. (Nonperforming loans are those on which bor-
rowers aren't paying, and charge-off rates measure the percentage of loans
the bank doesn’t think will ever be repaid.) The problem is that these mea-
sures are historical, which is the problem with many financial measures:
They tell you where a company has been, not necessarily where it’s going.
Almost everything we know about the credit quality of a lending institution
is learned after the fact.

This risk often rears its ugly head in the form of delinquent loans or out-
right defaults and could potentially be borne by anyone, not just banks.

Consider a commercial loan with a7 percent interest rate. Banks know
that some of their clients will default, so they build this cost into the price
of every loan. But if you made a similar loan as an individual, chances are
you wouldn't have enough capital to diversify. As a result, youd either
earn a7 percent return or lose everything. Banks’ giant balance sheets pro-
vide three major shields to insulate them against risk in ways that others

cant achieve:

233


234

BANKS

1. Portfolio diversity
2. Conservative underwriting and account management

3. Aggressive collections procedures

Here’s how these techniques work in practice. The most straightforward
way banks manage risk is to divvy up the amount they lend among many
companies, industries, or geographies. In the words of oil tycoon J. Paul
Getty, “If you owe the bank $100, that’s your problem. If you owe the bank
$100 million, that’s the bank’s problem.” To manage this risk, banks can
either originate a wide variety of loans themselves or buy and sell loan port-
folios. By assembling diverse portfolios, banks reduce their risks.

Within the industry, banks can also distinguish themselves through solid
underwriting and collections procedures. In other words, they figure out
ways to avoid writing bad loans, and if a loan is in trouble, banks can chase
down the deadbeats. Banks that develop these specialized skills better than
others have an edge over their competitors. In contrast, large nonbank com-
panies often lack the sophisticated credit approval systems and processes to
reduce default risk. History is littered with giant corporations that at one
time or another tried to make money by providing credit and ran into trou-
ble because of their inexperience (e.g., AT&T and Sears).

One of the biggest challenges to investing in banks is spotting credit
quality problems before they blow up in investors’ faces. To help avoid get-
ting stuck with a bank that blows up, investors should pay close attention to
charge-off rates and delinquency rates, which are seen as an indicator of fu-
ture charge-offs. Look for trends, not just absolute levels. The best regional
banks saw their charge-off rates rise quickly in the latest economic down-
turn, but they remained fairly low—less than 1 percent of loans. (This mea-
sure is higher, for example, for a credit card company and lower for a savings
and loan.)

Unfortunately, there’s no absolute measure that can be considered good or
bad, so investors must compare a bank's charge-off rates with those of its com-
petitors and see how they have trended over time. Charge-offs, nonperform-
ing loans, and delinquency rates are reported in press releases and can be
found in annual and quarterly reports to the Securities and Exchange Com-

mission. In addition, listen carefully to management. No manager knows


SELLING LIQUIDITY

exactly where charge-offs are headed, but a good management team should be
able to accurately outline trends.

Finally, beware of super-fast growth. It’s an axiom in the financial services
industry that fast growth can lead to big troubles. Fast growth is not always
bad—many of the best players have above-average growth rates—but any fi-
nancial services company that’s growing significantly faster than competitors
should be eyed with skepticism.

Look for clear evidence that the credit culture is sound, is conservative,
and has been tested. You can do this by examining charge-offs and delin-
quency rates, becoming familiar with the type of lending a bank does from
reading the annual reports, and considering the economic environment in
which the company operates. Five years of fast growth in perfect economic
conditions doesn’t really tell you much about credit quality, after all. If you

invest in fast-growing lenders, watch them carefully.

Selling Liquidity

There’s no doubt that a top-notch credit culture—along with the subsequent
borrower/lender relationships that banks establish—can create a competitive
advantage for firms in the industry. Less intuitive, but equally attractive from
a business perspective, is the role that liquidity management plays. This is the
second main type of risk that a bank has to deal with.

Suppose in a friction-free world that there were no banks and that lenders
(depositors) worked directly with borrowers. That's perfectly acceptable as
long as lenders know exactly when they'll need their money back. But, if
something unexpected happened and the lender suddenly needed cash sooner
rather than later, the lender might have to sell the loan for a big discount. In a
bank-filled world, however, they can just run to the nearest branch and make
a withdrawal.

Banks offer liquidity management services in many forms. For instance,
many businesses pay banks a standing fee to maintain a back-up line of credit.
Essentially, the bank has sold nothing but a promise. Some firms also sell their
receivables to financial services firms at a discount in a service known as fae-
toring, because the business wants or needs cash as soon as possible.

Less obvious to many consumers is that they are actually paying for liq-

uidity services, as well. Consider the case of Wells Fargo, one of the nation’s

235


236

BANKS

largest retail banks. In 2002, depositors paid the bank $2.2 billion in fees on
their accounts. The bank paid depositors about $1.9 billion in interest on de-
posits. Netting these two numbers, account-holders at Wells paid the bank
nearly $300 million to hold on to their money. Then the bank turned around,
lent the money out, and made more money on it.

There is no other business in the world where you can take money from
people and effectively charge them to take it off their hands. Can you imag-
ine walking up to someone on the street and offering to hold on to his $100
bill if he pays you a few bucks? It’s ludicrous. Yet, that’s what banks do every
day. In this sense, liabilities in the form of deposits are truly assets for banks.
Low-cost core deposits (e.g., checking accounts) are very stable and cheap.

This is why it’s important to track deposit levels. For example, check to
see whether deposits are increasing or decreasing. In particular, check to see if
low-cost deposit categories such as checking and savings accounts are grow-
ing. Most banks provide a breakout of deposit categories in their annual re-
ports. If management has been talking about the importance of a strong
deposit base and deposits have been declining over the last five years, they
aren't getting the job done.

Investors must also pay close attention to a bank’s balance sheet. Seek out
firms with a diverse stable of loans to prevent rising defaults in any one sector
from causing the bank to get into trouble. The annual report shows details
about the type of loans a bank holds, and investors should track how it has
changed over time. Has a bank that has traditionally been a mortgage lender
expanded into indirect auto loans, a much riskier type of lending? It takes
time to become familiar with the characteristics of different types of loans,
and you shouldn't invest in any financial services company without a feel for
the types of loans it makes and without confidence that the firm has plenty of

experience in making those types of loans.

Managing Interest Rate Risk
This is the third main type of risk faced by banks. If there’s a reservation that
investors frequently harbor about investing in banks, it’s that earnings can be
squeezed by interest rates, which are completely outside banks’ control.

The impact of rates on banks is often oversimplified to “Higher

rates, good; Lower rates, bad.” But there are more nuances to interest rate


MANAGING INTEREST RATE RISK

management than this. For instance, at any point, banks can be either asset
sensitive or liability sensitive. Asset sensitivity means that the interest rate on
assets (like loans) will change more quickly than the interest rate on liabilities.
In this situation, rising rates will be profitable—at least for a while. But when
banks are liability sensitive and rates start to rise, the interest rate on liabilities
will change faster than the interest rate on assets, pinching margins.

However, banks aren’t nearly as interest rate sensitive as they used to
be. Banks try to closely match the life of their assets to their liabilities. And
big banks have additional risk management tools at their disposal that small
banks don’t.

To understand why banks aren't entirely at the mercy of prevailing interest
rates, consider how banks report their revenue and income. Unlike traditional
firms, there is no explicit “revenue” or “sales” line. Instead, there are four major
components to examine: (1) interest income, (2) interest expense, (3) noninter-
est (or fee) income, and (4) provisions for loan losses. Here’s an example of

how the top of a bank income statement will look:

$1,000 Interest income

—500 Interest expense

$ 500 Net interest income
-100 Provisions for loan losses
+500 Noninterest income

$ 900

For now, let’s ignore the noninterest income component because this is gen-
erally steadier than interest income and interest expense. When we do this,
we see that banks have a natural hedge built into their business. Consider the

following asa base case for a bank operating in a strong economy:

$1,000 Interest income

—500 Interest expense

$ 500 Net interest income

-100 Provisions for loan losses

$ 400

237


238

BANKS

Suppose now that the Federal Reserve cuts rates. Because the Fed under-
stands the benefit of maintaining a strong banking system, subtle cues are
generally communicated before any cuts. In the meantime, banks reposition
their balance sheets so that they're liability sensitive, thus allowing net inter-
est income to widen. However, if a cut happens, it’s for a good reason. A re-
cession might be causing unemployment to rise and bankruptcies to increase.
That, in turn, leads to higher provisions for loan losses for banks. Here’s what

might happen in a weak economy:

$1,000 Interest income

-400 Interest expense

$600 Net interest income
-200 Provisions

$ 400

Have interest rates impacted the bank? Yes and no. Sure, net interest income
widened, but this number is meaningless in isolation. After all, the weak
economy caused provisioning to double, thereby wiping out the wider inter-
est spread. In the real world, this relationship doesn’t come out to the perfect
round numbers laid out here, but it can be close. From 2000 to 2001, for ex-
ample, FDIC data shows that net interest income grew $16.1 billion for the
banking industry, mostly because of lower rates. However, the weakening
economy caused banks to give most of that benefit back in the form of $13.8
billion of increased provisioning,”

Virtually all banks can benefit in this type of scenario. However, big
banks also have additional tools at their disposal. For starters, the breadth of
their business lines makes it easier for them to reposition their balance sheet
to focus on one sector versus another, depending on the operating environ-
ment. Perhaps most importantly, big banks have the ability to access the cap-
ital markets to pass the buck by letting investors purchase the loans (much
like a bond) and assume the interest rate risk. Then banks—which still ser-
vice the loans and collect a fee doing so—can focus on their strengths: credit

and liquidity risk management.

>“Historical Statistics on Banking,” FDIC, Annual report.


ECONOMIC MOATS IN BANKS

At the end of 2002, for example, Bank One owned just $11.6 billion of
credit card loans—those it held on its balance sheet—yet it managed a total
card portfolio of $74 billion. This has happened industrywide and highlights
the strength of larger lenders. For instance, although commercial banks and
savings banks held 56 percent of all U.S. consumer loans on their balance
sheets in 1990, that number had fallen to 37 percent by the end of 2002.
Why? Because securitized assets—those that are sold off to investors and that
banks continue to service—had risen from 6 percent of loans outstanding to
35 percent, according to the Federal Reserve.

Thus, while margins can be impacted by interest rates, large financial insti-
tutions are making progress toward managing the interest rate cycle. As you're
thinking about interest rate risk, remember that the impact it has on a bank’s

balance sheet is complex, dynamic, and varies from institution to institution.

Economic Moats in Banks
Banks have taken considerable advantage of their birthright as leaders in risk
management. But several other factors have also led to deeper and wider eco-

nomic moats. These deterrents to competition include:

1. Huge balance sheet requirements
2. Large economies of scale
3. A regional oligopoly type industry structure

4. Customer switching costs

Balance Sheet

There likely is no industry more capital-intensive than banking or, more gen-
erally, financial services. Of the 20 largest corporations by asset size in early
2003, 19 were financial conglomerates, according to Morningstar data. The
only nonfinancial name to crack the top 20 was General Electric, and even
General Electric generates a big chunk of its earnings from its finance arm.
Heavy capital requirement is one of the primary competitive deterrents. In
2001, Citigroup, for instance, passed the $1 trillion mark of assets on its balance
sheet. It is very difficult to raise an asset base that is larger than the economies

of all but a handful of countries.

239


240 BANKS

Economies of Scale

Hand in hand with the capital requirements is the fact that banking offers
huge economies of scale. This has been a driving factor behind the industry's
pervasive consolidation, with the number of U.S. banks declining by 44 per-
cent from 1980 through 2001. Large banks (defined as those with more than
$10 billion of assets) generated $264,000 of revenue per employee in 2002,
according to the FDIC. This was 2.2 times higher than the per-employee rev-
enue generated by small community banks, defined as those with less than
$100 million of assets. Part of this advantage stems from the fact that large
bank employees were responsible for nearly double the assets on average, but
big banks were also better at squeezing their customers’ assets for more rev-
enue (primarily through fees). On this front, big banks generated 23 percent

more revenues per dollar of asset than small banks.

Market Oligopolies

Even though the top U.S. retail bank in 2002—Bank of America—still con-
trolled a bit less than 10 percent of the country’s deposits, the industry has
become very concentrated on a regional level, with the biggest banks in indi-
vidual cities often operating as difficult-to-penetrate oligopolies. For instance,
in the 10 largest U.S. metro areas in 2002, the top three banks on average had
50 percent deposit market share, with the remainder often fragmented among
hundreds of small community banks with no pricing power. Even in banking
endeavors that have gone national, a handful of players often dominate. For
instance, in corporate syndicated lending, the top three loan arrangers—].P.
Morgan Chase, Bank of America, and Citigroup—controlled 70 percent of
the underwriting market in 2002. In the credit card industry, Citigroup,
MBNA, and Bank One carve up about half of the market share, thanks to

their low-cost advantage.

Customer Switching

Another key advantage is that banks tend to have very loyal customers. U.S.
Bancorp, Wells Fargo, and other large retail banks estimate that attrition
runs at about 15 percent per year. In other words, 85 percent of accounts—
and, therefore, revenues—recur every year, a pretty sticky business. This is

partially due to branding and the desire to stick with a firm you trust.


HALLMARKS OF SUCCESS FOR BANKS

Equally important is inertia. Most people don’t switch banks, even if they
feel that they're being nickeled and dimed by their current bank. For in-
stance, a 2001 study found that 38 percent of checking account customers
didn’t recall the last time that the price was raised on their account. Of the

remaining 62 percent, only 4 percent of those people moved banks because

of the higher fees}

Hallmarks of Success for Banks

What should investors look for when investing in banks and other financiers?
Because their entire business—their strengths and their opportunities—is built
on risk, it’s a good idea to focus on conservatively managed institutions that
consistently deliver solid—but not knockout—profits. Here’s a list of some

major metrics to consider.

Strong Capital Base
A strong capital base is the number one issue to consider before investing in
a lender. Investors can look at several metrics. The simplest is the equity-to-
assets ratio; the higher, the better. It’s difficult to give a rule of thumb because
the level of capital should vary with each institution based on a number of
factors including the riskiness of its loans, but most of the bigger banks we
analyze have capital ratios in the 8 percent to 9 percent range. Also, look for
a high level of loan loss reserves relative to nonperforming. assets.
