
8 • Way of the Turtle

tracts by buying them back at $1.8452 or perhaps even at a small
loss at $1.8453 or $1.8454 instead of the $1.8450 you originally
were looking for.
In a case like this, the bid–ask spread might widen to $1.8450
bid and $1.8455 ask. Or the bid and the ask might both move up,
reaching $1.8452 bid and $1.8455 ask, as the scalpers who had
been selling short at $1.8452 started trying to get rid of their position at the same price.
What changed? Why did the price move up? Price movement
is a function of the collective perception of buyers and sellers in a
market: those who are scalping to make a few ticks many times
each day, those who are speculating for small moves during the day,
those who are speculating for large moves over the course of weeks
or months, and those who are hedging their business risks.
When the collective perception changes, the price moves. If, for
whatever reason, sellers no longer are willing to sell at the current
price but demand a higher price and buyers are willing to pay that
higher price, the price moves up. If, for whatever reason, buyers no
longer are willing to pay the current price but only a lower price
and there are sellers who are willing to sell at that lower price, the
price goes down.
The collective perception can take on a life of its own. If
enough ﬂoor traders are caught with short positions when a large
buy order comes in, panic can ensue. A large buyer might drive
the price up sufﬁciently to trigger other buy orders that have been
placed in the markets, causing even more price movement. For
this reason, experienced scalpers will get out of their short positions quickly and scalp only on the buying side when prices start
moving up.

Risk Junkies • 9

Using the example described above, a ﬂoor trader who is not
quick enough might rapidly ﬁnd himself with a 10-, 20-, or even
50-tick loss per contract. If he holds 50 contracts with a 50-tick loss,
this represents a loss of $15,625 (50  50  $6.25), more money
than he may have made that entire week or month. At some point
the psychological pain of watching so much money disappear may
be so great that the ﬂoor scalper panics and buys at whatever price
the market offers. In a fast market this may take only 1 or 2 minutes; in a slower market it may take 10 or 15.
One can see that the experienced trader not only buys out of her
short position early, she buys a few more contracts to proﬁt further
as the price moves up. When a less experienced trader panics and
starts buying, an opportunity is presented to an experienced trader
to again sell and exit his recently acquired long position to make
another proﬁt.

Death of the Pits
When we traded as Turtles, futures contracts were bought and sold
exclusively in trading pits at the commodity exchanges, where men
fought mano a mano to execute their trades with other traders
using hand signals and shouting. To outsiders it looked like insanity
at times.
The pits are dying. Electronic exchanges are replacing them in
almost every market. Among other beneﬁts, the costs for electronic
execution are lower, the executions are quicker, and traders can
determine if they are ﬁlled in milliseconds instead of minutes. These
advantages are killing the pit traded futures. In every market where

10 • Way of the Turtle

electronic trading and pit trading coexist, the volume has moved to
the electronic markets. In fact, it is likely that before this book goes
out of print there will no longer be U.S. exchanges where futures
contracts are traded in pits.
Those of us who have been involved in trading since before the
advent of electronic exchanges are saddened by the death of the pits.
In Chicago, there are many examples of traders like Richard Dennis
who came from a working-class background and made their millions
trading in the pits. For those who are skillful, the pits are better
places to trade. In the pits you can see the psychology of the market
in the faces of the other traders. Numbers on a screen just don’t convey the same kind of information. Many traders had their start running orders into the pit from the banks of phones that surrounded
them.These jobs are disappearing.
Nevertheless, while we are saddened and nostalgic about the pits,
the new electronic markets offer some new opportunities. Execution
costs are lower, and this creates opportunities to trade using strategies that trade more frequently. Some of the electronic markets
have such large volume that it is possible to buy and sell millions of
dollars worth of futures contracts without even beginning to move
the price.
Keep in mind that when I refer to traders in this book as executing trades in pits, this may not be the way trading is currently transacted in many markets. The players and actions, however, are still
the same. The pain of a losing trade is still present whether you
trade electronically or you call a broker on the phone and the trade
is transacted in the pits. The hedgers, scalpers, and speculators are
still there, hiding behind the screen—waiting to eat you alive if you
let them.

Risk Junkies • 11

The next chapter delves into the psychological biases that create differences in outlook and behavior between an inexperienced
and probably losing trader and his more successful and experienced
counterpart. It also discusses the different types of trading styles and
market states that favor each of those styles. Later chapters show
how Rich’s training turned very inexperienced traders into profitable ones in only a few weeks time.

This page intentionally left blank

two
TAMING THE
TURTLE MIND
Human emotion is both the source of opportunity in trading
and the greatest challenge. Master it and you will succeed.
Ignore it at your peril.

o trade well you need to understand the human mind. Markets
are comprised of individuals, all with hopes, fears and foibles.
As a trader you are seeking out opportunities that arise from these
human emotions. Fortunately, some very smart people—behavioral
ﬁnance pioneers—have identiﬁed the ways that human emotion
affects one’s decision-making process. The ﬁeld of behavioral
ﬁnance—brought to popular attention in Robert Shiller’s fascinating book, now in its Second Edition, titled Irrational Exuberance
and greater details of which were published by Hersh Shefrin in his
classic Beyond Greed and Fear—helps traders and investors understand the reasons why markets operate the way they do.
Just what does make prices go up and down? (Price movements
can turn an otherwise stoic individual into a blubbering pile of
misery.) Behavioral ﬁnance is able to explain market phenomena

T

• 13 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

14 • Way of the Turtle

and price action by focusing on the cognitive and psychological
factors that affect buying and selling decisions. The approach has
shown that people are prone to making systematic errors in circumstances of uncertainty. Under duress, people make poor
assessments of risk and event probabilities. What could be more
stressful than winning or losing money? Behavioral ﬁnance has
proved that when it comes to such scenarios, people rarely make
completely rational decisions. Successful traders understand this
tendency and beneﬁt from it. They know that someone else’s
errors in judgment are opportunities, and good traders understand
how those errors manifest themselves in market price action: The
Turtles knew this.

Emotional Rescue
For many years economic and ﬁnancial theory was based on the
rational actor theory, which stated that individuals act rationally and
consider all available information in the decision-making process.
Traders have always known that this notion is pure bunk. Winning
traders make money by exploiting the consistently irrational behavior
patterns of other traders. Academic researchers have uncovered a surprisingly large amount of evidence demonstrating that most individuals do not act rationally. Dozens of categories of irrational behavior and
repeated errors in judgment have been documented in academic studies. Traders ﬁnd it very puzzling that anyone ever thought otherwise.
The Turtle Way works and continues to work because it is based
on the market movements that result from the systematic and
repeated irrationality that is embedded in every person.
How many times have you felt these emotions while trading?

Taming the Turtle Mind • 15

• Hope: I sure hope this goes up right after I buy it.
• Fear: I can’t take another loss; I’ll sit this one out.
• Greed: I’m making so much money, I’m going to double my
position.
• Despair: This trading system doesn’t work; I keep losing
money.
With the Turtle Way, market actions are identiﬁed that indicate
opportunities arising from these consistent human traits. This chapter examines speciﬁc examples of how human emotion and
irrational thinking create repetitive market patterns that signal moneymaking opportunities.
People have developed certain ways of looking at the world that
served them well in more primitive circumstances; however, when
it comes to trading, those perceptions get in the way. Scientists call
distortions in the way people perceive reality cognitive biases. Here
are some of the cognitive biases that affect trading:
• Loss aversion: The tendency for people to have a strong
preference for avoiding losses over acquiring gains
• Sunk costs effect: The tendency to treat money that already
has been committed or spent as more valuable than money
that may be spent in the future
• Disposition effect: The tendency for people to lock in gains
and ride losses
• Outcome bias: The tendency to judge a decision by its
outcome rather than by the quality of the decision at the
time it was made

16 • Way of the Turtle

• Recency bias: The tendency to weigh recent data or
experience more than earlier data or experience
• Anchoring: The tendency to rely too heavily, or anchor, on
readily available information
• Bandwagon effect: The tendency to believe things because
many other people believe them
• Belief in the law of small numbers: The tendency to draw
unjustiﬁed conclusions from too little information
Although this list is not comprehensive, it includes some of the
most powerful misperceptions that affect trading and prices. Let’s
look at each cognitive bias in greater detail.

People who are affected by loss aversion have an absolute preference
for avoiding losses rather than acquiring gains. For most people, losing $100 is not the same as not winning $100. However, from a
rational point of view the two things are the same: They both represent a net negative change of $100. Research has suggested that
losses can have as much as twice the psychological power of gains.
In terms of trading, loss aversion affects one’s ability to follow
mechanical trading systems because the losses incurred in following
a system are felt more strongly than are the potential winnings from
using that system. People feel the pain of losing much more strongly
when they follow rules than they do when they incur the same losses
from a missed opportunity or by ignoring the rules of the system. Thus,
a $10,000 loss is felt as strongly as a $20,000 missed opportunity.
In business, sunk costs are costs that already have been incurred
and cannot be recovered. For example, an investment that already

Taming the Turtle Mind • 17

has been spent on research for a new technology is a sunk cost. The
sunk cost effect is the tendency for people to consider the amount
of money that already has been spent—the sunk costs—when making decisions.
Say the ACME Company has spent $100 million developing a
particular technology for building laptop displays. Now suppose
that after spending this money it becomes obvious that an alternative technology is much better and more likely to produce the
desired results in the required time frame. A purely rational
approach would be to weigh the future costs of adopting the new
technology against the future expense of continuing to use the
developed technology and then make a decision solely on the basis
of future beneﬁts and expenditures, completely disregarding the
amount of money that already has been spent.
However, the sunk cost effect causes those who make this decision to consider the amount of money previously spent and view it
as a waste of $100 million if a different technology is used. They
may choose to continue with the original decision even if it means
spending two or three times as much in the future to build the laptop displays. The sunk cost effect leads to bad decision making that
often is heightened in group situations.
How does this phenomenon inﬂuence trading? Consider the typical new trader who initiated a trade with the expectation of winning $2,000. At the time the trade ﬁrst was entered, he decided that
he would exit the position if the price dropped to the point where
a $1,000 loss would be incurred. After a few days, the trade’s position is at a $500 loss. A few more days pass and the loss grows to
over $1,000: More than 10 percent of the trading account. The
value of that account has dropped from $10,000 to less than $9,000.

18 • Way of the Turtle

This also happens to be the point where the trader previously
decided to exit.
Consider how cognitive biases might affect the decision whether
to keep true to the prior commitment to get out at a $1,000 loss or
to keep holding the position. Loss aversion makes it extremely
painful for the trader to consider exiting the position because that
would make the loss permanent. As long as he does not exit, he
believes there is a chance that the market will come back and turn
the loss into a win. The sunk cost effect makes the decision not one
of deciding what the market is likely to do in the future but one of
ﬁnding ways to avoid wasting the $1,000 that already has been spent
on the trade. So, the new trader continues to hold the position not
because of what he believes the market is likely to do but because
he does not want to take a loss and waste that $1,000. What will he
do when the price drops even more and the loss increases to $2,000?
Rational thought dictates that he will exit. Regardless of his earlier assumption about the market, the market clearly is telling him
that he was wrong, since it is far past the point at which he originally decided to exit. Unfortunately, both biases are even stronger
at this point. The loss he wishes to avoid is now larger and even
more painful to consider. For many, this kind of behavior will continue until the trader loses all his money or ﬁnally panics and exits
with a loss of 30 to 50 percent of his account, perhaps three to ﬁve
times what he had planned.
I worked in Silicon Valley during the height of the Internet craze
and had many friends who were engineers and marketers for hightech companies. Several of them were worth millions from stock
options on companies that recently had gone public. They watched
the prices go up day after day during late 1999 and early 2000. As

Taming the Turtle Mind • 19

prices started to drop in 2000, I asked many of them when they
were going to sell their stock. The reply was inevitably something
along the lines of the following: “I’ll sell if it gets back up to $X,” a
price that was signiﬁcantly higher than the level at which the market was when I asked. Almost every single one of my friends who
was in this position watched the price of his or her stock drop to a
tenth or even a hundredth of its previous value without selling the
shares. The lower it dropped, the easier it was for them to justify
waiting. “Well I’ve already lost $2 million. What’s a few more hundred thousand?” they would say.
The disposition effect is the tendency for investors to sell shares
whose price is increasing and keep shares that have dropped in
value. Some say that this effect is related to the sunk cost effect
since both provide evidence of people not wanting to face the reality of a prior decision that has not worked out. Similarly, the tendency to lock in winning trades stems from the desire to avoid
losing the winnings. For traders who exhibit this tendency, it
becomes very difﬁcult to make up for large losses when winning
trades are prematurely cut short of their potential.
Outcome bias is the propensity to judge a decision by its outcome
rather than by the quality of the decision at the time it was made.
Much of life is uncertain. There are no right answers to many of the
questions that involve risk and uncertainty. For this reason, a person
sometimes will make a decision that he considers rational and that
appears to be correct, but as a result of unforeseen and unforeseeable
circumstances that decision will not lead to the desired outcome.
Outcome bias causes people to put too much emphasis on what
actually occurred rather than on the quality of the decision itself.
In trading, even a correct approach can result in losing trades, per-

20 • Way of the Turtle

haps a few in a row. These losses can cause traders to doubt themselves and their decision process, and they then evaluate the
approach they have been using negatively because the outcome of
that approach has been negative. The next bias makes this problem particularly acute.
Recency bias is the tendency for individuals to place greater
importance on more recent data and experience. A trade that was
made yesterday weighs more heavily than do trades from last week
or last year. Two months of losing trades can count as much as or
more than the six months of winning trades that happened previously. Thus, the outcome of a series of recent trades will cause most
traders to doubt their method and decision-making process.
Anchoring is the tendency for people to rely too heavily on readily available information when making a decision involving uncertainty. They may anchor a recent price and make decisions on the
basis of how the current price relates to that price. This is one of
the reasons my friends had such difﬁculty selling their stocks: They
were anchoring on the recent highs and comparing the current
price with those highs. After they made that comparison, the current price always looked too low.
The observation that people often believe things because many
other people believe them is known as the bandwagon effect or
the herd effect. The bandwagon effect is partially responsible for
the seemingly unstoppable increase in prices at the end of a price
bubble.
People who fall under the spell of the law of small numbers
believe that a small sample closely resembles the population from
which it is drawn. The term is taken from the statistical law of large
numbers, which shows that a large sample drawn from a popula-

Taming the Turtle Mind • 21

tion does closely resemble the population from which it is taken.
This law is the basis of all polling. A sample of 500 taken randomly
from a larger population can give very good estimations for a population of 200 million or more people.
In contrast, very small samples do not reveal much about the
underlying population. For example, if a trading strategy works
four times out of a test of six times, most people would say the strategy is a good one, whereas statistical evidence indicates that there
is not enough information to draw that conclusion with any certainty. If a mutual fund manager outperforms the indexes three
years in a row, he is considered a hero. Unfortunately, a few years
of performance says very little about what the long-term expectations might be. Belief in the law of small numbers causes people
to gain and lose too much conﬁdence too quickly. When combined with the recency effect and outcome bias, it often results in
traders abandoning valid approaches just before those approaches
start working again.
Cognitive biases have a profound effect on traders because if
a trader is not inﬂuenced by them, almost every bias creates
opportunities to make money. In the following chapters, as speciﬁc aspects of the Turtle Way are explored, you will see how
avoiding these biases can provide you with a signiﬁcant advantage in trading.

The Turtle Way
Now that we’ve discussed the mind-set of a trader, let’s look at the
many ways to make money trading. Different types of trading strategies or trading styles have their aﬁcionados. In fact, some traders

22 • Way of the Turtle

believe in their particular style with such fervor that all others are
considered inferior. I hold no such belief. Anything that works,
works. Doggedly sticking to a method to the exclusion of all others
is foolish. This section explores some of the most popular trading
styles currently in use. The ﬁrst approach I’ll discuss is known as
trend following.

Trend Following
In trend following, the trader attempts to capitalize on large price
movements over the course of several months. Trend followers
enter trades when markets are at historical highs or lows and exit
when a market reverses and sustains that movement for a few
weeks.
Traders spend a lot of time developing methods to determine
exactly when a trend has begun and when it has ended; however,
all the approaches that are effective have very similar performance
characteristics. Trend following generates excellent returns and has
done so consistently for as long as anyone has traded futures contracts, but it is not an easy strategy for most people to follow for several reasons.
First, large trends occur fairly infrequently; this means that trendfollowing strategies generally have a much higher percentage of
losing trades than winning trades. It may be typical for a trendfollowing system to have 65 or 70 percent losing trades.
Second, in addition to losing money when there are no trends,
trend-following systems lose when trends reverse. A common
expression that the Turtles and other trend followers use is “The
trend is your friend until the end when it bends.” The bends at the
end can be brutal both on your account and on your psyche.

Taming the Turtle Mind • 23

Traders refer to these losing periods as drawdowns. Drawdowns usually begin after a trendy period ends, but they can continue for
months when markets are choppy, and the trend-following strategies continue to generate losing trades.
Drawdowns generally are measured in terms of both their length
(in days or months) and their extent (usually in percentage terms).
As a general rule, one can expect drawdowns for trend-following
systems to approach the level of the returns. Thus, if a trendfollowing system is expected to generate a 30 percent annual return,
you can expect a losing period in which the account may drop 30
percent from its highs.
Third, trend following requires a relatively large amount of
money to trade using reasonable risk limits because of the large distance between the entry price and the stop loss price at which one
would exit if the trade did not work out.
Trading with a trend-following strategy with too little money
greatly increases the odds of going bust. We will examine this problem in much greater detail in Chapter 8, “Risk and Money Management.”
