
Requirements
With this rough road map in hand, we can next consider the prerequisites and necessities
of trading. On one hand, the requirements seem to be minimal: anyone with a few thousand dollars and an Internet connection can open an account and place trades, but this

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

378

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

does not mean that you can compete effectively, anymore than buying a football qualifies
you to be in the NFL. Just because you have access to a market and can execute effectively does not mean that you can profit in an environment that immediately punishes
any errors or inaccuracies. Many traders who fail do so because they have unrealistic
expectations about what it takes to be a trader, and these misconceptions are reinforced
by many authors and gurus. What follows is a brief but brutally realistic assessment of
the basic requirements a beginning trader needs in order to have a chance of competing
successfully in the marketplace.

Time Time is important in at least two different meanings. First, you must be able to
devote a sufficient amount of time on a regular schedule to building trading knowledge
and skills. Within reason, the more time you can devote to the task, the quicker you
will grow. It is important that you have a regular schedule for reviewing current market
action and potential trades, and also important to have a time to review your own trades
and your performance. It is better to have many repeated, regular work sessions than
to work one marathon session infrequently. For instance, most developing traders will
find that a half hour a day, every day, is more rewarding than a single 12-hour session on
the weekend. Remember, part of the reason for the length of the learning curve is that
you are physically restructuring your brain; this process works most efficiently in the
presence of repeated and constant stimuli.
These physical changes in the brain also take time, and it is important to be realistic
about the amount of time required for the entire learning curve. Most traders are unlikely
to find any degree of enduring success in less than three years—a three- to four-year time
horizon is consistent with what is required to achieve some degree of mastery in most
other fields. It does sometimes happen that new traders start in exactly the right environments and have quick success, but this is probably the worst thing that can happen to a
new trader. Many traders made quick and easy profits in the dot-com bubble in the late
1990s, as did those who began their trading adventures during the 2007 to 2008 financial
crisis and crude oil bubble. Very few traders who begin in an easy environment like this
have long and successful careers. When markets revert to more normal conditions, they
are not able to adapt to the slower pace and to a trading environment that requires real
skill and discipline.
You should be prepared to endure three years of trading with very limited success,
especially if you are gauging success by the bottom-line profit and loss (P&L). It is entirely possible that the majority of your trading experiences in this period will consist
of booking constant losses, but this is a normal part of the development process. You
will have triumphs, breakthroughs, and successes, but do not expect to be profitable;
no trader should make a call on his or her long-term ability in those first three years of
trading. If you find you do not love trading as much as you expected, then consider it an
important lesson learned and move on to something that does give you joy. On the other
hand, if you find yourself captivated by the process but are frustrated by your lack of
trading ability, persevere.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

Becoming a Trader

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

379

Capital It certainly is possible to trade for a living or to trade as a career, but there
are significant constraints that must be considered. Most people do not have realistic
expectations about the returns that professional traders make, so many of these traders
believe they will be able to support their lifestyle with $100,000 (or less) of risk capital. At
the institutional level, traders who can consistently make a 25 percent return on capital
each year are very rare; these are the rock stars in the industry. Many competent traders
are able to, at best, beat their benchmarks by a few percentage points; if you can do so by
even a few basis points consistently, you can have a very successful career as a money
manager. It is unrealistic to expect to consistently return hundreds of percents a year on
your capital; it may happen in some extraordinary years, but this is not a realistic longterm plan. Do not go into this business as an individual trader expecting to dramatically
outperform the industry benchmarks.
It is also necessary for the developing trader to have a sufficient amount of risk capital to fund the learning curve. You will lose money while you are learning to trade. Make
no mistake about it—plan to lose money. Too many traders start off with very small (less
than $25,000) accounts and plan not only to be profitable but to pay living expenses out
of that account very quickly. This is unrealistic and is a formula that virtually assures failure. Plan for additional funds for educational expenses, books, and possibly even some
graduate-level coursework, depending on your interests and educational background.

Working in a Team Many of the best professional traders work in a team, and some
of them count it as an essential part of their success. For this to be most effective, the
team must actually share both trading decisions and P&L; though is it scary, the reason
this arrangement works is that your decisions will have an impact on someone else’s P&L
and vice versa. Traders working in this arrangement are essentially yoked together—they
will succeed or fail together. There are many advantages to this arrangement, but the
most significant of them deal with the issues of discipline and self-control. It is much
more difficult to do something reckless or stupid if you know that not only will you have
to be accountable to another person, but your mistake will actually cost that person
money. Teammates who work together closely develop a sense of each other’s rhythm,
strengths, and weaknesses, so it is often easy to address behavioral problems before they
have an impact on the P&L. In addition, there are obvious advantages of having two sets
of eyes on trading questions and market data, and the camaraderie of a trusted teammate
can counteract the isolation of trading.
This is not a relationship to be entered into lightly or halfway. It is important that you
know and trust the other person, because you will be giving that individual full access
to your trading capital. Firm, written contracts are also essential, outlining responsibilities and obligations for both parties. It is also worth considering that this arrangement is
problematic for developing traders and may be much more suitable for established, consistent traders. Having another person in the decision process can compound the already
severe emotional challenges developing traders face. In addition, two developing traders
will grow at different rates and will have different sets of strengths and weaknesses.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

380

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

There is great potential for reinforcement of weaknesses and additional confirmation
bias if developing traders work too closely in teams.
It is possible to work an arrangement like this at a distance, though there are many
advantages to working in the same office. If you decide to pursue this relationship, spend
a lot of time considering how you will work with your teammate. Expectations must be
clearly defined. Have a clear plan for how work will be divided; it makes sense to do
some of the work together, but most teams find it useful to have done a good deal of
individual work before bringing ideas to the team. Expect that you both will make errors,
and expect to be called out on them. One of the reasons you are working with another
person is to have the benefit of someone looking over your shoulder and monitoring
your emotional state, but the first time you are on tilt and someone taps you on the
shoulder to suggest that you need to step back is always a difficult moment in the life
of a trader. It requires exceptional maturity and self-awareness to successfully manage a
teammate relationship in the emotionally charged trading environment, but the benefits
can be substantial. This element of teamwork is a secret of top-level professional trading
that is not often available to the at-home individual trader.
Working with a Mentor Most traders who achieve some degree of success owe
much of that success to the guidance of a mentor. (Personally, I can think of three people
without whom I probably would not have succeeded in this business.) There are many
ways this relationship can work, ranging from one-on-one instruction over an extended
period of time to much less frequent course corrections. In addition, a mentor can guide
a new trader in many different ways. Some mentors are teachers who prefer to work with
students who have little or no market knowledge, starting at the beginning and building
a comprehensive approach to trading. Others may work more as coaches, preferring to
take a student’s system and knowledge and help to shape the application of that system.
There are at least three important issues to consider about the mentoring relationship. First, both parties must be committed and there must be a clear understanding of
responsibilities and obligations. An effective mentor does not have to spend long hours
with a student, but if the student expects that kind of time and the mentor does not, the
relationship will not be successful. If a mentor expects to work only with full-time, professional traders, then a student working very hard to learn on evenings and weekends
is probably not going to fulfill expectations.
Second, the question of fit is very important, both in style and personality. A mentor with a hard-core, drill-sergeant style approach will be completely ineffective with a
student seeking a supportive, nurturing approach. A mentor who focuses on intraday
trading will probably be less effective working with students who focus on longer-term
trades—there certainly can be exceptions to these rules, but the issue of fit is paramount.
Last, the issue of compensation should be understood clearly by both parties. Mentoring can be a major investment of time and energy from the mentor’s side, so it
is reasonable for that person to be paid for the time, but too many mentors are not
competent traders themselves. Anyone can claim to offer trader mentoring, but it is difficult for the student to truly evaluate the mentor’s skill and ability.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

Becoming a Trader

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

381

Technology: Software and Hardware It goes without saying that you must have
access to good infrastructure: On the hardware side, you must have one or more good
computers with data backup and fast, reliable Internet access. In terms of software, you
need a few important tools:

r Execution software: Many traders base their choice of broker on the quality of
its execution software. It should be easy to use, allow easy tracking of positions
and open orders, and have excellent accounting support. Most traders find that
it is a good trade-off to pay slightly higher commissions for better software and
accounting—many of the lowest-cost brokers do not offer acceptable software interfaces, though this gap has closed in recent years.
r Charting software: Most execution packages incorporate some degree of charting
capability, but many traders find it worthwhile to pay for specialized charting programs. Good charting software has fast access to data, all of the relevant data for
markets you trade, and the ability to customize displays to fit your preferences. Most
higher-level programs will allow you to write programs for custom indicators and
customized data processing; some traders find this to be a valuable capability. Last,
if you trade futures, make sure you understand how your vendor handles rolls and
continuous contracts.
r Record-keeping software: There are several ways to keep the records you need, and
each trader must develop his or her own system. Some will prefer to keep journals
and trade records in a word processing document, while others will prefer more
complex solutions like a database.
r Microsoft Excel: This deserves its own bullet point since nearly every trader will
use it in some way. Invest the time learning to use it well and properly: be comfortable with formulas, references, and macros, and learn to use it without touching
the mouse. (Keyboard shortcuts are literally five times faster than corresponding
operations with the mouse.) Excel is adequate for many basic analytical and recordkeeping tasks.
r Analytical software: If you intend to perform deeper analysis of market tendencies
and create your own statistical studies, you will need to move beyond Excel at some
point. Excel is capable of doing some fairly in-depth analyses, but it is not the right
tool for this job. Some versions of Excel have small but persistent calculation errors
that can cause serious errors in trading applications, and Excel’s management of
large data sets is cumbersome at best. Though it is a major commitment of both time
and money, learning to use a software package like SPSS, SAS, Stata, or R is the only
alternative for traders wanting to do their own deep-dive data analysis.
A Business Plan and Trading Plan Always think of your trading as a business
and treat it as such. No one would try to start a business with insufficient capital, with no
plan for how to expand the business, and with no vision of where the business could be
in one, five, or 10 years, but this is exactly how most people start trading. The challenge,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

382

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

of course, is that you do not know at the beginning if you will be able to develop the skills
to trade successfully, or how long it will take. There are many more uncertainties than in
most other areas of business, but there are parallels—imagine a company that is making
a speculative bet on a new product that may or may not catch on, or a new industrial
process that may or may not be able to take market share from existing competitors. In
these cases, the companies would make very sure that they understood the competitive
marketplace, that they had access to resources they need to succeed, and that they had
sufficient capital to weather the start-up period, though their long-term success might be
less than certain.
With this in mind, craft a business plan for your trading operations. This will be a plan
that, hopefully, will mature as your trading abilities develop. In the beginning, perhaps
this is a document that focuses on your development and provides a yardstick for measuring your commitment. As you actually start trading, the document can be modified
to encompass risk parameters, markets traded, and new directions you are exploring.
(Strike a balance between modifying this document often enough that it is relevant and
having a good control document. If the plan is always changing, it is probably not very
helpful.) Hopefully, at some point you will expand this plan and perhaps even use it to
recruit partners or investors as your trading business grows. The sky truly is the limit,
but you must approach this as an extremely competitive and difficult business.
While the business plan is the overarching control document, the trading plan is more
dynamic and flexible. The trading plan defines exactly what you will and will not do in
the market, and it will evolve as your trading abilities mature. It is not unusual to revise a
trading plan at least slightly every month; each trader will adapt the concept of a trading
plan slightly, but a good plan will include all of the following:

r Schedule for your daily or weekly research and trade review.
r List of patterns and ideas you will trade, similar to Chapter 6.
r Target activity and risk levels. How many trades a day/week/month will you allow?
How many positions can you have on at the same time? What is the maximum percentage of your capital that can be at risk at any time? How and when will you use
margin? Is there a loss level at which you will stop trading for the day/week/month?
r A clear plan for trade management. Will you enter all at once or scale in? Will you
take partial profits? If so, where and how?
r How often will you make trading decisions? Are you able to make decisions in the
middle of the day, or do you prefer to create a plan the night before and simply
execute it as faithfully as possible during the trading day?
Once you have these documents, much of your work boils down to making sure that
you are following the plan. Remember, any evaluation of your performance over any time
period is an evaluation of both your plan and how well you followed that plan. Follow the
plan as precisely as possible to remove extraneous sources of variation in your returns.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Becoming a Trader

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

383

Commit to the Process
In many ways, the intellectual problems of trading are trivial. This may seem to be an
ironic statement, given that it appears in a large book about trading, but the essential
elements of market structure and trade management could fit on a single piece of paper. The elaborations, variations, and applications are much more extensive and will
reward long study, but the core knowledge of trading is not complicated. Most traders
rather quickly assimilate the foundation, but the gap between knowledge and execution
must be bridged. The core skills of competent trading—and be clear that skill is not the
same as knowledge—are primarily emotional. If traders have not mastered discipline and
emotional poise in the face of volatile market movements, their trading will be forever
plagued by errors that will erode whatever edge they may have had. Though it is possible
to accelerate the learning curve in many areas, the only way to master emotional control
is through actual trading over an extended period of time. The process of trading can
be summarized as doing analysis, making decisions, putting capital at risk, and dealing
with the consequences. Only by living through that loop repeatedly can the trader make
progress; regular, repeated exposure is the key.
Stay Small Again, while you are going through this learning curve, expect to lose
money. This is what new and developing traders do—they lose money while they are
learning. Therefore, it makes sense to keep your risk as small as possible on each
trade until you have achieved consistency. The gain or loss on any individual trade should
be so small that it is insignificant; the point of early trading is to gain experience and to
learn about the trading process while keeping the losses as small as possible.
Granularity is an issue in some markets. For instance, equity and forex traders can
usually trade small enough that they can risk a tiny amount, say $50, per trade. A trader
who has a $25,000 to $50,000 trading account can lose $50 many times in a row before
he has made a dent in his allocated capital. Futures and options traders, in contrast, may
often find it difficult to risk less than $500 on a trade because of the size of the contracts.
From a purely technical perspective, there are reasons why forex may be very difficult for
shorter-term traders, but equities might offer a better learning environment than either
futures or options for newer traders. This point cannot be overemphasized: keep your
risk small enough that the win or loss on any individual trade is insignificant until you
have shown many months of consistent profitability.
Periodic Evaluations It is important to have a regularly scheduled time to evaluate
your trading performance, both over the most recent period and over a longer time span.
This would also be an appropriate time to check in with a more experienced trader, a
coach, or a mentor if you do not work with someone on a regular basis. For most traders,
the end of the month is a natural spot, but for other, longer-term traders, the end of the
quarter might be more suitable. Find a balance between having frequent enough reviews
to make useful corrections and having long enough periods of trading in between so that

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

384

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

performance trends are meaningful. (Even for active traders, a week is too short a time
for a serious reevaluation.)
This review does not have to be a complicated, painful process, but it must be done
regularly. At a minimum, review your equity curve (perhaps without commissions for the
developing trader), the performance of the various categories of trades you are trading,
and each individual trade made over the period. It may also make sense to review psychological journals and performance, and most importantly, to note any recurring errors.
The result of this periodic evaluation should be a written list of things to work on in the
next period. This does not have to be a long list; in fact, many times it will be useful to
identify only the two or three biggest issues the trader is facing. Note that there is an obvious tie-in with the quality of your record keeping and the ease with which this review
can be done. If your records are a mess, then this review will be much less effective.
Dealing with Setbacks If you are an individual self-directed trader, expect setbacks
and failures, especially in the first two years. Expect that your triumphs may be promptly
followed by dramatic failures, that you will make mistakes in areas you thought you had
mastered, and that any positive P&L may be quickly erased next week. Furthermore,
do not expect that your learning curve will be described by a straight, upward-sloping
line. It is far more common for students of any high-level skill to find that their progress
comes in a series of jumps interspersed with long, flat plateaus. It is often difficult to
maintain motivation during the flat periods, because you will feel that you are working
very hard and not making any progress, and then progress comes, seemingly overnight,
in a blinding flash. The reason for the sudden spurts of progress is the hard work done on
the plateaus, but it can be difficult to keep up very hard work for seemingly no reward.
You will hear various stats suggesting that somewhere around 95 percent of selfdirected traders fail. The definition of failure, of course, depends on your definition of
success. What is success in the market? Is it being able to make a living, pay your bills,
and have enough left over for security? Is it having the satisfaction of being able to do
something extremely difficult well, so that being able to manage the trading process is itself a degree of success? Is it as simple as beating the indexes by a few percentage points,
consistently outperforming what a professional investment manager would be able to do
for your account? Your definition of success will probably change as your trading ability matures and your personal financial goals shift, but trading success must be both
financial and nonfinancial. Be clear that trading is about making money—whatever other
motivations and satisfactions are tied into the process, at the end of the day there must
be financial reward and it must be substantial. Trading is difficult, time-consuming, and
emotionally challenging, and nearly all traders find that their trading income is highly
variable, so a higher average (annual) income is required relative to other professions.
However, it will be very difficult to succeed if you are not absolutely fascinated by markets and the process of trading. If you don’t love it, you won’t be a very good trader, so
there must be motivations for trading that go beyond financial gain.
If we redefine success as making substantial financial gains on a percentage basis,
then I suspect the success rate for individual traders is far less than 5 percent. In fact,
