
318
I

I

Prescription

market price at the termination of the experiment serves as a
criterion by which the experiment can be judged. The criterion
does not meet the requirements of scientific method, because the
market price is not independent of the participants' decisions in
the way in which the events studied by natural scientists are
independent of the statements that scientists make about them.
Nevertheless, it is a useful criterion because it is just as real and
just as amenable to scientific observation as any natural phenomenon. Moreover, it is of vital interest to market participants. Thus
the market mechanism has the merit of providing an objective
criterion albeit a biased one.
Haw great that merit is we czn appreciate only xhen we consider what happens in its absence. For that purpose, we must look
at centrally planned economies which, in revulsion against the
deficiencies of market economies, have eschewed the use of the
pricing mechanism. Output has to be measured in physical quantities, and the distortions are far worse than the excesses of the
market.
Winston Churchill once said that democracy is the worst form
of government except for all the others. The same can be said
about the market mechanism: it is the worst system of allocating
resources except for all the others. Indeed, there are significant
similarities between the election mechanism and the market
mechanism. It would be difficult to argue that elections optimize
the political leadership of a country: the skills needed to attract
votes bear little relevance to the qualities a candidate is going to
need once he is in office. Nevertheless, the very fact that he has to
run for election imposes a discipline which helps prevent some
of the more egregious excesses.
The value of an objective criterion is perhaps best appreciated
subjectively. We all live in a fantasy world. Having an affinity for
abstract ideas, I am perhaps more apt to be carried away into a
world of my own creation than many other people. The markets
have always helped to preserve my sense of reality. It may seem
paradoxical that my sense of reality should be rooted in the markets when markets often behave so strangely that they strike other
onlookers as unreal; yet as a market participant, I am not merely
aware of being connected to reality: I actually feel it in my guts. I
react to events in the marketplace as an animal reacts to events in
the jungle. For instance, I used to be able to anticipate an impending disaster because it manifested itself in the form of a backache.

Free Markets Versus Regulation

319

1 was of course unable to tell what shape the disaster would take:
by the time I could identify it, my backache would dissolve. There
was a time when my involvement with the market was allembracing-much to the detriment of my relationships with
human beings. Now that I have managed to distance myself, my
market sense has sufferbd. Events often reach me as white noise:
I cannot make sense of8them. For instance, during the real-time
experiment, market dejelopments had sharp contours; during the
control period, the outlines became more blurred.
It is interesting to observe how my market involvement relates
to my ability to organize abstract ideas. One would think that
being active in the market would interefere with writing, but the
opposite seems to be the case: the discipline of having to make
investment decisions prevents me from getting too far divorced
from reality. During the three years that 1 was writing the The
Burden of Consciousness, I lost my ability to make money in the
stock market and eventually I got lost in my own abstractions.
Again, during the three years when I was trying to make sense of
the international debt problem I saw my ability to operate in the
market diminish, and, what is worse, I sensed that my analysis of
the debt problem was becoming increasingly removed from reality. By contrast, the real-time experiment brought both my investment activities and mysability to express myself to a high pitch.
I mention this because it may have more than subjective relevance. Had I been an academic, I could have persbted with my
analysis of the debt problem, and if reality failed to conform to
my expectations, I could have defended my analysis by blaming
extraneous developments. Eventually, some of my expectations
were fulfilled, albeit with a delay of several years. As a marketoriented man, I found such a delay intolerable, and I felt obliged
to search for, and to recognize, the flaws in my argument. As an
academic, I could have claimed to be vindicated. The point I am
trying to make is that the market is a harder taskmaster than academic debate.
Yet it is easy to exaggerate the merits of having an objective
criterion at our disposal. We have become so fixated on objective
criteria that we are inclined to endow them with a value they do
not intrinsically possess. Profit-the bottom line-efficiencytakes on the aspect of an end in itself, instead of being a means to
an end. We tend to measure every activity by the amount of
money it brings. Artists are valued according to the price their

320
I

1

Prescription

products sell for. What is worse, we often want to make a profit
from activities that ought to be otherwise motivated. Politicians
want to earn lecture fees and sell their memoirs; White House
aides become lobbyists; generals in charge of procurement angle
for lucrative jobs in industry, and so do lawyers working for regulatory agencies. The profit motive has become so all-embracing
that we find it hard to accept when someone is motivated by
considerations other than profit. An American executive finds it
a nuisance when an Englishman is unwilling to relocate for the
sake of a better job, a South African black who prefers to destroy
civilization rather than put up with apartheid strikes us as positively barbaric-not to .mention a phecsmenon like Islamic fundamentalism which is totally beyond our ken. Values that
motivate people cannot be readily translated into objective terms;
and exactly because individual values are so confusing, we have
elevated profit and material wealth-which can be readily measured in terms of money-into some kind of supreme value.
Surely that is an exaggeration. The fact is that in a world of imperfect understanding, there is some kind of exaggeration or bias
involved in every value. In our civilization, the value of profit is
exaggerated and so is the value of objectivity.
Let us take a closer look at the kind of criterion market prices
provide. The distinction we have drawn between scientific
method and alchemy will come in useful. I have argued that in
the study of social phenomena we need to distinguish between
two kinds of validity: one associated with truth, the other with
effectiveness. In natural science, the distinction is missing: theories are effective only if they are true; that is why alchemy does
not work. Following this line of thought, we can argue that the
market price provides a criterion of effectiveness but not a criterion of truth. Future market prices will determine how the various
participants fare, but they will not determine whether their understanding is correct. Only if market prices tended towards an
equilibrium would the two criteria merge: the market price would
then be the "correct" price.
We can see now how important the concept of equilibrium is.
It serves as a bridge between natural and social science and
eliminates the disturbing dichotomy between truth and effectiveness that characterizes the study of social phenomena. Unfortunately, the bridge does not stand up, because imperfect
understanding renders the concept of equilibrium inappropriate.

Free Markets Versus Regulation

321

Without an innate tendency towards equilibrium, the course of
events cannot be deterknined by scientific method; but it can be
shaped by the methods of alchemy.
The attempt to transpose the methods and criteria of natural
science to the social sphere is unsustainable. It gives rise to inflated expectations thai cannot be fulfilled. These expectations go
far beyond the immediate issue of scientific knowledge and color
our entire way of thinking. The belief that economic policy ought
to aim at the optimum allocation of resources has dominated political thought-and political action-since the middle of the
nineteenth century. Those on the left wanted the State to take
charge of the allocation; those on the right wanted to leave it to
the market mechanism. Under the influence of Marxism, the pursuit of the optimum led to the total abandonment of the market
mechanism in large parts of the world. Even in market-oriented
economies, the State was given a large role in correcting the imperfections of the market mechanism. Gradually, the harmful side
effects of State intervention have become increasingly evident,
and the prevailing bias has swung back in favor of free markets.
We are quite willing to recognize the fallacy in Marxism, but
we are much less inclined to admit that the theory of perfect
competition is imbued with a similar fallacy. Both are built on
the assumption of perfect knowledge. In one case, the assumption
produces market equilibrium; in the other, it finds expression in
an unconditional prediction of the course of histop. It is worth
pointing out that both theories originated in the nineteenth century, when the limitations of knowledge were not yet recognized
and science reigned supreme.
Once we recognize that the optimum is unattainable, we me in
a better position to evaluate the merits and shortcomings of the
market mechanism. I do not want to get involved in the problems
connected with the distribution of wealth-not because I do not
consider them important, but only because my analysis has little
to contribute to the subject; I want to focus on one particular
weakness of the market mechanism: its innate instability. Its
cause has been identified: it derives from the two-way connection
between thinking and reality that I have labeled reflexivity. It is
not in operation in all markets at all times; but if and when it
occurs, there is no limit to how far away both perceptions and
events can move from anything that could be considered equilibrium.

322

'

t

Prescription

Instability is not necessarily harmful; indeed, if it were described as dynamic adjustment, it would sound positively benign.
But carried to extremes, it can give rise to sudden reversals that
may take on catastrophic proportions. That is particularly the
case where credit is involved, because the liquidation of collateral
can lead to sudden compression of market prices. The prevention
of excessive instability is therefore a necessary condition for the
smooth functioning of the market mechanism. It is not a condition
that the market mechanism can ensure on its own. On the contrary, I have presented evidence that unregulated financial markets tend to become progressively more unstable. The evidence is
most clea-cut ir, the currancy markets, but it is also qiiite psranasive with regard to the expansion and contraction of credit.
Whether stock markets would prove inherently unstable if there
were no credit involved remains an open question, because stockmarket booms are always associated with credit expansion. Excessive instability can be prevented only by some sort of regulation.
How much instability is excessive is a matter of judgment. Standards vary with time. The degree of dislocation we are willing to
tolerate today, as measured by unemployment figures, would
have seemed inconceivable a few decades ago when the memories
of the Great Depression were still fresh and the drawbacks of fullemployment policies less evident. Similarly, the restrictions on
corporate restructuring have been greatly relaxed between the
conglomerate boom of the 1960s and the mergermania of the
1980s.
The trouble with regulation is that the regulators are also
human, and apt to err. In order to avoid arbitrary behavior and
abuse of power, rules and regulations need to be fixed in advance,
and it is difficult to devise regulations that are flexible enough to
meet all contingencies. Regulations tend to be rigid and to hinder
innovation. The rigidities and distortions they introduce tend to
be just as cumulative as the instability of an unregulated market.
Income taxes provide a good example. The steeper the rates and
the longer they stay in effect, the more widespread the tax avoidance and the more complex the tax code.
I do not want to keep the discussion at such a high level of
generality much longer, because it can easily deteriorate into
empty phrases. I shall try to make some policy suggestions in the
next chapter; here I want to make only one general point. Both

Free Markets Versus Regulation

323

regulation and unrestrained competition can be harmful when
carried to extremes, but the failure of one extreme is no justification for turning to the other. The two extremes should be treated
not as alternatives, but as limits, within which the right balance
needs to be struck. Tbe task is complicated by our innate tendency to be biased in one direction or the other.
In The Burden of ;Consciousness, written some twenty-five
years ago, I developed a rather elaborate scheme along these lines.
I took the rate of change as my critical variable, and I argued that
people, with their imperfect understanding, are bound to exaggerate it in one directiori or the other. One extreme yields a traditional or a dogmatic inode of thinking according to which the
existing arrangements have to be accepted as they are because it
is inconceivable that they should be otherwise. The other extreme
produces a critical mode of thinking in which everything is considered possible until disproved. Each mode of thinking is linked
with a form of social organization which corresponds to it with
the degree of imperfection that is appropriate to the imperfect
understanding of the participants. In this way, the traditional
mode of thinking is associated with tribal society, the dogmatic
mode with totalitarian society, and the critical mode with Open
Society. Needless to say, I was very much under the influence of
Karl Popper. I opted for Open Society, but the choice was not
without qualification. Each form of social organization was found
wanting in something that could be found only% its opposite:
totalitarian society lacked freedom; Open Society lacked stability.
But given our innate bias, a stable equilibrium between the two is
just as unlikely to be attained as a stable equilibrium in a free
market. Sentiment is likely to swing in one direction or the other.
After nearly half a century of what now appears as excessive
regulation, we have been moving towards excessive deregulation.
The sooner we recognize that some kind of regulation is necessary
in order to maintain stability, the better our chances of preserving
the benefits of a nearly free market system.

TOWARD AN INTERNATIONAL
CENTRtZL, BANK

We have concluded that financial markets are inherently unstable. What practical measures are needed to prevent them from
breaking down? I find myself ill-qualified to provide an answer.
My strength lies in identifying the flaws in any system and not in
designing systems. I have long nurtured the fantasy of becoming
an economic reformer a la Keynes but the closer I come to getting
a hearing for my views, the more acutely aware I become of my
own limitations. My particular expertise is derived from the insight that all systems are flawed; but my understanding of any
particular system is always inferior to that of the experts. This
holds true for security analysis as well as finance and economics.
When I sat for an examination as supervisory security analyst, I
failed in every subject; in analyzing the credit-cum-regdatory
cycle, I felt the lack of a thorough grounding in the theory of
money; and, as the reader saw, in the real-time experiment my
greatest weakness was in economic forecasting. Both in my investment activities and in writing this book I could take the state
of the art in any particular subject as given without actually possessing it; but when it comes to designing a new financial system,
my lack of knowledge becomes a decided drawback.
Nevertheless, I feel I have a contribution to make, especially as
the prevailing wisdom has so little to offer. Keynesianism (as
distinct from Keynes) has been discredited by the inflation of the
1970s; monetarism is in the process of being shown to be irrelevant to a regime of variable exchange rates and large-scale international capital movements; and supply-side economics turns out

Toward an International Central Bank

325

to be not much more than a pun on the Keynesian emphasis of
the demand side. There is a general malaise, but no clear ideas. In
these circumstances even my vague and tentative ideas may prove
useful.
First, I think we s h ~ u l ddistinguish between economic policy
and systemic reform. Both are necessary, but neither is sufficient
by itself. It is difficult ;to imagine how any system could function
fully automatically. Experience shows that every system-be it
the gold standard, Bretton Woods, or freely floating exchange
rates-has broken down when it was not supported by the appropriate economic polidies. It is equally difficult to see how economic policies could 'correct the prevailing inhalances without
some sort of systemic reform. The various imbalances are interconnected and it is impossible to deal with one without affecting
the others.
We are confronted with a disconcerting array of imbalances and
instabilities. To mention but a few: unstable exchange rates, the
international debt problem, the chronic budget and trade deficits
of the United States, the chronic trade surplus of Japan, a chronic
worldwide surplus of agricultural and mineral products, unstable
commodity prices with particular emphasis on oil, unstable international capital movements, and unstable international financial
markets. Some of these instabilities are caused by economic policies and can be altered only by pursuing different ones; others are
inherent in the prevailing system and can be cured%nly by changing the system.
We can take as an example of the first kind of imbalance the
desire of the Japanese to produce more than they consume and
the apparent desire of the United States to consume more than it
produces. If unchecked, these tendencies will lead, in due course,
to the rise of Japan as the dominant economic power of the world
and to the decline of the United States. The transition is bound to
cause a great deal of commotion and dislocation, but its occurrence can be prevented only by changing economic and financial
policies and not by changing the financial system. The system
itself must be able to accommodate the transition, insofar as it
occurs; otherwise it will break down to the detriment of all parties
concerned.
An example of the second kind of imbalance is the prevailing
system of exchange rates. As we have seen, freely floating exchange rates are cumulatively destabilizing. The fact has now

326
I

I

Prescription

been recognized by the authorities, and the Plaza agreement has
committed them to managing the exchange rates. But there is no
agreement on how to do it. Managing exchange rates is tantamount to coordinating economic policies. If coordination can be
achieved on a voluntary basis, well and good. If not, a different
system will have to be devised.
In this chapter I shall explore the possibilities for systemic reform; the appropriate economic policies will be discussed only
tangentially.
In my opinion, there are three major problem areas that require
systemic reform: exchange rates, commodity pricing with special
emphasis on oil, and international debt. Each of these problem
areas has a number of aspects that cannot be dealt with individually but only as part of the whole system. There is a fourth major
problem area that is not even recognized as such: international
capital markets. They reflect, accommodate, and help to generate
the various other imbalances. Their rapid development is universally acclaimed as a welcome innovation and treated as yet another instance where markets spontaneously adjust to changing
needs. I contend that, in retrospect, the rapid growth of international capital markets will be recognized as yet another excess,
similar to the rapid growth of international bank lending in the
1970s. We all know that the international lending boom was
based on faulty foundations; I believe it is only a matter of time
before the flaws in international capital markets will be recognized.
At present, there is a strong predilection for treating problems
on a case-by-case basis. It is now generally agreed, for instance,
that exchange rates cannot be allowed to drift any further without
interference; but it is also agreed that the.interference has to be
gradual and tentative. The debate revolves around the question of
target zones: should they be tacit or explicit? The possibility of
returning to fixed exchange rates is more or less ruled out. Similarly, there is a recognition that the international debt problem
requires some new initiative; but the Baker Plan emphatically
insists on a case-by-case approach. It is easy to see why. A concession granted to one country can easily spread to all others, so that
any talk of systemic reform can precipitate a breakdown of the
system. As far as oil prices are concerned, the matter is left to
OPEC; the idea that consumer countries ought to cooperate to
bring stability to the industry has not even been broached.

Toward an International Central Bank

327

The step-by-step approach advocated by James Baker represents
a significant advance oier the hands-off approach taken by Donald Regan when he was at the Treasury. It constitutes a recognition that markets cannot be left to their own devices, that the
authorities have to proyide some direction if a breakdown is to
be avoided. The initiatibe taken at the Plaza meeting of the Group
of Five touched off a major rise in the world's stock and bond
markets. But the momentum generated by the Plaza meeting has
dissipated and we are once again drifting dangerously, If the
momentum could be recaptured by ad hoc measures, well and
good. But without effective international cooperation the dangers
of protectionism, currency dislocations, and a breakdown in debt
service loom larger than ever, and the need for systemic reform
becomes correspondingly more pressing.
Once we turn to systemic reform, the approach has to be completely reversed. Instead of dealing with individual problems in
isolation, we must tackle them all at the same time. Problems that
appear intractable on their own may fall into place within a larger
solution. The more cdmprehensive the scheme, the better its
chance of success. Perhaps the three or four major problem areas
I have mentioned could be treated separately, but it would be
more effective to deal with them simultaneously. 1 realize that
any radical change in prevailing arrangements goes against the
grain, especially in matters of international cooperation where the
common good has to be whittled down to accommdate national
interests. But there are times when reforms are both possible and
necessary. Usually, those are times of crisis.
In the following pages I shall discuss the major problem areas
separately, but the solution I shall suggest will link them together.
It involves the creation of an international central bank. Historically, central banking has evolved in response to crises. Each
central bank has its own history, although developments in one
financial center have also affected the others. The problems of the
present time are primarily international; hence, the solution must
also be international. We have the beginnings of international
central banking institutions: the Bank for International Settlement
was organized in 1930 in response to the German debt problem;
the IMF and the World Bank were founded in 1944 at Bretton
Woods. The next step ought to involve an enlargement of their
functions or the establishment of a new institution.
