
501

AU3772_book.fm Page 502 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

502

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
• On adverse breakout from Rectangle.
• On establishment of new Minor low or new Minor high in adverse
direction.
• On adverse breakout from Diamond.
• On adverse breakout from Wedge.
• On One-Day Reversal if marked by heavy volume or a gap.
• On adverse breakout from Flag or Pennant.
• On clear penetration of any Resistance or Support Level in the adverse direction.
• On an adverse Breakaway Gap.
• On the appearance of an Island after a move in the favorable direction.
• On penetration of basic trendline in the absence of pattern or other
favorable criteria.
Note: It is understood that all breakouts must close in the breakout
area. A closing 3% beyond the Support, trend, or pattern is sufficient
to give the danger signal. All takeouts are performed by the use of
⅛-point progressive stops.
Make new commitments
• In line with the Major Dow Trend, or to a limited extent in countertrend moves as insurance to reduce overall risk.
• On breakout from Head-and-Shoulders Pattern.
• On breakout from Symmetrical Triangle, provided it is not working
into the final third of its length toward the apex.
• On breakout from Right-Angle Triangle.
• On breakout from Rectangle, or (possibly) on points of contact, beginning with the sixth Reversal.
• On breakout from a Broadening Top.
• On breakout from Double or Multiple Top or Bottom. (By this is
meant breakout through the Bottom of the valley between Tops, or
upside penetration of the “dome” between Bottoms.)
• On breakout from Wedge, or (possibly) commitments within the
Wedge in the last third of its length as it approaches its apex.
• On Flags and Pennants, after sufficient Secondary or Corrective Move
by the pattern, or (possibly) within the pattern, provided that volume
and all other indications tend strongly to confirm the pattern.
• On clear penetration of a well-defined Support or Resistance Area.
• On Breakaway Gap (possibly).
• After formation of an important and well-defined Island following
a considerable move.
• On contact with, or penetration of, the “favorable” trendline if both
trendlines are moving in the Major Trend direction. (Blue Top
Trendline in a Bull Market, Red Bottom Trendline in a Bear Market.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 503 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-four:

A Quick Summation of Tactical Methods

503

Note: Breakouts and penetrations must show a closing in the breakout area and must conform to volume requirements. Breakout closings should conform to the 3% rule.
New commitments (marked “possibly”) may be made in certain cases
within some patterns: Rectangles, Wedges, Flags, and Pennants. Exceptional
care should be used in such cases.
It is extremely difficult to catch Breakaway Gaps, and we would not
recommend this as a general practice. EN: This is not so difficult as it was in
Magee’s time due to modern communications, computers, and the Internet.
All commitments, except those just noted, are made on the next following reaction or rally, to rules previously stated.
All commitments are protected by stops from the moment they are made.
Stops are moved, as conditions justify moving them, but always in the
favorable direction, never in the adverse direction.

AU3772_book.fm Page 504 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 505 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirty-five

Effect of Technical Trading
on Market Action
The question often is asked whether the very fact that traders are studying
methods and patterns tends to create those very patterns and trends — in
other words, whether the technical method sets up, to some extent, an
artificial market in which the market action is merely the reflection of chart
action instead of the reverse.
This does not seem to be true. The charts we make today seem to follow
the old patterns; the presumption is very strong that markets have followed
these patterns long before there were any technicians to chart them. The
differences mentioned briefly in Part One, due to changed margin requirements, restraining of manipulative practices, etc., seem to have changed
these habits, if at all, only in degree and not in their fundamental nature.
The market is big, too big for any person, corporation, or combine to
control as a speculative unit. (EN9: And even beyond big in the 21st century.
Gargantuan.) Its operation is extremely free, and extremely democratic in the
sense that it represents the integration of the hopes and fears of many kinds
of buyers and sellers. Not all are short-term traders. There are investors,
industrialists, employees of corporations, those who buy to keep, those who
buy to sell years later — all grades and types of buyers and sellers.
And not all short-term traders are technicians by any manner of means.
There are those who trade on fundamentals for the short term; those who
rely on tips, hunches, on reading the stars, on personal knowledge of the
company. They are all part of the competitive market, they are all using
methods different from yours — and sometimes they will be right and you
will be wrong.
The technician using the various tools of technical analysis, Dow Theory,
Point-and-Figure charts, oscillators, scale order systems, and monthly, weekly,
and daily charts is in the minority. The cold attempt to analyze a situation
on the basis of the market record alone does not appeal to many people.
Technical analysis leaves out the warmth and human interest of the boardroom, the trading room, the fascinating rumors of fat extra dividends to
come, the whispered information on new patents, and the thrilling study of
the quarterly earnings reports. (EN9: Unless I am mistaken the only appearance
of irony in Magee’s work.)

505

AU3772_book.fm Page 506 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

506

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

It is the influence of all these rumors, facts, and statistics that causes
people to buy and sell their stocks. It is their actions that build the familiar
chart patterns. You are not interested in why they are doing what they are
doing. So far as your trading is concerned, you are interested only in the
results of their actions.
The habits and evaluative methods of people are deeply ingrained. The
same kinds of events produce the same kinds of emotional responses, and
hence, the same kinds of market action. These characteristic approaches are
extremely durable. It is not quite true that “you can’t change human nature,”
but it is true that it is very difficult to change the perceptive habits of a
lifetime. And since the “orthodox” investors greatly outnumber the technicians, we may confidently assume that technical trading will have little or
no effect on the typical behavior of free markets.
EN: This statement by Magee is still true in principle. And, it should be noted
that in modern markets professional investors attempt to learn (or perhaps it is “the
mysterious and anomalous market”) what makes systems and other investors successful. They then take action to frustrate those methods which are inimical to their
self-interest. For example, locals and professionals will search for stops above a
congestion zone in an attempt to cause the market to break away. This might be in
an attempt to create a trend, or it might be in an attempt to create a bull trap.
The proliferation of systems trend traders in the futures markets has, some of
those traders feel, created conditions hostile to systems traders as a group. The moral
of the story is that the trader/investor must be ever alert for the false move and the
changing rhythm of the markets.
No one has been able to quantify chart analysis, nor to disguise his own activities
from the x-ray of the charts. Nor has anyone changed human nature to eliminate
treachery and perfidy and truculent defense of self-interest.
EN9: And – dramatic drum roll – in 2005 Smith-Barney fires its entire technical
analysis staff. What to make of this is left to the imagination of the reader. Some
commentators attribute it to the bearish outlook of the technical staff as opposed to
the need of the firm to sell long positions to its customers. In my view an unintended
validation of the craft. When you have to shoot the messenger it says something
about the state of the market, as well as something about the industry.
Also, in conversation at a meeting of the Technical Securities Analysts Association of San Francisco (tsaasf.org), Larry Williams: “I hate technical analysis.” I
am reasonably certain that the “technical analysis” referred to is number driven
analysis.

AU3772_book.fm Page 507 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirty-six

Automated Trendline:
The Moving Average
There was a time back in 1941 when we were still filled with starry-eyed
ignorance, and we felt that if only we worked hard enough and looked
shrewdly enough, we would discover the sure, unbeatable formula or system
that would solve all our problems in the stock market, and all we would
have to do for the rest of life was apply the magic and telegraph our broker
periodically from Nassau, or Tahiti, or Switzerland, or wherever we happened to be enjoying life at the time.
We have learned (we hope) quite a bit since then. We have learned most
particularly a number of things not to do; and by not repeating the same
errors over and over, we have been able to improve our performance substantially. We have also learned that (to date) (EN: still true in the 21st century)
there are no sure, unbeatable formulas or systems in the market, that even
the most useful and generally dependable forecasting methods must be
regarded as statements of probability only, subject to revision and vulnerable
to failure at times.
One of the useful tools, and one of the first many students of market
action adopt, is the trendline. Whether a stock is moving generally up, or
generally down, or generally sideways, there seems to be a tendency for the
Major Trend to continue, to persist. It is true that every trend is broken sooner
or later, and the fact that it has been broken is often significant. But given a
well-established trend, the probabilities certainly appear to favor its continuance rather than its Reversal.
However, as with all other market studies, there are times and conditions
in which the simple trendline action seems “not quite good enough.” One
feels that there should be some mechanical or mathematical way of determining the trend that might avoid some of the perplexities of choosing the
right point through which to draw a trendline. And, it was back in 1941 that
we delightedly made the discovery (though many others had made it before)
that by averaging the data for a stated number of days, or weeks, or months,
one could derive a sort of Automated Trendline which would definitely
interpret the changes of trend over the past 30 days, or 200 days, or 12
months, or whatever period was chosen. It seemed almost too good to be
true. As a matter of fact, it was too good to be true.

507

AU3772_book.fm Page 508 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

508

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

The Moving Average is a fascinating tool, and it has real value in showing the trend of an irregular series of figures (like a fluctuating market) more
clearly. It also has value in that it can be used to cancel out the effect of any
regular cyclical variation, such as a normal seasonal range of temperatures
in order to get a better picture of the true secular trend.
The trouble with a Moving Average (and which we discovered long
since, but keep bumping into from time to time) is that it cannot entirely
escape from its past. The smoother the curve (longer cycle) one has, the more
“inhibited” it is in responding to recent important changes of trend. And
there is a very bad fault of Moving Averages in that “the tail tends to wag
the dog”; the figures back to the first date of the current tabulation, perhaps
6 months ago, or a year ago, if they are large, may unduly affect the present
average, and may conceal or mask some important feature by distorting the
curve.
We feel the Moving Averages trendlines are useful. But they should be
understood and used with discretion, and with a full perception of their
limitations.
Now that we have gone through some of the caveats of Moving Averages, let us give you some of the ways to construct them. Moving Averages
can be classified as Simple Moving Averages, Weighted or Exponential Moving Averages, and Linear Moving Averages. We prefer, and have found over
the years, that the simple methods work just as well and sometimes better
than the more complicated Moving Averages, and the others are more useful
when using computers.
For this reason, we will concentrate on Simple Moving Averages. The
most common are the 50-day and the 200-day Moving Averages. If you want
to increase the sensitivity of a Moving Average, shorten the Moving Average
by using 10 or 20 days. Another way is to increase the lead time by starting
on the third day for the 10-day Moving Average, or on the 20th day for a
50-day Moving Average, etc.
To construct a Simple Moving Average, whether it is 5 days, 10 days,
50 days or 200 days, you add the price of 5 days, and divide by 5, or the
10 days and divide by 10, or the 50 days by 50, or 200 days by 200. A simple
way of doing the 5-day Moving Average, instead of adding all 5 prices each
time, is to drop day 1 and add day 6. A similar method can be used in doing
the 50-day Moving Average or the 200-day Moving Average. Instead of
adding the 50-day Moving Average each time, just drop the first day of the
previous average and add the 51st day. The same with the 200-day Moving
Average; drop the first day of the previous 200 and add the 201st day.
Another way of doing the 200-day Moving Average is to take one day of the
week of 30 weeks, such as Wednesday or Thursday, add them and divide
by 30. This will give you the same Moving Averages as you would have
doing 200. Another way to put it is, on the second day, take the total, add
the new day’s price, and subtract the oldest day’s price from your 5-day
Moving Average, 10-day Moving Average, 50-day, or 200-day, whichever
way you are doing it. Repeat the process on a daily basis and divide by the

AU3772_book.fm Page 509 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-six:

Automated Trendline: The Moving Average

509

representative day — for the 5-day, you would divide by 5; for the 10-day,
you would divide by 10; for the 50-day, divide by 50; and for the 200-day,
you would divide by 200.

Sensitizing Moving Averages
The shorter the time period, the greater the sensitivity you will develop in
your Moving Average. The 5-day Moving Average will be much more sensitive than a 10-day. The problem with short-term Moving Averages is that
you can have a greater number of false moves. Shorter Moving Averages are
more suitable for commodities. On commodities, we would even advise
using a 30-hour, a 3-day, and a 6-day Moving Average.
It is often better to use two Moving Averages, one of shorter duration
and one of longer duration. In addition, you can use channels, a Moving
Average of lows, and a Moving Average of highs.

Crossovers and Penetrations
As a general rule, consider the crossing of two lines by the price line as a
sell or buy signal in the direction of the crossover or penetration.
1. Uptrends — Long positions are retained as long as the price trend
remains above the Moving Average Line.
a. When the price line intersects or penetrates the Moving Average
Line on the upside, it activates a buy signal.
b. When the price line goes above the 200-day Moving Average, but
falls sharply toward it without penetration, it is a buy signal.
c. When the price line falls below the Moving Average Line while
the line is still rising, it could be a buy signal.
d. When the price line spikes down too fast and far below a declining
Moving Average Line, a short-term rebound toward the line may
be expected: a possible whipsaw trap.
2. Downtrends — Short positions are held as long as the price trend
remains below the Moving Average. When the price trend reaches a
bottom and turns upward, a penetration of the Moving Average is a
buy signal.
a. When the price line moves above the average line while the average line is still falling, it is a sell signal.
b. When the stock price line moves below the average line and rises
toward it, but fails to penetrate and breaks down again, it is a sell
signal.
c. If the price line rises too fast above the rising average line, a shortterm reaction may be expected: could be a whipsaw.
d. Occasionally, penetration of the Moving Average Line will occur
in close conjunction with the penetration of a trendline, then
according to its direction, it is a buy or sell signal.

AU3772_book.fm Page 510 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

510

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
3. Horizontal, Diagonal or Sideways Movements — If the fluctuations
are broad in comparison to the length of the Moving Averages being
used, the price trend will fluctuate back and forth as the Moving
Average, true to its character or purpose, moves horizontally.
4. Gaps — Moving Averages, depending on their length, may have a
tendency to be penetrated in close proximity to a Breakaway Cap,
particularly at the beginning of a Major Phase of an Intermediate
cycle, and also in such cases where Breakaway Gaps occur at the
beginning of correction phases.

Area Patterns can be a pitfall for the Moving Averages. Normally, the
Moving Average oscillates through the center of these areas producing buy
and sell signals in rapid succession. In Area Patterns, the Moving Average
is a headache to the trader because he never knows which penetration is the
one preceding either the renewal of the trend or Confirmation of a Reversal.
When trading areas develop in the form of Triangles — Descending,
Declining, or Symmetrical — the Moving Average will trend through the
center of the Triangle. The technician has some small advantage in judging
which of the series of penetrations of a Moving Average is the important
one. When the Triangle reaches its apex, and the stock breaks out in one
direction or another and penetrates the Moving Average, the penetration is
likely to be the most important one during the sideways movement of the
Triangle’s development. Penetrations occur many times in close conjunction
with the penetration of a trendline.
As a price derivative product, the Moving Average can be a trend indicator by the way it fits a trendline. But, nevertheless, it should be considered
an adjunctive tool to everything else you have learned in relation to technical
analysis.
A 150-day Moving Average is charted on the following page.

AU3772_book.fm Page 511 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter thirty-six:

499.99
449.99

Automated Trendline: The Moving Average

511

$INDUA LAST-Monthly
Created with TradeStation www.TradeStation.com

399.99
349.99
299.99
249.99
199.99

149.99

99.99

49.99
1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

1955

FIGURE 227. 150-day moving average (dotted line). Up to the 1980s (the period
during which Ronald Reagan tripled the national debt) trading the 150-day moving
average (buying on an up crossover and selling on a down crossover) gave a trader
somewhat the same advantage that trading the Dow Theory afforded. In the 1980s,
the system stopped working. But here in 1929 it would have been a life saver as can
be seen.

AU3772_book.fm Page 512 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 513 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter thirty-seven

“The Same Old Patterns”
To the newcomer, the market appears filled with wonders and mysteries as
the landscape of Mars will appear to the first space travelers to land there.
There are strange rumblings, apparently unexplainable upheavals, weird
growths. An unknown stock will suddenly emerge from a morass of debt
and deficit, and proceed to soar to great heights. An old and trusted issue
will paradoxically sag and droop, although apparently rooted in the soil of
economic stability. All will seem peaceful and secure; and suddenly, the
ground opens up and swallows values in a sensational market break.
Such a newcomer, perhaps not realizing what appears unusual and
alarming is only the normal fluctuation and adjustment that goes on continually in the market according to the changing evaluations of millions of
investors, will feel frightened, insecure, and indecisive. He may scurry from
boardroom to boardroom, personally or on the telephone, scan the financial
pages, talk with friends, accumulate a mass of conflicting information, and
end up shutting his eyes and making a blind stab in the hope that he may
come up with the right answer.
Some never, even after years of contact with the market, achieve a tranquil and assured approach.
But it is possible to learn something about the basic nature of stock
trends. It is possible to know, within reasonable limits, about what might be
expected in certain situations. And it is also possible to find ways of coping
with these situations, including the exceptional cases that persist in doing
the unexpected. To repeat: It is possible to deal successfully with the unexpected and with that which cannot be precisely predicted.
To put it another way, it is possible to be wrong part of the time, and
still to be successful on the balance. And to do this, it is only necessary to
have a background of experience sufficient to know what will usually happen under particular conditions, about how often the unexpected will occur,
and how to deal with the unexpected when it does happen. These are the
same general problems that would confront the space traveler, the chemist,
the physician, or almost anyone else in his daily affairs.
There are men who have observed the market long enough and carefully
enough to discover that there are not quite so many unexpected events as
the newcomer might be led to believe.

513

F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
J
F
M
A

M
J
J

1951–1952–1953

A

S

O

N

D

UV

J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N

D

FIGURE 228. A 1952 Major Head-and-Shoulders Top in U.S. Smelting, Refining & Mining. This stock had moved up from
a bottom at 33 in 1950 to the peak at nearly 88 shown here. The decline carried down to 37. This chart shows the typical
high volume on the left shoulder. The volume at the head is a little higher than in the “ideal” pattern. Light volume on the
right shoulder is a definite warning. Notice the Pullback Rally to the neckline in the last week of August. Also the Secondary
Recovery in November and December. There also appears at the left side of this chart in 1951 a beautiful example of an
Ascending Triangle, indicating the resumption of the previous interrupted advance.
