which declared laws against abortion unconstitutional in California. Munger helped write the opinion. Buffett
says he has never seen Munger “so fired up,” the most unconventional thing he has ever seen Munger do.
48. Buffett said Munger tempted him into running a church by offering him the job of sexton, until he found
out the job description was not what he thought. “We held mock debates over who got to be the preacher.”
49. Garrett Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science, Vol. 162, No. 3859, December 13, 1968.
Hardin’s theory was essentially a restatement of the “prisoner’s dilemma,” which also addresses cooperation
and “cheating” as covered in references on that subject. In the 1970s it was assumed that economic progress
would accelerate population growth, that population growth would prevent economic growth. The earth’s
“carrying capacity” was assumed to be essentially fixed, rather than at least somewhat flexible through the
use of technology and market forces, incorrect assumptions that caused such forecasts to peg the dates of
critical population levels too early.
50. Garrett Hardin, “A Second Sermon on the Mount,” from Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 1963.
51. Nevertheless, some remnants of the eugenics movement remained alive, and by the millennial era,
developments in genetic, genomic, and reproductive science had raised complicated questions about the idea.
52. The historic linkage between “population control,” the eugenics movement, and racism is detailed by
Allan Chase in The Legacy of Malthus: The Social Costs of the New Scientific Racism (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 1977). While a full treatment of these issues is beyond the scope of this book, what seems clear, from
his change in terminology, steering of the Buffett Foundation, and gradual distancing from the Hardin camp,
was Buffett’s disenchantment with the Malthusian views of Hardin because of their eugenics implications.
(Hardin’s personal stationery featured a small U.S. map around the words “Quality of the Population.”)

53. In a highly controversial move, the Buffett Foundation had paid half the first-year costs to bring the
RU-486 abortion pill to the United States.
54. From Eager’s Global Population Policy: From Population Control to Reproductive Rights, which
chronicles the gradual rejection of neo-Malthusianism and coercive population control methods in favor of
voluntary, evolutionary changes in birth rates through economic development, reproductive rights, and an
emphasis on women’s health.
55. In “Foundation Grows: Buffetts Fund Efforts for Population Control” (Omaha World-Herald, January
10, 1988), Bob Dorr quotes Susie as saying, “Warren likes numbers…he likes to see concrete results, and
you can see them [numbers] change” to explain her husband’s interest in groups such as Planned Parenthood
and the Population Institute.
56. A similar term, “Ovarian Roulette,” was apparently first used by Dr. Reginald Lourie of Children’s
Hospital, Washington, D.C., at a hearing of the Committee on Government Operations, United States, “Effect
of Population Growth on Natural Resources and the Environment,” September 15-16, 1969, in a discussion
with Garrett Hardin, to describe a mother who takes the risk of an unwanted pregnancy by not using birth
control (and the term has since been used by Responsible Wealth). However, it is the second
word—“lottery” versus “roulette”—that changes a bad choice to bad luck: from a child who is born
unwanted to a woman who trusts to random chance, to a child who is born in cruel circumstances because of
random chance.
57. “I Didn’t Do It Alone,” a report by Chuck Collins’s organization, Responsible Wealth.
58. See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice, Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1971.
The Ovarian Lottery resembles Rawls’s view, which is a form of determinism—and assumes that much,
though not necessarily all, of what happens to people is determined by the present and past, for example,
through their genes, or the luck of where they are born and when. The opposite of determinism is free will.
From the days of the earliest philosophers, mankind has been debating whether free will exists. Philosophers
also debate whether it exists on a scale or is irreconcilable with determinism. Critic Robert Nozick, in
Anarchy, State, and Utopia, gives the case for irreconcilability in a critique of Rawls that more or less says
that economist Adam Smith’s invisible hand gives people what they have earned and deserved (Anarchy,
State and Utopia. New York: Basic Books, 1974). All true libertarians believe in free will and deny
absolutely that determinism exists. Since economic policy is so influenced by these ideas, the topic is worth
understanding; for example, it sheds light on the debate over how Alan Greenspan’s libertarian leanings
influenced Federal Reserve policy that led to recent debt-fueled asset bubbles. Likewise, the debate over
eugenics in genomism and reprogenetics resounds with issues of determinism and free will.
59. Interview with Bill Gates.
60. In 2005 Oxnam published A Fractured Mind, his memoir of living with multiple personality disorder
(New York: Hyperion).
61. Interview with Bill Gates.
Chapter 51
1. Anthony Bianco, “The Warren Buffett You Don’t Know,” BusinessWeek, July 5, 1999.
2. Interview with Tony Nicely.
3. This was a 40% premium to where GEICO was trading.
4. In 1993, 707 new issues raised $41.4 billion. In 1994, 608 IPOs raised $28.5 billion, the secondmost-productive year in the past quarter century. The third-best year for IPOs had been 1992, when 517
issues raised $24.1 billion. (Securities Data Co. of Newark, N.J.)

5. Molly Baker, Joan Rigdon, “Netscape’s IPO Gets an Explosive Welcome,” Wall Street Journal, August 9,
1995.
6. Interview with Sharon Osberg.
7. The Buffetts made other philanthropic gifts using Susie’s stock, as well as funding the Buffett Foundation.
8. Carol Loomis, “The Inside Story of Warren Buffett,” Fortune, April 11, 1988.
9. Berkshire Hathaway press release, February 13, 1996.
10. Interviews with Dana Neuman, Mark Millard.
11. The employees’ pay could not really be fully aligned with shareholders. Unlike at the Buffalo News, for
example, the employees’ base pay at a bank is too low to compensate for the labor value of their time that is
owed by the shareholders. In effect, much of the bonus is really salary. The reason that a plan that requires
employees to work almost for free in a bad year to compensate for “excessive” bonuses in other years cannot
succeed is that it transfers some of the risk assumed by capital onto the backs of labor. The bonus structure of
Wall Street—without the glue of partnership—is inherently problematic.
12. To be considered an arbitrage, two trades must take place simultaneously to eliminate market risk. Buying
a stock and selling it later is not an arbitrage. Buying cocoa beans in Ecuador and selling them in San Diego is
not an arbitrage.
13. Interview with Deryck Maughan.
14. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed: The Rise and Fall of Long-Term Capital Management. New
York: Random House, 2000.
15. In July 1998, Weill shut down Salomon’s bond arbitrage unit. One could argue that it was Travelers’
subsequent merger with Citicorp—which provided cheap capital—that made the firm a serious competitor in
those businesses. Looked at another way, Travelers paid a high price to enter a business with high barriers to
entry, and subsequently exploited its capital and scale advantage. Citigroup dropped the Salomon name in
2001.
16. Carol Loomis, “A House Built on Sand,” Fortune, October 26, 1998.
17. Interview with Charlie Munger.
18. Lowenstein, in When Genius Failed, estimated that these returns were achieved through leverage;
Long-Term’s cash-on-cash return was only about 1%. This low return, multiplied fifty to a hundred times
through borrowing, appeared extraordinarily profitable.
19. In When Genius Failed, Lowenstein drew this conclusion after extensive interviews with Meriwether’s
former team.
20. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed. Shorting it as a collection of stocks would not work because of a
basis mismatch between Berkshire and the offsetting hedgeable positions. Berkshire was a collection of
wholly owned businesses fueled by an insurance company that also owned some stocks, not a quasi-mutual
fund.
21. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed.
22. Stock or merger arbitrage is a bet on whether a merger will close. Merger-arb specialists talk to lawyers
and investment bankers and specialize in scuttlebutt. Their bets are based partly on knowledge about a deal,

not just statistics about how typical deals have done.
23. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld; Lowenstein, When Genius Failed.
24. Michael Siconolfi, Anita Raghavan, and Mitchell Pacelle, “All Bets Are Off: How Salesmanship and
Brainpower Failed at Long-Term Capital,” Wall Street Journal, November 16, 1998.
25. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld.
26. The Standard & Poor’s index was down 19% since July and the NASDAQ down by more than 25%.
27. John Meriwether letter to investors, September 2, 1998.
28. Warren Buffett letter to Ron Ferguson, September 2, 1998.
29. Hence, don’t try to make it back the way you lost it.
30. Interview with Joe Brandon.
31. Craig Torres and Katherine Burton, “Fed Battled ‘Financial Maelstrom,’ 1998 Records Show,”
Bloomberg News, April 22, 2004.
32. Roger Lowenstein, in When Genius Failed, includes, as do other accounts, an interesting sidebar about
the role of Goldman Sachs, which, as capital-raiser for the firm, also sent in a mysterious “trader” who spent
days downloading Long-Term’s positions into a laptop and making mysterious cell-phone calls. Afterward,
Long-Term’s partners bitterly blamed their demise on predatory behavior by competitors.
33. According to one partner, the lawyer was dubious about the rushed process, saying maybe there was
some trickery involved, and wanting to slow things down and take more time to look over the details.
34. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed.
35. Michael Lewis, “How the Eggheads Cracked,” New York Times Magazine, January 24, 1999.
36. Interview with Fred Gitelman, Sharon Osberg.
37. After three 0.25% interest-rate cuts—September 29, October 15, and October 17—the market leapt 24%
from its low on August 31 of 7,539 to an all-time high of 9,374 on October 23.
38. Michael Lewis, “How the Eggheads Cracked.”
39. Roger Lowenstein, When Genius Failed.
40. Interview with Eric Rosenfeld.
41. The Federal Reserve’s instant and dramatic cut of interest rates gave rise to a concept called the
“Greenspan Put,” the idea that the Federal Reserve would swamp the market with liquidity to bail out
investors in a crisis. The Greenspan Put theoretically encourages people to worry less about risk. Greenspan
denied there was a Greenspan Put. “It takes a good deal longer for the cycle to expand than for it to
contract,” he said. “Therefore we are innocent.” (Reuters, October 1, 2007, quoting Greenspan speaking in
London.)
Chapter 52
1. Kurt Eichenwald, The Informant. New York: Broadway, 2000. Unbeknownst to Howie, Andreas
reportedly made an illegal donation in response to at least one request that Howie had passed along,

shrugging off the fine as the cost of doing business.
2. Interview with Howie Buffett.
3. Ibid.; Scott Kilman, Thomas M. Burton, and Richard Gibson, “Seeds of Doubt: An Executive Becomes
Informant for the FBI, Stunning Giant ADM—Price Fixing in Agribusiness Is Focus of Major Probe; Other
Firms Subpoenaed—A Microphone in the Briefcase,” Wall Street Journal, July 11, 1995; Sharon Walsh,
“Tapes Aid U.S. in Archer Daniels Midland Probe; Recordings Made by Executive Acting as FBI Informant
Lead to Seizure of Company Files,” Washington Post, July 11, 1995; Ronald Henkoff and Richard Behar,
“Andreas’s Mole Problem Is Becoming a Mountain,” Fortune, August 21, 1995; Mark Whitacre, “My Life
as a Corporate Mole for the FBI,” Fortune, September 4, 1995.
4. Interview with Kathleen Cole.
5. Astrid was going to be well taken care of by Warren, too, although, as he says about the apparent
willingness of his fans to buy any article belonging to him—his wallet, his car; “She’s got one of my wisdom
teeth. It’s the ugliest thing you’ve ever seen. That’s her ace in the hole.”
6. Interview with Bill Gates.
7. Every board member interviewed reached some variation of this conclusion, no matter where they stood
on later events.
8. Mark Pendergast, For God, Country, and Coca-Cola. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1993.
9. Speaking at the 1998 Berkshire Hathaway shareholder meeting.
10. At the time, NetJets marketed itself both as NetJets and by its legal name, Executive Jet, Inc. It was
renamed NetJets in 2002.
11. Interviews with sources; Anthony Bianco, “The Warren Buffett You Don’t Know,” BusinessWeek, July
5, 1999.
12. The business requires a “core fleet” of redundant aircraft, so expensive that running a fractional jet
company is by definition unprofitable unless done on a huge scale (or used as a loss-leader by an aircraft
manufacturer or other company with a tie-in product).
13. It cost Berkshire over nine times what it paid for the remaining half of GEICO almost three years earlier.
The GEICO purchase doubled Berkshire’s existing float (to $7.6 billion), while Gen Re tripled that (to $22.7
billion).
14. Interview with Tad Montross.
15. BRK paid approximately three times book value, a premium to prevailing prices at the time. The
reinsurance business became more competitive after this acquisition, and multiples have since declined.
16. Berkshire Hathaway 1997 annual shareholders’ meeting, May 5, 1997.
17. Shawn Tully, “Stock May Be Surging Toward an Earnings Chasm,” Fortune, February 1, 1999.
18. At the companies’ June 19, 1998, press conference, as quoted in “Is There a Bear on Mr. Buffett’s
Farm?” New York Times, August 9, 1998.
19. Buffett’s comments in Anthony Bianco’s July 5, 1999, BusinessWeek cover story, “The Warren Buffett
You Don’t Know”: “‘Charlie and I don’t talk a lot anymore,’ acknowledges Buffett, who says he did not
even bother to consult his vice-chairman before making the epochal Gen Re acquisition.”

20. BRK dropped 4.2% on news of the deal. Over a month later, it was down 15% versus a flat market.
Setting an exchange ratio implicitly required a view on equities and interest rates, as well as the underlying
businesses’ prospects. What investors could not know was the relative weighting of these factors.
21. James P. Miller, in “Buffett Again Declines to Flinch at Market’s High-Wire Act,” Wall Street Journal,
May 5, 1998, got it. He attended the shareholder meeting at which Buffett reiterated his views and
commented that maintaining return on equity was a particularly vexing issue. On the other hand, Justin
Martin and Amy Kover, in “How Scary is this Market, Really?”(Fortune, April 27, 1998), wrote that “no less
an authority than Warren Buffett” had endorsed the market bulls through his “not overvalued” statement.
22. On August 22, 1997, Wells Fargo stock nosedived after Berkshire Hathaway reclassified it from the
publicly filed form 13-F to the confidential disclosure to the SEC, creating the appearance that Buffett had
sold his position in Wells Fargo. The SEC announced that it would consider tightening the confidentiality
rules. In June 1998, the SEC announced it was tightening its “13F” rule that had allowed Buffett to file
confidentially for a year while building large stock positions. Although the SEC did not absolutely rule out
confidential filings, Buffett heard the footsteps. Berkshire Hathaway fought an aggressive battle with the SEC
over this issue as its confidential filings were denied, and lost. In 1999, Berkshire filed confidentiality
requests each quarter along with its regular 13-F forms containing positions that were not confidential. The
SEC made a single announcement relating to these three filings that certain of the positions they contained
must be publicly disclosed. Buffett’s right to make a profit presumably was not part of the SEC’s
deliberations. The SEC’s interest is to protect investors. While the SEC staff had long held that it is desirable
to prevent extraordinary fluctuations in stock prices unrelated to fundamental factors so that investors do not
profit or suffer as a result, investors’ right to know the identity of a company’s largest shareholders
outweighed that.
23. Interview with Herbert Allen.
24. Nikhil Deogun, James R. Hagerty, Steve Secklow, and Laura Johannes, “Coke Stains, Anatomy of a
Recall: How Coke’s Controls Fizzled Out in Europe,” Wall Street Journal, June 29, 1999.
25. Interview with Herbert Allen.
26. Ibid.
27. Through Project Infinity, partly cloaked in Y2K spending, Coca-Cola turned the soft-drink business into a
technology-fed numbers game. In 1999, the company hired 150 experts for worldwide implementation of
SAP’s programs. SAP, an acronym for Systems, Applications, and Products in Data Processing, provided
business software solutions for process redesign in supply-chain management, customer-relationship
management, and resource planning.
28. Ivester did not respond to repeated requests for interviews.
29. Betsy Morris and Patricia Sellers, “What Really Happened at Coke,” Fortune, January 10, 2000.
30. Interview with Sharon Osberg.
31. Betsy Morris, “Doug Is It,” Fortune, May 25, 1998, and Patricia Sellers, “Crunch Time for Coke,”
Fortune, July 19, 1999.
32. This is Herbert Allen’s version of the conversation. Buffett doesn’t recall the exact details.
33. “They never sat down, never even removed their overcoats. In tones frostier than the air outside, they
told him they had lost confidence in him.” Constance L. Hays, The Real Thing: Truth and Power at the
Coca-Cola Company. New York: Random House, 2004. Buffett and Allen dispute this version and say they
sat down and removed their coats. But, they say, it was indeed a very short meeting, with no chitchat.

34. Had the board supported him, it would have left Ivester a weakened CEO. He would also have been
gambling that Allen and Buffett would not resign from the board, an instantly fatal blow. Allen and Buffett
were also gambling that if Ivester threw himself on the board’s mercy and survived, it would not be for long.
35. Interview with James Robinson, former CEO of American Express and Coca-Cola board member.
36. KO stock dropped 14% in two days.
37. Betsy Morris and Patricia Sellers, “What Really Happened at Coke.”
38. Martin Sosnoff, “Buffett: What Went Wrong?” Forbes, December 31, 1999.
39. Andrew Barry, “What’s Wrong, Warren?” Barron’s, December 27, 1999.
40. Andy Serwer, “The Oracle of Everything,” Fortune, November 11, 2002.
41. Interview with Kathleen Cole.
42. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
43. Interview with Peter Buffett.
44. Interview with Howie Buffett.
45. Interviews with Howie Buffett, Peter Buffett, Susie Buffett Jr.
Chapter 54
1. Joe Lauria, “Buffett Bombs as High-Tech Funds Boom,” Sunday Times (London), January 2, 2000.
2. The expected profit on the deal was 90%; i.e., the premium covered odds that the lottery would hit 1 out of
10 times whereas in fact it was expected to hit less than 1 out of 100 times.
3. Every 10% change in KO was equivalent to 2.5% of BRK (a percentage that is representative over time),
but the stocks often traded almost in tandem—especially when there was bad news at Coca-Cola—as if BRK
and KO were one and the same.
4. Beth Kwon, “Buffett Health Scrape Illustrates Power—or Myth—of Message Boards,” TheStreet.com,
February 11, 2000. The story made the Financial Times say, “Warren Buffett may not be sick, but his share
price is,” in the “Lex” column, February 12, 2000. Financial Times described the rap on Buffett not buying
tech stocks as a “serious charge.”
5. Berkshire Hathaway press release; also see “Berkshire Hathaway Denies Buffett Is Seriously Ill,” New
York Times, February 11, 2000. The way that Buffett uses probabilities to describe things is one of his
intriguing qualities; what if he had said that the rumors were 90% false?
6. Ed Anderson, “Thesis vs. Antithesis: Hegel, Bagels, and Market Theories,” Computer Reseller News,
March 13, 2000.
7. Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger, “We Don’t Get Paid for Activity, Just for Being Right. As to How
Long We’ll Wait, We’ll Wait Indefinitely,” Outstanding Investor Digest, Vol. XIII, Nos. 3 & 4, September
24, 1998, and “We Should All Have Lower Expectations—In Fact, Make That Dramatically Lower….,”
Outstanding Investor Digest, Vol. XIV, Nos. 2 & 3, December 10, 1999.
8. “Focus: Warren Buffett,” Guardian, March 15, 2000 (emphasis added).

9. Some commentators understood that the bubble was bursting but since the averages continued to move
higher, the general perception was slower to change. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan’s comments
were seized on as reason for concern or relief, depending on the listener’s perspective. See Matt Kranz and
James Kim, “Bear Stages Sneak Attack on Net Stocks,” USA Today, February 16, 2000; Greg Ip, “Stalking a
Bear Market,” Wall Street Journal, February 28, 2000; “Technology Stocks Continue to Dominate,” USA
Today, March 2, 2000.
10. E. S. Browning and Aaron Lucchetti, “The New Chips: Conservative Investors Finally Are Saying:
Maybe Tech Isn’t a Fad,” Wall Street Journal, March 10, 2000. The Journal cited another investor as
saying, “It’s like when the railroads started up and were changing the whole face of the nation.” Yes, it was
much like that. Speculation in railroad stocks led directly to the financial panics of 1869, 1873, and 1901. The
Erie railroad and Northern Pacific stock corners were only two episodes in the long history of colorful
financial chicanery surrounding railroad stocks.
11. Gretchen Morgenson, “If You Think Last Week Was Wild,” New York Times, March 19, 2000. Another
sign that the game was up: On March 20, Fortune ran a cover story by Jeremy Garcia and Feliciano Kahn,
“Presto Chango: Sales Are HUGE!” accusing many dotcoms of using accounting legerdemain to inflate
sales—counting marketing expenses as sales, treating barter revenues as sales, and booking revenues before
contracts were signed.
12. Interview with Sue James Stewart.
