
W. D. Gann and Harmonic Trading
One of the most famous traders in history, W. D. Gann utilized trading methods based upon
time and price analysis. Although many students of Gann’s approach focus their attention on
his application of geometric proportions based on the circle, square, and triangle, the true value
of his work was revealed “in between the lines” of his many books, which emphasized the
importance of respecting natural laws in financial market analysis. Although his methods are
notoriously accurate—as evidenced by his performance in 1933 when he made 479 trades
during the year, of which 422 were winners and 57 were losers—his profound writings offered
a great deal of insight into the proper approach required to analyze the market. (Referenced
from the W. D. Gann website: http://www.wdgann.com/pages/about_gann.php)

Chapter 3 Pattern Identification

37

The premise of Gann’s approach should be considered as one of the primary forerunners to
Harmonic Trading. In fact, one of the earliest references to Harmonic Trading was mentioned in
his 1927 book The Tunnel Thru the Air in which Gann stated:
“But mathematical science, which is the only real science that the
entire civilized world has agreed upon, furnishes unmistakable
proof of history repeating itself and shows that the cycle theory, or
harmonic analysis, is the only thing that we can rely upon to ascertain the future.”
(The Tunnel Thru the Air [Pomeroy, WA: Lambert-Gann Publishing,
1927], 77)

Although Gann’s brand of harmonic analysis is more complex, including the use of his
Natural Squares Calculator, both approaches utilize relative geometric price calculations of
cyclical trends in an attempt to define critical turning points in the markets.

Fibonacci Pattern Alignments
Although many price structures may appear similar, they simply are not. The differentiation of
patterns is the underlying basis and primary effectiveness of Harmonic Trading identification
techniques. Like a combination to a safe, Harmonic Trading’s precise Fibonacci price
alignments unlock valid market signals in an unprecedented fashion.
In real trading situations, the specification of similar price structures that possess different
Fibonacci alignments can substantially reduce overall risk. Furthermore, the ability to
differentiate price structures is essential for identifying the best trade opportunities and handling
each situation in the most effective manner. Differentiation is the key to successful Harmonic
Trading, and it begins with the understanding that similar price structures are not the same.
This specification of Fibonacci alignments instills a disciplined approach that requires exact
conditions to be satisfied before trade signals are generated. Although this can create situations
where opportunities are missed if certain patterns do not reverse at the projected completion
point, valid price structures become trade signals only when all conditions are satisfied. Such
strict application of pattern identification techniques removes potentially dangerous and flawed
strategies of flexible interpretations of price action.
One example that will be reviewed later in this book is the difference between a Bat pattern
and an ideal Gartley pattern. Many people mistakenly believe that these are the same pattern.
They simply are not. A Bat pattern is an entirely different combination of Fibonacci alignments
than the ideal Gartley. In fact, I have seen e-mails and charting postings on the Internet over
the past few years that frequently identify potential Gartley patterns, when the alignment clearly
possesses a Bat structure. It is an example of strict application of different alignments like this
that sets Harmonic Trading techniques apart from all other Fibonacci methods.
It is important to note that the strict application of any trading system is the primary basis for
consistent performance—good or bad. Although this will be discussed in Chapter 11, “The
Harmonic Trade Management System,” the application of precise harmonic patterns offers a
disciplined and consistent approach to trading.

38

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Another essential principle of Harmonic Trading is founded in the belief that trading signals
come from the market. Since Harmonic Trading utilizes quantifiable price patterns that have
repeated historically, it is important to note that the price action is the determining element to
define trading opportunities. After calculating the relative segments of each price structure,
Harmonic Trading techniques quantify precise zones of potential support or resistance based
upon their prescribed Fibonacci alignments. The price action must satisfy these conditions
before any trading action can be taken. In this manner, it is the market that provides the signals
required to take action.
The completion of patterns as market signals is based upon the notion that each segment
within a particular structure can offer vital information regarding the potential state of future
price action. The premise of Harmonic Trading’s exact Fibonacci alignments that define specific
patterns depends upon the relative measure of price action within each structure. This relative
measure is known as the Principle of Harmonicity.

Principle of Harmonicity
J. M. Hurst outlined one of the most comprehensive references to Harmonic Trading in his
Cycles Course from the early 1970s. His Principle of Harmonicity states:
“The periods of neighboring waves in price action tend to be related by a small whole number.”
(J. M. Hurst, J. M. Hurst Cycles Course [Greenville, S.C.: Traders Press,
1973])

The important concept to grasp is that price waves or distinct price moves are related to
each other. Furthermore, Harmonic Trading techniques utilize Fibonacci numbers and price
patterns to quantify these relationships, and provide a means to determine where the turning
points will occur. From a general sense, the Principle of Harmonicity is the technical term that
explains the basic premise of Harmonic Trading. The “neighboring waves” of price movements
are utilized to identify and calculate potential trading opportunities. Harmonic Trading’s focus
on “neighboring waves of Fibonacci alignments” inherently grounds all trading decisions from
a technical perspective based upon past and future price movements. Not to get into a
long-winded discussion regarding fundamental information such as market news and other
financial media-related stories that might affect the financial markets, the focus of all decisions
within the realm of Harmonic Trading is dependent upon pure price action.
The strict reliance on pure price action to define trading decisions is essential to remain
unbiased and open to all technical signals that are available. Relative measurements of
“neighboring waves” do provide the necessary signals of potential market turning points.
Harmonic Trading techniques determine market conditions and identify trading opportunities
at price levels where the natural ebb and flow of buying and selling is changing based upon
specific price patterns.

Chapter 3 Pattern Identification

39

The precise rules that validate all harmonic patterns also create a system that bases all
trading decisions on a defined technical entity. Specifically, trading decisions that are based
upon individual patterns (the technical entity) fall within precise numeric ranges, where all
elements, such as execution points, stop loss limits, and profit objectives, are defined relative
to the structure.
This understanding that patterns create a “defined trading realm” promotes a sense of
security, as all potential actions are defined in advance by the limits established by the setup
and the price action behavior within this range. These concepts are easily understood with
actual chart examples that will be covered later in this material. For now, it is important to
understand that this approach generates valid trading signals based upon pure price action
that is quantified by Fibonacci measurements and pattern recognition techniques.

Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
The concept of a Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) was originally outlined in The Harmonic
Trader:
“History has proven that a convergence of Fibonacci numbers
and price patterns provides a highly probable area for a reversal.…
This area of convergence is called the potential reversal zone.
When three, four, or even five numbers come together within a
specific area, you must respect the high probability for some type
of reversal.”
(The Harmonic Trader, [Nevada: HarmonicTrader.com, L.L.C., 1999])

Specific price structures that possess three or more numbers within a defined area are the
basis for defining these harmonic zones. It is called “Potential” because the defined area must
be analyzed as the price action tests the projected “Reversal Zone.” Although this concept will
be covered extensively later in this material, it is imperative to understand that patterns are
defined by specific price structures that contain combinations of distinct and consecutive
Fibonacci retracements and projections. By calculating the various Fibonacci aspects of a
specific price structure, harmonic patterns can indicate a specific area to examine for potential
turning points in price action. Again, this area is called the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ). In
essence, a PRZ represents the critical areas where the flow of buying and selling is potentially
changing. These harmonic zones attempt to identify the price levels where imbalanced
overbought and oversold situations are reversing—at a minimum—back to their respective
equilibrium level.
Any trading system attempts to be on the “right side” of the market—buying low and selling
high. Harmonic Trading techniques quantify these areas and generate buy and sell signals
based on the price action at these turning points. Furthermore, these techniques inherently
define and direct trading behavior as a means of anticipating these potential changes in price
action.

40

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

From a broader perspective, the identification of harmonic price patterns can offer
tremendous technical insight of the state of price action. Past patterns and historically
significant Fibonacci levels are an effective means of identifying important areas of support
and resistance. Furthermore, each pattern provides additional information regarding the extent
of overbought or oversold conditions in the markets that no other technical method offers.
The PRZ serves as a “harmonic window” that examines a specific price area with respect to
the entire price structure. This concept places a great deal of emphasis on the price action
within these windows of opportunity. Furthermore, the result of the price action in these zones
is another defining element of Harmonic Trading.
From a general perspective, Harmonic Trading requires a belief that the markets provide the
signals necessary to understand price action. Since all harmonic patterns represent the total
sum of buying and selling relative to prior respective price action, each signal is generated
from the market’s own movements. In this manner, the relative analysis of past price action,
as explained by the Principle of Harmonicity, is essential to define PRZs, to generate trading
signals and to quantify specific structures.
It is important to emphasize that Harmonic Trading utilizes many unprecedented
measurements to define critical areas of support and resistance. Exact alignments of Fibonacci
ratios are the primary methods that validate price structures as harmonic patterns. In fact, the
PRZ is truly a remarkable technical tool that no other method incorporates. Although these
concepts will require some time to grasp and to integrate into your trading strategies, the
Harmonic Trading techniques will always provide critical information regarding the state of
future price action.

Chapter 4

The AB=CD Pattern

The AB=CD pattern is a 4-point price structure where the initial price segment is partially
retraced and followed by an equidistant move from the completion of the pullback. This
structure has been previously discussed in many technical works, and it represents the basic
foundation for ALL harmonic patterns. The Fibonacci aspects in the pattern should occur at
specific points. In the AB=CD, the C point will be a defining level for the completion of the
pattern. Although the BC projection is critical in this structure, the most significant harmonic
number is the exact completion point of the AB=CD.

AB=CD Reciprocal Ratios
In the AB=CD pattern, the alignment of Fibonacci ratios within the structure usually manifests
specific reciprocal relationships. The reciprocal ratio of the C point retracement of the AB leg
usually indicates which BC projection is utilized to define the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).
For instance, a 0.618 retracement at the C point typically will possess a 1.618 BC projection
that converges closest with the completion of the AB=CD. This reciprocal relationship within the
equivalent AB=CD pattern defines the best PRZ for this structure. The reciprocal ratios that
complement the AB=CD structure are as follows:
C Point Retracement

BC Projection

0.382

.24 or 2.618

0.50

2.0

0.618

1.618

0.707

1.41

0.786

1.27

0.886

1.13

The reciprocal ratios help define the completion of the pattern. However, the most
important consideration to remember is that the BC projection should converge closely with
the completion of the AB=CD.
41

42

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The Bullish AB=CD Pattern
The Bullish AB=CD pattern is an excellent measure when looking at a well-defined sell-off.
Although the symmetry may vary, this basic structure is a minimum requirement for all
harmonic patterns (see Figure 4.1).

A

0.38
2;
0.88
6

B

C

1.13
;
3.14
Figure 4.1

D

It is important to point out that the “0.382; 0.886” Fibonacci retracement range for the
C point can be any of the Harmonic Trading ratios that fall between these two constraints.
Therefore, the C point can be 0.382, 0.50, 0.618, 0.707, 0.786, or 0.886. Referring to the
reciprocal ratios listed on the previous page, this correlates into a BC projection that can either
be a 1.13, 1.27, 1.41, 1.618, 2.0, 2.24, or 2.618. In some rare cases, a 3.14 projection can
be utilized.

Chapter 4 The AB=CD Pattern

43

Google (GOOG): Weekly
The first example of this weekly chart of Google (GOOG) shows a distinct Bullish AB=CD
pattern with the completion point calculated at 267 (see Figure 4.2). The 1.618 BC projection
complimented this area at 295. The pattern defined a Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) of 30
points to buy the stock. Each price leg was approximately 300 points and required 6 months to
complete.

Figure 4.2

44

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The following chart of the price action in the PRZ shows an ideal reversal from this support
level (see Figure 4.3). On the first week Google hit the numbers in the PRZ, the stock stabilized
in the lower range of support. The stock held its ground and rallied nicely to reverse the
downtrend. The following week, the upside breakout was confirmed.

Figure 4.3

This example illustrates an ideal reversal. When looking at a PRZ, it is important for the
price action to turn in the area where the harmonic numbers define the situation. Clearly, this
pattern identified a distinct support zone in the $265–290 area. The entire PRZ was tested and
the price action reversed accordingly. Furthermore, the ability of Google to hold the low of the
initial weekly test of the entire PRZ and rally above this projected support are excellent signs of
a valid reversal at hand. This example is remarkable due to the precise symmetry and length of
time that this pattern possessed. Each down leg required 6 months to complete and extended
nearly 350 points. Although Google exceeded the exact completion point at 267, as the stock
threatened to test the psychological 250 level, the price action stabilized the week following the
complete test of the weekly PRZ.
When assessing the validity of a PRZ, it is important to examine the specific range to define
where harmonic patterns complete. Although the exact completion of the Bullish AB=CD
pattern completed lower than the 1.618 extension, both numbers defined the area under 300 to

Chapter 4 The AB=CD Pattern

45

look to buy the stock. In these situations, the AB=CD completion point is the most important
number of the pattern. In fact, the completion point of the AB=CD pattern should serve as a
mandatory requirement before executing a trade. The 1.618 BC projection should complement
the completion point area to validate the pattern. The key is to closely monitor the price action
in the PRZ and look for the predominant downtrend to stabilize in the overall range defined by
the PRZ. In the AB=CD pattern, trades will be executed close to the exact pattern completion
point but the validity of the setup will be determined shortly after PRZ is tested.

Eurodollar
(EUR_A0-FX): 60-Minute
Figure 4.4 is an example of the 60-minute chart of the Eurodollar (EUR_A0-FX) shows a
distinct Bullish AB=CD pattern with the completion point calculated at 1.3426. The 1.27 BC
projection complemented this area at 134.32. Again, it is important to consider the range
defined by the PRZ. In this case, the AB=CD completion point at 1.3430 was the trigger for the
setup. After selling off for nearly the prior three sessions, the Euro clearly stabilized before
completing the reversal.

Figure 4.4

46

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The following chart of the price action in the PRZ shows the reversal at the numbers in this
harmonic support area (see Figure 4.5). After two tests of the PRZ, the price started to turn up.

Figure 4.5

Although the reversal required some consolidation to reverse the downtrend, the harmonic
support identified critical support just under 1.3430. It is important to note that the ideal, exact
AB=CD reversal are very obvious situations. However, the validity of any reversal depends upon
the price action in the PRZ after all the numbers have been tested. Sometimes, a valid reversal
is automatic. The price action hits the harmonic numbers and reverses nicely. In other
instances, the situation may require some consolidation. Despite the time required, the focus
should remain on the defined range in the PRZ after the numbers have been tested. In this
manner, the PRZ creates a distinct window to examine and to assess the validity of the
structural signal provided the pattern.

Chapter 4 The AB=CD Pattern

47

Dow Jones Industrial Average
($INDU): 5-Minute
Figure 4.6 shows an exact Bullish AB=CD pattern in the Dow Jones Industrial Average on this
5-minute chart. The Industrials formed this intra-day pattern with nearly identical time and exact
price components. Each down leg was approximately 70 points. The AB leg required 8 price
bars, while the CD leg entailed 7 price bars.

Figure 4.6

The completion point of the AB=CD pattern was calculated at 9306.75. The 2.0 BC
projection complemented this area at 9312.21. The following chart of the price action in the
PRZ shows the near-perfect reversal on the complete test of this support. After dropping more
than 70 points early in the session, the $INDU hit the completion point of the pattern just above
9300 and started to stabilize.

48

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Although the initial test nearly hit all the numbers in the PRZ, the third price bar was the
clear trigger for the reversal. Figure 4.7 demonstrates the technical importance of the entire
PRZ. The index stabilized on the initial test of this projected harmonic support before yielding a
nice intra-day rally. The next several 5-minute price bars confirmed the reversal at hand, as the
upside continuation indicated the strength of the pattern’s completion point.

Figure 4.7

Another consideration is the sharp decline into the PRZ. Although the severe price action
was a warning sign of a potential pattern failure, the ability of the index to stabilize immediately
after hitting the PRZ is a strong factor in the validity of successful reversal. Not to mention, the
reversal accelerated immediately after the AB=CD completion point was hit.
These are ideal signs of a valid reversal regardless of the timeframe. Although this was a
5-minute chart, the same principles apply for longer timeframes—60-minute, daily, weekly. The
same technical principles should be assessed to determine the validity of a reversal from a PRZ.

Chapter 4 The AB=CD Pattern

49

NASDAQ Mini-Contract
(Continuous)—(NQ_#F): 15-Minute
Figure 4.8 of the NASDAQ 100 Continuous Mini-contract exemplifies the ideal stabilization in
the PRZ that valid patterns can demonstrate. The NQ possessed a considerable AB=CD
pattern on this 15-minute chart. The BC projection converged in nearly the exact area as the
completion point of the Bullish AB=CD. Both numbers defined the 1353 area as important
intra-day support.

Figure 4.8

The PRZ in this example required several tests to validate the harmonic support. In these
situations, the price action will require some consolidation to resolve the prior downtrend before
reversing. Although this concept will be thoroughly discussed in Chapter 11, “The Harmonic
Trade Management System,” it is important to consider the time required for a valid reversal
is typically relative to the size of the pattern. In this example, the price action stabilized as it
tested all of the numbers in the PRZ. Despite the consolidation, the Bullish AB=CD pattern
clearly identified the precise area for a long position.

50

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Figure 4.9 shows the price action at the completion point of the pattern. Despite a somewhat
severe decline into the PRZ, the 1.618 BC projection complemented the AB=CD at the 1353
level. The price action bottomed after testing all the numbers in the Bullish AB=CD Potential
Reversal Zone. This situation provided ample opportunity to get long in this area, as the NQ
reversed nicely from the completion of this pattern.

Figure 4.9

Chapter 4 The AB=CD Pattern

The Bearish AB=CD Pattern
The Bearish AB=CD should possess a distinct symmetry with the completion point of the
pattern complementing the BC projection and defining a precise PRZ (see Figure 4.10).

;
3
1
.
1
3.14
