
It was slightly more complicated than that, however. To a degree they
were separate by choice. Ranieri didn't exactly go out of his way to build
bridges to the rest of the firm. And Bob Dall had insisted in his original
three-page memo to the Salomon executive committee that the
mortgage department stand alone. He remembered the way the old boss,
Bill Simon, had treated the first mortgage securities. If the mortgage
department were forced to work with the government department, he
said, "the mortgage market would never get off the ground; it would be
subjugated." If the few financiers at Salomon Brothers, whose job it was
to call on the CEOs of large corporations, were given mortgage finance,
"they would never have done the deals. Corporate finance people feel
mortgage deals are beneath them," Dall explained.
But in Ranieri's mind, the mortgage department stood alone for the very
simple reason that it had no friends. He built high walls to protect his
people from hostile forces. The enemy was no longer his Wall Street
competitors, for they had mostly disappeared. The enemy was Salomon
Brothers. "The irony," says Ranieri, "is that the firm would always point
to the mortgage department and say, 'Look, see how innovative we are!'
But the truth is that the firm said no to everything we did. This
department got built in spite of the firm, not because of the firm."
Chapter Six
The Fat Men and Their
Marvelous Money Machine
1981-1986
CTS began to flash on the mortgage trading desk in October 1981, and at
first no one knew why. On the other end of the telephones were nervous
savings and loan presidents from across America wanting to speak to a
Salomon mortgage trader. They were desperate to sell their loans. Every
home mortgage in America, one trillion dollars' worth of debt, seemed to
be for sale. There were a thousand sellers, and no buyers. Correction.
One buyer. Lewie Ranieri and his traders. The force of the imbalance
between supply and demand was stunning. It was as if a fire hydrant
burst directly upon a group of thirsty street urchins. One trillion dollars
came barreling through the phone lines, and all the traders had to do was
open their mouths and swallow as much as they could.
What was going on? From the moment the Federal Reserve lifted
interest rates in October 1979, thrifts hemorrhaged money. The entire

structure of home lending was on the verge of collapse. There was a time
when it seemed that if nothing were done, all thrifts would go bankrupt.
So on September 30, 1981, Congress passed a nifty tax break*
* The tax break allowed thnfts to sell all their mortgage loans and put
their cash to work for higher returns, often by purchasing the cheap
loans disgorged by other thnfts The thnfts were simply swapping
portfolios of loans. The huge losses on the sale (the thnfts were selling
loans for sixty-five cents on the dollar they had originally made at par,
or a hundred cents on the dollar) could now
for its beloved thrift industry. It provided massive relief for thrifts. To
take advantage of it, however, the thrifts had to sell their mortgage
loans. They did. And it led to hundreds of billions of dollars in turnover
on Wall Street. Wall Street hadn't suggested the tax breaks, and
indeed, Ranieri's traders hadn't known about the legislation until after it
happened. Still, it amounted to a massive subsidy to Wall Street from
Congress. Long live motherhood and home ownership! The United States
Congress had just rescued Ranieri & Co. The only fully staffed mortgage
department on Wall Street was no longer awkward and expensive; it was
a thriving monopoly.
It was all a great mistake. The market wasn't exploding because of the
megatrends that Bob Dall had listed in his memo to Gutfreund (growth in
housing, movement from Rust Belt to Sun Belt, etc.) although those later
became factors. The market took off because of a simple tax break. It
was as if Steven Jobs had bought office space, built an assembly line,
hired two hundred thousand salesmen, and written brochures before he
had anything to sell. Then someone else creates the personal computer,
and seeing this, Jobs leaps into action, calling his previously useless
infrastructure Apple Computer.
Bond traders tend to treat each day of trading as if it were their last.
This short-term outlook enables them to exploit the weakness of their
customers without worrying about the long-term effects on customer
relations. They get away with whatever they can. A desperate seller is in
a weak position. He's less concerned about how much he is paid than
when he is paid. Thrift presidents were desperate. They arrived at the
Salomon Brothers mortgage trading desk hat in hand. If they were going
to be so obvious about their weakness, they might as well have written a
check to Salomon Brothers.

The situation was aggravated by the ignorance of the thrifts. The 3-6-3
Club members had not been stress-tested for the bond market; they
didn't know how to play Liar's Poker. They didn't know the mentality
be hidden. A new accounting standard allowed the thrifts to amortize
the losses over the life of the loans. For example, the loss the thrift
would show on its books in the first year from the sale of a thirty-year
loan that had fallen 35 percent in value was a little over 1 percent: 35 /
30. But what was even better is that the loss could be offset against any
taxes the thrift had paid over the previous ten years. Shown losses, the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) returned old tax dollars to the thrifts.
For the thrifts, the name of the game was to generate lots of losses to
show to the IRS; that was now easy. All they had to do to claw back old
taxes was sell off their bad loans; that's why thrifts were dying to sell
their mortgages.
of the people they were up against. They didn't know the value of what
they were selling. In some cases, they didn'teven know the terms (years
to maturity, rates of interest) of their own loans. The only thing the
thrift managers knew was how much they wanted to sell. The truly
incredible thing about them, noted by all the Salomon traders, was that
no matter how roughly they were treated, they kept coming back for
more. They were like ducks I once saw on a corporate hunt that were
trained to fly repeatedly over the same field of hunters until shot dead.
You didn't have to be Charles Darwin to see that this breed was doomed.
Trader Tom DiNapoli fondly remembers a call from one thrift president.
"He wanted to sell a hundred million dollars' worth of his thirty-year
loans [bearing the same rate of interest], and buy a hundred million
dollars of some other loans with the cash from the sale. I told him I'd
bid [buy] his loans at seventy-five [cents on the dollar] and offer him the
others at eighty-five." The thrift president scratched his head at the
numbers. He was selling loans nearly identical to those he was buying, but
the difference in yield would leave him out of pocket an unheard-of ten
million dollars. Or, to put it another way, the thrift was being asked to
pay a transaction fee of ten million dollars to Salomon Brothers. "That
doesn't sound like a very good trade for me," he said. DiNapoli was ready
for that one. "It isn't, from an economic point of view," he said, "but look
at it this way, if you don't doit, you're out of a job." A fellow trader
talking to another thrift president on another line overheard DiNapoli

and cracked up. It was the funniest thing he had heard all day. He could
picture the man on the other end of the phone, just oozing desperation.
"October 1981 was the most irresponsible period in the history of the
capital markets," says Larry Fink, a partner with Steven Schwartz-man,
Peter Peterson, and David Stockman in the Blackstone Group. In October
1981 Fink was head of the small mortgage trading department at First
Boston, which would soon grow large and become Lewie Ranieri's major
competitor. "The thrifts that did the best did nothing. The ones that did
the big trades got raped."
Perhaps. However, like all trades in the bond market, these were
negotiable transactions between consenting adults, and the sole rule of
engagement was: Buyer beware. Had this been a boxing match, it would
have been canceled to prevent the weaker fighter from being killed. But
it wasn't. In any case, the abuse could have been even worse. Ranieri
had a sense of mercy and, where he could, stepped in to redress the
balance of power between the thrift presidents and his traders.
Mortgage trader Andy Stone recalls having bought $70 million of
mortgage bonds at a price of eighty (again, cents on the dollar). At
Stone's insistence, a bond salesman in California sold them immediately
to Ben Franklin Savings & Loan for a price of eighty-three. In minutes
Stone had made $2.1 million (3 percent of $70 million). After the
customary slapping of palms and the praising of the salesman over the
firm loudspeaker, Stone informed Ranieri.
Now $2.1 million was a good day's work. Stone had been a trader for just
eight months, and he was eager to show the boss how well he was doing.
The boss wasn't pleased. "Lewie said, 'If you weren't young, I'd fire you
right now. Call the customer and tell him you're the asshole who ripped
him off. Tell him you bought the bonds at eighty, and the price is
therefore not eighty-three,.but eighty-point-two-five,' " says Stone.
"Imagine how it feels to call up a customer and say, 'Hi, I'm the asshole
who ripped you off.' "
It wasn't just the dummies who queued to trade with Salomon Brothers.
Even knowledgeable thrift presidents felt they faced a choice between
rape and slow suicide. To do nothing spelled bankruptcy for many. Paying
out 14 percent on deposits while taking in 5 percent on old home
mortgage loans was a poor way to live, but this is precisely the position
thrifts were in. By late 1982 the thrifts were attempting to grow their

way out of catastrophe. By that time, short-term interest rates had
fallen below long-term interest rates. The thrift could make new
mortgage loans at 14 percent while taking in money at 12 percent.
Many thrifts layered a billion dollars of brand-new loans on top of their
existing, disastrous hundred million dollars of old loss-making loans, in a
hope that the new would offset the old. Each new purchase of mortgage
bonds (which was identical to making a loan) was like the last act of a
desperate man. The strategy was wildly irresponsible, for the
fundamental problem (borrowing short term and lending long term)
hadn't been remedied. The hypergrowth only meant that the next thrift
crisis would be larger. But the thrift managers were not thinking that
far in advance. They were simply trying to keep the door to the shop
open. That explains why thrifts continued to buy mortgage bonds even as
they sold their loans.
The tax and accounting breaks, designed to rescue the savings and
loan industry, seemed, in the end, to be tailor-made for Lewie Rameri's
mortgage department. It rained gold on Salomon Brothers' mortgage
traders. Or at least that is how it appeared to the rest of envious Wall
Street. Ranieri allowed his boys to assume a carefree buy now, worry
later attitude in the midst of the upheaval in the thrift industry. And
the Salomon traders found themselves in a weird new role. They were no
longer trading mortgage bonds, but the raw material for mortgage bonds:
home loans. Salomon Brothers was all of a sudden playing the role of a
thrift. Nothing—not Ginnie Mae, not the Bank of America—stood
between Wall Street investment banker and homeowner; Salomon was
exposed to the homeowners' ability to repay. A cautious man would have
inspected the properties he was lending against, for nothing t»ut
property underpinned the loans.
But if you planned to run with this new market, you did not have time to
check every last property in a package of loans. Buying whole loans (that
is what the traders called home loans, to distinguish them from mortgage
bonds) was an act of faith, like eating bologna. Lea.ps of faith were
Ranieri's specialty. A quick mental calculation told him that whatever the
cost of buying bad loans, it couldn't possibly match the profits he would
make by trading the things. He turned out to be right. Once he ended up
with loans that had been made to a string of Baptist churches in Texas,
but generally the loans were for housing, just is the thrift managers who

sold them had claimed.
However, as I have said, the notion of trusting the thrifts .gave
Salomon's top brass the willies. (And Salomon wasn't alone. Most other
Wall Street firms had severed ties with the thrifts.) As Ranieri recalls,
"The executive committee said I couldn't trade whole loans. So I just
went out and did it anyway. Everyone insisted I shouldn't have done it.
They told me I was going to go to jail. But whole loans were ninety-ninepoint-nine percent of the entire mortgage market. How could you not
trade whole loans?" How indeed. "We bought them," says Tom Kendall,
"and then found out you had to have an eagle before you buy them." An
eagle was Federal Housing Administration approval to trade in whole
loans. "So then we went and got the eagle."
Ranieri & Co. intended to transform the "whole loans" into bonds as soon
as possible by taking them for stamping to the U.S. government. Then
they could sell the bonds to Salomon's institutional investors as, in
effect, U.S. government bonds. For that purpose, partly as the result
I
of Ranieri's persistent lobbying, two new facilities had sprung up in the
federal government alongside Ginnie Mae. They guaranteed the
mortgages that did not qualify for the Ginnie Mae stamp. The Federal
Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (called Freddie Mac) and the Federal
National Mortgage Association (called Fannie Mae) between them, by
giving their guarantees, were able to transform most home mortgages
into government-backed bonds. The thrifts paid a fee to have their
mortgages guaranteed. The shakier the loans, the larger the fee a thrift
had to pay to get its mortgages stamped by one of the agencies. Once
they were stamped, however, nobody cared about the quality of the
loans. Defaulting homeowners became the government's problem. The
principle underlying the programs was that these agencies could better
assess and charge for credit quality than individual investors.
The wonderfully spontaneous mortgage department was the place to be
if your philosophy of life was: Ready, fire, aim. The payoff to the
swashbuckling traders, by the standards of the time, was shockingly
large. In 1982, coming off two and a half lean years, Lewie Ranieri's
mortgage department made $150 million. In 1984 a mortgage trader
named Steve Baum shattered a Salomon Brothers record, by making
$100 million in a single year trading whole loans. Although there are no

official numbers, it was widely accepted at Salomon that Ranieri's
traders made $200 million in 1983, $175 million in 1984, and $275 million
in 1985.
Lewie Ranieri was the right man at the right place at the right time.
"Lewie was willing to take positions in things he didn't fully understand.
He had a trader's instinct that he trusted. That was important," says
one of his senior traders. "The attitude at Salomon was always, 'If you
believe in it, go with it, but if it doesn't work, you're fucked.' And Lewie
responded to this. At other places management says, 'Well, gee, fellas,
do we really want to bet the ranch on this deal?' Lewie was not only
willing to bet the ranch. He was willing to hire people and let them bet
the ranch, too. His attitude was: 'Sure, what the fuck, it's only a ranch.'
In other shops, he'd have had to write a two-hundred-page memo for a
committee that wanted to be sure that what he was doing was safe. He
would have had to prove he knew what he was doing. He could never have
done that. He knew what he was doing, but he could never have proved it.
Had Lewie been assigned to look at the mortgage market at other firms,
it wouldn't have gone anywhere."
The Salomon trading floor was unique. It had minimal supervision, minimal
controls, and no position limits. A trader could buy or sell as many bonds
as he thought appropriate without asking. The trading floor was, in other
words, a CEO's nightmare. "If Salomon's trading floor was a business
school case study," says mortgage trader Wolf Nadool-man, "the guy
pretending to be the CEO would say, 'That is shocking!' But you know
what? He'd be wrong. Sometimes you lose some dough, but sometimes
you make a fortune. Salomon was right."
Salomon's loose management style had its downside. Salomon Brothers
was the only major firm on Wall Street in the early 1980s with no
systernjor allocating costs. As unbelievable as it seems, no measure was
taken of the bottom line; people were judged by the sum total of the
revenues on their trading books irrespective of what those cost to
generate. When the firm was a partnership (1910-1981) and managers
had their own money in the till, loose controls sufficed. Now, however,
the money didn't belong to them but to the shareholders. And what
worked for a partnership proved disastrous in a publicly owned
corporation.
Instead of focusing on profits, trading managers focused on revenues.

They were rewarded for indiscriminate growth. Gross revenues meant
raw power. Ranieri had finally been made partner in 1978. His influence
waned with his revenues until the end of 1981, but when the mortgage
market exploded, he began a rapid rise to the top of Salomon Brothers.
In 1983, with his department generating 40 percent of the firm's
revenues while no other department generated more than 10 percent, he
was placed on the Salomon Brothers executive committee. He expanded
by hiring more traders and moving into real estate mortgages.
In December 1985 John Gutfreund told a reporter, "Lew is -very
definitely on the short list of potential future chairmen." Ranieri
expanded by purchasing a mortgage banker, who made loans directly to
home buyers and supplied Ranieri with the raw material for mortgage
bonds. In 1986 Ranieri was named to the office of the chairman directly
beneath Gutfreund. In that year Ranieri expanded overseas, creating the
Mortgage Corporation in London to reshape the British mortgage market
in the image of America's. Joining him in the office of the chairman was
one representative each of the government and corporate t>ond trading
desks, Tom Strauss and Bill Voute. Both were also on the short list of
potential future chairman. Both were expanding their departments
as well, though not so fast as Ranieri. By mid-1987, though it has proved
impossible to confirm the assertion, a Salomon managing director claimed
that 40 percent of the seven thousand-odd Salomon employees reported,
in one way or another, to Ranieri.
With trading revenues came glory and advancement at every level of the
company. The numbers on a neighbor's trading book became known within
Salomon Brothers in the same manner as the size of a neighbor's bonus.
Though trainees were the last to hear anything, word eventually reached
them of the opportunity created by the massive change in the capital
markets over which Salomon presided. "All you had to do was sit in the
classroom, find out how many mortgages there were in the country,
figure out what would happen if they securitized, say, ten percent of
them, and you realized this was going to be big," says former Salomon
trader Mark Freed, a member of the Salomon Class of 1982.
By 1984 Salomon Brothers could plausibly assert to a U.S. congressional
subcommittee that the nation would require four trillion dollars in new
housing finance before 1994. Ranieri the conquering hero, the Salomon
legend, the incarnation of the concept of success, appeared before the

training class to describe how he had just flown in from California, and
how he had looked down from his airplane and seen all those little houses,
and how all those little houses were mortgaged, and how all those
mortgages would eventually make their way onto the trading floor of
Salomon Brothers (no one questioned his ability to see the houses from
thirty thousand feet; if anyone could, it was Lewie). By 1984 the
mortgage desk would be the place to work in the eyes of young M.B.A.'s
emerging from the Salomon Brothers training program. People wanted to
trade mortgages, to be Salomon Brother mortgage traders, to be a part
of a money machine that by this time was earning more than half of the
firm's revenues.
Salomon Brothers mortgage traders rode roughshod over both the
largest capital market in the world and their own firm, which was far and
away the most profitable on Wall Street. They felt lucky. "It was an
accepted fact," says a mortgage trader, "that mortgage traders had iron
balls. It was an accepted fact that as a mortgage trader you didn't make
a lot of money in your market, you made all the money in your market. It
was an accepted fact that you didn't do some of the trades in your
market, you didn't do most of the trades in your market, you did all of
the trades in your market."
To do all the trades in your market, you had to have buyers as well as
sellers, and these, in October 1981, were thin on the ground. Ranieri,
along with the guru of junk bonds, Mike Milken of Drexel Burnham,
became one of the great bond missionaries of the 1980s. Crisscrossing
the country, trying to persuade institutional investors to buy mortgage
securities, Ranieri bumped into Milken. They visited the same accounts on
the same day. "My product took off first," says Ranieri. "Investors
started to buy the gospel according to Ranieri." The gospel according to
Ranieri was, in simple terms, "that mortgages were so cheap your teeth
hurt." Ranieri's initial pitch focused on how much higher the yield on
mortgage bonds was than the yield on corporate and government bonds
of similar credit quality Most mortgage bonds were accorded the highest
rating, triple A, by the two major rating agencies, Moody's and Standard
& Poor's^ Most mortgage bonds were backed by the United States
government, either explicitly, as in the case of Ginnie Mae bonds, or
implicitly, as in the case of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae.
No one thought the U.S. government would default. Investors

nevertheless wanted no truck with Ranieri or Ranieri's growing army of
salesmen. In spite of the upheaval in the mortgage market, the initial
objection expressed by Bill Simon to Ginnie Mae remained valid: You
couldn't predict the life of a mortgage bond. It wasn't that prepayments
were bad in themselves. It was that you couldn't predict when they
would arrive. And if you didn't know when the cash would come back to
you, you couldn't calculate the yield. All you could surmise was that the
bond would tend to maintain its stated maturity as rates rose and
homeowners ceased to prepay, and would shorten as rates fell and
homeowners refinanced. This was bad. Though the conditions of supply
had changed overnight in October 1981, the conditions of demand for
mortgage securities had not. Mortgages indeed were cheap; they were
plentiful, yet no one wanted to buy them.
Worse, in several states mortgage securities were still illegal
investments, a condition Ranieri didn't fully accept. In a meeting he
screamed at a lawyer whom he had never met, "I don't want to hear what
lawyers say, I want to do what I want to do." He sought a federal
preemption of state laws. And he began to look for a way to make
mortgages resemble other bonds, a way to give mortgage securities a
definite maturity.
Ultimately he wanted to change the way Americans borrowed money to
buy their homes. "I ought at least be allowed the right," he said, "to
I'
go to the consumer and say, here are two identical mortgages, one at 13
percent, and one at 12.5 percent. You can have either one you want. You
can refinance the one at 13 percent anytime you want for whatever
reason you want. The one at 12.5 percent, if you move or die or trade up,
has no penalty. But if you just want to refinance it for savings and debt
service, you pay me [a fee]." Congress gave him permission to sell his
mortgage securities in every state, but to his more radical proposition it
said no. The horneowner kept his right to prepay his mortgage at any
time, and Ranieri was forced to find another way to persuade
institutional investors to buy his godforsaken mortgage securities.
So he did. "Lewie Ranieri could sell ice to an Eskimo," says Scott
Brittenham, who accompanied him on many of the sales calls. "He was so
good with customers you couldn't keep him on the trading desk," says
Bob Dall, who was coming to the end of his days at Salomon. Says Ranieri:
