
4

Currency Strategy

speciﬁcally the subject of this book, the currency market. Firstly, classical economic theory
asserts that market practitioners are “objective”, that is they are completely independent of
and are not affected by the market conditions in which they operate. Intuitively, we know this
to be nonsense. An investor is not only directly affected by present market conditions such as
liquidity and volatility but also by past experience. Past successes may make our investor bolder
in their future investment decisions, while past losses may make them much more cautious. As
John Donne would have it, no man is an island, so the same is true for the market practitioner,
who can both be affected by and can affect market conditions. In short, they are both cause and
effect. We can see this with that most fundamental of economic principles, supply and demand.
Here too, there is no “objectivity”. Each is affected by the other — and we know this because
if it were not the case price trends could not happen. If they were completely independent of
each other, supply would instantly match demand and vice versa, thus stopping a price trend
before it had begun. Yet, this is not the case. Price trends across asset and currency markets
can last for days, weeks, months or even years.
Another widely held myth is that markets are perfectly “efﬁcient”. The suggestion here is
that both information availability and distribution are perfect — that all market participants
have equal access to available, market-moving information. Furthermore, the assumption of
market efﬁciency is that all market participants are “rational” and are proﬁt-seeking. Like the
suggestion of “objectivity”, this is also the stuff of nonsense. Information is widely and freely
available, but neither its availability nor its distribution is perfect. Indeed, one could argue that
the very purpose of currency market practitioners is to get information that others do not have.
Equally, the very concept of being “rational” is a subjective one and open to interpretation.
Further, currency dealers are “rational” to the extent that they are trying to make a proﬁt.
However, cautious investors or corporate Treasurers who are seeking to manage their currency
risk are not trying to make a proﬁt. Rather, they are trying to limit any possible loss from
their original currency exposure. Central banks and Treasury departments, who also operate
within the currency market, are also not for the most part proﬁt-seeking. Trying to impose
an all-ﬁts-one approach to explaining exchange rates simply does not work. For this very
reason, economics by itself has had mixed results at best in forecasting exchange rates. The
dynamics of the currency market are different from other markets and this should be taken into
account.
As we have seen, equilibrium exchange rate models help to provide the framework and
the direction for long-term exchange rate analysis, but they are for the most part incapable of
being more speciﬁc or more accurate over a shorter time frame. In trying to forecast shortterm exchange rate moves, it may be necessary to use other tools and even other analytical
disciplines. Within this book, there are outside of economics four types of analysis that we
will look at for this purpose: ﬂow, technical, risk appetite and market psychology. Depending
on what kind of currency market practitioner you are, you may view one or more of these
analytical disciplines with some scepticism. This is all to the good, for if someone is to use any
form of analysis in their daily business they ﬁrst have to be convinced that it actually works.
We will examine these types of analysis in detail in the ﬁrst four chapters of this book. For
instance, market psychology may be thought of as an excessively vague concept incapable of
serious analysis or use, yet this is precisely what the ﬁeld of “behavioural ﬁnance” seeks to
explain. How else to explain the fact that political events that do not materially affect economic
fundamentals can have lasting impact on exchange rates, were it not for the fact that such events
changed the “psychology” or “sentiment” of the market? In early 1993, the then US Treasury
Secretary Lloyd Bentsen was reported as saying that the Japanese yen was undervalued. This

Introduction

5

statement and others after it led the market to believe that the US was deliberately seeking
to devalue the US dollar against the yen in order to reduce the huge US–Japan trade deﬁcit.
Whatever the reality, the market convinced itself that this was the case and for two years after
that statement the yen rose inexorably against the US dollar. Did economic “fundamentals”
play a part? Of course they did. Japan’s huge trade and current account surpluses with the US
meant that for the dollar–yen exchange rate to remain stable Japan had to export to the US
the same amount of capital through its capital account deﬁcit. At times when this was not the
case, the yen was bound to appreciate and so it transpired. The trigger, the catalyst for this
subsequent yen appreciation was however a change in market sentiment or psychology — and
it took another change in market sentiment resulting from the new US Treasury Secretary
Robert Rubin’s call for an orderly reversal of the dollar weakness for that yen appreciation to
reverse.
The subject of technical analysis also draws mixed reactions. While widely followed by
currency dealers and the leveraged fund community, many corporate ofﬁcers and investors
appear to regard it with scepticism — and many economists look on it as some form of voodoo
or witchcraft. Yet technical analysis or “charting” has a strong following not for any ideological
reason, but simply because it “works”. Like any other form of analysis, there are technical
analysts who are highly regarded by the market for their accuracy in meeting their forecasts,
and those that are less successful. The appealing thing however for many market practitioners is
that technical analysis has targets at all. While there are important exceptions, too many within
the economics profession remain content to talk eloquently if vaguely, attaching a multitude
of caveats and in sum coming to no conclusion whatsoever. Needless to say, decisions on
whether or not to hedge or invest cannot tolerate such imprecision. Where the strength of
equilibrium exchange rate models is in providing a long-term exchange rate view, the strength
of technical analysis is in predicting the timing of currency moves. In particular, it can be
especially effective in predicting when those fundamentally-based long-term trends may take
place.
A more recent addition, at least in its present form, to this group of short-term analytical
disciplines is “ﬂow” analysis, which involves the tracking of a bank’s client ﬂows, again for the
purpose of forecasting short-term exchange rate moves. The benchmark ﬂow analysis product
within the industry has been for some time CitiFX Flows. The ﬁeld of behavioural ﬁnance has
undertaken considerable research into behavioural patterns such as investor herding, which
can both be responsible for accelerating short-term trends and also for reversing them. The
broad rule of such trends is that the longer they continue the more they become self-fulﬁlling.
This is of course how ﬁnancial bubbles develop, in whatever kind of market. As the old adage
goes, when you ﬁnd your taxi driver giving you stock tips, it’s probably time to get out of
the market! We shall look at this recent yet intriguing discipline of ﬂow analysis later in the
book.
Most works to date on exchange rates rely purely on “fundamental” analysis, falling back on
the traditional exchange rate models. While several of these are notable, most would appear to
come up short on two grounds. Firstly, they fail to address the issue of the forecasting inaccuracy
of those models. Secondly, few have included other analytical disciplines to try to improve on
that forecasting inaccuracy. Crucially, few have tried to see exchange rates from the perspective
of the end user of analysis or the currency market practitioner. For those who trade, invest or
hedge in the currency market, the bottom line is indeed the bottom line. Fundamental economic
analysis is the means, it is not the end. A key aim of this book is to include other analytical
disciplines and also to use a more currency-focused form of economic analysis or as I term
@Team-FLY

6

Currency Strategy

it “currency economics”, both for the purpose of trying to improve currency forecasting and
recommendation accuracy. Using these various disciplines, I would recommend that currency
market practitioners adopt an integrated approach towards currency forecasting and strategy
that is both rigorous and ﬂexible. Equilibrium exchange rate models should still be used as
the guide for short-term exchange rate trends, but for short-term moves a combination of
currency economics, ﬂows, technical analysis, risk appetite and market psychology should be
used. Therefore, at its most ambitious this book, Currency Strategy: The Practitioner’s Guide
to Currency Investing, Hedging and Forecasting seeks to provide a new and more focused
framework for currency analysis and thereafter to apply it to the decision-making process of
the currency market practitioner themselves.
The fact that the currency market affects just about every aspect of our economic life is a
relatively recent phenomenon. Before 1971–1973, when the Bretton Woods system of pegged
exchange rates, which had lasted since 1944, ﬁnally collapsed, you would have been laughed
at if you had suggested as much. Currency risk was not a primary consideration. Indeed, the
last 30 years have marked the ﬁrst time in monetary history that all major currencies have been
freely ﬂoating and completely independent of some commodity peg. You could say as a result
that we are living in a time of monetary experiment, an experiment which remains the subject
of great controversy and debate as to whether or not it has been beneﬁcial or harmful. For my
part, I nail my colours to the mast from the outset. I am an unequivocal, unashamed proponent
of free trade and free capital markets. There is little doubt that free and open competition carries
with it a harsh discipline. Yet, just as there are ﬂaws with that other experiment, democracy, so
it can be measured only on a relative basis; that is, it is the worst option, apart from all the rest.
Attempts at subsidizing the economy have clearly failed, thus for now free trade and capital
markets reign supreme until such time as better alternatives come along. The currency markets
are the fuel within the engine of globalization, an experiment that provides the liquidity for
the world’s markets.
That experiment began more precisely on August 15, 1971 when US President Richard
Nixon announced that the US was abandoning its convertibility commitment between the
value of the US dollar and gold at the rate of USD35 per ounce of gold. A diplomatic bandaid was subsequently attempted in December 1971 in the form of the so-called “Smithsonian
Agreement”, but the attempt to keep major exchange rates pegged and shackled ﬁnally collapsed in March 1973. As with the ERM crises of 1992 and 1993, the cost of defending a
currency peg that was incapable of responding to economic changes was eventually viewed
as intolerable. The 1971–1973 period was unquestionably the seminal turning point in the
development of the currency markets. Subsequently, there were historical events of varying
importance, not least the development of the European Monetary System or the “Snake” which
was succeeded by the ERM, the various oil crises, the Plaza and Louvre Accords of 1985 and
1987 respectively, and the coordinated G7 effort to achieve an “orderly reversal” of dollar
weakness from 1995 onwards. None of these however carried the same weight as that of the
second most important event in the recent life of the currency markets, the break-up of the
Soviet Union and the ending of the Cold War. The coming to power in the Soviet Union of
Mikhail Gorbachev in 1985 was a momentous event, the effects of which are arguably still
being felt to this day. Glasnost and perestroika were primarily viewed as political doctrines
of change, but they also reﬂected signiﬁcant economic change and not just for the Soviet
Union.
The tearing down of the Berlin Wall and the ending of the Soviet occupation of Eastern
Europe marked the end of an era of hostility, conﬂict and subjugation, but it also marked the

Introduction

7

beginning of the tearing down of global trade and capital barriers. The competition of the future
would not be with arms, but instead with trade and economic competitiveness. This most recent
phase of globalization is widely thought of as only being three or four years old, but it dates
further back to those heady days of hope in the late 1980s, when all things seemed possible
and the prospect of “mutually assured destruction” through nuclear confrontation between the
US and the Soviet Union was ended. Purists will argue that there have been previous examples
of globalization, notably around the beginning of the twentieth century, an experiment that as
we all know ended badly, but for our purposes we focus only on this more recent exercise.
The breaking down of those barriers — ﬁrstly those made of brick and subsequently those
economic barriers to free markets — triggered an explosion in trade and capital ﬂows, which
in turn triggered a parallel explosion in the size of the currency market as the BIS surveys from
1989 to 2001 conﬁrm. At a daily turnover of around USD1.2 trillion a day, the currency market
now dwarfs the US stock or bond markets. As the pulling down of trade and capital barriers
has led to investors and corporations seeking to expand and diversify in other countries, so
the global currency market has been the facilitator of that, and in the process increased in size
exponentially.
When the experiment began in late 1971, most economists viewed favourably this newfound exchange rate ﬂexibility. Subsequently, to some, the experiment that started 30 years
ago appears to have created a monster. The last decade in particular has seen much talk of a
need to bring exchange rates back under control, either through a tax on currency trading (the
so-called “Tobin Tax” idea) or a move to re-peg exchange rates, perhaps even using gold as the
monetary anchor. From my perspective, while exchange rate volatility is frequently unwanted,
empirical studies have noted that over the long term it is lower than equity market volatility
and few are trying to shackle similarly the equity markets. Equally, the explosion the world
has seen in trade, ﬁnance and most of all growth simply would not have taken place were it
not for the currency market, acting as the facilitator of that growth.
Whatever one’s view on the matter, there is no debate as to the global effect the currency
market now has, nor that currency risk is now a crucial consideration. At the level of the
ordinary man or woman on the street, the most obvious expression of this is through travel.
When travelling abroad, most people consciously or subconsciously translate “foreign” prices
back into their home currency terms to give them a frame of reference. Thus, the price of foreign
goods can seem “cheap” or “expensive” relative to the price of the same good in the home
country. Economic models can be more effectively explained sometimes through example
and analogy rather than through complex mathematical formulae. For instance, Americans
generally regard the UK as “expensive”. If a New Yorker, who is used to paying a dollar ﬁfty
for his morning cappuccino comes to London and has to pay three pounds sterling (USD4.5
at a sterling–dollar exchange rate of 1.5) the UK price is clearly expensive. In our example,
the price differential reﬂects the sterling–dollar exchange rate, the relative supply/demand
dynamics of cappuccino in New York and London and the different cost prices. The “law of
one price” otherwise known as Purchasing Power Parity suggests that over time the exchange
rate between two countries must alter so as to correct any imbalance between the price of the
same basket of goods in those two countries. In our cappuccino example, if we use a cup of
coffee as reﬂective of the general price differential for a representative basket of goods between
the US and the UK, a combination of a sterling depreciation over time against the dollar and
a fall in the domestic London price of cappuccino relative to that in New York should occur
in order to narrow the price differential. In theory, this works ﬁne over the long term. Readers
will note that in 1992, the sterling–dollar exchange rate was brieﬂy above 2.00. At the start of

8

Currency Strategy

2002, it was around 1.45. Over the short term, however, the record of PPP is decidedly more
patchy, which is of course no consolation to London coffee lovers nor to our New Yorker guest!
Relative pricing can be further distorted by other factors such as barriers to trade and different
cultural tastes. For instance, some people may not like coffee while to others it may be against
their religion. That said, it holds true that the exchange rate is a key determining factor for how
one deﬁnes “expensive” or “cheap” in the ﬁrst place.
The same premise is also evident at the corporate level. When the US dollar was appreciating
to multi-year highs against European currencies during the period of 1999–2001, this together
with the fact of strong US consumer demand made it very attractive for European manufacturers
to export their production to the US at increasingly competitive prices. The strength of the US
currency deﬂated the dollar price of these products, thus making them more competitive and
encouraging US consumers to buy more European goods. For US exporters, however, the
picture was the opposite, as their exports to Europe became less competitive as the dollar
strengthened, reducing their market share or pricing them out of some markets entirely. Thus,
the US trade deﬁcit ballooned, not just with Europe but with the world as a whole, reaching
a level of some USD400 billion in 2001. Yet, just as the US trade deﬁcit was expanding,
so more competitive exports to the US together with a slowdown in US demand in 2001
forced US manufacturers in turn to cut their prices, reducing inﬂationary pressures. However,
as corporate executives are painfully aware, just as domestic currency weakness can lead to
more competitive exports and thus higher proﬁts, causing a benign circle, so a vicious circle
can result from domestic currency strength, hurting one’s export competitiveness. From the
perspective of a European exporter, a weak dollar is not a good thing, as it causes the exporter’s
prices to rise in dollar terms. At some stage, those higher prices will cause US consumers to
buy American instead of European. This will cause the US trade deﬁcit with Europe to shrink,
but it will also bite hard into the proﬁts of European exporters.
Exporters are of necessity keenly aware of the importance of exchange rate movements.
However, companies that have no exports but simply produce and sell in a single country are
also affected. A company that has no direct export exposure and thus thinks itself blissfully
exempt from currency risk is in for a nasty shock. As we have seen in the above example,
changes in the exchange rate — the external price — cause changes in turn in the domestic price
of goods and services. Thus, if your currency strengthens against that of your competition, you
face a competitive threat — and assuming all else is equal, the choice of either cutting your
prices, thus reducing your margin, or losing market share.
Currency movements can also have a profound effect on investing. Fixed income and equity
portfolio managers, in investing in another country’s assets, automatically take on currency
exposure to that country. Frequently, fund managers view the initial decision to invest in a
country as being one and the same with investing in that country’s currency. This is not necessarily the case for the simple reason that the dynamics which operate within the currency
market are frequently not the same as those that govern asset markets. It is entirely possible for a country’s ﬁxed income and equity markets to perform strongly over time, while
simultaneously its currency depreciates. My favourite example of this phenomenon is that of
South Africa. From the autumn of 1998, when the 5-year South African government bond
yield brieﬂy exceeded 21%, this was one of the world’s most outstanding investments until November 2001. By then, this yield had made a low of around 9.25%, a direct and inverse reﬂection of the degree to which its price soared over the previous three years. In that
time however, the value of the South African rand has fallen substantially from around 6 to
the US dollar to almost 14. Here is a clear example where the currency and the bond market

Introduction

9

of the same country have been going in opposite directions over a period of three years! An
investor in the 5-year South African government bond in the autumn of 1998 would have
seen their excellent gains in the underlying ﬁxed income position over that time wiped out
by the losses on the rand exposure. The lesson from this is that currency risk should be an
important consideration for asset managers and moreover one that is managed separately and
independently from the underlying. Empirical studies have shown that currency volatility
reﬂects between 70 and 90% of a ﬁxed income portfolio’s total return. Thus, for the more
conservative fund managers, who cannot take such swings in returns but do not take the prudent step of hedging currency risk, it can be the main reason why they stay out of otherwise
proﬁtable markets. Conversely, currency risk can also enhance the total return of a portfolio.
When the US dollar was falling from 1993 to 1995, this made offshore investments more
attractive for US fund managers when translating back into dollars. It was no coincidence that
this period also saw a substantial increase in portfolio diversiﬁcation abroad by this investment
community.
There is little doubt that currency exposure can be unpredictable, frustrating and infuriating,
but it is not something one has the luxury of ignoring. In John Maynard Keynes’ reference
to the “animal spirits”, that elemental force that drives ﬁnancial markets in herd-like fashion,
he was referring to the stock market. More than most, he should have deﬁned such a term
as he was one himself, having been an extremely active stock market speculator as well as
one of the last century’s most pre-eminent economists. However, he might as well have been
referring to the currency market, for the term sums up no other more perfectly. A market that
is volatile and unpredictable, a market that epitomizes such a concept as the “animal spirits”
surely requires a very speciﬁc discipline by which to study it. That is precisely what this book
is aimed at doing; providing an analytical framework for currency analysis and forecasting,
combining long-term economic valuation models with market-based valuation techniques to
produce a more accurate and user-friendly analytical tool for the currency market practitioners
themselves. In terms of a breakdown, the book is deliberately split into three speciﬁc sections
with regard to the currency market and exchange rates:
