
CANDLESTICK PATTERNS
Swing traders spend months trying to memorize the dozens of candlestick patterns found in popular
books but still learn little about the subject. While technicians attempt to define many different
candle sets, only a few major formations deserve attention. First, realize that each candle pattern
displays an internal bias toward continuation or reversal. But so do many simple sets of price bars.
Candlesticks draw their real power through an ability to highlight how the crowd will drive prices
higher or lower.
Popular candlestick patterns focus on intense bull-bear conflict but rarely allow easy profit. Precise
trade entry comes when swing traders drop down to the time frame below the developing bars and
interpret these pockets of emotional crowd behavior. Look for more recognizable patterns, S/R, and
common landscape features that place the larger action into perspective. This candle microanalysis
works well with the intuitive mind to generate accurate and consistent prediction.
Examine the charting landscape in which each candlestick pattern appears. Most important
formations take place within the context of ongoing trends rather than constricted ranges. Always
consider timing within a trend. Some patterns will display a bullish bias near the beginning of a
price move but a bearish one as it matures. Look for predictive bars that form right through other
forms of S/R, such as prior highs-lows and major moving averages. Then visually compare candle
length with the recent price action. The most important events will exhibit above-average volume
and bar range.
Don’t depend on candle reversals to last very long: most formations only offer short-term
prediction. Price frequently moves back and takes out the pattern within five to seven bars. This
tendency makes candles an outstanding tool for swing traders, but it also opens the door to major
trend relativity errors. Long-term reversals depend strongly on precise volume, trend, and location.
For example, broad dark cloud cover events may print the high price for years. But these require
new highs on panic participation following a parabolic rally.
A tall real-body candlestick represents strong single-bar S/R. If price retraces back into its range,
the subsequent action should not pierce the entire length without several small reversals. The
chances of a 100% reversal on the next bar carry low odds when a long daily candle prints. For this
reason, buying an immediate pullback after a tall bullish candle presents a low-risk opportunity
under most circumstances. The safest trades arise when the new bar opens near the previous closing
price and starts to fade immediately. This signals profit-taking by those still long from the prior
candle. Price should spring back quickly through the interest of new participants when this pressure
lightens up.
Candlestick patterns have great power at the edges of central tendency. Watch closely for candle
shadows that shoot through the sides of Bollinger Bands, especially when they point against
constricting bands. This combined pattern provides significant warning of an impending reversal.
Prediction here works well through both rangebound and trending markets.
Focus on dojis and hammers more than any other candle events. These short-body, long-shadow
single bars generate diverse trading strategies and offer important clues about subsequent price
change. Their broad power reveals trend change in the next-lower time frame through very brief
price discovery. These major candles comprise a larger collection of finger formations that includes
the haramis and shooting stars. They are examined in greater detail in Chapter 10.
FIGURE 5.17
Network Associates prints a bear flag that aligns with multiple Fibonacci retracements to uncover a major price decline.
The flag slowly rises against the downtrend and forms three small highs. The final high reverses at the 62% pullback of

the last downtrend wave where it briefly fills the gap at 50. That signpost also fits perfectly into the 38% retracement of
the entire selloff. Use the 38-62 to find high profit opportunities for trends in both directions.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The harami pattern closely aligns with the classic inside day. One difference allows the candle
shadow to extend outside the range of the previous bar as long as the body remains within it. This
pattern represents a potential reversal when it appears within a tall expansion bar after a strong price
move. Drop down one time frame and notice that the opening tick often prints a gap from the
previous close. In an uptrend, this hole-in-the-wall may present a significant boundary to further
price gains. In a downtrend, the gap may initiate a breakaway move to the upside.
Apply three different tactics to haramis that carry graduated risk. Each strategy executes in the same
direction as the short-term break. The first enters a position when price exceeds the expansion bar
high or low, the second when it exceeds the range of the inside bar, and the last when price ejects
past the real body of the inside bar. Set stop loss according to the chosen entry level in each case. In
other words, if the trade uses the real body to trigger execution, exit the losing position when price
then violates the real body’s range in the opposite direction.
FIGURE 5.18
The tall daily candlestick on this major PMC-Sierra reversal hides important swing trading information. This bar and
the one that follows it, draw a complete five-wave rally in the next-lower time frame. This aligns retracement to classic

mechanical rules. The stock pulls back and bases right at the 50% level before it ejects to higher prices. Big expansion
candles rarely retrace 100% quickly and offer concealed low-risk entry.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The harami cross presents a specialized form of this pattern through a doji that appears inside the
range of the prior expansion bar. It signals a possible 2B reversal in the time frame beneath the
candlesticks. In that chart length, price dips to a new low or high but jumps back across S/R by
close. Trade this formation in the direction of the reversal rather than looking for price to break
through the shadow. The odds of a strong reversal increase if a long-legged doji shadow prints
across S/R.
Bearish dark cloud cover and its bullish piercing pattern cousin signal sharp price reversal. They
both hide significant exhaustion gaps that mark the end of extended trends. Each two-bar pattern
begins with a long expansion candle in the direction of the prevailing trend. The next candle opens
well beyond the last bar’s close but then reverses deep into the prior range. Price typically
completes this rout on the next few candles and thrusts well out of the pattern in the opposite
direction.
Consider a fade entry if price returns to test the filled exhaustion gap on the chart just below the
event. But when price doesn’t reverse quickly off the gap, congestion may form right through it.
This suggests that a continuation move will ultimately allow that market to head off into new highs

or lows. If no pullback occurs, execute when the next bar or two pierces the range of the second
pattern candle. Latecomers will find that the best trade often appears after the completed reversal
retraces into a test that reenters the edge of the formation.
Long dark cloud cover can stop a rally for months or years when it occurs on a daily chart well into
new highs. The two candles represent significant overhead supply that fresh demand must absorb
before that market can go higher. A second lower high often forms the rounded Eve of the classic
Adam and Eve top after the sharp pattern event. Measure the ratio between this bounce and the
pattern high. If it cannot rise more than 38–50% before pulling back, that market will likely move
quickly to much lower levels.
FIGURE 5.19
Harami candlestick patterns signal two changes in trend on the Marsh and McLennan chart. The first inside day
generates a whipsaw after a brief selloff but the second one starts a substantial decline. Note the hole-in-the-wall
morning gap that initiates each pattern on the 60-minute chart. Both lead immediately to lower intraday prices
with no pullbacks. Use the hole and morning gap strategy to capitalize on haramis before the closing bar prints.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.
FIGURE 5.20
A cluster of dark cloud cover patterns form a major top on American Power Conversion. Five different sets of this
important reversal print through a series of 22 daily bars before they finally trigger a 16-point decline. This
bearish candlestick pattern will usually complete its business in a single turn.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

PATTERN FAILURE
The best trades could be in the opposite direction when patterns don’t behave according to plan.
Many classic formations have built-in setups that trigger contrary positions from their natural bias.
Alex Elder illustrated this poorly-understood concept with his Hound of the Baskervilles signal in
Trading for a Living. He offers the interesting example of a head and shoulders neckline that just
won’t break. Traders take notice of the failure and enter long positions to ride price back up to the
old highs.
Patterns appear at the end of thrusting price movements. Constricted swings between key support
and resistance characterize their development. Patterns complete when a new trend leg breaks
through this wall and expands outward. The direction of this new thrust may be the same as or
opposite to that of the previous one. A pattern between adjacent price moves in the same direction
continues that trend. Alternatively, when a breakout turns and retraces the last trend, the intervening
pattern reverses the prior move.
Classic tutorials categorize patterns by their tendency toward continuation or reversal. This familiar
bias underlies the predictive power of these odd formations. Patterns also tend to repeat themselves
through all time frames. These two characteristics generate a well-marked charting landscape that
traders use to locate profitable opportunities. Most market players view patterns according to

common knowledge. The majority choose the strategy that matches the formation and enter
positions where directional movement will likely erupt.
But sometimes patterns don’t do what the crowd expects. A powerful entry signal may flash when a
setup fails to act according to its tendency. This pattern failure can trigger sharp price movement in
the opposite direction from the formation’s natural bias. Swing traders must prepare contrarian
entry tactics to capitalize on this secondary event. But first exercise sound risk management to
recognize failure in progress and wait for low-risk opportunity.
Probability underlies all prediction. Swing traders anticipate future price and enter positions to
profit from it. Most times this strategy dictates execution that aligns with the highest odds. But
trading plans must be flexible enough to capture setups for the less likely outcome. Start at the
opposite edge from the formation’s common breakout level. For example, study the declining tops
of a bearish descending triangle to locate long entry if price fails and thrusts into a rally.
The classic head and shoulders pattern has been analyzed over the last century more than any other
price range. In fact, one investigation concluded that this well-known pattern triggered the expected
result about 74% of the time. While this intriguing measurement lies well outside the range of
random outcome, it clearly illustrates just how often losses are taken when speculators sell short at
the head and shoulders neckline. And consider how common knowledge further deteriorates this
pattern’s reliability in our modern markets.
Pattern failure now goes well beyond concepts presented in recent trading books. The contemporary
market crowd recognizes most classic price patterns and takes positions according to textbook logic.
This decreases the odds that price will move in the direction of the most accepted prediction.
Fortunately, few tutorials teach participants about the virtues of contrary thinking. Rather than
abandon their positions, the masses tend to hold on through the early stages of pattern failure in an
effort to be proven right. This often leads to an eventual panic.
Swing traders must consider the opposite execution for every setup that triggers through a pattern
breakout. This additional evaluation tracks the same reward: risk parameters as the original
opportunity. Trade planning then visualizes what steps will be taken if the setup fades and breaks
against the high-odds direction. Each failure trade must stand on its own merits. Don’t consider
flipping unless the new setup passes all the usual filters. Also realize that this combined workflow
defines natural stop loss for both intended execution targets. Prepare for anything that the market
gives and act according to a predefined plan.
Common knowledge raises the failure threat for every well-known price pattern. This unsettling fact
admonishes swing traders to stand aside far more often than in the past. Lower odds for success
dictate that the potential reward must be worth the additional risk. Don’t jump on every neat
triangle or bull flag, believing that it will provide an easy profit. Many times the failure pattern
offers a far better setup and should be the only side under consideration. Train the mind to pay
attention to the chart before the failure appears. These setups often signal with little warning and
have a very small window of opportunity.
Pattern failure setups don’t end with trendlines that refuse to crack. Whipsaws characterize modern
markets and fill the pockets of insiders. Many classic patterns break out as expected, carry a few
ticks, and reverse violently. If price then pulls back into congestion, swing traders can enter failure
positions well before a move back through the opposite break point. The original false breakout
dissipates demand in that direction and lowers risk. The whipsaw also signals that the market will
likely trend sharply the other way.

Contrary entry signals arise from different S/R considerations than the original setup. An unyielding
trendline does not trigger a failure trade all by itself. Congestion shows unique upper and lower
boundaries. Failure patterns depend on violation as much as the opposite outcome. Learn to
recognize the location of these reverse breakouts for each classic formation. For example, the head
and shoulders neckline points to a classic short sale when violated. But the fade position does not
execute until price mounts the descending line formed by the tops of the head and right shoulder.
The most recognizable patterns carry the greatest risk for failure. Perfection attracts attention and
invites those who might stay on the sidelines in other circumstance. When setups look too good to
be true, most participants enter positions on one side of the trade and attract whipsaws. Manage
entry with narrow-range bars before price breaks in either direction to reduce risk and allow for a
fast exit. Execution after a high-volume breakout and pullback to the trendline also improves trade
success.
FIGURE 5.21
Ascending triangles often lead to dramatic rallies, but watch out when they fail. The rising trendline marks a
breakdown level as Sigma-Aldrich suddenly rolls over and collapses. The crowd that buys into a bullish pattern
provides substantial fuel in the other direction when it fails. Note how the selloff quickly cuts through strong
support at 32 in response to the extreme selling pressure.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Pattern failures provide higher-reward opportunities than textbook breakouts because they catch the
crowd leaning the wrong way. Most participants understand how patterns should work but get
confused when price behavior doesn’t match their expectations. They freeze like a deer in the
headlights and get trapped as the failure event proceeds. This feeds on price movement until they
finally capitulate. For this reason, these contrary setups exhibit highly dependable outcomes with
few false moves.

INDICATOR TOOLS
Build and manage indicators to support the price pattern. Use them as truth serum to confirm or
refute promising setups. Tune them properly to the intended holding period and competing crowd.

BOLLINGER BAND TACTICS
Bollinger Bands (BBs) draw their power through two important characteristics. First, they exhibit
an underlying trend-range axis just like price or moving averages. Second, they constrict or expand
as they move. The interaction between these two forces draws unique patterns as bars unwind
through their boundaries. Candle-sticks work especially well with bands. For example, a doji that
strikes through a constricting band effectively signals a short-term reversal.
BBs bend and twist in response to price movement. These undulations predict how far trends should
stretch before central tendency forces them back toward a central axis. Complex relationships
develop between price-band direction and price-band constriction. For example, a trend tends to
pause when constricting bands oppose it. It takes great skill to predict the bands’ ultimate impact on
price, but is well worth the effort. BBs pinpoint hidden swings better than any other tool, and
telegraph whether the profit door lies open or closed.
Bands may swing through relative highs or lows and then pull back in proportional retracement to
start another trend thrust. Or they may enter extended ranges that meander back and forth without
direction. Movement frequently stops dead in its tracks when price rises into a falling band or drops
into a rising one. Sideways bands can appear in both rangebound and trending markets. Price often
fails to reach new high or low territory until bands expand to clear the path. In many ways,
Bollinger Bands predict time better than they predict price.
The skilled eye watches constricted bands in real time to estimate the buying or selling force
required to push them out of the way. They work extremely well during the second test of an
important high or low. When markets finally break out, expanding bars often shoot into the band’s
edge where congestion forms a flag until the BB allows further movement. Bands constrict tightly
around narrowing price in sideways markets. Apply NR7 methodology here to anticipate an
impending positive feedback event.
Bollinger Bands signal early warning of trend change. Sharp price movement forces bands to
expand outward. When these active markets finally turn sideways, the bands slowly tighten and roll
toward price. Time passes and the BB door closes on rapid vertical movement. Experience enables
the swing trader to quickly estimate the time required before bands will tighten and plan
accordingly.
Strong buying or selling may push price well outside a band. A tall bar can even print completely
through the barrier in extreme conditions. General tactics suggest that violent reversals often follow
these major band violations. But trading against these events carries risk because markets can print
a short series of these volatile bars before the reversal takes place. Also note that this price action
infrequently occurs during intraday markets, except at the open.

Reduce risk by dropping down to the next-lower time frame and waiting for a reversal there before
executing a countertrend position. Odds also improve if the thrusting bars run into other forms of
S/R that allow cross-verification for the entry level. Stay defensive during the trade. Once price
returns within the band’s limits, the underlying trend can reappear quickly unless the pullback
generates other reversal signals. Look for dark cloud cover or a similar candle pattern that fills any
gap created by the bar outside the band. This complex setup can produce windfall profits if
managed properly.
FIGURE 5.22
The top Bollinger band rises toward a test of the intraday high as Worldcom drops. This sharp divergence signals the
eventual breakout after price finally reverses off of the bottom band. Watch band slope closely when bars return to test
important highs or lows. It often reveals the time and force needed to push price through a S/R barrier.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Thirteen-bar, 2 std dev Bollinger Bands work extremely well for intraday markets. Combine them
with the 5, 8, and 13-bar simple moving averages to improve information flow. Use the averages to
measure trend strength and the bands to target the length of each bar print. At new highs or lows,
strong price movement will wrap tightly between the 5-bar and outside band while all three
averages line up and point in the direction of the trend. As price rolls, bands tighten and signal a
changing market while averages pinpoint pullbacks and new S/R. Eventually, bands shift direction,
averages flip over and price breaks through toward the other extreme.

Swing traders work the quiet middle ground of Bollinger Bands for consistent profits. Build
strategies that enter countertrend positions at one band and exit at the other. These swing setups
face far fewer whipsaws than breakout entries at band extremes. The center band presents a natural
profit obstacle that needs special consideration when calculating reward:risk. Make sure a safe exit
near this center point still produces a decent profit for the trade.
Keep in mind that all bands change dynamically in response to price. This allows continuous
feedback that shifts target values with each bar. Experience with this powerful indicator helps
swing traders anticipate how it will move. The longer that price travels sideways, the tighter the
bands become. Trend change for the bands themselves first begins with a turn by the band closest to
the prior price trend. For example, when an uptrend prints along a top band, expect this side of the
indicator to turn down before its twin when price moves into a range or down-trend.
Combine Bollinger Band study with momentum-based indicators. This uncovers hidden directional
movement and improves trade timing. Add MA ribbons to price and display the MACD histogram
across the lower pane. Price often remains well within band constriction during the early phases of
new positive feedback events. As these indicators show rising momentum, shift attention to natural
pattern/band breakout levels and look for entry within narrowing bars.
