
Considering the benefits of
straight-line channels
When you use straight lines to represent a range, you get a chart that’s easy
to read. Your eye fills in the blanks. The benefits include the following:
✓ Straight-line channels imply absolute limits that give you comfort and
the sense that you know where you stand.
✓ When a new price touches the channel top or bottom, but then retreats,
you believe that the channel limits are correctly drawn and valid — and
will likely work next time, too. As I explain in Chapter 10, the more often
a price touches a support or resistance line but doesn’t cross it, the
more reliable you can consider the line to be.
✓ If a channel line is broken, you feel certain that something significant has
happened to the perception of the security by its market participants.
Violation of the channel alerts you to changing conditions and the need
to consider making a trading decision.
A sense of certainty can be illusory and therefore dangerous. Like all technical
indicators, channels only indicate; they don’t dictate.

www.pdfdummies.com

187

188 Part IV: Finding Patterns
Delving into the drawbacks
of straight-line channels
If your price series is orderly and doesn’t vary much day to day from the average, the straight-line channel is fairly narrow. But if your chart contains a disorderly price move where prices jump around all over the place, your channel
lines have to be so far apart that you can’t judge what is usual or normal.
To some extent, a channel is valid because many others can see the same
thing. One of the reasons that a technical analysis method works is because
it creates a self-fulfilling prophecy. When everyone can see the same lines, a
consensus builds as to what constitutes breaking the lines. When you draw a
channel so wide or so narrow that only you can see it, you can’t expect other
traders to respond to it. To forecast a price range is really to forecast the
probable collective behavior of the people who trade the security.

Using channels to make
profit and avoid loss
When you have confidence that the channel broadly describes the trend, you can
✓ Buy near the channel bottom and sell near the channel top — over and
over again, as long as the channel lasts.
✓ Estimate your future gain. If the width of the channel is $5 and you
bought near a support line, your maximum probable gain over the next
few days is about $5 — as long as the channel remains in place and
you’re able to sell near the resistance line. This is more useful than you
may think at first, because
• It’s a sanity check. You can’t reasonably expect a gain that would
call for a price far outside the channel.
• It’s a reality check. You can use the channel to evaluate a forecast
made by someone else. If the forecaster is calling for a price far
outside the channel, you have grounds to question the forecast.
✓ Calculate your maximum loss. Regardless of where you bought the security, you know that when a price bar breaks the bottom support line of
the channel, the channel is no longer valid. The trend is likely over. This
is the point at which you want to sell. And you don’t have to wait for the
actual breakout. You can place a stop-loss order with your broker at the
breakout level (see Chapter 5).

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 11: Transforming Channels into Forecasts

Dealing with Breakouts
The breakout is one of the most important concepts in technical analysis. It’s
a direct, graphic representation that something happened to change the market’s sentiment toward the security. In the simplest terms, a breakout implies
that a trend is over, at least in its present form. After a breakout, the price can
go up, down, or sideways, but it seldom resumes at exactly the same level and
rate of change you had before the breakout.
A breakout must always be respected, but you want to be sure it’s authentic,
which is what the following sections are all about. As I mention in Chapter
10 and elsewhere, because so many traders draw support and resistance
lines, there’s always some wiseguy in the market who tries to push the
price through the lines. In an uptrend that’s retracing downward, he tries to
break the support line and panic holders into selling. He may believe in the
uptrend; he’s just trying to get a lower price for himself. In a downtrend, he’s
the joker who buys so much that the price puts in a new high and a close
higher than on previous days, which scares the pants off sellers, who then
cover their shorts and propel the price higher. In addition, a breakout can be
just a random aberration.

Distinguishing between false
breakouts and the real thing
You often see a tiny breakout and don’t know how to evaluate it. Say your
support line is at precisely $10 and the low of the price bar is $9.75. Is that a
legitimate breakout or just an accident? As I note in many places in this book,
sometimes you have to accept imperfection and live with ambiguity. The
channel lines are an estimate, not a certainty.
Or sometimes you get a minor break of a channel line that lasts one or two
days but then the price returns back inside its channel and performs just as
before. The breakout was a false breakout, which is a breach of a trendline
that then fails to deliver the expected additional moves in the same direction
(see Figure 11-2). As I note in Chapter 10, to call it false is misleading, because
the price bar unmistakably breaks the trendline. What’s false is the conclusion you draw from it — that the trend is over.
In Figure 11-2, the channel does define the high-low trading range, after all.
Sometimes you have to accept one or two violations of your lines. The challenge, of course, is that you don’t know right away whether a breakout is
meaningful or just a random outcome. I provide some answers to this question in the following sections.

www.pdfdummies.com

189

190 Part IV: Finding Patterns

Figure 11-2:
False
breakout.

FALSE BREAKOUT

The first line of defense
Your first line of defense is the configuration of the breakout bar. A simple
judgment is to see whether the breakout is a violation of the channel line by
the close, and not just the high or low. As I explain in Chapter 6, the close is
the bar component that best summarizes sentiment. A high or a low can be a
random aberration. The close is less likely to be random.
A special version of the close rule is to evaluate whether the bar that breaks
the line is a key reversal bar, which is a form of outside day (see Chapter 7
for the outside day). When you’re in an uptrend, the key reversal bar has a
promising open — above yesterday’s close. The price even makes a new high
over yesterday’s high, but then the price crashes and delivers a close at or
near the low and below yesterday’s low. The market psychology isn’t hard to
read — the day started out well but then something happened to make negative sentiment rule the day, right into the close.
In a downtrend, the key reversal bar initially confirms the trend — the open
is below yesterday’s close and the price even makes a lower low. But then
the price reverses direction and rallies strongly into the close, so that the
close is above yesterday’s high. Good news must have come out.
Opinion differs on whether the key reversal bar is definitive. Some traders
swear by it, while others say that you wouldn’t want to make trading decisions on the key reversal bar alone — you should have additional confirming
factors or at least be able to verify the “news” that caused the abrupt change
of sentiment during the day.

Does volume verify?
Breakouts are often accompanied by a change in volume, usually an easily
noticed higher level. Consulting volume for confirmation is in keeping with
interpreting events on the chart in terms of supply and demand, as described

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 11: Transforming Channels into Forecasts
in Chapter 6. You can verify that the breakout isn’t random by seeing an equivalent change in volume:
✓ Increase in volume: Extraordinarily high volume on one or two days is
named a volume spike and often accompanies the end of a strong trend,
either a rally or a crash. Buying and selling interest is frenzied.
✓ Decrease in volume: If volume declines steeply after holding steady at
about the same level over the life of your trend, demand is falling off but
so is selling interest. You don’t necessarily know what falling volume
means, but it may foreshadow a breakout. All the people who wanted to
sell have done so, and the people still holding an inventory aren’t willing
to sell at the current price. It’s like a logjam. It will be broken up when
either the bull camp or the bear camp takes the initiative and causes a
new high or new low, with accompanying higher volume.

Clues from other indicators
While the breakout is a powerful technical indicator, you still want as much
confirmation as you can get. As I note in Chapter 8 on candlestick patterns,
momentum and relative strength are useful to confirm or deny that a breakout is real. A loss of momentum and/or relative strength in an uptrend almost
always precedes a downside channel breakout.

Size matters — and so does duration
You can use a filter to estimate whether a breakout is meaningful or can be
ignored. A filter is a formula or a procedure used to modify an indicator. In this
instance, the indicator is the break of the channel line. A filter can modify the
amount or duration of the breakout. Here’s how you do it:
✓ To modify the size of the indicator, you add some percentage of the total
range to the channel line. You stipulate that to constitute a real break of
the channel line, the new high or low must surpass this extra amount.
If the channel is $5 wide, you can specify that a price has to violate the
line by more than 5 percent (or 25 cents). Anything less wouldn’t be a
real breakout. Where does 5 percent come from? Why not 10 percent or
20 percent? Either one may be effective, or neither. You need to experiment with each security to see whether it has a habit of breaking its
lines by this amount or that amount. You can also specify that the close
has to break the line by x percent to qualify as a real breakout. In either
case, the result is a new channel line that is a little farther out, effectively widening the channel.
✓ To modify the duration, you can specify that you’re willing to accept
one price bar violating the channel line, but not two. Or perhaps two
days of violation, but not three. Again, you have to experiment with each
security to see what its habits are. Also, you can combine the duration
rule with the close rule and specify that the close beyond the line for x
number of days is the sign of a true breakout.

www.pdfdummies.com

191

192 Part IV: Finding Patterns
Experienced technical analysts warn against making size and duration filters
too complex and fancy, for a number of reasons:
✓ Rules count. The breakout principle is a powerful and well-known concept. A lot of other traders in your security are likely to heed a breakout
in a black-and-white way. They always exit on a downside breakout of
a support line by the low, for example. They feel that a breakout is a
breakout, and traders shouldn’t try to second-guess it.
✓ One size doesn’t fit all. You can only know that 10 percent is the right
amount to put into your filter if 10 percent was the amount that worked
in the past on this security. Each security has its own habits; or rather,
the people who trade it have their collective habits. In one security, the
best filter may consistently be 10 percent and in another, it may consistently be 40 percent. (In the 1930s and 1940s, a filter of 3 percent was
standard.) No single correct filter exists for every security under all circumstances. You only know whether a filter is usable by testing different
filters on the price history of each security, one by one.
✓ Blending works only with coffee. The orderliness of your security can
change without warning. During some periods, a 5 percent filter may be
the most effective, but later, volatility can increase and you would need
a 10 percent filter to capture all the price highs and lows that really do
belong inside the same channel. Looking back over historical data to
find the best filter has an enormous flaw: Chances are that you’ll come
up with a blended percentage filter that’s too small for an orderly move
and too big for a volatile one. And if today is the breakout day, you don’t
know how volatile the upcoming move is going to be.

Putting breakouts into context
A genuine breakout means that your trend channel is now defunct. You need
to discard it. To verify that the breakout truly ended the trend, you need
to evaluate it in the context of the general volatility characteristics of the
security itself. By examining conditions at the time of the breakout, you may
gather clues as to what the price is likely to do next.

Neatness counts
As a general rule, a breakout that occurs in the course of an orderly (low volatility) trend is more meaningful than a breakout that occurs in a disorderly
(high volatility) trend. See Chapter 14 on volatility.
Figure 11-3 illustrates this point. In the first chart, the security is orderly —
prices line up neatly within the channel. The breakout is obvious. In the
second channel, the security isn’t so tidy — prices jump around a lot. The
breakout bar is exactly the same size as the orderly channel breakout bar,
but in the disorderly price series, you can’t be sure that it’s authentic. The
people who trade this security are accustomed to big bars and big jumps.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 11: Transforming Channels into Forecasts
You can see that it broke the support line, but perhaps others won’t find it
meaningful.

Figure 11-3:
Orderly
security
versus
disorderly
security.

PRICE BREAKOUT,
ORDERLY CHANNEL

PRICE BREAKOUT,
DISORDERLY CHANNEL

Orderliness isn’t a word you find in the technical analysis literature. Instead,
you find volatility. Volatility refers to the extent of variation away from a central reference point (like an average). You should consider that low volatility
constitutes orderliness and high volatility implies disorder.
The more orderly your price bars, the more reliable your channels are. A
breakout of an orderly channel is more likely to be the real thing than a
breakout of a high-volatility (disorderly) channel. If you chose to trade a disorderly security, you must be able to tolerate a high number of false breakouts — and modify your filters accordingly.
If your security generates a lot of false breakouts and they make you nervous,
find another security. A number of vendors offer software you can use to scan
a collection of securities for those which are low volatility and therefore less
likely to generate a lot of false breakouts.

Transition from orderly to disorderly (and back)
When a price series morphs from an orderly to a disorderly mode, the transformation is almost always accompanied by a breakout and a change in
volume. Weirdly, a shift the other way also foreshadows a breakout. When
prices shift from disorderly to orderly, the sharp decrease in volatility warns
you that a breakout is impending; buyers and sellers alike don’t know what to
do, so they do nothing. On the day of the breakout and in the day or two following, you see a big increase in volume.

Driving faster is always risky
You also want to know the context of the breakout in terms of where the
prices were located within the channel just before the breakout. The usual
breakout is in the opposite direction of the prevailing trend.

www.pdfdummies.com

193

194 Part IV: Finding Patterns
But sometimes you see prices pressing against the top or bottom of the channel line, and this can lead to a breakout in the same direction as the trend. In
other words, higher volatility can mean an acceleration of an existing trend.
A breakout can be to the upside in an uptrend as well as to the downside in
a downtrend.
Figure 11-4 illustrates an upside breakout in an uptrend. It’s still a breakout,
and you should expect that it still marks a change in the trend even though
it is in the same direction. The acceleration of an existing trend should make
you sit up and take notice. While it may simply signal a steepening of the
trend as the crowd develops enthusiasm for the security, it can also occur
near the end of a trend. It is sometimes called a blowout (or blowoff) top or a
blowout bottom. In other words, an upside breakout in an uptrend is often a
warning of an impending downside breakout, counterintuitive as that seems
at first.

BLOWOUT TOP
BREAKOUT

Figure 11-4:
Upside
breakout in
an uptrend.

How can such a pattern come about? Easy. The crowd becomes overheated
with greed to buy a security that is rising with tremendous force, or overwhelmed by fear to dump a security that is declining with great momentum.
At some point, everyone who was going to buy has bought. Because these are
traders who bought only to get a fast profit, when the rise slows down and a
lower high or a lower low appears, these buyers exit in a horde. (For a discussion of a lower high together with a lower low in an uptrend, see Chapter 6.)
By selling a lot of the security in a very short period of time, the market has
an oversupply, and just like the price of tomatoes falling to ten cents in late
August, buyers can command a low price.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 11: Transforming Channels into Forecasts
The same thing happens when a down move exhausts itself. Everybody who
was going to sell has sold. Supply is now limited. Anyone who wants to buy
has to start bidding the price up until he induces a longer-term holder of the
security to part with it.

Riding the Regression Range
You can construct a more “scientific” set of parallel lines by drawing channel
lines around the linear regression line. As I describe in Chapter 10, the linear
regression is the line that minimizes the distance from itself and every point
of the chart. It is the true, pure trendline, and thus the channel built on it,
named the standard error channel (also called the linear regression channel)
should be the true trend channel. You can calculate the standard error by
hand, but it’s laborious. Software is less error prone and a lot faster.
You use a channel based on the linear regression line the same way that you
use a hand-drawn support and resistance channel, as you can see in the following sections. By projecting the lines out into the future, you get a forecast
of the future price range, and you deem a significant breakout of a channel
line as ending the trend.
With hand-drawn support and resistance channels, the channel is defined by
the outer limits (the series of higher highs with higher low, or lower lows with
lower highs). No centerline exists. In the linear regression channel, you build
the channel from the inside out, so to speak. You start with a center linear line
and draw the outer lines from that.

Introducing the standard error
Computer software places the standard error channel on either side of the
linear regression line, according to the statistical measure named the standard error. Like the standard deviation you discover in Chapter 2, you don’t
need to know how to calculate this number or even precisely what it means
in order to use it effectively.
The standard error measures how closely the prices cluster around your linear
regression line. Most chartists use two standard errors, which results in a
channel top and channel bottom that enclose a high percentage (95 percent)
of the highs and lows. An extreme high or low constitutes a bigger error away
from the trendline than 95 percent of the other highs and lows.
The closer prices are to the linear regression line, the stronger the trend.
Here are a couple points to keep in mind:

www.pdfdummies.com

195

196 Part IV: Finding Patterns
✓ If you have an orderly trend, the prices don’t stray very far from one
another or from the linear regression, and therefore the channel is a
narrow one on either side of the linear regression. A price that doesn’t
vary at all from the linear regression is literally “on the trend” and has a
zero standard error.
✓ If you draw a channel and see that it’s very wide, your price series has
a lot of variation away from the linear regression. Prices far from the
norm, the linear regression, are called outliers and when you have a lot
of them, they are collectively called noise. The more noise, the less reliable your channel.

Drawing a linear regression channel
How “true” the linear regression and its channel turn out to be depends on
where you start drawing. See Chapter 10 for a discussion of starting the linear
regression in a reasonable place.
You start a linear regression channel at an obvious low or high, draw a channel line from there to a second relative low or high, and then extend it out. The
parallel line comes along for the ride, which often helps you adjust the slope of
the line by discovering relative highs or lows that you didn’t see at first.
As with the hand-drawn support and resistance channel lines (see earlier sections in this chapter), you know that you have drawn your channel line correctly when a third relative high or low makes a touch of the line but doesn’t
cross it. Sometimes the “obvious” swing high or low occurs within a previous
channel that has been broken and discarded: Go back to the swing bar and
use it as the starting point for the new channel.
Figure 11-5 shows a nicely uptrending security with two channels. Look at the
shorter one first. I start it at the lowest low, and let the software do the drawing to the bar after the next relative low. Then I stop drawing and extend the
lines by hand, using dotted lines to mark them as hypothetical.
It isn’t until three months later that prices break out of the channel — to the
upside. Oh, oh. A breakout always means something. When it’s a breakout in
the same direction as the trend, you start worrying that it may be a blowout
breakout, as I describe earlier in the chapter in the section “Driving faster is
always risky.” Whatever it turns out to be, you still need to discard the old
channel. It has been broken. In this case, I left it on the chart.
Now I draw a new linear regression and its channel (the darker lines on the
chart) from the same lowest-low starting point, and keep drawing until just
after a new relative high appears. I know it’s a relative high because it’s
breaking the top of the channel and followed by a lower high. I stop drawing
at that relative high and extend the channel lines out, as before. Notice that
the price does it again! It breaks out of the top of the channel a second time.
