
hours, it is easy to plot it slightly off, particularly when the highs or
lows of relevance do not line up so neatly. Always try to get in as many

41

Understanding Price Aaion
touches as possible and then extend the line well beyond the current
bar in progress. Should the line maintain its value for an even longer
period, just extend it some more. At times, you may have to adjust it a
little along the way in order to find a better alignment with the follow-up
action. If your pattern line has become invalid or redundant, erase it to
keep the chart clean, but do not do so immediately when prices break
away: the extension of the line could still play a role in a pullback situ­
ation. (Will be taken up in Chapter 5 . )
Since we shouldn't have been looking to short this chart, there was
no real reason to put in the horizontal line here. It is plotted to show
a textbook example of a false break trap (7) . As we can see, bulls may
have given up on the 25ema support below bar 6, they were quick to
return when bears came to pierce the double bottom lows of 2-4. Rec­
ognizing very well the absence of buildup, contrarian parties simply
responded by doing what they love to do most, which is to counter the
non-buildup break. This tactic worked out wonderfully well and now
left a triple bottom in its wake (2-4-7).
Ironically, just a few bars after the failed break through support,
bulls let themselves get trapped in almost identical fashion, in the high
of bar 8. Although more in line with the overall pressure, this break was
of poor quality also. Now prices had come straight up from the lows,
only to break out with virtually no pausing (buildup) underneath the
pattern line: not a great way to set a break either. Once again contrar­
ian parties stepped in, this time anticipating a failure of the bulls. As
trapped bulls hurriedly sold out, this added to the bearish pressure of
the 8-9 swing.
Failed perforations at either end of a pattern are very common in­
deed and they clearly illustrate the danger in playing breaks without the
backup of buildup. How about another false break at 9.
Obviously, these stand-off situations can't last. Sooner or later, one
side will force its way through the defense of the other. But how can we
tell a tradable break from a potential trap? By following closely the pres­
sure in the bars. A situation that definitely warrants attention is when
prices tighten up in cluster format while pushing up or down against a
pattern line of interest.

42

Chapter 3

Price Aaion Principles-Praaice

One of the most telling clues to obtain that a breakout is near is
when a strong bar gets printed on the right of a cluster progression. Bar

1 0 is a good example (and so was bar 6 earlier on) . Granted, when bar
1 0 was broken topside, prices were still trapped within the bigger pat­
tern, but the event did let on that the bears were once again beaten in
support, and this time with buildup. That basically put the overhanging
pattern line next on the agenda. Time for a conservative breakout trader
to sharpen up the focus some more.
There is another form of buildup that can really put the pressure
up. Whenever prices in a potential breakout area are capped on one
side by a pattern line and on the other by the 25ema, we have what
can be referred to as a squeeze situation. Although this chart is actu­
ally not the best candidate to introduce this highly effective form of
pre-breakout tension, it does show us, prior to the breakout, one tiny
bar squeezed tight between the pattern line and the average (bar 1 1 ) .
Preferably, squeezes contain at least two or three, if not many more
bars, which can really make the tension coil up like a spring. We will see
plenty of examples soon enough.
Very interesting also was to see the break above bar 1 1 stem from a

W-pattem, progression 8-9- 1 0- 1 1 . When such a potent pattern is posi­
tioned favorably within the price action, it is widely known to portend
a breakout on the bull side (as is its bearish counterpart, the M-pattem
on the bear side) . W and M-patterns come in many different shapes and
sizes and they can serve a very useful purpose in both entry and exit
technique. We will take up their appearances and implications in more
detail in the discussions and chapters to come.
To top it off, this pattern breakout found itself assisted by a very
powerful ally. Have a look at how the round number of 1 . 38 literally
sucked prices in from the moment the "proper" break was set. Not a
bear in sight until the level was hit upon. Such can be the power of a
favorable magnet.

43

Understanding Price Aaion
IFig 3.31

www.ProR••lTime.com

eur/usd 5-minut.

1.305

· 1.3

4
., ProReelfine .com

05:00

06:00

07:00

00:00

00:00

10:00

11:00

Figure 3.3 Whenever the action goes more or less sideways for a number

of hours, we can generally identify the market as traveling in a range.
In most such cases it shouldn't be too hard to wrap and extend a box
around the activity. Aside from establishing a clearer view on the barri­
ers of interest, a box will help to visualize the pressures and the buildup
within the range itself. It is certainly possible to do all of your analysis
without ever drawing a single box or line on your charts; but just by
looking at the picture above, it's hard to deny the benefits of a little vi­
sual assistance.
Note: Before delving into the range breakout, let us briefly discuss an

interesting characteristic of the eurj usd market: with the big UK and
US traders absent, and news and incentives often scant, it makes sense
that there isn't much firework to be expected during the latter half of the
Asian session. Understandably, Asian traders aren't particularly keen
on taking positions that will probably travel relatively flat for the rest of
their day. How is this useful? Without carving things in stone, we can
generally state that when the latter half of the Asian session contains a
pretty tight range, it is highly prone to be broken when volume picks up,
first thing in the EU JUK morning. A good indication of volume revival is
the way the bars immediately grow in length, usually from 08:00 on (EU
Open), but almost certainly in or around the more powerful UK Open at
09:00. As a result, not seldom the first decent trade of the new session
is found within this voluminous hour and it will pay to be alert when
trading in this time zone. As for other markets, it could never hurt to
check your instruments for similar kind of particulars.

44

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Practice

Figure 3.3 provides a fine example of a UK morning breakout. The
box may already have been plotted when the high of bar 2 had put in
the double top with bar 1 . With the bars currently traveling above the
25ema, the bottom barrier was of less significance and could always be
adjusted later on.
From 08:00 on, the activity did pick up a bit, but the bars remained
very tight in span. Prior to the UK Open at 09:00, bears had managed to
take out the low of bar 3 in bar 4, but then failed to reach the obvious
round number magnet. Already a telling clue. Not only did this show
bullish resilience (or bearish weakness, if you wish), it put a false low in
the chart. And since the low of 4 undercut the low of 3 by a mere one
or two pip, it pretty much resembled a double bottom also (3-4). Not
much later prices were trading back above the 25ema again. All very
bullish.
Have a close look at progression 2-3-4-T. This shows us another W­
pattern, a flatter version of the 8- 1 1 variant in Figure 3-2 . By tracking
the bars from left to right, it is easy to see why these patterns harbor
such strong breakout potential: with a double bottom built in and the
right leg swinging up, the pressure definitely points north.
From the false low at 4, eager bulls immediately pushed on to set the
bull break at T (tease). This can be seen as a little premature (not much
buildup prior to the break), but the situation definitely called for atten­
tion. We already addressed the fact that attacking parties can be very
persistent, even when forced to retreat on first try. The more they have
the chart's pressure working in their favor, the bigger the chance they
will give it another shot in the bars to come.
Note that the retreat from the tease breakout was very modest. The
next few bars simply kept pushing up against the top barrier, a defi­
nite sign of bullish determination. In fact, these four bars in the ellipse
represent a textbook squeeze: not only did they push up against the
top barrier (ignoring the tease high), the 25ema at the other end was
lending a supportive hand, gently squeezing the bars out of the box.
To a conservative breakout trader, this is one of the best setups in the
field, and it gets even better when the buildup hangs from the right leg
of a W -variant. The bullish response to the breakout may have been a

45

Understanding Price Action
bit over the top, but the mechanics in play are evident: bulls buying in,
bears buying out.
I Fig 3.4\

www.ProRealTime.com

«> ProRealTrne.com
1 2:00

13:00

· 1 .31 5

eurlusd 5-minule

14:00

15:00

1f>00

17:00

16:00

Figure 3.4 Squeeze progressions do not solely occur in the top or bottom

of a range; they can just as well form above or. below an angular pattern
line, with the 2 5ema pushing at the other end (first ellipse) .
A little before this took shape, bulls had broken through a bigger
boundary in bar 4. The buildup leading up to this break was a bit on the
thin side, but the overall conditions were definitely supportive. While
not visible in the snapshot above, we can grasp the bullish nature of
the forgoing action by monitoring the uptrending slope of the 25ema on
the far left. That tells us a bull rally had preceded the 1 - 3 progression.
The latter pattern is often referred to as a bull-flag formation (only the
flag showing) .
The general consensus on a favorable flag pattern is that (a) prices
tend to break away in line with the pole from which the flag is hanging,
and (b) the follow-through on the breakout tends to mimic the length
of the flagpole. Naturally, such fine prospects make these flag patterns
interesting candidates to be traded for continuation (trading a break in
line with the earlier dominance).
Understandable also is that when prices break away from a flag (or
any other pattern) with relatively little buildup preceding the event,
plenty of breakout traders may be left empty-handed on the sidelines.
But there is hope for these parties still. After all, it is quite common for
prices to briefly revisit the pattern they broke away from. We can refer to

46

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Practice

this type of pullback as a technical test of the breakout; in many a chart
this is a highly sought-after event for it could offer an opportunity to
catch the breakout in "second instance".
We can tell by the small bars in progression 4-5 that the pullback
was calm and orderly, devoid of bearish aggression. To those who aim
to hop on, this is a favorable development. The more subdued the con­
trarian pressure in the correction, the better the odds for a turnaround
once the pullback's momentum peters out. Opinions may differ on how
to best position oneself for the ride, but two elements are likely to play
a role in the tactics; the first is a pullback line (if one can be drawn
neatly) , the other is a break of a crucial bar in the lows or highs of the
correction.
Sometimes the most "useful" slope of a minor pattern line becomes
evident only at the very last touch before its perforation; still, with every
bar taking five minutes to complete, in most cases there is ample time
to experiment with the angle, even when using the high or low of the
current bar in progress.
Interesting also was the subtle false low of bar 5. This bar had briefly
dipped below its two neighbors but closed back above the 25ema. To
bulls lying in wait to buy themselves in on a pullback reversal, a false
low, even when seemingly minute, is always a welcome feature, for it
shows weakness on the part of the opponent. When bar 5 was taken out
topside, this "technically confirmed" the false low incident (bear break
followed by a bull break) , while coinciding pleasantly with the break of
the pullback line, if plotted as depicted.
Looking closely, the perforation of the pullback line was in fact an­
other bull-flag break (swing 2-4 the pole, progression 4-5 the flag) . It is
very common indeed to see a pullback transform itself into a little flag
variant on top of a bigger broken pattern. Should these smaller flags get
broken in turn, away from the bigger pattern, not seldom that is when
prices pop for real. This chart really shows a textbook example.
Bar the occasional exception of a very stale session, at some point
either a 50 or OO-level will become the topic of a more lengthy fight.
Since many parties tend to focus their attention on these round num­
bers, it is easy to understand the many clashes around them. A tricky

47

Understanding Price Action
feature of a typical round number skirmish, however, is that the initial
perforation of the level frequently takes place without much protest. It
is when prices start to run out of steam above or below the broken level
that the true fight begins. This tendency of prices to retrace to a broken
round number is what we have termed the adverse magnet effect. There
is no need for the market to immediately put in this test on any first cor­
rection, but it can play a nagging role in the coming action and possibly
keep many traders on the sidelines.
Like the EU / UK morning, the early US session is another volumi­
nous environment. It is often referred to as the UK/US overlap, which
more or less starts an hour before the major US stock markets open for
the day and ends shortly after the close of the London markets (14:3018:00 CET). In the event of a strong rally leading up to the US Open (as
was the case above) , the overlap is known not for its compliance with
but more for its rebellion against this pre-Open pressure. If aware of
these mechanics, bulls sitting tight on their profitable positions will
surely have kept a sharp eye on the action. With no correction of sub­
stance yet, and with even a small bull leg added to the 5-6 breakout,
the current situation was practically untenable. Note the sneaky false
high in bar 7, and the way the bar spun bearishly around, right in the
US Open at 1 5:30.
Technically seen, the total box progression was the market's way
to absorb and assess the 5-7 bull rally. Although no significant lows
were broken yet, the gradual succession of lower tops clearly indicated
that bull parties were no longer so keen on buying in the highs of the
market. Or else their enthusiasm was easily curbed by whatever supply
came forth (including that of fellow bulls selling out) .
In the few bars that preceded the collapse of the box (second ellipse),
tension had been building up in a textbook squeeze: the bars, though
tiny in span, were jammed tight between 25ema on one side and the
box barrier on the other. An interesting cue, favoring the bear side, was
the tiny false high in bar 8; in an attempt to escape the bearish implica­
tions of the squeeze, bulls had taken a shot at an upside break, only to
see their efforts attract no follow-through whatsoever. Such failure may
appear almost nondescript on the chart, but it can have a big impact on

48

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Practice

the bullish morale a little further down the line.
Ironically, prior to the box collapse, bears were dealt a little trap of
their own: within its 5-minute span, bar 8 had broken below the range
barrier also, only to close above it again. Such can be the fickle behavior
in a pattern barrier skirmish.
Without delving yet into details of how exactly to have traded this, if
at all, we can imagine the break of the range to be somewhat compro­
mised by the round number level directly below it. Although the number
itself possessed little technical value in this chart (no prior fight around
it, and thus no technical support offered) , the earlier price action had
been very bullish, which may still have left a lot of buy orders lying in
wait to get filled on a pullback to 1 . 3 1 , or even a little below it (com­
mon contrarian practice). On the other hand, with the UK/US overlap
already in its final stage, would bulls really want to step in against a
downside break of the box, knowing that volume would probably be thin
in the hours ahead?
Although we can never be sure of how a break will play out, it is es­
sential to always look at the situation from both sides of the field prior to
taking position. By also reflecting on the vantage point of the opponent,
as opposed to merely looking on the bright side of our own intentions,
we may obtain a better take on the true prospects of the wager at hand.
As it turned out, bulls ostentatiously threw in the towel on the break
of bar 8. The dotted line is put in to mark the near perfect ceiling test
with the high of bar 2 . Whether it was a ceiling test, a double bottom or
even a false low that would have stopped this decline is basically irrel­
evant (we shouldn't be trading there anyway) . But to bears in position,
this level provided an excellent marker to cash in some or all of their
windfall profits from the mini crash; at the same time, it offered heroic
bulls an opportunity to take their chances on a double-pressure pull­
back to the 25ema (9- 1 0 ; not recommended) .

49

Understanding Price Action
IFig 3.51 WHW.ProReaITime.com

U55

eur/usd 5-minute

1.35

It ProRelfTime.com
14:00

15:00

16:00

17:00

19:00

Figure 3.5 Examine for a moment what happened to a bull who bought

himself in when bar 3 surpassed the high of 1 , bar 4 the high of 3, and
bar 6 the high of 4. These breaks may all have been in line with the
current dominant pressure, but that doesn't necessarily make for great
opportunity. There was no buildup prior to any of them and the moves
that led up to each breakout were already quite "extended". That makes
these breaks very prone to (temporary) failure.
Of course, it is not our business to comment on the tactics of our
fellow traders in the field. Maybe they are tiny scalpers cleverly aim­
ing for a couple of pip as stops are hit above a previous high or low;
or maybe they are trading from a much bigger frame, with their stops
safely placed well above or below the market. But from where we stand,
trading such non-buildup breaks as mentioned above is a losing propo­
sition on the whole.
Pullback 4-5 came to test the broken round number (adverse mag­
net), a feat that coincided with the first touch of the 25ema since the
start of the bull rally-always an interesting development to monitor.
Prices may have sunk a little through, but they held up well in the area
of the big 1 .35.
While it usually requires quite some buildup to set up a barrier break
of a range (at least a small cluster of bars) , pullback reversals, on the
other hand, can be very swift. Sometimes it takes no more than a single
"turnaround bar" in the 2 5ema to set up the reversal in tradable fashion
(5) . In a bull trend, a popular practice is indeed to trade the break of a
bullish bar in the low of a bearish correction, with a stop below the low

50

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Praaice

of the pullback. When going this route, however, traders are well ad­
vised to make distinctions between a highs-odds turn and its low-odds
counterpart. Bar 7, for example, may have been a classic turnaround
bar also (a so-called doji, showing a very small body on a long tail), but
it set up very poorly for breakout purposes. First off, an entry above it
would have been very close to the high of the foregoing swing (6), leaving
prices little room to "reverse" before running into potential resistance.
Second, the tall span of bar 7 would have demanded a rather wide
technical stop. And third, this stop would have resided quite unpleas­
antly on the path to the OO-level adverse magnet. When compared to
the break of bar 5, the break above bar 7 was of much lesser standing,
if not plain unsavory.
The 25ema by itself never provides support or resistance, it is just
an average. Yet in the continual seesaw motions of price action it is
extremely common to see a pullback of about 40 to 60 percent coin­
cide with the average closing price of the last 25 bars-and not seldom
with some form of technical support as well. The low of bar 7 is a good
example: it tested both the 25ema and the high of bar 5 and this simul­
taneously represented (a) a ceiling test (floor in the 4-5-6 arch) , (b) a
technical test of a former breakout and (c) a 60 percent retracement of
the forgoing swing 5-6. This type of "obvious" support will surely have
contributed to the aggression with which the low of bar 7 was bought
(a popular scalper's tactic) . No such aggression came forth, however, on
the break of bar 7.
On the way down, pullback 8-9 undercut the low of bar 7, but the
more prominent low of pullback 4-5 stood its ground well. This may
have kept the bullish pressure up for the moment, but it was hard to
ignore the magnetic power of that round number level; prices kept com­
ing back to it.
If an initial pattern line had been drawn to connect the turnarounds
of 2 and 5, bar 9 will have fallen below the extension. This doesn't au­
tomatically warrant adjustment, but we best keep the perforation in
mind. Should future price action better line up with the new low, per­
haps it is wise to adjust. Considering the squeeze progression in the
ellipse later on, the line is indeed best plotted as depicted.

51

Understanding Price Aaion
Before we take up the ellipse situation, let us first address the bull
swing 9 - 1 0 . This leg headed out quite happily but suffered a nasty blow
when prices approached the former high of bar 8. Try to imagine how
bar 1 0 must have shown a tall white body at some point, only to do a
full turn and close on its low. Bearish dojis in the high of a bull swing
(8 and 10), like bullish dojis in the low of a bear swing (7), can be some­
what intimidating. They are often looked upon as reversal bars, but by
themselves these dojis do not deserve such status. To judge their po­
tential impact, we should always regard them in the light of the overall
picture.
Things indeed had started to look a little less promising for the bulls.
Despite their repeated efforts to leave 1 .35 behind, the adverse magnet
never lost its pull. With now two lower tops standing (8 and 1 0), it was
evident that supply kept coming in at lower levels. If this continued, it
wouldn't take long before the bears would start to sink their teeth in the
round number itself.
On the other hand, let us not overlook the fact that the three major
lows of 2, 5 and 9 were all put in at higher levels, which was still a sign
of underlying demand. Neutrally regarded, the chart showed a standoff
situation with descending tops on one side and ascending bottoms on
the other, in essence a triangle pattern. As with all triangular patterns,
at some point they demand a conclusion.
The four bars within the ellipse set the stage for the chain of events
about to unfold. With prices stuck between pattern line support on one
side and resistance of the 25ema on the other, this was a make-or­
break situation. As long as the line held up, there was hope for the
bulls still, but it wasn't hard to imagine the consequences if they failed
to defend it properly.
The bears, obviously, had a task of their own. With the bars caught
in a classic squeeze, they now had their opponents in striking distance
of defeat. It was crucial not to let them escape.
What will certainly help your understanding of price action is not
just to look at the bars from a technical perspective but to really try to
grasp the extent of psychological forces at work. In the marketplace,
hopes and dreams are built and shattered by the minute and in this
