
CHAPTER 9

ECONOMICS

135

business cycle. A decreasing unemployment figure signals a mature cycle,
whereas the opposite occurs when the unemployment indicator increases.
The greater the unemployment data are, the worse it is for the currency.
Nonfarm Payroll (NFP)
In general, the most used employment figure is not the monthly unemployment rate, which is given as a percentage, but instead the nonfarm payroll.
This figure is calculated as the proportion of the difference between the
total labor force and the employed labor force divided by the total labor
force [(TLF – ELF)/FLT].
These data are complex, but they generate a lot of information. In the
FOREX, the standard indicators watched by traders are the unemployment
rate, the manufacturer payrolls, the nonfarm payroll, average income, and
average working week. Generally speaking, the most significant employment data are the manufacturer and nonfarm payrolls, followed by the
unemployment rate. A higher NFP is better for the currency
Employment Cost Index (ECI)
The ECI measures salaries and inflation and provides a comprehensive
analysis of the compensation given to workers, including salaries, commissions, and wages, as well as additional benefits. The higher the number is,
the better it is for the currency.
Consumer Spending Indicators
These consumption indicators are based on data that are relative to the volume
of retail sales and are important for FOREX traders because they show the
demand level from consumers and their sentiment, which represents initial
data necessary for calculation of other indicators such as GNP and GDP. The
higher the consumer spending indicators are, the better it is for the currency.
Retail Sales
Retail sales are a significant indicator of consumer spending for FOREX
traders because the figure shows the strength of consumer demand and at
the same time consumer confidence. As an economic indicator, retail sales
are particularly important in the United States. Unlike other countries, such
as Japan, the core of the U.S. economy is the consumer. If consumers have
enough additional income or enough credit because of it, more merchandise will be produced or imported. The figures for retail sales create an economic process of impulse to the manufacturing sector. The seasonal aspect

136

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

also is important for this economic indicator. The months that are watched
more closely by FOREX traders as to retail sales are December because of
the Christmas holidays and September, the month of return to school. Also,
November is becoming a more and more important month owing to the
changes in previous post-Christmas sales to pre-December sale days.
Another interesting phenomenon occurred in the United States. Despite
the economic recession of the early 1990s, the volume of retail sales was
unusually high. The profit margin, however, was much smaller. This occurred
because consumers turned their preferences to discount stores.
Traders watch retail sales closely to evaluate the global strength of the
economy and thus the strength of the currency. This indicator is issued
monthly. The higher the number is, the better it is for the currency.
Consumer Sentiment
Consumer sentiment is the result of a household survey designed to measure directly the individual tendency to spend money to increase or maintain at the same level the expenses related to the satisfaction of actual
household needs and thus implies a gauge of the actual labor market. The
higher this number is, the better it is for the currency.
Auto Sales
Despite the importance of the automotive industry in terms of production
and sales, the level of vehicle sales is not an economic indicator that is
widely taken into account by FOREX traders. American vehicle manufacturers have experienced a long and constant loss of market share that only
started reversing in early 1990s. However, the internationalization of vehicle manufacturing has grown more and more, given that American vehicles
are being assembled outside the United States and German vehicles are
being built inside the United States.
Owing to this confusion, vehicle sales figures can’t be used easily in
FOREX fundamental analysis.
Leading Indicators
The following economic indicators are leading indicators:
●
●
●
●

Weekly average production of manufacturing workers
Weekly average of state employment claims
New orders for consumer goods and materials (inflation-adjusted)
Sales performance (companies that receive slower deliveries from
suppliers)

CHAPTER 9

●

●
●
●

ECONOMICS

137

Contracts and factory orders for products and equipment
(inflation-adjusted)
New building permits
Changes in the nondelivered factory orders and in durable goods
Changes in prices of important materials

The higher these figures are, the better it is for the currency, except for the
weekly state employment claims (unemployment claims). The higher those
unemployment levels are, the worse it is for the currency.
Personal Income
Personal income is the income received by individuals, nonprofit institutions, and private investment funds. The elements of this indicator include
commissions and wages, income from rent, profits, dividends, interest
earnings, and payment transfers (Social Security, state unemployment
insurance, and veteran’s benefits). Commissions and wages reflect the
underlying economic conditions.
This indicator is vital for the sales sector. Without an adequate personal
income and a tendency to buy, durable and nondurable goods purchases by
consumers will be limited. For FOREX traders, personal income is not significant. However, when it is high, this is positive for the currency.

JAPAN’S MONETARY POLICY
During the long economic depression in Japan from the beginning of the
1980’s through the fourth quarter of 1991, monetary policy essentially consisted of the application of a very low interest rate since 1995, a zero interest rate since 1999, and a quantitative easing since 2001. The purpose of
such a policy was to lower expectations about future interest rates.
However, there is a problem because a more effective way to reduce
interest rates and at the same time stimulate the economy would be to
increase expectations of the private sector about future price levels. Quantitative easing can induce expectations of a higher price level, which, in
turn, can lead to a depreciation of the current value of the currency, especially if the quantitative easing is expected to be permanent. The commitment to a zero interest rate until inflation was controlled was not effective
in inducing inflationary expectations or escaping from a liquidity trap.
Especially between 1998 and 2003, the policies of the Bank of Japan
were not helpful in fighting deflation, which can be a very costly mistake.

138

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

A zero interest rate implies that there is no other way to use the overnight
interest rate as an instrument of monetary policy.
The monetary policy meetings of the Bank of Japan produce a guideline for money-market operations in the periods between meetings, and this
is written as a target for the overnight interest rate, which is to be achieved
with open-market operations. After the March 19, 2001, meeting, the operating target was changed to a target on overnight bank reserves, which had
experienced a significant increase, thus generating a zero interest rate.
The Bank of Japan executes open-market transactions two or three
times a day. As it intervenes in the money market, it represents an interestrate target operating procedure, which helps it to fix the noncollateralized
overnight interest rate in the Interbank market. Additionally, the Bank of
Japan has a steady program of buying Japanese government bonds.
Since 1998, the monetary policy meetings of the Bank of Japan have
been held on a preannounced but somewhat irregular schedule, usually
around the tenth and twenty-fifth of each month. Interest-rate decisions are
announced immediately after the meeting. No press conference or further
information or discussion is given. The minutes of the meetings are
released after six weeks or more. The Bank of Japan issues a monthly
report of recent economic and financial developments that summarizes all
the economic information that has been used in the discussions during the
monetary policy meeting.

JAPAN ECONOMIC INDICATORS
The Economic Structure of Japan
The economy of Japan can be compared with the economy of developed
European countries. Japanese companies see financing from banks as more
reliable than the use of market of equities and bonds. Employment, at least
in the big companies, is usually a lifetime career. The economy can be
divided in two large groups: multinational corporations and small family
enterprises.
The main indicators of Japan’s economy are the balance of payments,
the CPI, the GDP, the industrial production index, leading and coincident
indices of business conditions, machinery orders, money supply, retail sales,
unemployment, the wholesale price index (WPI), and the Tankan index.
Tankan Index
This index is based on the surveys that Japanese companies hold four times
a year. It shows business confidence. The Tankan index is one of the key
indicators of the Japanese economy.

CHAPTER 9

ECONOMICS

139

A positive economic trend usually is shown by Tankan values higher
than 0, which is considered as normal; however, higher values provide good
support for the yen and are good for the entire economy of Japan.
Money Supply
The money supply strongly affects the rate of the Japanese currency, the
yen. If the supply is growing slowly, the Bank of Japan needs to decrease
the interest rate, which has a negative influence on the yen. In the same
way, deflation (represented by a fall in prices) has a negative effect on the
Japanese currency.

FOREX CURRENCY CARRY TRADE
The carry trade is a well-known FOREX strategy that takes profit from the
different interest rates between two currencies; if one currency has a relatively low interest rate, it can be sold against another currency that has a
higher interest rate, and the trader will profit from the positive difference
that results. Every day, speculators have a steady deposit of positive interest, or swap, in their trading accounts, and this can be an important incentive for traders. For example, if you open a position in a FOREX currency
pair where the higher-interest currency is 7 percent and the lower-interest
currency is 2 percent, the swap can yield 5 percent as long as the market
doesn’t change.
The term carry trade without further modification refers directly to
currency carry trades: Investors borrow low-yielding and lend high-yielding currencies. It is principally correlated with global financial and
exchange-rate stability, and its use decreases when there are global liquidity shortages.
However, even when the differences between interest rates can be profited on, important risks still remain. The market obviously still can change
and go against the trader’s position, although the continuous daily rise in the
interest amount in the account may help to attenuate the potential losses.
With the exceptionally high leverages that are used to profit from those differences, even a small variation at a given moment can lead to huge losses.

THE YEN CARRY TRADE
In earlier years, many trillions of dollars were accumulated on the yen carry
trade. Interest rates set by the Bank of Japan allowed profitability on borrowing the Japanese yen to acquire other currencies.

140

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

For several years in the recent past, Japan had a 0 percent interest rate.
The rate was increased to 0.5 percent but remained much lower than the
rates of other countries. On the other hand, Japan has a very high level of
savings, around US$15 billion (much higher than the total U.S. GDP).
Because of the low interest rate, Japanese investors save in other currencies, accumulating around US$6 trillion in foreign assets. This, in turn,
increases the value of those foreign currencies. Other investors have borrowed the yen to invest in the global markets. However, in the recent
months, the lowering of interest rates in all major currencies has caused the
yen carry trade to begin unwinding.

UNWINDING OF THE YEN CARRY TRADE
The yen carry trade can only be profitable if there is stability in most currencies or if they are rising against the yen, especially the U.S. dollar. If the
dollar falls, the trade would bring up a loss independent of the positive
interest-rate difference.
Now that the United States, Europe, and other countries have lowered
their interest rates, this signifies the end of the carry trade. The global economy has entered a recession. There is a slowdown in the overall economies
of the world. Thus the interest-rate differential has narrowed, and there is no
longer an incentive to borrow the Japanese currency. Local investors have
started to sell their investments in dollars and euros and take their money
back to Japan. The yen has started to increase in value.
This increases the risk of losing a huge amount of money on those
trades as the yen is rises against the dollar and the euro, and as a consequence, people have started selling their foreign investments, which, in
turn, reevaluates the yen even more as the demand is increased.
The other currencies depreciate, and this harms Japanese exports
because they become more expensive, thus reducing the general demand
and leading to a lower growth in the economy and possible deflation.

INTERVENTIONS
Interventions are the result of decisions by central banks to intervene in
the economy by using their reserves and buying or selling their foreigncurrency assets in order to stabilize the value of their own currency. Interventions represent quite an interesting opportunity for traders because

CHAPTER 9

ECONOMICS

141

they can be an indicator that the currency involved has a lower value with
respect to fundamentals, especially if what triggers the intervention is
highly negative, such as the national debt or a natural catastrophe.
The sharp fall of one currency leads the counterpart asset to rise fast,
and thus traders can speculate to what extent there could be an intervention,
which would have as a result a series of price movements in the near term.
They can then take a position previous to the potential intervention and
make profits on those moves, exiting after the effects of the intervention
have ended. This can be very risky, however, because such traders are operating against the current trend, and large capitals losses could result in a
very short period of time because of the fast-moving market.
Some indicators will signal if there is a possibility of intervention.
Interventions usually will occur at the same price level as previous interventions. This is not always true, though, because sometimes the intervention is canceled by the central bank if it costs too much. Another clue can
be found in speeches by finance officials, such as announcements or
threats of possible future interventions. Those words sometimes can be
enough to give impulse to the markets. However, if there is no reaction,
with time, such announcements will have lesser and lesser impact because
their credibility decrease. Finally, FOREX analysts can determine fair estimations of levels where an intervention may occur, especially those who
work for the main banks or investment companies.
How can you trade when an intervention is occurring? First of all, you
should identify the previous intervention levels and evaluate the actual
expected price level to make your decision. Then, of course, always trade
with a stop loss and a target level so as to limit losses and lock in some profits. Leave enough room on the stops though, to mitigate against sharp
movements that may occur after the intervention. The targets for profits
should be set at the same levels that were attained in the previous intervention. Finally, open your trade with a reduced position size. Remember that
you will be trading against the main long-term trend, so there are high risks
of a margin call if the intervention doesn’t happen during the time span that
you have considered.
Although interventions can be extremely profitable, trading them is
mostly for pure speculators. There are several ways to identify the moment
when an intervention is most likely to happen, but it is always a good idea
to be prepared by using a very low leverage and a well-planned smart
money management through the use of stop losses and the setting of targets
to lock profits.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

142

GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (GDP)
The gross domestic product (GDP), also called gross domestic income
(GDI), is one of the instruments that allows measuring the income and output of the national economy of a particular country. It represents the total
value in dollars of all the goods and services produced in a given year
inside that country.
The most common approach to measuring and quantifying GDP is the
expenditure method:

GDP ⫽ consumption ⫹ gross investment ⫹ government spending
⫹ (exports ⫺ imports)

Consumption and investment in this equation represent the expenditures on final goods and services. The net exports (exports minus imports)
adjust this by subtracting the part of this expenditure that is not produced
domestically (the imports) and adding back the income coming from what
has been produced locally (the exports).
GDP per capita is often used as an indicator of standard of living in a
given country; the explanation is that theoretically all citizens benefit from
an increase in their country’s economic production. The advantage of using
this figure is that GDP is measured frequently, and information is given
four times a year. The standard of living in different countries can be compared because GDP is measured in practically every country of the world.
Finally, the calculations are consistent between countries, so the same
things are measured and the comparisons can be done at the same level.
However, per capita GDP is not really a strict measure of the standard
of living because it measures particular types of economic activity within
a country, such as exports and imports. For example, if a country exports
100 percent of its production but does not import anything, the GDP still
would be high, but the standard of living would be poorer.
GDP rather is used as such an indicator because the standard of living
tends to increase when GDP per capita increases. It is not a direct measure
but a relative measure. Also, it can be used to gauge working productivity.
An alternative to GDP as a country’s economic health measurement is the
human development index (HDI).

CHAPTER 9

ECONOMICS

143

