Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits

Originally devised as a practical course for investors, it is as alive, vital and instructional today
as the day it was written. It paved the way for Robert Edwards and John Magee's best-selling
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends – a debt which is acknowledged in their foreword: 'Part One
is based in large part on the pioneer researches and writings of the late Richard Schabacker.'

Richard Schabacker

Richard Schabacker achieved his financial fame in the 1920s and 1930s. First as Financial Editor
of Forbes and later as Editor of The Annalist, a weekend section of the New York Times. During
this time he also authored three books. To many in the markets, who know of him, he is known
as "the father of technical analysis".
"To be a successful trader, you need to understand markets deeper than your competitors. A good
way to get started is to read this ground-breaking book - a major text on technical analysis that
has already helped countless traders find their way to market profits while avoiding dangerous
pitfalls."
Dr Alexander Elder, author of Trading for a Living
"Today's technician has all the modern computer methods of interpreting price and buying
trends. No matter how sophisticated they get, all technicians must get back to basics and there is
no finer way of reviewing those time-honored technical principles, rules and precepts than with
the original version of Schabacker's Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits."
Ralph Acampora
"If you think you know all there is to know about technical analysis as it pertains to charting and
chart trading then you must read Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits by Richard
Schabacker. This original work by the founder of technical analysis will teach you many
valuable things that you don't know."
J. Welles Wilder

Hh Harriman House Classics

Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits

Schabacker presents technical analysis as a totally organized subject and comprehensively lays
out the various important patterns, formations, trends, support and resistance areas, and
associated supporting technical detail. He presents factors that can be confidently relied on, and
gives equal attention to the blemishes and weaknesses that can upset the best of analytical
forecasts. Factors which investors would do well to absorb and apply when undertaking the
fascinating game of price, time and volume analysis.

Richard
Schabacker

Richard W. Schabacker's great work, Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits, is a worthy
addition to any technical analyst's personal library or any market library. His "pioneering
research" represents one of the finest works ever produced on technical analysis, and this book
remains an example of the highest order of analytical quality and incisive trading wisdom.

Hh

7.44 x 9.69

.951

Technical
Analysis
and

Stock Market
Profits

“The real bible of

technical analysis”

Richard W. Schabacker
Introduced and edited by Donald Mack

Hh Harriman House Classics

7.44 x 9.69

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
AND STOCK MARKET
PROFITS
A Course in Forecasting

RICHARD W. SCHABACKER

70+ DVD’s FOR SALE & EXCHANGE
www.traders-software.com
www.forex-warez.com
www.trading-software-collection.com
www.tradestation-download-free.com

Contacts
andreybbrv@gmail.com
andreybbrv@yandex.ru
Skype: andreybbrv

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
AND STOCK MARKET
PROFITS
A Course in Forecasting

RICHARD W. SCHABACKER
former Financial Editor of Forbes Magazine
and author of
Stock Market Theory and Practice
and
Stock Market Profits
Introduced and edited by

Donald Mack

HARRIMAN HOUSE LTD
43 Chapel Street
Petersfield
Hampshire
GU32 3DY

Tel: +44 (0) 1730 233870
Fax: +44 (0) 1730 233880
email: enquiries@harriman-house.com
web site: www.harriman-house.com

Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits
first printed in the United States of America in 1932
Second edition 1937

First published in Great Britain 1997 by Pearson Professional Limited
This edition published by Harriman House Ltd
© Harriman House Ltd 2005
ISBN 1897597568

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained
from the British Library.

All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise without either
the prior written permission of the Publishers or a licence permitting restricted
copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd,
90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0LP. This book may not be lent,
resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published,
without the prior consent of the Publishers.
Printed and bound
by Lightning Source

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Richard W. Schabacker
Richard W. Schabacker achieved his financial fame in the 1920s and 1930s first as
Financial Editor of Forbes and later as editor of the Annalist, a weekend section of the
New York Times. During this time he also authored three books: Stock Market Theory
and Practice, 1930; Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits, 1932; and Stock Market
Profits, 1934.

ABOUT THE SERIES EDITOR
Donald Mack
If any phrase describes the editor of the Traders’ Masterclass series, which is dedicated solely to bringing back to traders and investors everywhere many of the great
and rare Technical Analysis classics from the past, that phrase would be “a perpetual student of the market”. Students in high school or college eventually graduate.
Not so students of speculative markets. The study and the work is never finished,
especially when there is an enduring interest in Technical Analysis. The editor’s
interest grew by leaps and bounds when in the late 1970s and the 1980s he established in Los Angeles the only bookstore in the USA that dealt exclusively in stock
and commodity books; those that were in print at the time and those that were out
of print. Current books were generally unchallenging and of various degrees of
quality. Many out-of-print books were also of varying degrees of quality, but so
many fascinating rare works from the 1920s to the 1950s, of great creativity and marvelous technical analytics and application came his way, that a life long appreciation
of their quality grew.
Almost needless to say, more attention was focused on the old books than on the
new, for he found those old books that made up the great classics were superior to
the new in so many ways. While operating the bookstore, there was a natural inflow
and outflow of many thousands of books and from those thousands of books a personal library and collection numbering a good 5,500 plus individual titles was put
together. A little of the knowledge contained in these great market classics rubbed
off on the editor (actually more than a little) and he trusts that it will also rub off on
the many market students of today and tomorrow as they also come in contact with
the superb Technical Analysis classics that will come their way through this Series.

380

380

360

360

340

340

320
300

320
300

INDUSTRIALS

280

280

260

260

240

240

220

220

200

200

180

180

160

160

140

140

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

5

5

SHARES

4

3

2

2

1

1

1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937

THE DOW-JONES INDUSTRIAL STOCKS AVERAGE
Monthly High and Low of Closing Prices -- 1897 Through August, 1937.

SHARES

3
MILLION

DAILY
AVERAGE STOCK
TRADING-BY MONTHS

MILLION

4

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Editor’s Introduction

xi

Preface to First Edition

xix

Study I TECHNICAL APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING

1

Definition of a Stock Chart · Technical vs. Fundamental Factors · Technical Position
of Market Most Important · Sources for Chart Data · Advantages of Making Your
Own Charts · Which Stocks to Chart and How Many · Method of Constructing
Charts · Price, Volume and Time Scales · Major, Intermediate and Minor Movements

Study II IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS

29

Public vs. Insiders · Detecting Professional Operations · Determining Major Turning
Points or Reversals · Volume Signs at Reversals · The One-Day Reversal ·
Comparative Volume at Tops and Bottoms · Price and Volume Must be Considered
Together · The Head and Shoulders Formation · Volume Action on Head and
Shoulders · Importance of Neck-Base Line · Varying Width of Shoulders · The Time
to Act on Head and Shoulders · Ascending and Descending Neck-Base Lines · Flat
Shoulder Variants of Head and Shoulders Formation · Reliability of Head and
Shoulders Formation · Logic of Chart Patterns

Study III IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS CONTINUED

65

The Common or Rounding Turn · Volume Action on Rounding Turns · The
Symmetrical Triangle as a Reversal Formation · The Break-away Move from
Triangle Patterns · Volume Action on Break-Outs · Comparative Reliability of Early
and Late Break-Outs · Relation of Price Move to Patterns Size · Wave Movement
Following Apex · The Right-Angle Triangle as Reversal · The Descending Triangle ·
Volume on Break-Out From Descending Triangle · Effect of General Market on
Individual Stocks · Ascending Triangles as Reversals · The Wedge Formation ·
Action Following Up-Turned and Down-Turned Wedges Compared · Strict
Definition Required for Wedge Patterns · Probable Causes for Triangles

Study IV IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS CONTINUED
The Double Top and Double Bottom · Requirements for Valid Double Reversal
Formations · Multiple Tops and Bottoms · Illustration of a False Double Top ·
Double Tops and Bottoms on Long-Range Charts · “M” and “W” Formations ·
Complex Reversal Formations · Relation to Multiple Formations and Head and

– vii –

105

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Shoulders · Varieties of Complex Patterns · Volume Indications in Complex
Reversals · The Broadening Top Reversal · Analysis of Broadening Top · Broadening
Top Ending Bull Market · Rally Following Completion of Broadening Top ·
Broadening Formations Which Fail · Possible Explanation for Broadening Top

Study V MINOR REVERSAL FORMATIONS

143

The Inverted Triangle · Differences Between Inverted and Normal Triangle ·
Inverted Right-Angle Triangle · The Diamond Formation · The Rectangle as a
Reversal · Break out of Dormancy · Relative Dormancy in an Active Stock · The
Island Reversal · Strict Requirements for Island Formation · The One-Day Island

Study VI MAJOR CONTINUATION FORMATIONS

177

Logic of the Intermediate Area Patterns · The Symmetrical Triangle as a
Continuation · Volume Action in Continuation Triangles · Right-Angle Triangles as
Continuations · The Ascending Triangle in Up-Trends · The Descending Triangle in
Down-Trends · Inverted Triangles as Continuations · The Rectangle as a
Continuation · Volume Action in Rectangle Continuations · The Flags and Pennants
· Various Flag Aspects and Interpretations · Flags in Up and Down-Trends ·
Relation of Pennant to Wedge Pattern · The Head and Shoulders Continuation
Pattern · Review of Continuation Patterns · Formations Which Change Their
Nature

Study VII MISCELLANEOUS INTERMEDIATE PATTERNS
AND PHENOMENA

219

Patterns with Drooping Bottom · Patterns with Accelerating Peaks · Trading on the
Accelerating Patterns · The Horn Formation · The Inverted Horn · Out-of-Line Price
Movements · Interpretation of Out-of-Line Action · The Zig-Zag Movement ·
Recurrent Patterns of Price Action · Warning Given by Recurring Movements · The
Price Gap – General Description · Classification of Gaps · The Common Gap · The
Break-Away Gap · Interpretation of the Break-Away Gap · Continuation Gaps · The
Exhaustion Gap · The Interpretation of the Exhaustion Gap · Variants of the Island
Formation · Gaps on Ex-Dividend and Ex-Rights Days

263

Study VIII TREND LINE ACTION
Definition of the Trend Line · The Theory of Trend Lines · Practical Uses of Trend
Lines · Methods of Establishing Trend Lines · Practicing on the Chart · Patterns
Appearing Within Trends · Trading on the Primary Trend Line · The Double Trend
Line or Trend Channel · Playing the Major Trend · Relative Profits With and Against
the Major Trend · Trend Lines Signaling Reversals · Horizontal Trading Areas ·
What Constitutes a Significant Break · Volume Action on Breaking of Trend Line ·
Fanning Trend Lines and Flattening Trends · The Throw Back After a Trend is
Broken · Estimating the Extent of Probable Movement by Trend Lines · Logarithmic
vs. Arithmetic Scales
GENERAL REVIEW OF VOLUME : Volume as an Indication of Reversal · Volume Action
at Temporary Halts in Trends · Declining Volume During Patterns Formulation ·

– viii –

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Volume as an Indication of Continuation · Relation of Volume to Price Movement ·
Relation of Volume Action to Basic Trends
THE DOW THEORY: Its Major Tenets · Limitations of Dow Theory in Practical Trading

Study IX SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE LEVELS

301

Definition of Support and Resistance Levels · Logical Explanation for Reversal
Levels · Reliability of Support and Resistance Levels · Bottoms Become Tops and
Tops Become Bottoms · Value of Weekly Charts in Forecasting · The Volume Factor
in Estimating Future Influence · Practical Application of Support and Resistance
Study to Current Charts · Resistance and Support Levels in Minor Fluctuations ·
Resistances Set Up by Trend Lines · The Cradle Formation · Resistance and Support
Levels Set Up by Head and Shoulders Formation · Support and Resistance Levels
Set Up by Multiple Formations · Support and Resistance Levels Set Up by
Rectangles and Right-Angle Triangles · Support and Resistance Levels Set Up by
Symmetrical Triangles · Support and Resistance at Gaps · Practical Uses of Pattern
Resistance Study · The Longevity of Support and Resistance Levels · 50 and 100 as
Critical Levels · The Half-Way Intermediate Movement Theory · Price Action at
Support or Resistance Levels

Study X MEASURING RULES AND FORMATIONS

333

Use of Support and Resistance Factors in Measuring · Trend Lines as Measuring
Indications · Measuring Implications of Patterns in Bull and Bear Markets ·
Measuring Implications of Head and Shoulders Formation · Measuring
Implications of Triangle · Flags and Pennants as Measuring Patterns · The HalfMast Congestion Pattern · Measuring Theories Applied to Gaps · The Single Gap
Measuring Theory · The Multiple Gap Measuring Theory · Dependability of Gap
Theories · The Time Element in Measuring
FALSE MOVES AND SHAKE-OUTS: Definition of False Move and Shake-Out · Triangles
Most Susceptible to False Moves · Volume Action on False Moves · False Moves From
Right-Angle Triangles · False Moves out of Rectangles · False Move vs. Out-of-Line
Movement · False Moves Follow Head and Shoulders Formations · Defense Against
False Moves · Strict Construction of Break-Out Rules · Use of Stop-Loss Orders
Against False Moves · The Bright Side of False Moves · The End Run Price Action
STOP - LOSS ORDERS : The Mechanics of Stop Orders · When to Place Stop Orders ·
Where to Place Stop Orders · The 5% Allowance Rule · Shifting the Stop Order · The
“Two Days Away” Rule · Stop-Loss Orders in Short Selling · Judgment in Placing
Initial Stop · Use of “Mental” Stops · Stop Orders Not Recommended Within
Patterns · Doubling or Switching Stops · Use of Stops to Make New Commitments

Study XI USE OF LONG-TERM CHARTS, AVERAGES AND GROUPS
Monthly Charts · Average Charts · Group Charts · Shorter Time Intervals in Charts ·
Hourly Charts · The Ticker Chart · Minor Move Chart · Minor Trend Line Chart ·
Point or Figure Charts
CHARTING BONDS AND COMMODITIES : The Bond Market · Commodity Charts · The
Wheat Market · Formations Appearing on Wheat Charts · The Cotton Market

– ix –

377

TABLE OF CONTENTS

405

Study XII TRADING TACTICS
Selection of Operating Stocks · Swing Power Studies · Poor Stocks for Charting ·
Necessity for Patience · Limited vs. Market Orders · Advice to the Too Conservative
· Danger of Stubborness · Weighing Risks in Advance · Paper Trading
SUMMARY AND REVIEW : Chart Science a Catalog of Experience · Chart Deception
Engineered by Operators · A Program for the Beginner · Making Up the List ·
Starting the Charts · Studying the Patterns · The Final Test

Index of Figures by Figure Number

433

Index of Figures by Subject

437

Index of Text References to Figures

440

Index of Subjects

444

Editor’s note
Because of the poor quality reproduction of the original charts it was found
necessary to re-draw each one. The vertical price bars on each chart were faithfully
reproduced as closely as possible to the original bars, in terms of size and date. The
horizontal bars (the Closing Price bars) proved troublesome and the decision was
made to insert them only when the author made specific reference to their position.
With there being no other references in the text concerning the other horizontal bars
on the charts, the closing price indications were superfluous and could be, and were,
safely omitted.

–x–

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION
“Part One is based in large part on the pioneer researches and writings of the late Richard W.
Schabacker. Students of his Technical Analysis and Stock Market Profits (the latest revision of
which – now out of print – was made in 1937 by the present writer and Albert L. Kimball) will
find in the pages of this section much that is familiar and except for the illustrations, only a
little that is really novel”
From the Foreword to Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
by Robert D. Edwards and John Magee, 1948

To American technical analysts past, present, and future, the year 1948 stands out as
one of the brightest of beacons, bringing the solid foundations of modern Technical
Analysis. For it was this year that saw the publication of Technical Analysis of Stock
Trends, written by Messrs Edwards and Magee, which was the pivotal work in
launching Technical Analysis at a time that was to prove ready for it. Without a
doubt a great debt of gratitude has to be bestowed on the two authors and their
timely book which has sold some 800,000 plus copies and in later years has earned
for itself the accolade of “the bible of Technical Analysis.” A check with most dedicated technical analysts who have learned their craft since 1948 would confirm their
personal debt to this work, which was responsible for introducing them to Technical Analysis or expanding their technical education.
But how did all of this come about? Technical Analysis certainly did not have a
long history of acceptance in the 1940s and before by the established investment fraternity in New York, London, Paris and elsewhere. Without a doubt it was easier to
keep to long held beliefs that this form of analysis, utilizing charts of share price
action, was more akin to mumbo-jumbo than to the accepted seemingly logical
approach built around the respectable tools of Fundamental Analysis. To value a
company it was enough to analyze its accounts, work out its p/e ratio, be aware of
its research developments, weigh up its reported sales figures, estimate future
prospects, etc., thus arriving at a basis to value the company in terms of its share
price. Comparing that with the technical analyst’s toolbox containing charts, horizontal, vertical, angular and squiggly lines, fanciful looking patterns, pictured formations, plus indicators, oscillators and the like, logical investment thinking easily
came to the conclusion that Technical Analysis was a pseudo-scientific approach
that basically relied on price, time, and volume numbers, and paid little or no attention to the company itself. In comparison, accepted serious investment analysis concentrated on the company’s important fundamentals, for it was considered that in
– xi –

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

these lay the only real basis for valuing a company’s share price in the trading markets, which to fundamental analysts is what investing is about.
Looking back now, it is easy to see that the post-World War II period investment
scene was ripe for new thinking not contrary to, but in addition to, the established
fundamental approach that relied heavily on the work that flowed out of the large
brokerage firms’ research departments to their customers. Filling that vacuum
knowingly or unknowingly, Messrs Edwards and Magee produced their timely and
technically definitive book which not only gave organized form and shape to the
field of Technical Analysis, but also gave rise to new analytical thought that the postwar age could substantially make use of as an efficient methodology for investment
timing and selection. In the years prior to the publication of their influential Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, it should not go unnoticed, however, that many books
were published that can certainly be described as outstanding technical works
encompassing many phases of this analytical technology and thinking. A good
number of these books and courses were as original and as technically advanced as
anything on the subject of Technical Analysis that has been published since; great
technical thinking is just that whether it is expressed in 1920, 1940, 1997 or at any
other time. Such is the case with this book by Schabacker, for it, like many of the
great works of the past, is a worthy addition to any technical analyst’s personal
library or any market library. It is our belief that such great classics with their timeless analytical knowledge should never be allowed to disappear from the technical
scene, if possible. It is to this end that Pitman Publishing, publishers of this Master
Class Series, will be making many of these very rare works available again with an
increasing number of additions to this series of great classical writings from the
“Golden Age of Technical Analysis,” that very productive period between 1922 and
1957.
Returning to the post-World War II period, it would appear the investment world
was open to that one vital analytical work turning up to give this recovery period a
boost. History has shown that Edwards and Magee were the boost-givers. Delving
into their book we find it is divided into two main parts; Part One forms the bulk of
the book and contains the main subject matter which is the descriptions contributed
by Mr Edwards in his coverage on reversal, consolidation, and continuation patterns, trends, trend line action, support and resistance levels, and other areas of technical price action. The shorter Part Two by Mr Magee concentrates on the practical
applications of what to do in the markets and when. While Part Two includes much
in the way of general investment and trading knowledge that has been covered in
many books before and since, it is Part One that made the difference in 1948. In Part
One both private investors and professional analysts were presented with a compendium of chart patterns, formations, and technical action. If they had studied conscientiously and applied the knowledge extensively, they would have had some
– xii –
