
RealTick
RealTick combines price data with charting services and market signals for
stocks, options, futures, and foreign exchange, making it useful for traders who
are working in several markets. Its add-on services let you customize the data
if you have an unusual strategy. The service includes direct-access trading
through several different brokerage firms, including a few that work with day
traders.
For more information, go to www.realtick.com.

StockTwits
Social media is a great way to keep up with pop stars and find out local bargains, and it has applications for trading, too. StockTwits is a service that is
similar to Twitter. It lets members post trade ideas and market data, and it
pulls in streams from Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn. It’s a way of following
market sentiment more than anything, but sentiment drives markets. And
StockTwits is free.
For more information, go to www.stocktwits.com.

Trade-Ideas
Trade-Ideas is designed for stock traders. The software scans the incoming
price data feed to find trading opportunities based on prespecified indicators, and it can also show how much the market is deviating from a trader’s
style. For traders watching hundreds or thousands of stocks, Trade-Ideas can
be a useful addendum to a brokerage firm’s offerings.
For more information, go to www.trade-ideas.com.

225

226 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
News, newsletters, gurus, and
strategic advice
Trading relies on information so that everyone in the market can evaluate
what the right price for a security should be. Most of this information can
be found from an analysis of the news and the price data, both of which are
readily available from brokerage firms and quote services. But many traders
follow explicit philosophies or rely on the insight of certain analysts. Here’s a
list of some of the bigger ones you’ll come across.
Many of these market gurus have good ideas, but don’t follow any of them
blindly. Their techniques don’t work in all markets at all times. Besides,
anyone with a truly foolproof plan isn’t going to give it away. These newsletters are just part of the ongoing conversation in the markets that help traders
make decisions.

Briefing.com
If you follow a news-driven trading strategy, you need to know what the news
is. Briefing.com offers daily news summaries and live updates on news events
and ideas for trades that may suit your style. And unlike the standard news
feeds available to anyone with Internet access, it doesn’t have any celebrity
or human-interest stories to distract you.
For more information, go to www.briefing.com.

Elliott Wave
The Elliott Wave is a theory that says markets move in grand cycles over
a century or more. Within that grand cycle are subcycles lasting years,
months, weeks, days, minutes, and seconds. Given all the layers and analysis
required, those who follow the theory usually subscribe to research services
to help them. This site is maintained by Robert Prechter, who is one of the
leading scholars of the theory.
For more information, go to www.elliottwave.com.

School of Gann
The Gann method of technical analysis looks at the slopes of the charts to
predict changes. It’s a complicated system, so traders who follow it usually
rely on newsletters and research services to help them. School of Gann is
one that specializes in this system.
For more information, go to www.schoolofgann.com.

Chapter 13: Researching Research Services
TraderZone
Designed for stock traders working a momentum strategy, TraderZone offers
subscribers access to proprietary signal information based on technical
analysis.
For more information, go to www.traderzone.com.

TradeTheNews.com
TradeTheNews offers independent traders access to a squawk box, the audio
news feed and commentary that goes in the background on most professional
trading desks. Its staffers work on the floor of different exchanges and provide real-time news and analysis, which is helpful for traders working newsdriven strategies.
For more information, go to www.tradethenews.com.

Trending 123
Trending 123 publishes newsletters on technical analysis in the U.S.,
Canadian, and English stock markets and in foreign exchange. It also offers
software and e-mail alerts that point out opportunities in the markets, identified through the company’s analytical system. Trending 123 regularly covers
psychological aspects of trading to support its customers.
For more information, go to www.trending123.com.

The printed word
Several books cover specific aspects of trading
psychology, trading strategy, and research systems in much more detail than I can in the space
that the good folks at Wiley have given me. If you
turn to the appendix, you can see a list of other
resources that can help you in your research.
Just remember: Day trading was a hot topic
in the late 1990s, and you may find that a lot

of the books and articles on the subject date
from that era. Some are lurking in your public
library; others are still available for sale or can
be found on the Internet. Markets change. So
do regulations. SOES isn’t around anymore.
Don’t rely on a system popularized a decade
ago unless you’ve tested it and ensured that
it still works.

227

228 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Doing Your Due Diligence
Trading software, training, and research can get expensive, and some
services and seminars are outright scams. Even those that are legitimate
(and most are) may not be right for you. Before you spend your money, do
your research. Start with the free programs offered by the exchanges (listed
in the first section of this chapter) so that you have enough knowledge
to understand what a trading-services purveyor is trying to do. Then do
research and ask questions. To find out where to go and what to ask,
read on.

Where to start your research
You have a ton of tools available to you to do your due diligence. A good place
to start is the Internet. Go to your favorite search engine and enter the name
of the program you’re looking at plus the word scam or rip-off and see what
turns up on the third or fourth page of the search. If nothing of much interest
turns up, proceed to the regulatory agencies listed in the following sections.
Anyone with even a little knowledge of search-engine optimization knows this
tip. If your search turns up 50 blog posts with lines like “Why Company X is
NOT a scam!!!” well, guess what? Company X probably has something to hide,
and if you go to the third or fourth page of the search results, you may find out
what it is. Or just move on, because plenty of legitimate vendors that you can
work with instead are out there.
You may learn very little about any given research firm from an Internet search
or checks with the different regulatory organizations. That doesn’t mean the
firm in question isn’t for real, just that it hasn’t caused any concerns so far.

Commodity Futures Trading Commission
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (www.cftc.gov/
ConsumerProtection/index.htm) regulates options and futures markets, which are popular with day traders. Although not as well known as the
Securities and Exchange Commission, its functions are similar. At its website,
you can check out investor advisories, known scams, and recent enforcement
efforts to see whether the vendor you’re thinking of working with is legitimate or too good to be true.

FINRA BrokerCheck
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) provides a handy service
that lets you check on the current enforcement status of different brokerage
firms and their employees, especially in the stock, bond, and options markets.

Chapter 13: Researching Research Services
Some of these firms and people may be offering research services or newsletters, so check to see whether they’ve had problems in the past. Then you can
make decisions based on what you find. Some issues, such as a history of disputes over customer funds, should send you running. Go to www.finra.org/
Investors/ToolsCalculators/BrokerCheck.

National Futures Association BASIC
Futures are popular with day traders, and they’re regulated by the National
Futures Association. Its Background Affiliation Status Information Center
(BASIC), at www.nfa.futures.org/BasicNet, gives you information on
people and firms registered with the National Futures Association.

Securities and Exchange Commission
At www.sec.gov/investor.shtml, the Securities and Exchange
Commission offers lots of great information about every aspect of stock and
bond investing, with a special emphasis on problems and scams to avoid.
Ponzi schemes involving virtual currencies? E-mail pump-and-dump scams?
Don’t let the information scare you away from the market; use it to evaluate
any services that you’re thinking of paying for.

Questions to ask
After you do your basic background checks, you’re ready to ask some questions about the service providers you’re considering. Talk to the customer
service reps, and try talking to other traders as well. This section contains a
list of questions to get you started.
✓ Can I get a free trial to check the service out?
✓ What training and support do you offer? Do you have a user community?
✓ How long will it take me to learn the system? Will I need to pay for additional training and coaching, or is your built-in support adequate?
✓ Who will be teaching me or advising me, and what is this person’s
background?
✓ How long have you been in business? Why was the company formed?
✓ What additional features are available at additional costs? How many
customers subscribe to only the basic system?
✓ Does this system support my trading style and work with the assets I
prefer to trade?
✓ Do you screen traders for your program? Do you ask traders to leave? What
are the characteristics of those who do well? Of those who don’t do well?

229

230 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
✓ Can I talk to other customers?
✓ Is your software compatible with my broker? With other services I’m
using? With my computer’s operating system? With my Internet
bandwidth?
✓ Are your performance numbers actual, or are they hypothetical and
based on backtesting? How were the numbers calculated? (Chapter 16
has more information on performance calculation.)
Hypothetical performance is based on an analysis of what would have happened had the system been in place in the past or of what may happen if
market conditions cooperate. It can be subject to data mining, which means
that the system was developed to generate good performance in backtesting,
not because it has any logical or theoretical basis.
Don’t trust any promises of performance. Day trading is a difficult business.
Many people wash out because it doesn’t suit their personality. Others fail
because they don’t have enough startup capital, they don’t take the time to
figure out how to do it, or they simply have a run of bad luck. No one can
promise that you’ll succeed.

Chapter 14

Stress Management in the
Trading Day
In This Chapter
▶ Reading cautionary tales of traders gone wrong
▶ Finding out how to control your emotions
▶ Checking out the paramount trading plan

D

ay trading can be a ruthless business. Some days, you don’t find any
trades worth making. Other days, you find trades, but they don’t work
out the way you want them to. And some days, there are too many good
trades, more than you can possibly make, and so you watch profitable opportunities slip away. When you’re working with real money, all this stress can be
too much to take.
In a money-management or brokerage firm, traders have tremendous camaraderie. They work for the same employer and stick together to blow off the stress.
What do you do at home, though? How do you keep from panicking, getting
depressed, or otherwise letting this business hurt your profits and hurt you?
If you’re going to day trade, you need to understand the very real physical
and psychological stresses that the market pushes on its participants. In this
chapter, I offer some information and advice that can help you avoid a crisis.

Heeding Tales of Those Who Failed
Trader lore is loaded with stories of people who flamed out in spectacular and
destructive ways. People who work on trading desks or on trading floors tell
tales of colleagues who freaked out, walked off the desk, broke down in the pit,
or died at the trading post. They can name colleagues who are alcoholics, who
suffered bitter divorces, who committed suicide. Even though day traders usually work by themselves, stories of their self-destructive behavior abound.

232 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Because not that many people day trade consistently, not a lot of good
demographic studies have been conducted on just how many day traders
end up abusing drugs and alcohol, getting divorced or becoming estranged
from friends, and turning to suicide. The anecdotal evidence is pretty strong,
though. People in the securities business face high pressure and real dollar
losses every day they go to work. Their performance is constantly judged by
the market, and it doesn’t grade on a curve. If you spend even a few minutes
talking to people in the business, you hear horror stories.
Don’t be the person who finally gives researchers enough critical mass to
report on day trader self-destruction. Stress is a real part of day trading, and
not all day traders handle it well. If you know what you’re up against and
prepare for it, you’ll be better off than many.
Many, probably most, day traders lead pleasant lives and suffer no more problems than any other person. That’s because they have perspective, balance,
and a personality that matches the demands of the business. The following
sections offer a few cautionary tales of traders who succumbed to the pressures inherent in the job. I relate them here for this simple reason: Knowing
what can go wrong can help you keep in the right.

Jesse Livermore
Jesse Livermore is sometimes considered to be the father of day trading.
He’s the subject of the book Reminiscences of a Stock Operator by Edwin
LeFevre, a classic book about trading (see the appendix for more information).
Livermore was born in 1877 and started trading stocks when he was in his
teens. He claimed to have made $1,000 when he was 15, which may not seem
like much, except that he was very young and that $1,000 would be worth
more than $20,000 in today’s dollars. He made huge fortunes betting against
the market in 1907 and again in 1929, and he managed to lose it all both times.
By 1934 he was broke and depressed. He attempted suicide in 1935 and
succeeded in 1940.

Steve Perkins
Is he a cautionary tale, or the man who learned from his mistakes? Steve
Perkins is an energy trader who worked for PVM Oil Futures, a London-based
firm. One night in 2009, he got very drunk, got out his laptop computer, and
started buying futures; he ended up controlling almost 70 percent of the world’s
oil market and left his firm with $10 million in losses. He was fired and banned
from trading in the U.K. However, in 2010, he was hired by an energy trading
firm in Switzerland, and, it is hoped, he will not make that mistake again.

Chapter 14: Stress Management in the Trading Day

Knight Capital
Knight Capital is a company, not a person, but its story is a good one to keep
in mind given how much electronic trading takes place anymore. The company is a major dealer in the stock and equity options markets. It trades for
its own account, buying and selling securities from discount brokerage firms
to help them execute trades more efficiently. In the wee hours of the morning
on August 1, 2012, the company did a software upgrade. When the market
opened at 9:30 am New York time, Knight Capital sent a flood of erroneous
orders into the market. It turned out that there was a flaw in the software
that was installed. Ooops! Before the trading system was shut down, Knight
Capital lost $440 million dollars. The firm would have folded if it had not been
taken over by a competitor, GETCO.
Unlike Knight Capital, day traders don’t get bailed out by competitors. Riskmanagement techniques can help minimize your risk, and so can having a
backup trading method (say, on a laptop or phone) to help you close out
quick if your computer does something goofy.

Controlling Your Emotions
The key to successful day trading is controlling your emotions. After all, the
stock doesn’t know that you own it, as equity traders like to say, so it isn’t
going to perform well just because you want it to. This can be infuriating,
especially when you are going through a draw-down of your capital. Those
losses look mighty personal.
Traditional financial theory is based on the idea that traders are rational. In
practice, however, most of them are not. In fact, traders and investors are
often irrational in completely predictable ways, which has given birth to a
growing area of study called behavioral finance. It’s a hot area generating
Nobel Prize winners, and it may eventually help people incorporate measures
of investor behavior into buy and sell decisions.
If you can’t figure out a way to manage your reactions to the market, you
shouldn’t be a day trader. Almost all day traders talk about their enemies being
fear and greed. If you panic, you’ll no longer be trading to win, but trading not
to lose. That’s an important distinction: If your goal is not to lose, you won’t
take appropriate risk, and you won’t be able to respond quickly to what the
market is telling you.
Controlling your emotions is all much easier said than done. Human beings
are emotional creatures, constantly reacting (and sometimes overreacting) to

233

234 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
everything that happens in their lives. Knowing the emotions that affect trading and having some ways to manage them can greatly improve your overall
performance.

Dealing with destructive emotions
In trading, the big emotions can take over and mess up your strategy and
your returns. The enemies are doubt, fear, and greed; like any bullies, they
have their toadies, including anger, anxiety, boredom, and depression. At
this point in your life, you may already know whether you have tendencies
toward any of these moods. If so, trading can exacerbate them. If you’ve
never experienced them, you may for the first time. The following sections
explain these emotions as they relate to day trading so that you know what
you’re up against and can plan accordingly.
I include some tips that can help you deal with destructive reactions, but if
you are really in the throes of an emotional crisis that affects your trading,
seek professional help. And by all means, walk away from the trading desk.

Doubt
Day traders have to act fast. They have to place their buy and sell orders
as the opportunities present themselves. The market doesn’t give anyone
time to second-guess the decisions, but many traders start to do just that.
Did the signal really flash? Is this pattern going to continue or reverse? Will
waiting a few seconds lead to a better price? Would closing out for the day
just be better?
I don’t know. And neither do you. That’s why traders need to stick to their
plans, which isn’t always easy. Backtesting (explained in Chapter 16) can help
build confidence in a plan, and the use of automated trading tools (refer to
Chapter 13) can help overcome the tendency to hesitate before clicking on
the mouse button.
Most brokerage firms that offer services to day traders have automated trading
capabilities to help you follow your plan. And all brokers can execute stop and
limit orders, which can help you get out of positions based on your plans
rather than your emotions.

Fear
Fear is one of the worst emotional enemies of the day trader. Instead of trying
to make money, the fearful trader tries hard not to lose it. She is so afraid of
failing that she limits herself, doesn’t take appropriate risk, and questions her
trading system so much that she no longer follows it, no matter how well it
worked for her in the past.

Chapter 14: Stress Management in the Trading Day
By the way, failure isn’t the only thing that traders fear. Many fear success,
sometimes for deep-seated psychological reasons that I am in no position
to address. A trader who fears success may think that if she succeeds, her
friends will treat her differently, her relatives will try to take her money, and
that she will become someone she doesn’t want to be.
One way to limit fear is to have a plan for the trading business. Before you
start trading, take some time — maybe half a day — to sit down and think
about what you want, what will happen to you if you get it, and what will
happen to you if you don’t. For example, if you lose your trading capital, then
you’ll have to live on your walk-away fund (see the section “Watching your
walk-away money” later in this chapter) until you find another job. If you
make a lot of money, then you can pay off your mortgage, and your friends
will be none the wiser.

Greed
Greed seems like a silly thing to have on this list. After all, isn’t the whole purpose of day trading to make money? This isn’t charity; this is capitalism at its
purest. Ah, but there’s a popular saying down at the Chicago Board of Trade:
“Pigs get fat, but hogs get slaughtered.”
Traders who get greedy start to do stupid things. They don’t think through
what they’re doing, and they stop following their trading plans. They hold
positions too long in the hope of eking out a return, and sometimes they
make rash trades that look an awful lot like gambling. The greedy trader loses
all discipline and eventually loses quite a bit of money.
If your goal is simply to make more and more money, you may have a
problem with greed. Sure, everyone wants to make more, but there are
also a basic need-to-make number (enough to cover your costs and your
basic living expenses) and a want-to-make number (enough to cover costs,
basic expenses, and extras that are important to you). Your want-to-make
can be open ended (as in “as much as possible”), but your need-to-make
should be a key component of your risk management. If you know
what those numbers are, you’re well on your way to preventing the
problem.
Limit orders, which automatically close out positions when they hit set prices,
are one way to force discipline in the face of greed. You can learn more about
limit orders in Chapter 2.

Anger
The markets can be maddening. They don’t do what you want them to, and
that often costs you real money. And no one wants to lose money. Your rage
at the markets can cause you to stop seeing straight.
