be at 1:10 true leverage. However, you still would lose only 2 percent of
your account if stops are hit. Raise your stops to 100 pips, and decrease the

88

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

position to 600 units or 6 nanolots. Your position now would be at 1:2 true
leverage, but you still would lose only 2 percent of your account if stops are
hit. And so on.
Also remember that the calculations have to be made on your account’s
equity, not the balance. You could have several positions open and going
down, and thus your equity would be decreasing. The remaining equity is
the only available capital at that moment.
Position size has to be adjusted while growing (and while decreasing).
In fact, if you maintain the same 2 percent risk and 20-pip calculation,
you’ll be automatically adding lots (or mini-, micro-, or nanolots) to your
position as soon as the proportion allows it. You also can decide to increase
the stops instead and keep the original number of lots should you want to
trade on higher time frames.
There are numerous ways of looking at leverage and risk. I like to keep
things simple, so I think about them separately. Risk is the percentage of your
account that you’re willing to lose on a trade. Let’s say that you have a $10,000
account (for a $500 account, see my comments below). If you trade 0.5 lot of
GBP/USD, every 1-pip movement will affect your account by $5. Thus, if you
set your stop loss 40 pips away from entry, then the risk is 40 ⫻ $5 ⫽ $200,
which is 2 percent of your $10,000 account. Viewed this way, none of this has
anything to do with leverage. Risk is the product of position size (0.5 lot in this
example) and stop-loss point (40 pips from entry).
Leverage determines the amount of money you need in your account
(margin) to be able to take the trade. Let’s say that GBP/USD is currently
priced at $1.45, and your broker is offering you 100:1 leverage. Then the
margin you need is 0.5 lot ⫻ $100,000 per lot/100 leverage ⫻ 1.45 ⫽ $725,
which is 7.25 percent of your $10,000. If the leverage were only 50:1, then
the amount required would be 0.5 ⫻ 100,000/50 ⫻ 1.45 ⫽ $1450, or 14.50
percent; that is, at 50:1, you need twice the margin than at 100:1, and so on.
Thus, at 50:1, you are locking up 14.50 percent of your account balance,
leaving the remaining 85.50 percent free (unused or available margin) to
place on other trades. None of this alters the fact that the risk is still 2 percent, meaning that if your stop loss gets hit, you lose $200.
A standard account allows a minimum position size of 1 lot, a mini
account allows 0.1 lot, and a micro account 0.01 lot. This, assuming a
minimum-size trade on GBP/USD in a standard account, each pip move
alters your account balance by $10; in a mini account, $1; and in a micro
account, 10 cents.
As a general rule, you shouldn’t place more than 1 to 2 percent at risk on
any one trade. This will allow your account to survive many losses. Preserving capital will keep you in the game. Of course, if you’re new to the FOREX,

CHAPTER 6

HOW TO KEEP YOUR PROFITS

89

you should start trading in a demo account to practice your understanding of
the preceding and to get a feel for the mechanics of trading.
Take, for example, a $500 mini account: 2 percent (risk per trade) of $500
is $10. Thus, given that each pip is worth $1, the maximum distance your stop
loss can be away from entry is 10 pips. Obviously, this gives very little room
to move. Hence, with only $500, it would be better to trade in microlots. It is
said that to trade a standard account (at 2 percent risk per trade), the ideal
amount required would be a minimum deposit of $25,000; proportionally,
then, a mini account would require $2,500 and a micro account $250. At 2
percent risk, each of these allows you to place a stop loss 50 pips from entry.

OVERTRADING AND OVERCONFIDENCE
Overtrading can be interpreted in two ways: opening too many positions
with regard to your account equity or trading beyond a certain quantity of
positions in a single day because you feel that you need to be “always in the
market.” It is so easy to jump compulsively into a trade without regard for
your strategy or for the consequences, which often can be costly. Overconfidence can lead to overtrading because you feel all powerful and think that
you will keep winning more and more. As a result, you incur excesses and
overlook the warning signs. Revenge trading is the inverse behavior and
another type of overtrading, where you keep desperately opening positions
after you have lost many previous ones in the hope of recovering the losses.
Such behavior is enhanced by emotions such as anger and frustration.
How can you determine if you are overtrading? The following are some
symptoms that can help you to identify and correct this erroneous trading
style:
●
●

●

●

●

●

You don’t have a trading signal, or at least the signal is not very clear.
You check all the possible time frames, currency pairs, and indicators
available, switching from one to another looking for a “confirmation”
justifying your need to be in the market.
You open a trade as soon as you enter your trading platform without
much previous analysis.
You see opportunities and trends everywhere, and if you don’t trade,
you feel that you are missing out on potential profits.
You feel frustrated when you think of an entry point but fail to enter,
and then it goes the way you predicted.
You want to stay awake from Sunday to Friday so that you don’t miss
any trade; you sleep very little and scour the charts every 5 minutes
looking for another trade.

90

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

●

You can’t bear to be away from your trading platform. In fact, this is
one of the reasons I created the James Dicks FOREX alerts—so that
you don’t have to sit at your computer Sunday through Friday. My
traders do that for you, and when they enter a trade, they will send out
an alert so that you can quickly see what they are looking at and make
a decision to enter the trade or not.
Maybe you have a working trading plan and system, but you often
bend the rules and justify this with a series of weak excuses: “I’m
risking so little that it won’t matter”; “This time only”; “This is the
perfect setup, and I don’t want to miss the profits”; “The market is
moving a lot; I’ve got to jump in”; and so on.
You think that the more you trade, the more profits you will make.
You open a lot of random positions because behind any of them lies
assuredly the “big home run” that will make up for all your previous
losses. You trade carelessly and furiously, with despair and excitement
and contradictory emotions throughout the entire process. You enjoy
the rush and stress and think that they are a normal part of trading.
Anything else would be boring.

●

●

Overtrading reduces your win-loss ratio and increases your costs
because every time you open a trade, you are paying the spread and commissions if your broker is an electronic communications network (ECN).
Trading should not be seen as an adventure or a hobby. It is a business
and a money-making opportunity, where you can succeed if you treat it as
such. If you constantly lose or have huge losses followed by extraordinary
wins without a system and a planned strategy, you are trading carelessly
and just gambling. Trying to get revenge after a string of losses is very
common. This attitude is lead by a mixture of fear and anger and only
brings about more losses and frustration. Keep your money management
under strict control. Many traders increase their position size after a series
of bad trades in the hope that a single winning trade will allow them to
recover all. Trade what you see in the market, use your system, and follow
your plan. Losses are part of the picture, and money management will take
care of them. Money-management rules are very easy: Your winning positions should be bigger than your losing trades.
If you are new to FOREX trading, do not get involved in scalping. This
is a very risky and difficult strategy that requires a strong personality, total
control, focus, and a clear mind that is free of negative or positive emotions. A strict discipline is needed to enter and exit many dozens of trades
in a short time span.

CHAPTER 6

HOW TO KEEP YOUR PROFITS

91

Overconfidence is perhaps the trickier state of mind for a trader. The
ego boost that a series of winning trades can give you is even worse than
the effects of a losing streak. Wait for the market to come to you. Chasing
the market is a common mistake. After every small move, there is almost
always a retracement, where you can enter at a better price.

OVERLEVERAGING
The extreme leverage allowed by some FOREX brokers—a relative proportion that can go up to 500:1, which means controlling on the markets an
amount of money 500 times greater than what you are required as margin—
can induce a trader very easily to overleverage his or her positions and risk
a total margin call. The most important and first thing to do is to protect
your working capital.
Working with only a small percentage of your total equity is not easy
when trading on very small accounts. For this reason, you should find a broker that allows microlots or even nanolots, in which every pip has a value of
1 or 10 cents. A microlot is equivalent to controlling $1000; a nanolot would
be $100. In this way, you can trade with a greater confidence and manage
your risk more efficiently by setting your stop losses at the exact level where
they have to be and avoid being stopped out on tight settings because you
can’t afford to risk more.
Depending on your trading style, you will need to open much smaller
lot sizes, especially if you are scaling or averaging down into a losing position, which is not a recommended trading style but can be done with a careful plan. Scaling involves splitting a single position into several parts to
enter at a better price on a trade after a signal given by your system has
proven that the entry and direction can have good probabilities. Always
protect your trading account; the best way to make it grow is to use compounding and make continuous small, consistent profits instead of hoping
that you will hit the jackpot. Remember, FOREX trading is not gambling.
When you use smaller positions, you are limiting your risk and also avoiding huge drawdowns that would limit your available margin and thus your
trading ability.
It is of fundamental importance to determine how much you can
afford to lose because this is what will allow you to choose the most suitable type of leverage. Using leverage judiciously allows you to maximize
your profits and minimize your losses and, above all, to keep trading for a
longer time.

92

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

TRADE EXPECTATIONS
Many traders worry about how many pips they are “leaving on the table.”
Currency rates are constantly moving, giving and taking, even in a small
range. Thus there will always be “pips on the table” for traders to take or lose.
The price moves (on average and based on the slowest markets such as
Asia) about 10 pips every 5 minutes, then reverses, then again, etc., even in
a tight channel, as you might have seen (barely 15- to 20-pip ranges). On a
1-minute chart, you can’t expect much more per trade unless the pair starts
trending (which seldom occurs in Asia) or unless you stay in the trade by
managing your stops and watching the higher time frame (5 minutes). This
is especially true if your entry is conservative.
However, in more volatile market conditions, trades can yield a better
return. Thus maybe you would have to find better trading conditions, such
as the Europe–New York market, where a conservative entry will not hamper evolution of the trade.
There are thousands of pips of the table (and many more if you consider all the pairs that are moving at the same time). Cherish the ones the
market is willing to give you; there are always plenty of opportunities
throughout the day.
I often make light of how badly traders want to be in the market, myself
included. I like to trade. I enjoy the process. I am not a gambler and really
do not like to lose. I focus on good money management, but even that and
my plan sometimes suffer at the hands of boredom. I can be at home sitting
around late at night after everyone has gone to bed, nothing on television,
and the only thing left to do is pull out my laptop, open up my AI software,
and start looking for a trade. I will analyze everything with nothing really
to trade. In such a situation, the next thing that happens is that you start seeing things that aren’t there. You place a trade, and the trade goes against
you. Then you get mad, and you cost-average down or revenge trade. And
then you take a loss. I always say that I can make any chart look good. It is
true. Stare at any currency pair or stock, for that matter, and if you want to
get into the market, you will convince yourself that the trade looks good.
Just remember the rule of 72, and don’t force trades. If things aren’t going
well for you, simply stop trading and take a break. Come back with a clear
head and a positive mental attitude, and then you will be ready to trade
some more.

P

3
A

R

T

TRADING PSYCHOLOGY

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

7

A

P

T

E

R

MASTERING
EMOTIONS
TRADING PSYCHOLOGY
Most traders can spend years trying to find and develop the “right” system
with the expectation that it will yield excellent results and make a lot of
money for them. However, very few would dedicate as much time to delve
deeply in their own psychology as human beings and as traders, thus
neglecting the most important part of the FOREX trading scene: the individual trader.
Having a good system, coupled with a sound money management and
a disciplined trading plan, is fundamental indeed. But it will not work completely unless the trader is able to understand all the psychological barriers
than could affect the decision-making processes and the ulterior reactions
that stem from any positive or negative outcome of the decisions made.
Trading must include all these elements in a balanced way for the trader to
succeed in this business.
What is the first thought that comes to your mind when your trade has
a negative outcome? The first thing you probably blame is “your system.”
You “knew” you shouldn’t have taken the trade; you look for what could
be wrong in your strategy, even if the system effectively gave the trading
signal. Seldom, however, do you look inside your own self to see what
really happened at that moment.

95

96

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

What is a mistake? In your day-to-day life, being wrong or making a
mistake is something bad and signals incompetence. You are conditioned
to strive and fight to always be right, so it is very difficult at the beginning to be able to accept that losses are only a normal part of the trading
environment.
It is said that only a small group of traders is able to achieve the goal of
obtaining consistent and continuous profits. Do they have a special gift that
differentiates them from others? The reason behind their success is persistence. They are not set back because of mistakes. On the contrary, any mistake they make is a lesson to learn and another chance to try again, to do it
better, and in the end, this persistence is what makes all the difference.
You accept the concept that failing to obtain money from any given
trade is a mistake. However, this is not true. You make mistakes when you
don’t follow the guidelines of your trading plan. You make mistakes when
you violate the rules of your system. Here are a few examples of what
would be a trading mistake and what wouldn’t.
First trade: Your system gives the signal to take a trade. You do so,
and the outcome is profitable. You make money with that trade.
You followed the rules. This confirms that the system works and
reinforces your confidence in it, as well as your self-confidence
as a trader. No mistakes were made.
Second trade: You take the signal, but it ends up being a losing trade.
You lose money. You followed the rules. You understand that it is
not possible to win every trade that you make and that it is part of
the whole outcome of your system, a given percentage of winners
and losers. You keep your confidence because you respected the
guidelines of your system. No mistakes were made.
Third trade: You do not take the signal, and the trade would have
been profitable. You do not lose, but neither do you gain any
money. You feel frustrated because you didn’t follow the rules of
your system. You lose self-confidence as a trader. You made a
mistake, which was not taking a trade when the system gave you
the entry signal.
Fourth trade: You do not take the signal, and the trade would have
been a losing one. You are glad that you didn’t lose any money.
This is a risky outcome because you might start thinking that you
are better than your system. Thus, thereafter, you will continue to
have second thoughts on every trade that is signaled by your
system because subconsciously you are certain that your “feeling”

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

97

is more accurate than the system. You start developing
overconfidence, which is fatal to your confidence into the system
and most probably to the final outcome of your trading activities.
You made the same mistake as in the third trade: not taking a
trade when the system gave you the entry signal.
Fifth trade: You don’t have a signal from the system. You don’t take
any trade. You are disciplined and enter trades only as signaled by
the system and the rules. You feel confident as a trader and trust
your system. No mistake was made.
Sixth trade: No signal, but you take a trade, which turns out to be
profitable. You make money. As in the fourth trade, this is very
dangerous and leads to overconfidence because you will start
thinking that you do not need the system at all, that you know
better. You will start trading based on your own thoughts. You
have lost confidence in the system. You made a mistake, which
was taking a trade when the system did not give any entry signal.
Seventh trade: No signal, but you take a trade, and it is a losing one.
You lose money. You start thinking that your strategy is not good.
You will think twice next time before entering a trade if it is not
signaled by the system. You regain confidence in the system. You
made a mistake by taking a trade without a signal from the system.
Mistakes are independent of the results (money gained or money lost).
A huge win can be a huge mistake, and a small loss can be a positive outcome. Mistakes are only related to your ability to respect the rules and follow the discipline of your trading system and plan. The same concept
applies to entry and exit strategies and includes money-management rules,
such as entering a trade with a bigger position size than what your system
has calculated previously based on your plan.

HOW CAN YOU HANDLE MISTAKES?
The basic approach to avoiding mistakes is to have a trading plan, which
will include the system itself, how and when to enter and exit the market,
money management, how much will you risk on every trade, and any additional detail relative to the trade itself. Then a very important element is to
be able to exert a strict discipline and follow the outlined trading plan.
Another important issue is that your trading plan should be in line with
your personality and beliefs. If any of the elements of the plan contradict
your belief system or your action pattern and habits, it will be much harder
to develop enough discipline to follow its guidelines.

98

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

At the moment you created the plan, you were not trading, so there
were no psychological obstacles to developing the plan after a thorough
analysis of all possible situations. In this way, you can be assured that if you
follow your plan to the letter, you will be making the best decision, and this
will help you to get the best results. The system eliminates most worries
and concerns because you only have to follow the plan point by point with
confidence and steadiness.
There are four steps that I find useful in successfully handling the concept of “making mistakes” when trading:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Change your beliefs.
Find out what the mistake was.
Study the consequences of the mistake.
Implement an action so that the mistake doesn’t happen again.

Change Your Beliefs
Your beliefs will determine, to a certain extent, your mental fitness. Your
beliefs represent your attitude in life toward anything that surrounds you.
They also shape your emotions. You agree or disagree with a certain point
of view independent of the right or wrong of it. You trust your view. But
how many of those beliefs are really helping you to see the real picture? To
change your beliefs, you would have to examine what lies at the root of
your belief system, look for evidence that sustains a different point of view,
and investigate further.
Begin to see every mistake as a learning experience and every losing
trade as a lesson that you will have to accept and understand fully instead
of feeling frustration and disappointment. Find out what happened and
why. In this way, you will be able to change the beliefs that are presently
limiting your success.
Find Out What the Mistake Was
Reexamine the situation that led to a loss, and identify the mistake itself.
Find out its nature, why it happened, what the conditions were, and what
you did or didn’t do. Were you following the system? Did you break any
rules of your plan? What were you feeling at that time? You need to search
as deep as you can to find the real motives that caused the mistake.
You also will need to find out about mistakes that had a positive outcome; this can be a little more difficult because you will tend to overlook the
details of a successful trade. Examine every trade you make under the same
parameters. Keep a thorough record of all the circumstances involved so that
you can easily discover if taking that particular trade was a mistake or not.

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

99

Study the Consequences of the Mistake
Make a list of all the consequences of a specific mistake, good and bad.
Also make a list of all the possible lessons that you can learn from what
happened. For example, one of the lessens could be that not following the
system will cause you to lose confidence in it and be out of winning trades
when you should be in or in losing trades when you should be out.
Implement an Action So That the Mistake Doesn’t Happen Again
You need to change your behavior so that the mistake doesn’t happen again.
Every mistake can be changed into a trading success if it is thoroughly
assimilated in your mind and action. In this way, you can commit other mistakes, but not this particular one again. If the mistake comes from your system, redefine and refine the strategy so that you don’t encounter further
problems in following its rules and signals in the future.
As soon as you understand that the result of your trades has nothing to
do with a mistake, you will be opening your mind to hundreds of possibilities, and you will be able to finally comprehend the very nature that lies
behind every apparent mistake. Taking action properly will lead you to a
successful trading career, where you never stop learning. The process will be
slow and probably repetitive, but your attitude when dealing with mistakes
and your constant work at finding out and correcting the situation gradually
will shape your future as a trader and, most important, as a human being.
