
268

The Intelligent Investor

disregarded, as no longer called for, after the investor is sure that
all the problems of stock-exchange firms have been disposed of,
but not before.*

Investment Bankers
The term “investment banker” is applied to a firm that engages
to an important extent in originating, underwriting, and selling
new issues of stocks and bonds. (To underwrite means to guarantee to the issuing corporation, or other issuer, that the security will
be fully sold.) A number of the brokerage houses carry on a certain
amount of underwriting activity. Generally this is confined to participating in underwriting groups formed by leading investment
bankers. There is an additional tendency for brokerage firms to
originate and sponsor a minor amount of new-issue financing, particularly in the form of smaller issues of common stocks when a
bull market is in full swing.
Investment banking is perhaps the most respectable department
of the Wall Street community, because it is here that finance plays
its constructive role of supplying new capital for the expansion of
industry. In fact, much of the theoretical justification for maintaining active stock markets, notwithstanding their frequent speculative excesses, lies in the fact that organized security exchanges
facilitate the sale of new issues of bonds and stocks. If investors or
speculators could not expect to see a ready market for a new security offered them, they might well refuse to buy it.
The relationship between the investment banker and the

* Nearly all brokerage transactions are now conducted electronically, and
securities are no longer physically “delivered.” Thanks to the establishment
of the Securities Investor Protection Corporation, or SIPC, in 1970,
investors are generally assured of recovering their full account values if their
brokerage firm becomes insolvent. SIPC is a government-mandated consortium of brokers; all the members agree to pool their assets to cover losses
incurred by the customers of any firm that becomes insolvent. SIPC’s protection eliminates the need for investors to make payment and take delivery
through a bank intermediary, as Graham urges.

The Investor and His Advisers

269

investor is basically that of the salesman to the prospective buyer.
For many years past the great bulk of the new offerings in dollar
value has consisted of bond issues that were purchased in the main
by financial institutions such as banks and insurance companies. In
this business the security salesmen have been dealing with shrewd
and experienced buyers. Hence any recommendations made by the
investment bankers to these customers have had to pass careful
and skeptical scrutiny. Thus these transactions are almost always
effected on a businesslike footing.
But a different situation obtains in a relationship between the
individual security buyer and the investment banking firms, including the stockbrokers acting as underwriters. Here the purchaser is
frequently inexperienced and seldom shrewd. He is easily influenced by what the salesman tells him, especially in the case of
common-stock issues, since often his unconfessed desire in buying
is chiefly to make a quick profit. The effect of all this is that the
public investor’s protection lies less in his own critical faculty than
in the scruples and ethics of the offering houses.3
It is a tribute to the honesty and competence of the underwriting
firms that they are able to combine fairly well the discordant roles
of adviser and salesman. But it is imprudent for the buyer to trust
himself to the judgment of the seller. In 1959 we stated at this
point: “The bad results of this unsound attitude show themselves
recurrently in the underwriting field and with notable effects in the
sale of new common stock issues during periods of active speculation.” Shortly thereafter this warning proved urgently needed. As
already pointed out, the years 1960–61 and, again, 1968–69 were
marked by an unprecedented outpouring of issues of lowest quality, sold to the public at absurdly high offering prices and in many
cases pushed much higher by heedless speculation and some semimanipulation. A number of the more important Wall Street houses
have participated to some degree in these less than creditable activities, which demonstrates that the familiar combination of greed,
folly, and irresponsibility has not been exorcized from the financial
scene.
The intelligent investor will pay attention to the advice and recommendations received from investment banking houses, especially those known by him to have an excellent reputation; but he
will be sure to bring sound and independent judgment to bear

270

The Intelligent Investor

upon these suggestions—either his own, if he is competent, or that
of some other type of adviser.*

Other Advisers
It is a good old custom, especially in the smaller towns, to consult one’s local banker about investments. A commercial banker
may not be a thoroughgoing expert on security values, but he is
experienced and conservative. He is especially useful to the
unskilled investor, who is often tempted to stray from the straight
and unexciting path of a defensive policy and needs the steadying
influence of a prudent mind. The more alert and aggressive
investor, seeking counsel in the selection of security bargains, will
not ordinarily find the commercial banker’s viewpoint to be especially suited to his own objectives.†
We take a more critical attitude toward the widespread custom
of asking investment advice from relatives or friends. The inquirer
always thinks he has good reason for assuming that the person
consulted has superior knowledge or experience. Our own observation indicates that it is almost as difficult to select satisfactory lay
advisers as it is to select the proper securities unaided. Much bad
advice is given free.

Summary
Investors who are prepared to pay a fee for the management of
their funds may wisely select some well-established and wellrecommended investment-counsel firm. Alternatively, they may
use the investment department of a large trust company or the
supervisory service supplied on a fee basis by a few of the leading
New York Stock Exchange houses. The results to be expected are in
no wise exceptional, but they are commensurate with those of the
average well-informed and cautious investor.

* Those who heeded Graham’s advice would not have been suckered into
buying Internet IPOs in 1999 and 2000.
† This traditional role of bankers has for the most part been supplanted by
accountants, lawyers, or financial planners.

The Investor and His Advisers

271

Most security buyers obtain advice without paying for it specifically. It stands to reason, therefore, that in the majority of cases they
are not entitled to and should not expect better than average results.
They should be wary of all persons, whether customers’ brokers or
security salesmen, who promise spectacular income or profits. This
applies both to the selection of securities and to guidance in the elusive (and perhaps illusive) art of trading in the market.
Defensive investors, as we have defined them, will not ordinarily be equipped to pass independent judgment on the security
recommendations made by their advisers. But they can be
explicit—and even repetitiously so—in stating the kind of securities they want to buy. If they follow our prescription they will confine themselves to high-grade bonds and the common stocks of
leading corporations, preferably those that can be purchased at
individual price levels that are not high in the light of experience
and analysis. The security analyst of any reputable stock-exchange
house can make up a suitable list of such common stocks and can
certify to the investor whether or not the existing price level therefor is a reasonably conservative one as judged by past experience.
The aggressive investor will ordinarily work in active cooperation with his advisers. He will want their recommendations
explained in detail, and he will insist on passing his own judgment
upon them. This means that the investor will gear his expectations
and the character of his security operations to the development of
his own knowledge and experience in the field. Only in the exceptional case, where the integrity and competence of the advisers
have been thoroughly demonstrated, should the investor act upon
the advice of others without understanding and approving the
decision made.
There have always been unprincipled stock salesmen and flyby-night stock brokers, and—as a matter of course—we have
advised our readers to confine their dealings, if possible, to members of the New York Stock Exchange. But we are reluctantly compelled to add the extra-cautious counsel that security deliveries
and payments be made through the intermediary of the investor’s
bank. The distressing Wall Street brokerage-house picture may
have cleared up completely in a few years, but in late 1971 we still
suggest, “Better safe than sorry.”

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 10

I feel grateful to the Milesian wench who, seeing the philosopher Thales continually spending his time in contemplation of
the heavenly vault and always keeping his eyes raised upward,
put something in his way to make him stumble, to warn him
that it would be time to amuse his thoughts with things in the
clouds when he had seen to those at his feet. Indeed she
gave him or her good counsel, to look rather to himself than
to the sky.
—Michel de Montaigne

D O YO U N E E D H E L P ?
In the glory days of the late 1990s, many investors chose to go it alone.
By doing their own research, picking stocks themselves, and placing
their trades through an online broker, these investors bypassed Wall
Street’s costly infrastructure of research, advice, and trading. Unfortunately, many do-it-yourselfers asserted their independence right before
the worst bear market since the Great Depression—making them feel,
in the end, that they were fools for going it alone. That’s not necessarily true, of course; people who delegated every decision to a traditional
stockbroker lost money, too.
But many investors do take comfort from the experience, judgment,
and second opinion that a good financial adviser can provide. Some
investors may need an outsider to show them what rate of return they
need to earn on their investments, or how much extra money they
need to save, in order to meet their financial goals. Others may simply
benefit from having someone else to blame when their investments go
down; that way, instead of beating yourself up in an agony of selfdoubt, you get to criticize someone who typically can defend him or
herself and encourage you at the same time. That may provide just the
psychological boost you need to keep investing steadily at a time
272

Commentary on Chapter 10

273

when other investors’ hearts may fail them. All in all, just as there’s no
reason you can’t manage your own portfolio, so there’s no shame in
seeking professional help in managing it.1
How can you tell if you need a hand? Here are some signals:
Big losses. If your portfolio lost more than 40% of its value from
the beginning of 2000 through the end of 2002, then you did even
worse than the dismal performance of the stock market itself. It hardly
matters whether you blew it by being lazy, reckless, or just unlucky;
after such a giant loss, your portfolio is crying out for help.
Busted budgets. If you perennially struggle to make ends meet,
have no idea where your money goes, find it impossible to save on a
regular schedule, and chronically fail to pay your bills on time, then
your finances are out of control. An adviser can help you get a grip on
your money by designing a comprehensive financial plan that will outline how—and how much—you should spend, borrow, save, and invest.
Chaotic portfolios. All too many investors thought they were diversified in the late 1990s because they owned 39 “different” Internet
stocks, or seven “different” U.S. growth-stock funds. But that’s like
thinking that an all-soprano chorus can handle singing “Old Man
River” better than a soprano soloist can. No matter how many sopranos you add, that chorus will never be able to nail all those low notes
until some baritones join the group. Likewise, if all your holdings go up
and down together, you lack the investing harmony that true diversification brings. A professional “asset-allocation” plan can help.
Major changes. If you’ve become self-employed and need to set
up a retirement plan, your aging parents don’t have their finances in
order, or college for your kids looks unaffordable, an adviser can not
only provide peace of mind but help you make genuine improvements
in the quality of your life. What’s more, a qualified professional can
ensure that you benefit from and comply with the staggering complexity of the tax laws and retirement rules.
T R U S T, T H E N V E R I F Y
Remember that financial con artists thrive by talking you into trusting
them and by talking you out of investigating them. Before you place

1

For a particularly thoughtful discussion of these issues, see Walter Updegrave, “Advice on Advice,” Money, January, 2003, pp. 53–55.

274

Commentary on Chapter 10

your financial future in the hands of an adviser, it’s imperative that you
find someone who not only makes you comfortable but whose honesty
is beyond reproach. As Ronald Reagan used to say, “Trust, then verify.” Start off by thinking of the handful of people you know best and
trust the most. Then ask if they can refer you to an adviser whom they
trust and who, they feel, delivers good value for his fees. A vote of
confidence from someone you admire is a good start.2
Once you have the name of the adviser and his firm, as well as his
specialty—is he a stockbroker? financial planner? accountant? insurance agent?—you can begin your due diligence. Enter the name of the
adviser and his or her firm into an Internet search engine like Google
to see if anything comes up (watch for terms like “fine,” “complaint,”
“lawsuit,” “disciplinary action,” or “suspension”). If the adviser is a
stockbroker or insurance agent, contact the office of your state’s
securities commissioner (a convenient directory of online links is at
www.nasaa.org) to ask whether any disciplinary actions or customer
complaints have been filed against the adviser.3 If you’re considering
an accountant who also functions as a financial adviser, your state’s
accounting regulators (whom you can find through the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy at www.nasba.org) will tell
you whether his or her record is clean.
Financial planners (or their firms) must register with either the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission or securities regulators in the
state where their practice is based. As part of that registration, the
adviser must file a two-part document called Form ADV. You should be
able to view and download it at www.advisorinfo.sec.gov, www.iard.
com, or the website of your state securities regulator. Pay special
attention to the Disclosure Reporting Pages, where the adviser must
disclose any disciplinary actions by regulators. (Because unscrupu-

2

If you’re unable to get a referral from someone you trust, you may be able
to find a fee-only financial planner through www.napfa.org (or www.feeonly.
org), whose members are generally held to high standards of service and
integrity.
3
By itself, a customer complaint is not enough to disqualify an adviser from
your consideration; but a persistent pattern of complaints is. And a disciplinary action by state or Federal regulators usually tells you to find another
adviser. Another source for checking a broker’s record is http://pdpi.nasdr.
com/PDPI.

Commentary on Chapter 10

275

lous advisers have been known to remove those pages before handing an ADV to a prospective client, you should independently obtain
your own complete copy.) It’s a good idea to cross-check a financial
planner’s record at www.cfp-board.org, since some planners who
have been disciplined outside their home state can fall through the regulatory cracks. For more tips on due diligence, see the sidebar below.

WOR D S OF WAR N I N G
The need for due diligence doesn’t stop once you hire an
adviser. Melanie Senter Lubin, securities commissioner for the
State of Maryland, suggests being on guard for words and
phrases that can spell trouble. If your adviser keeps saying
them—or twisting your arm to do anything that makes you
uncomfortable—“then get in touch with the authorities very
quickly,” warns Lubin. Here’s the kind of lingo that should set off
warning bells:
“offshore”
“the opportunity of a
lifetime”
“prime bank”
“This baby’s gonna
move.”
“guaranteed”
“You need to hurry.”
“It’s a sure thing.”
“our proprietary
computer model”
“The smart money is
buying it.”
“options strategy”
“It’s a no-brainer.”
“You can’t afford not to
own it.”
“We can beat the
market.”
“You’ll be sorry if you
don’t . . .”

“exclusive”
“You should focus on
performance, not
fees.”
“Don’t you want to be
rich?”
“can’t lose”
“The upside is huge.”
“There’s no downside.”
“I’m putting my mother
in it.”
“Trust me.”
“commodities trading”
“monthly returns”
“active asset-allocation
strategy”
“We can cap your
downside.”
“No one else knows how
to do this.”

276

Commentary on Chapter 10

G E T T I N G TO K N OW YO U
A leading financial-planning newsletter recently canvassed dozens of
advisers to get their thoughts on how you should go about interviewing them.4 In screening an adviser, your goals should be to:
•
•
•

determine whether he or she cares about helping clients, or just
goes through the motions
establish whether he or she understands the fundamental principles of investing as they are outlined in this book
assess whether he or she is sufficiently educated, trained, and
experienced to help you.

Here are some of the questions that prominent financial planners
recommended any prospective client should ask:
Why are you in this business? What is the mission statement of your
firm? Besides your alarm clock, what makes you get up in the morning?
What is your investing philosophy? Do you use stocks or mutual
funds? Do you use technical analysis? Do you use market timing? (A
“yes” to either of the last two questions is a “no” signal to you.)
Do you focus solely on asset management, or do you also advise
on taxes, estate and retirement planning, budgeting and debt management, and insurance? How do your education, experience, and credentials qualify you to give those kinds of financial advice? 5
What needs do your clients typically have in common? How can
you help me achieve my goals? How will you track and report my
progress? Do you provide a checklist that I can use to monitor the
implementation of any financial plan we develop?

4

Robert Veres, editor and publisher of the Inside Information newsletter,
generously shared these responses for this book. Other checklists of questions can be found at www.cfp-board.org and www.napfa.org.
5
Credentials like the CFA, CFP, or CPA tell you that the adviser has taken
and passed a rigorous course of study. (Most of the other “alphabet soup”
of credentials brandished by financial planners, including the “CFM” or the
“CMFC,” signify very little.) More important, by contacting the organization
that awards the credential, you can verify his record and check that he has
not been disciplined for violations of rules or ethics.

Commentary on Chapter 10

277

How do you choose investments? What investing approach do you
believe is most successful, and what evidence can you show me that
you have achieved that kind of success for your clients? What do you
do when an investment performs poorly for an entire year? (Any
adviser who answers “sell” is not worth hiring.)
Do you, when recommending investments, accept any form of compensation from any third party? Why or why not? Under which circumstances? How much, in actual dollars, do you estimate I would pay for
your services the first year? What would make that number go up or
down over time? (If fees will consume more than 1% of your assets
annually, you should probably shop for another adviser.6 )
How many clients do you have, and how often do you communicate
with them? What has been your proudest achievement for a client?
What characteristics do your favorite clients share? What’s the worst
experience you’ve had with a client, and how did you resolve it? What
determines whether a client speaks to you or to your support staff?
How long do clients typically stay with you?
Can I see a sample account statement? (If you can’t understand it,
ask the adviser to explain it. If you can’t understand his explanation,
he’s not right for you.)
Do you consider yourself financially successful? Why? How do you
define financial success?
How high an average annual return do you think is feasible on my
investments? (Anything over 8% to10% is unrealistic.)
Will you provide me with your résumé, your Form ADV, and at least
three references? (If the adviser or his firm is required to file an ADV,
and he will not provide you a copy, get up and leave—and keep one
hand on your wallet as you go.)
Have you ever had a formal complaint filed against you? Why did
the last client who fired you do so?

6

If you have less than $100,000 to invest, you may not be able to find a
financial adviser who will take your account. In that case, buy a diversified
basket of low-cost index funds, follow the behavioral advice throughout this
book, and your portfolio should eventually grow to the level at which you can
afford an adviser.

278

Commentary on Chapter 10

D E F E AT I N G YO U R O W N W O R S T E N E M Y
Finally, bear in mind that great financial advisers do not grow on trees.
Often, the best already have as many clients as they can handle—and
may be willing to take you on only if you seem like a good match. So
they will ask you some tough questions as well, which might include:
Why do you feel you need a financial adviser?
What are your long-term goals?
What has been your greatest frustration in dealing with other advisers (including yourself)?
Do you have a budget? Do you live within your means? What percentage of your assets do you spend each year?
When we look back a year from now, what will I need to have
accomplished in order for you to be happy with your progress?
How do you handle conflicts or disagreements?
How did you respond emotionally to the bear market that began in
2000?
What are your worst financial fears? Your greatest financial hopes?
What rate of return on your investments do you consider reasonable? (Base your answer on Chapter 3.)
An adviser who doesn’t ask questions like these—and who does
not show enough interest in you to sense intuitively what other questions you consider to be the right ones—is not a good fit.
Above all else, you should trust your adviser enough to permit him
or her to protect you from your worst enemy—yourself. “You hire an
adviser,” explains commentator Nick Murray, “not to manage money
but to manage you.”
“If the adviser is a line of defense between you and your worst
impulsive tendencies,” says financial-planning analyst Robert Veres,
“then he or she should have systems in place that will help the two of
you control them.” Among those systems:
•
•
•
