
4

Is the Market Efficient?

was firmly in place, molded by my experience of four prior

decades. It is not coincidence that with only one exception all of
both the wise and the foolish actions I have mentioned as examples that
helped form the background of this philosophy were incidents that
occurred during these four prior decades. This does not mean that I
have made no mistakes in the 1970's. Unfortunately, it seems that no
matter how much I try, sometimes I must stub my toe more than once
in the same way before I truly learn. However, in the examples I have
used I usually took the first instance when a particular type of event
happens to illustrate my point, which explains why all but one of the
examples I used occurred during these earlier periods.

It might be helpful to notice the striking parallels in each of these
past ten-year periods. With the possible exception of the 1960's, there
has not been a single decade in which there was not some period of
time when the prevailing view was that external influences were so
great and so much beyond the control of individual corporate manage-
ments that even the wisest common stock investments were foolhardy
and perhaps not for the prudent. In the 1930s there were years when
this view, influenced by the Great Depression, was at its most extreme,
but perhaps not any more than the fear of what the German war
machine and World War IT might do in the 1940’s, or the certainty that
another major depression would hit in the 1950's, or fear of inflation,
hostile government actions, etc., in the 1970's. Yet every one of these
periods created investment opportunities that seemed almost incredible

B: the coming of the 1970's nearly all of my investment philosophy


Is the Market Efficient? 267

with all the advantages of hindsight. In each of these five decades there
were not a few, but many common stock opportunities that ten years
later yielded profits running to many hundreds of percent for those who
had bought and stayed with the shares. In some instances profits ran well
into the thousands of percent. Again in every one of these five decades
some stocks which were the speculative darlings of the moment were to
prove the most dangerous kind of trap for those who blindly followed
the crowd rather than those who really knew what they were doing. All
of these ten-year periods essentially resembled the others in that the
greatest opportunities came from finding situations that were extreme-
ly attractive but that were undervalued because at that particular
moment the financial community had significantly misjudged the situ-
ation. As I look back on the various forces that buffeted the securities
market over this fifty-year period and at the great waves of public opti-
musm and pessimism that succeeded each other over this time span, the
old French proverb, “Plus ca change, plus c’est la meme chose” (the more
things change, the more they remain the same), comes to mind. I have
not the slightest doubt that as we enter the emerging decade of
the 1980's, with all the problems and the prospects that it now offers,
the sare will continue to hold true.

THE FALLACY OF THE EFFICIENT MARKET

In the last few years, too much attention has been paid to a concept that
I believe is quite fallacious. I refer to the notion that the market is per-
fectly efficient. Like other false beliefs in other periods, a contrary view
may open up opportunities for the discerning.

For those unfamiliar with “efficient” market theory, the adjective
“efficient” does not refer to the obvious mechanical efficiency of the
market.A potential buyer or seller can get his order to the market where
a transaction can be executed very effectively within a matter of a cou-
ple of minutes. Neither does “efficiency” refer to the delicate adjustment
mechanism which causes stock prices to move up or down by fractions
of a point in response to modest changes in the relative pressure of buy-
ers and sellers. Rather, this concept holds that at any one time the mar-
ket “efficient” prices are assumed to reflect fully and realistically all that
is known about the company. Unless someone has some significant,
illicit inside information, there is no way genuine bargains can be found,


268 DEVELOPING AS INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

since the favorable influences that make a potential buyer believe that
an attractive situation exists are already reflected in the price of stock!

If the market was as efficient as it has become. fashionable to believe,
and if important opportunities to buy or significant reasons to sell were
not constantly occurring, stock réturns should not subsequently have
the huge variations that they do. By variation, I am not referring to
changes in prices for the market as a whole, but rather the dispersion of
relative price changes of one stock against another. If the market is effi-
cient in prospect, then the nexus of analysis that leads to this efficiency
must be collectively poor.

Efficient market theory grew out of the academic School of Random
Walkers. These people found that it was difficult to identify technical trad-
ing strategies that worked well enough after transactions costs to provide
an attractive profit relative to the risks taken. I don’t disagree with this. As
you have seen, I believe that it is very, very tough to make money with in
and out trading based on short-term market forecasts. Perhaps the market
is efficient in this narrow sense of the word.

Most of us are or should be investors, not traders. We should be
seeking investment opportunities with unusual prospects over the long
run and avoiding investment opportunities with poorer prospects. This
has always been the central tenet of my approach to investments in any
case. I do not believe that prices are efficient for the diligent, knowl-
edgeable, long-term investor.

Directly applicable to this is an experience I had in 1961. In the fall
of that ycar, as in the spring of 1963, I undertook the stimulating duty
of substituting for the regular finance professor in teaching the senior
course of investments at Stanford University’s Graduate School of Busi-
ness. The concept of the “efficient” market was not to see the light of
day for many years to come and had nothing to do with my motivation
in the exercise I am about to describe. Rather, 1 wanted to show these
students in a way they would never forget that the fluctuations of the
market as a whole were insignificant compared to the differences
between the changes in price of some stocks in relation to others.

I divided the class into two groups. The first group took the alpha-
betical list of stocks on the New York Stock Exchange, starting with the
letter A; the second group, those starting with the letter T. Every stock
was included in alphabetical order (except preferreds and utilities, which
I consider to be a different breed of cats). Each student was assigned four
stocks. Each student looked up the closing price as of the last day of


Is the Market Efficient? 269

business of 1956, adjusted the stock dividends and stock splits (rights
were ignored as not having sufficient impact to be worthy of the addi-
tional calculations), and compared this price with the price as of Friday,
October 13th (Gf nothing else, a colorful closing date!). The percentage
increase or decrease that occurred ‘in each stock over this period of
almost five years was noted. The Dow Jones averages rose from 499 to
703, or by 41 percent in this period. Altogether, there were 140 stocks
in this sample. The results are displayed in the following table:

Percentage Capital No. of Stocks Percentage of

Gain or Loss in Group Total Group
200% to 1020% gain 15 stocks 11%
100% to 199% gain 18 stocks 13%
50% to 99% gain 14 stocks 10%
25% to 49% gain 21 stocks 15%
1% to 24% gain 31 stocks 22%
Unchanged 3 stocks 2%
1% to 49% loss 32 stocks 23%
50% to 74% lass 6 stocks A%
140 stocks 100%

These data are quite insightful. In a period when the Dow Jones
averages rose 41 percent, 38 stocks, or 27 percent of the total, showed a
capital loss. Six of them, or 4 percent of the total, recorded a loss of over
50 percent of their total value. In contrast, roughly one quarter of the
stocks realized capital gains that would have been considered spectacular.

To drive the point home, I noted that ifa person invested $10,000
in equal amounts in the five best stocks on this list, at the outset of this
four and three-quarter year period, his capital would now be worth
$70,260. On the other hand, if he had invested the $10,000 in the five
worst stocks, his capital would have shrunk to $3,180. These extreme
results were most unlikely. It would take luck, either good or bad, as well
as skill, to hit either of these extremes. It would not be so implausible
for a person with real investment judgment to have picked five out of
the ten best stocks for his $10,000 investment, in which case his net
worth on Friday the 13th would have been $52,070. Similarly, some
investors consistently select stocks for the wrong reasons and manage to
pick lemons. For them selecting five out of the ten poorest in performance


270 DEVELOPING AS INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

is also not an entirely unrealistic expectation of results. In that case, the
$10,000 investment would have shrunk to $4,270. On the basis of this
comparison, there might be, in less than five years, a difference of
$48,000 between a wise and an unwise investment program.

A year and a half later, when I also taught this same course, I repeat-
ed the exact same exercise, with the exception that instead of using the
letters A and T, I selected two different letters in the alphabet from
which to form the sample of stocks. Again, over a five-year time frame,
but with a different starting and a different closing date, the degree of
variation was almost exactly the same.

Looking back on most markets of five-year duration, I believe that
one can find stock performance results that are about as disparate. Some
of this dispersion may come as the result of surprises—important new
information about a stock’s prospects that could not be reasonably fore-
seen at the outset of the period. Most of the differences, however, can
be anticipated at least roughly both in terms of direction and general
magnitude of gains and losses relative to the market.

THE RAYCHEM CORPORATION

In view of this kind of evidence, it is hard for me to see how anyone can
consider the stock market efficient, again using the word “efficient” as it is
used by the proponents of this theory. But to belabor the point further, let
me take a stock market situation of just a very few years ago. In the early
years of the 1970’, the shares of the Raychem Corporation had consider-
able prestige in the market place and were accordingly selling at a relative-
ly high price-earnings ratio. Some of the reasons warranting this prestige
may be perceived by some comments made by the company’s Executive
Vice President, Robert M. Halperin. In outlining what he called the four
cardinal points to Raychem’s operating philosophy, he stated:

1. Raychem will not do anything technically simple (i.c., some-
thing that would be easy for potential competitors to copy).

2. Raychem won't do anything unless it can be vertically integrat-
ed; that is, Raychem must conceive the product, manufacture it,
and sell it to the customer.

3. Raychem won't do anything unless there is a substantial oppor-
tunity for real proprietary protection, which generally means


Is the Market Efficient? 271

patent protection. Unless this occurs, research and development
energies will not be employed on a project, even though other-
wise it might fit into Raychem’s skills.

4. Raychem will only go into new products when it believes it can
become the market leader in whatever niche, sometimes smaller,
sometimes larger, that product attempts to capture.

By the mid-1970's, awareness of these unusual strengths was sufh-
ciently prevalent among those who controlled large institutional funds
so that sizable blocks of shares had been taken out of the market by peo-
ple who believed that Raychem was a situation of unusual competitive
strength and attractiveness. However, it was another aspect of this com-
pany that gave Raychem its greatest appeal to these holders and was
probably the cause of the high price-earnings ratio at which it was then
selling. Many considered that Raychem, which was spending an above
average percentage of sales on new project development, had perfected
a research organization capable of producing an important enough
stream of new products so that the company could be depended on to
show an uninterrupted upward trend in sales and profits. These research
products had quite justifiably a special appeal to the financial comumu-
nity because many of the newer ones only indirectly competed with
older products of other companies. Primarily, the new products enabled
high-priced labor to do the same job in considerably less time than had
previously been required. There were enough savings offered to the ulti-
mate customer of these products to justify a price which should afford
Raychem a pleasing profit margin. All this caused the stock toward the
end of 1975 to reach a high of over $42’ (price adjusted for subsequent
stock splits)—~-a level about 25 times the estimated earnings for the
fiscal year ending June 30, 1976.

RAYCHEM, DASHED EXPECTATIONS,
AND THE CRASH

Toward the close of the June 30, 1976, fiscal year, Raychem was hit by
two hammer blows, which were to play havoc with the price of the
stock and with the company’s reputation in the financial community.
The financial community had become very excited about a proprietary


272 DEVELOPING AS INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

polymer, Stilan, which enjoyed unique advantages over other com-
pounds used by the airplane industry for coating wire and which was
then in the final research stages. Furthermore, the polymer was to be the
first product in which Raychem would go basic, that is, make the orig-
inal chemicals in its own plant rather than buying raw materials from
others and compounding them. Because of the appeal of the product,
Raychem had allocated by a considerable margin more funds to this
research product than to any other in its history. The financial commu-
nity assumed this product was already on its way to success, and after
passing through the usual “learning curve” experienced by all new
products it would become highly profitable.

Actually, quite the opposite was occurring. In the words of the
Raychem management, Stilan was “a scientific success but a commer-
cial failure.” Improved products of an able competitor, while technical-
ly not as desirable as Stilan, proved adequate for the job and were far
cheaper. Raychem management recognized this. In the course of a rel-
atively few weeks, management reached the painful decision to abandon
the product and write off the heavy investments made in it. The result-
ing charge to earnings for that fiscal year was some $9.3 million. This
charge-off caused earnings, exclusive of some offsetting special gains, to
drop to $.08 a share from $7.95 the previous fiscal year.

The financial community was as much upset by the erosion of the
great confidence in the company’s research ability as by the precipitous
drop in earnings. Largely ignored was the basic rule that some new
product developments are bound to fail in all companies. This is inher-
ent in all industrial research activity and in a well-run company is far
more than offset in the long run by other successful new products. It
may have been just bad luck that the particular project on which the
most money had been spent had been the one to fail, At any rate, the
effect on the stock price was dramatic. By the fourth quarter of 1976,
the stock had dropped to a low of approximately $14% (again adjusted
for subsequent splits amounting to six to one) or to approximately one-
third its former high. Of course, only a tiny amount of stock could be
bought or sold at the low point for the year. Of greater impact, the stock
was available at prices only moderately above this low level for months
thereafter.

Another development also affected the profits of the company at
this moment and contributed to Raychcm’s fall from favor. One of the
most difficult tasks for those responsible for the success of any growing


Is the Market Efficient? 273

company is to change the management structure appropriately as the
company grows to allow for the difference between what is needed for
proper control of small companies and optimum control of big compa-
nies. Until the end of the 1976 fiscal year, Raychem management had
been set up along divisional lines based largely on manufacturing tech-
niques; that is, on the basis of the products produced. This worked well
when the company was smaller, but was not conducive to serving the
customer most efficiently as the company was growing. Therefore, at
about the end of the 1975 fiscal year, top Raychem management started
working on a “big company” management concept. The firm restruc-
tured the divisions by the industry served rather than by the physical and
chemical composition of the products being manufactured. The target
date to make the change was set at the end of the 1976 fiscal year. This
was done at a time when there was not the least thought within the
management that this date would coincide with the time of the huge
write-off for the abandonment of Stilan.

Everyone in Raychem knew that when the organizational change
was to occur there would be at least one quarter and probably a mini-
mum of two of substantially reduced earnings. While making these
changes caused almost no change in the individuals on the Raychem
management payroll, so many people now had different superiors, dif-
ferent subordinates, and different co-workers with whom they had to
interface their activities that a time of inefficiency and adjustment was
bound to occur until Raychem employees learned how best to coordi-
nate their work with the new faces with whom they were now dealing.
Perhaps no stronger indication could have existed to justify long-range
confidence in this company or to indicate that management was not
concerned with short-term results than its decision to go ahead with
this project as planned rather than to postpone what was bound to be a
second blow to Raychem’s current earnings.

Actually, this significant change worked with considerably less diffi-
culty than had been anticipated. As expected, the first-quarter earnings of
the new fiscal year were much lower than would have been the case if the
change had not been made. However, the change was working so well
that as the second quarter progressed, the short-term costs of what had
been done had largely been eliminated. Fundamentally these develop-
ments should have been considered bullish by analysts. Raychem was now
in a position to handle growth properly in a way that could not have been
done before. It had successfully hurdled a barrier of the type that is most


274 DEVELOPING AS INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

apt to dull the luster of otherwise attractive growth companies. By and
large, the financial community did not seem to recognize this, however,
and instead the temporary further shrinkage of earnings was just one
more factor holding the stock at the low levels to which it had fallen.

Making these price levels even more attractive to potential investors
was another influence that I have seen happen in other companies
shoruy after they had abandoned a major research project that had
proved unsuccessful. One financial effect of the abandonment of Stilan
was that a sizable amount of money that had heretofore been devoted
to that project was now free to be allocated elsewhere. Even more
important, it had similarly freed the time of key research people for
other endeavors. Within a year or two much like a field of flowers start-
ing to bloom when rain follows drought, the company began to enjoy
what was possibly a greater number of attractive research projects in
relation to its size than had ever before been experienced.

RAYCHEM AND THE EFFICIENT MARKET

Now what has Raychem’s situation to do with this theory of an “effi-
cient market” that has recently gained such a following in certain
financial quarters? According to that theory, stocks automatically and
instantly adjust to whatever is known about a company, so that only
those who might possess illicit “inside information” that is not known
to others could benefit from what might lie ahead for a particular
stock. In this instance, at the drop of a hat, the Raychem management
would and did explain to anyone interested all the facts I have just cited
and explained how temporary they believed was the period of poor
earnings.

Actually, well after all this had happened and when profits were
climbing to a new all-time high level, the Raychem management went
even further. On January 26, 1978, they held a long one-day meeting
at their headquarters which I had the privilege of attending. Raychem
management invited to this meeting the representatives of all institu-
tions, brokerage houses, and investment advisors who either had any
interest in Raychem or they thought might have. At this meeting
the ten most senior executives of Raychem explained with what |
believe was extreme frankness and in detail, such as | have only occa-
sionally seen at similar meetings of other companies, the prospects, the


Is the Market Efficient? 275

problems, and the current status of Raychem matters under their juris-
diction.

In the year or two following this meeting, Raychem’s earnings
growth developed exactly as might have been inferred from what was
said there. During that period, the stock was to much more than dou-
ble from the price of $23'4 at which it was selling that day. Yet in the
weeks immediately following this mecting, there was no particular
effect on the stock whatsoever. Some of those present were obviously
impressed by the picture being presented. Too many, however, were still
under the influence of the double shock that they had experienced a
year or two before. They obviously mistrusted what was being told them
then. So much for the theory of an efficient market.

What kind of conclusion does the investor or the investment pro-
fessional reach from experiences like Raychem? By and large, those
who have accepted and been influenced by this theory of the “efficient
market” fall into two groups. One is students, who have had a minimum
of practical experience. The other, strangely enough, seems to be many
managers of large institutional funds. The individual private investor, by
and large, has paid relatively little attention to this theory.
