
162

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

trend. Since price patterns often represent the structural end of a significant trend, it seems that
it is most important to understand some type of relative measure that manifests the degree of
buying and selling at critical harmonic areas. Although many technical indicators were
advantageous in my research, within the framework of this approach, certain measures offered
more relevant and reliable predictive information. From a harmonic pattern perspective, the
structure is as important as where it completes relative to its prior price history. Therefore, the
importance of the relative structural alignment led me to the Relative Strength Index (RSI),
which provided that measure.
The integration of other technical studies, in particular RSI, was a significant evolution in my
research. As a dedicated student of the financial markets, I have always believed it is important
to embrace a gamut of market strategies to thoroughly understand market price action.
Considering a variety of technical methods can provide greater confirmation of potential price
action.
In fact, H. M. Gartley in his infamous book Profits in the Stock Market, emphasized such
multiple confirmation strategies of technical methods, stating:
“Patterns must be used in conjunction with other technical working
tools. The study of tops and bottoms, to be of greatest value, must
be combined, and used in conjunction with the study of other
working tools, such as Trend Lines, Moving Averages, Gaps, and
particularly Volume, as well as Dow Theory and the general market
phenomena which we call ‘Breadth-of-the-Market’ studies.”
(Profits in the Stock Market [Pomeroy, WA: Lambert-Gann Publishing,
1932], 221).

The evolution of the Harmonic Trading approach has led to a more integrative perspective
that is congruent with Gartley’s philosophy. Patterns—in this case, harmonic patterns—must be
used in conjunction with other technical working tools. Of the vast array of indicators and
oscillators available that I have researched, RSI represents the most effective measure in
relation to the completion of harmonic patterns.
Although when talking about Relative Strength, sometimes people confuse the subject as
relative to another index, such as the S&P 500. In this case, I’m talking about the Relative
Strength measure that calculates the internal change of price movement, usually comparing the
current price history with that of an average of a certain number of periods prior. (Typically, a
14-period average is calculated.) The readings of RSI measurements exhibit a number of
unique technical traits in their own merit. For example, patterns that complete at extreme RSI
readings can help to identify those special situations where the impending reversal signals the
end of an extended trend. In many instances, I have noticed RSI readings that have formed
similar complex structures in setups that possessed distinct price patterns. Even more
compelling were situations where a Bearish Gartley, for instance, would develop on the price
chart, while an indicator reading was showing a Bearish Three Drives structure. Both the price
and the indicator reading structures completed at the same point within their own relative chart,

Chapter 6 RSI BAMM

163

serving to confirm the reversal. These are a few of the many distinct relationships that help to
decipher price action within the context of harmonic price patterns. Furthermore, these unique
phenomena can pinpoint the most critical turning points in the markets. Regardless of these
obvious relationships, I was still looking for those exact situations where the dynamics of
harmonic price patterns and technical indicators identified unique Potential Reversal
Zones (PRZ).

Relative Strength Index (RSI)
The RSI was discovered by Welles Wilder in the 1970s. Wilder introduced RSI in his book New
Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. In addition to the RSI technique, he introduced several
other indicator and oscillator studies, including the Directional Movement Index (DMI). He
presented a variety of unprecedented technical measurement strategies, but RSI is among his
finest contributions to the field of Technical Analysis. Although it is properly categorized as a
momentum oscillator, RSI is typically considered one of the more popular indicator studies
available today.
The RSI was devised by Wilder as a means of calculating the change in momentum of price
movement as it relates to a predetermined time period. The name Relative Strength Index is
slightly misleading, as the RSI does not compare the relative strength of two markets, but
rather the internal strength of the price action of an individual issue.
RSI is a price-following oscillator that ranges between 0 and 100. The RSI typically peaks
above 70 and bottoms below 30, and it usually forms these readings before the underlying
price chart. The RSI equation is derived by calculating the ratio of the average of X (number)
price bars (days) day’s closes up divided by the average of X (number) price bars (days) day’s
closes down. Although “X” can be any value, Wilder employed a 14-period factor in his
computation. The equation is calculated as follows:
RSI = 100 – (100 / (1+RS))
Average of 14 (X) day’s closes UP
RS = Average of 14 (X) day’s closes DOWN

This equation quantifies the relative momentum of the current price action with that of 14 (X)
periods ago. The extreme RSI readings provide excellent measures to the degree that the price
action has persisted and the continued strength or momentum of the predominant trend. The
true value of these readings occurs when the price and the indicator react at extreme areas.
When the RSI tests an extreme overbought or oversold area at critical harmonic levels of
support or resistance, the price action can reveal a great deal regarding the potential state of
the predominant trend.

164

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Divergence
The benefit of the RSI is most advantageous when compared to clear areas of support and
resistance. The key technical event occurs when the price and the RSI diverge. In fact, in his
book New Concepts, Wilder emphasized the importance of divergence:
“Although divergence does not occur at every turning point, it does
occur at most significant turning points. When divergence begins
to show up after a good directional move, this is a very strong
indication that a turning point is near. Divergence is the single
most indicative characteristic of the Relative Strength Index.”
(New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems [Greensboro, NC: Trend
Research, 1978], 70).

I agree with Wilder. In fact, I believe that the RSI is the most reliable technical reading to
reveal such divergence as it directly relates to price. Furthermore, the technical phenomenon of
RSI divergence is particularly revealing when related to the completion of harmonic patterns.
As my research continued to explore this technical phenomenon further, I soon realized that
the various RSI readings could be differentiated in much the same manner as harmonic
patterns. I was able to define different types of extreme RSI readings and categorize these
structures accordingly. This experimentation yielded significant technical information and helped
to validate harmonic setups immensely.

RSI + BAMM = RSI BAMM
When applied to indicator readings, the BAMM concept differentiated various structures,
especially in the extreme overbought and oversold RSI zones. The differentiated RSI readings
at the completion of distinct harmonic patterns confirmed reversals and the overall validity of
the setup in an unprecedented manner.
Although the BAMM principles could be applied to many technical studies, Relative Strength
readings formed more distinct structures than any other indicator and provided the most
reliable information in these divergent situations. As I continued to investigate the effectiveness
of this strategy, one divergent technical situation, in particular, that I discovered worked
unbelievably well within the Harmonic Trading approach.

RSI BAMM
The RSI BAMM is a method that examines the state of the indicator before considering the
structure of the price action. As is the case with harmonic patterns, the RSI BAMM requires
specific conditions to be met to validate a trade opportunity. Regardless of the extent of any

Chapter 6 RSI BAMM

165

price move or the structure that it forms, the RSI BAMM requires that a mandatory reading in
the extreme overbought or oversold area occur to initiate the setup.
This condition creates an inherent problem within the Harmonic Trading approach, since the
setup is dependent upon the RSI reading and not the price structure. For example, there are
many instances where an extended predominant trend will seem to go on forever. Price action
that enjoys a rally for quite some time may seem to never stop. Frequently, such wellestablished trends trade quite nicely within an upward sloping range and seem to be invincible.
These situations can lull a trader into a complacent mindset, believing that the rally will last
forever. However, the RSI reading can paint a different picture by assessing the relative extent
of the price action. In other words, the RSI reading can indicate the degree of buying that has
occurred. Although the RSI is an early signal, an extreme reading can serve as a potential
warning sign of an impending reversal. When compared to the price action, clear areas of
divergence can be defined.
I would like to take a moment and comment on a common misconception regarding
indicators as a stand-alone technique for trading the markets. Many critics in the past have
argued against the effectiveness of the RSI to be a reliable market signal. Some have argued
that RSI does not possess credible technical information due to the fact that price action does
not follow any consistent and predictable pattern following an extreme reading. Such universal
application is not realistic, as anyone who really understands Technical Analysis knows this is
not the proper analysis of such measures. All methods must be compared, contrasted, and
analyzed with other approaches to determine the aggregate information provided from the price
action. Whether to use trend lines, Stochastics, Candlestick reversal patterns, or any other
method, it is imperative to have confirmation of multiple approaches to yield the most pertinent
information for the best technical decision regarding any trade. In fact, in his book New
Concepts, Wilder emphasized the importance of divergence:
“The Relative Strength Index, used in conjunction with a bar chart,
can provide a new dimension of interpretation for the chart reader.
No single tool, method, or system is going to produce the right
answers 100% of the time. A successful trader utilizes several
different kinds of input into his decisions.”
(New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems [Greensboro, NC: Trend
Research, 1978], 70).

166

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

A Unique Technical Situation
Although the RSI BAMM involves many steps to validate this technical phenomenon and it
might seem complex first, it is important to understand that this is truly a unique technical
situation. The RSI BAMM is an advanced divergent condition where the RSI readings and
harmonic pattern completions define extremely accurate technical levels and decipher the
predominant trend in an unprecedented fashion. Although this advanced application of the
basic tool that Welles Wilder developed decades ago does not appear in every market all of
the time, when these conditions are present, the RSI BAMM is extremely accurate in defining
precise levels of harmonic support and resistance. Furthermore, this technique quantifies the
“indicative characteristic” of divergence in a manner that I believe even Wilder would find
interesting.
I have accumulated a great deal of research on the various applications of the RSI. Starting
with Wilder’s original work and examining a variety of other material, I believe that the RSI
BAMM is an unprecedented application of this technical tool. Although many of the strategies
do include some of the simple concepts involved within the Wilder’s original application—such
as divergence, confirmation, and basic measurement techniques—the advanced application of
the RSI with harmonic patterns represents uncharted territory for the Harmonic Trading
approach, and for that matter, Technical Analysis.
The simple integration of the RSI represents a dramatic shift in the Harmonic Trading
approach. Although the RSI BAMM may seem to stray from the principles of this methodology,
the integration of the RSI adheres to the basic tenets of the Harmonic Trading approach.
Fibonacci measurement techniques and pattern recognition strategies are still the primary
basis that differentiate each situation and define the potential opportunity. I suggest to
thoroughly study all aspects of this new strategy before attempting to implement it into real
trading situations. Although the RSI BAMM requires many technical conditions to be met,
pattern completions within this framework provide the significant trade signals and accurate
evidence of the probable future price action well in advance.

Chapter 6 RSI BAMM

167

Bullish RSI BAMM
The Bullish RSI BAMM begins with a complex reading in an oversold area under the 30 limit.
Referring to the RSI BAMM illustration in Figure 6.1, the entire process requires several
elements to validate this specific scenario. In much the same manner that the initial rules of
harmonic pattern identification and differentiation may have seemed overwhelming, the RSI
BAMM rules—albeit a bit complex upon first study—provide a coherent and comprehensive
method for accurately measuring potential areas of divergence.

34

A

32
30
28
26
24

X

22

1.13-1.6

18

B

20

Relative Strength (RSI)
Overbought (70)
RSI BAMM
Trigger Bar

RSI BAMM
Confirmation Bar

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Oversold (30)

Figure 6.1

Obviously, the ideal situation does not occur every time. It is important to remember that the
real application of the RSI BAMM principles requires a degree of flexibility. However, the ideal
model does present all of the critical elements that clearly explain the effectiveness of this
strategy. Furthermore, it is essential to maintain the patience to execute only those trades that
possess all required elements that validate a trade signal based upon the rules of the Bullish
RSI BAMM setup.
Despite its initial complexity, the RSI BAMM strategy in combination with harmonic patterns
effectively validates PRZs and offers an enhanced level of precision and accuracy.

168

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Chevron-Texaco (CVX): Daily
Bullish RSI BAMM
The example of Chevron-Texaco in Figure 6.2 shows an excellent RSI BAMM setup on the
daily chart. Figure 6.2 does not display all of the critical details of the RSI BAMM; rather, the
Chevron-Texaco chart manifests all of the basic elements to validate this setup.

1.13

RSI BAMM
Trigger Bar

RSI BAMM
Confirmation Point

Figure 6.2

This example of Chevron Texaco shows a distinct RSI BAMM setup. The initial complex RSI
formation established the beginning of the entire process, and the indicator completed the
necessary steps to validate the setup. Although I will outline the advanced concepts later in this
chapter, it is important to review this chart carefully because it truly exemplifies all of the ideal
elements of the RSI BAMM.

Chapter 6 RSI BAMM

169

Step 1: Initial RSI Test of Extreme Bullish Limit
In the Bullish RSI BAMM scenario, the first step is to identify price action that possesses an
RSI reading in the extreme oversold zone below 30. As I mentioned previously, it is important to
note that the 30 level for the oversold limit, as well as the 70 level to define the overbought
area, were first outlined by Welles Wilder in his book New Concepts and Trading Systems. In
addition, a 14-period average is calculated from his approach. Although this system utilizes the
standard RSI measures, the indicator can be refined to utilize other levels and time periods to
define the extreme Relative Strength levels. I leave that to you to research. I have experimented
with other periods, and these results have yielded excellent confirmation signals. In general, the
standard parameters above a 70 reading as overbought and below the 30 limit as oversold with
a 14-period average serve as the best guidelines for the entire RSI BAMM approach. Besides,
who am I to disagree with Welles Wilder?

Step 2: Complete a Bullish W-Type Complex RSI
Structure
One of the reasons why the RSI BAMM is so effective is because it requires that the entire
structure of the indicator form below the oversold 30 level before a trade signal can be
generated. This is advantageous because the RSI structure can be distinguished while still
allowing for enough time for the price action to set up correctly to validate the entire technique.
The initial focus should be on the formation of the indicator reading in the entire extreme range
rather than looking for a specific numeric level.
This is a mandatory requirement of the RSI BAMM, where all points of the W-type formation
must take place below the 30 level. It is important to remember that this is an early signal, and
the price action quite frequently will continue in the predominant downtrend after the W-type
structure has formed. But, this marks the initial stage of the divergence setup, where the price
action continues lower, while the RSI stabilizes and begins to move higher. However, due to the
variety of indicator structures that form in the oversold area, it is important to differentiate the
two types that form at RSI extreme levels.

Two Types of Bullish Indicator Structures
There are two general classes of W-type indicator structures that test the extreme oversold
level—impulsive and complex. Most bullish indicator readings that are below 30 will be
impulsive in nature and will not yield the required structure to be considered a valid RSI BAMM
setup. However, valid complex structures that are correctly identified offer a tremendous
technical advantage because they are particularly unique and represent a vital potential
reversal area within the overall trend of the price action. The primary focus of the initial step is
to identify a complex RSI W-type structure in the extreme oversold area under the 30-limit.

170

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Bullish Impulsive Indicator Structures
A bullish impulsive indicator structure reflects price action that is experiencing a quick test of
the extreme oversold support area, and it can typically reverse quickly without any
consolidating price action (see Figure 6.3). Since the price action commonly reverses sharply in
these cases, the indicator reading rallies above the extreme limit above 30 typically within 1 or
2 price bars of the initial test.
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
Relative Strength (RSI)
Overbought (70)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Oversold (30)

Figure 6.3

Although such impulsive formations may test the extreme bullish RSI level, it is important to
focus on the nature of the indicator structure and not necessarily the exact numeric reading (as
long as it is below the 30 limit). The exact indicator level is important in quantifying the extreme
state of RSI, but the general indicator formation is the critical factor that serves as the essential
trigger to validate a potential trade opportunity.

Chapter 6 RSI BAMM

171

Chevron-Texaco (CVX): Daily
Bullish Impulse Indicator Structure
In this example, Chevron-Texaco possessed an ideal impulsive structure (see Figure 6.4). It is
important to note the sharp nature of the test of the extreme oversold area, as both the price
action and the RSI reading reversed immediately after sinking below the 30 level.

Figure 6.4

Impulsive structures like these can be effective technical measures as they serve to confirm
bullish patterns and other trading signals. However, it is important to note that the signals
generated from extreme RSI readings do not constitute a comprehensive approach to trading
the market. As I mentioned previously, I believe this is a common misconception in the
application of the Relative Strength measure, and for that matter, most other technical
indicators and oscillators. In my opinion, such technical measures must be utilized as a
complementary methodology rather than as an exclusive approach. A Relative Strength reading
below the 30 limit does not automatically signify a trade opportunity. In fact, certain extreme
impulse structures can signal significant continuations of the predominant trend. These
strategies will be covered later in the book. For now, it is important to keep in mind the two

172

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

different types of structures. Furthermore, as is the case with all technical indicators, other
methods must be employed to validate any potential trade opportunity on a multiple
confirmation basis.

Bullish Complex Indicator Structure
A complex structure represents an indicator formation that initially exceeds the 30 level and
forms a W-type pattern entirely in the extreme area, as illustrated in Figure 6.5. The complex
structure typically remains below the oversold 30 limit longer than an impulsive formation.
34
32
30
28
26
24
22
20
Relative Strength (RSI)
Overbought (70)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Oversold (30)

Figure 6.5

Despite representing a more significant technical condition than an impulsive formation, the
bullish complex structure is usually an early trading signal. In fact, it is common for price action
to continue to decline sharply in price, while the complex RSI structure is developing in the
oversold range under the 30 limit. Although the advanced concepts will be clearly presented
later in this chapter, it is important to keep in mind that a complex indicator reading is merely
the starting point for the entire approach, not the defining event of the methodology.
Furthermore, the complex formation establishes the beginning of the most critical aspect of the
entire RSI BAMM methodology—divergence.

Chapter 6 RSI BAMM

173

Chevron-Texaco (CVX): Daily
Bullish Complex Indicator Structure
The chart in Figure 6.6 shows an excellent complex RSI structure, as the stock formed a
distinct W-type pattern in the extreme oversold area under the 30 level.
