
has to offer in the way of experiences in relationship to dogs. Not every
dog that exists is dangerous. Quite the contrary, very few would be
considered threatening; most see a child and want to play.
Now, in every chance encounter the child has with a dog in the future he
will create an experience of terror, regardless of the disposition of any
particular dog he happens to run into. If a dog makes any movement toward
the child, the child will perceive that movement as an actual attack when all
the dog wanted to do was play or be petted. In fact, the child could become
so afraid of being attacked that he will devote most if not all of his
attention to scanning the surrounding environment for dogs. Eventually his
senses will become attuned to picking up their sights and sounds. And every
time he sees or hears one, he will create another terrifying experience that
just reinforces his fears. His focus of attention will attract to his attention
the object of his fears so that he can avoid what he has learned is
threatening. The problem is that what he has learned is erroneous in
relationship to the conditions, that not all dogs are dangerous. Not
knowing that, he will naturally believe that his terror is coming from
outside him instead of inside him. In effect his fears are acting on his
perception to create the very experiences he is trying to avoid by causing
him to hone in on all the dogs in the environment.
What we focus our attention on in the environment is what we will
usually get. The dog-biting example is a graphic illustration of this.
However, there are other ways that our fears act as a cause to create what
we are trying to avoid that aren't so obvious. Remember that all fears act on
our perception as a warning mechanism to help us avoid what we believe
to be threatening. One way to avoid the object of our fears is simply to
refuse to acknowledge the existence of threatening information. Another
more subtle way that will create some real blind spots in our perception is
to focus all our attention on alternative - nonthreatening - information to
the exclusion of everything else. These blind spots will exclude whole
categories of perceivable information from our awareness, which can result
in some disastrous consequences, especially in the trading environment.
For example, let's say that the market is offering us what we believe to
be a good opportunity to make some money, so we go ahead and put on a
trade, but at the same time we are also operating out of a fear of being
wrong. We will fear being wrong because, if we are, it will force us to feel
whatever negative energy has accumulated inside of us as a result of being
wrong in the past. Now, if the market offers us a choice between
information that would indicate we are right or information that would
indicate that we are wrong, what information will we naturally focus our
attention on? The information that will make us right, without
acknowledging or considering the implications of the information that
would indicate otherwise. Again, those implications could be disastrous.
Let's look at another example of a trader who is afraid of losing. A fear of
losing presents an obvious conflict because it would be difficult to put on a
102

trade in the first place. However, for the sake of this example, let's say this
trader was so attracted to a specific opportunity that he managed to operate
outside of his fear long enough to put on a trade. Now, the kind of
information he focuses his attention on will depend on what the market
does. If the market goes against him, he will be afraid to confront the
possibility of another loss, so he will focus his attention on any other
nonthreatening information. If the market happens to come back to his
entry point, he will exit the trade in a sigh of relief, regardless of what the
potential is for any further movement in his direction. But, if the market
continues to go against him, his mental defenses will begin to break down as
the threatening information becomes just too overwhelming for him to be
able to block from his awareness any longer. At that point he could easily
become paralyzed and not be able to do anything on his behalf. Eventually
his stress and anxiety will become so acute that the only way he can relieve
it is by getting out of the trade.
On the other hand, if he finds himself in a winning trade he will focus on
completely different information. His fear of losing will cause him to focus
his attention on what the market can take away from him. In a winning trade
he will exclude from his awareness any information that would indicate what
the potential is for the market to continue to move in his direction, which is
the only information he focused on in a losing trade, and instead focus
exclusively on information that will confirm his fears of the market,
retracing back to his entry point or beyond. In effect, his fear of losing
causes him to exit the trade early for a small profit regardless of whatever
the possible profit potential was in that trade. Once he is out, if the market
continues to move in his original direction, he will agonize over the profits
he left on the table and wonder why he just couldn't hang in there just a
little longer, not realizing that his fear of losing actually caused him to lose
all those additional profits.
What you have just been given is an example of why the vast majority of
traders cut their profits short and let their losses run. In a winning trade, the
fear of losing will cause us to focus our attention on information that the
market is going to take our profits away, compelling us to get out early. In a
losing trade we will focus our attention on just the opposite information—
anything other than that which would indicate the trade is a loser. Fear
causes us to act without a perception of choice. When we are afraid to
confront certain categories of market information, it drastically limits the
choices that we perceive as available. Cutting a loss isn't a choice if we
systematically block from our awareness any information that would
indicate that we are in a losing trade. Staying in a winner isn't a choice if we
are consumed with the fear that the market is going to take away our money.
To prevent these blind spots in our perception, we have to learn to trade
without fear. And to trade without fear we need to completely trust
ourselves to confront and accept whatever information the market is
offering about itself, and we need to be able to trust ourselves to know that
103

we will always act in our best interests without hesitation, regardless of the
conditions. Any endeavor will require some degree of trust. We would find
it difficult to cross the street it we didn't trust ourselves to be able to get out
of the way of the oncoming traffic. From a psychological perspective, the
market environment can wreak just as much havoc in our lives as getting hit
by a car. To be successful as traders, we need to believe that we can win
with an absence of fear so we can make better assessments of the conditions
and perceive more choices. What this means is that we have to do the
necessary mental work to release ourselves from anything within us that
would cause us to narrow our focus of attention or specifically block certain
categories of information from our awareness.

104

CHAPTER 11

Why We Need to Learn
How to Adapt

There is a direct relationship between our ability to adapt to changing
environmental conditions and the level of satisfaction we feel about our
lives. To adapt to the changes occurring in the outside environment implies
that we are changing ourselves as we learn more and more of what the
environment has to offer in terms of distinctions about its nature. The
more distinctions we can make between the various components of the
environment and how they act as a force on one another, the more
information becomes available to us through our perception. As we
expand our perception of information available, we will gain a deeper level
of understanding and insight into the cause-and-effect relationship that we
have with the outside environment, that is, how the environment has the
potential to act as a force on us and how the environment will react to the
force of our behavior.
The deeper the level of our understanding and insight, the more
effectively we can interact with the environment to fulfill our needs and
achieve our goals. Fulfilling our needs and achieving our goals create within
us a feeling of well-being, confidence, and satisfaction about our lives that
would otherwise be characterized by feelings of dissatisfaction,
disappointment, and deterioration when we can't fulfill ourselves. Success,
confidence, and satisfaction are all synonymous. They breed from one
another to create and perpetuate a positive cycle of expansion and mental
growth. And, by the same token, disappointment, dissatisfaction, and
deterioration also feed on one another to create negative cycles of
emotional pain, anxiety, and depression.
105

To fulfill our needs and achieve our goals, there has to be some level of
correspondence or balance between the inner mental environment and the
outer physical environment. What I mean by "correspondence" is some
level of understanding of how the outer environment works. Our needs,
intents, goals, and desires—all— exist first in the mental environment.
Then one of three things can happen in some future moment in the
physical environment; they are either 100 percent fulfilled, partially
fulfilled, or not fulfilled at all, resulting in feelings of satisfaction or
dissatisfaction equivalent to the degree of fulfillment.
To fulfill ourselves, we need to interact with the outside environmental
forces. The extent to which we fulfill ourselves is a function of knowing the
most appropriate set of steps to take in relationship to the outer conditions
and to what extent we can act on what we know. Knowing the most
appropriate set of steps to take in relationship to the prevailing conditions is
a function of how much or little we have learned in relationship to what is
available to be learned.
Example: Draw a large circle with a diameter of approximately 6 feet.
This circle will represent everything that is available to be learned
about the nature of the universe, not limited by what we know of it,
but as it exists in every way as yet to be discovered. Now, draw a
smaller circle within the larger one, with a diameter of approximately 2
feet. This smaller circle will represent all the accumulated knowledge
of humankind since the dawn of our existence, in other words, what
we have learned in relationship to what we have yet to discover about
the interacting forces of our environment and ourselves. Now, place a
dot within the smaller circle. This dot would probably be a fair
representation of what each of us as individuals has accumulated in
knowledge, insight, and understanding, in relationship to what has
already been discovered and learned by others (both in the past and
present), in relationship to everything else that is still waiting to be
discovered.
The empty space between the inside boundaries of the larger circle
and the smaller circle is basically everything we don't know or haven't
learned about yet, either individually or collectively. There are many
things in the environment available to be experienced. However, until
we learn about them, we won't experience them, just as people
couldn't experience atomic energy until it was discovered. Yet it existed in the environment, waiting to be experienced and learned about
for hundreds of thousands of years before we actually discovered it.
These were hidden components that had to be actively uncovered by
someone. Otherwise, if the environment acts as a force on us in ways
that we haven't learned to understand yet, we will either dismiss the
experience as not real or form some superstition or think of it as some
unknown or random force, until we investigate and understand the
106

phenomena. When we investigate, we learn to make enough distinctions to recognize all the interacting components acting as a force on
one another to create the effect that we also believed was random,
until we learned about the experience. For years, many people in the
academic community believed that the markets were random; this is a
perfect example of their general lack of understanding of human
nature. People act as a force on prices in perfectly logical ways, when
you understand the logic of their fears.
The small circle represents what has been discovered and experienced by somebody at sometime in human history. All the discoveries
throughout human history have expanded the small circle to include
more and more of the larger one. For example, the small circle would
probably have been a tenth of its present size during the Middle Ages.
Each discovery since then changed the environment that we could
experience because it added something to the mental environment that
didn't previously exist in it. In other words, as we learned, we changed
the way we perceived the world around us, resulting in the evolution
of the thinking of humankind overall.
There is no question that the accumulated knowledge of humankind has increased to levels that would be completely inconceivable to or boggle the mind of even the broadest, most progressive
thinking person alive just 100 years ago. Everything that exists now
that didn't exist then (cars, planes, phones, computers, etc.) is the
result of what someone learned and shared with others, and consequently it changed the consistency and makeup of the environment
we live in. And yet all of what we have now existed as possibilities since the
beginning of humankind. The possibility for manned space flight existed
from the first moment that a person looked up into a star-lit sky and
wondered what it would be like to be on the moon. Of course, we didn't even
attempt to do it until our knowledge evolved to a point where mere wishing
could be turned into a reality. But what if we could go back to 1889 and tell
the typical 40-year-old person about the world their great, great, greatgrandchildren will grow up in? There is no way he would believe how
different things will be. He wouldn't believe it because he wouldn't have the
mental framework to believe it, just like we would have a very difficult time
believing what we will have evolved into 100 years from now.
The dot simply represents the world we experience as individuals in
relationship to what would be possible to experience if we had inside of
our mental environment all the accumulated knowledge of humankind.
Everything you and I know as individuals in relationship to everything we
haven't learned yet would represent the current set of limitations that we
operate from. That is, all our individual accumulated knowledge—every
memory, belief, distinction, association, insight, or understanding—about
the nature of the physical environment would all represent our personal
limitations compared to what is available in the environment to experience,
107

believe, and understand. That is, there will always be more information
available in the environment than what our personal limitations will allow
us to perceive or experience.
Just contemplate the immensity of what we don't know yet; consider that
every person who exists acts as a force on the environment to change it in
some way that can affect us as individuals in some gratifying or
unsatisfying way. The way in which each individual acts as a cause to
change the environment, which in turn, affects everyone else, will
correspond to the makeup of his mental environment. So, until you or I
understand every facet of everyone else's behavior and the ways in which
they can express themselves to act as a force on the environment (meaning
the rest of us), then every other person that exists would represent an
unknown outside force to the extent that we haven't learned about human
nature or understand it.
We could start filling in the small circle with dots to represent the
knowledge of each individual that exists on the planet, until the circle was
almost filled. The blank space left in the small circle would represent
knowledge that exists in some form that is not inside the mind of some
person alive today. We could also organize the dots into clusters, where each
dot would overlap a bit to represent the shared knowledge and beliefs of
different cultures, although they couldn't overlap too much because we all
know something different because of our individual differences in
experiences. The dots would also have to be different sizes to represent the
increased or decreased levels of understanding and insight that we operate
out of in relationship to one another. For example, the dot of a child would
be much smaller than the dot of a typical adult.

The physical environment was here before we were born—and we
certainly weren't born with the insight that we need to interact with it in
such a way that we can assure ourselves of experiencing high levels of
satisfaction. For example, if there was a 100 percent correspondence
between our mental and physical environment, then everything there is to
know about the nature of the physical environment we would have
already learned, and this knowledge would be a component part of the
mental environment. Implied within this perfect correspondence would
be a complete understanding of all the forces that operate in the physical
environment, coupled with a complete understanding of their cause-andeffect relationship. We would know exactly how the environment would
act as a force on us to create experience and how the environment would
respond as a counteracting force to the force we apply to it through our
behavior. And, therefore, with this perfect understanding we would know
the most appropriate set of steps to take to fulfill our needs, intents, goals,
and desire, resulting in a complete state of satisfaction. I am defining
behavior as the outward physical expression of mental energy acting as a
108

force on the outside environment.
Obviously, none of us possesses this kind of perfect correspondence with
the environment, and, as a result, it is probably safe to say that none of us
lives our lives in a complete state of satisfaction. However, the more we
understand and know about the interacting forces behind our own behavior
and the interacting environmental forces outside of us, the easier it is to
fulfill our needs and achieve our goals, resulting in greater levels of
satisfaction that we will experience in our lives. Conversely, if we don't
understand our own behavior, we certainly can't begin to understand or
anticipate anyone else's, and the less we understand and know about the
rest of the environmental components that have a potential to act as a force on us,
then it would stand to reason that the less potential we have to fulfill our needs
and achieve our goals, resulting in feelings of disappointment, stress, anxiety,
unhappiness, and fear.
LEARNING AND
THE QUALITY OF OUR EXPERIENCES
As I have mentioned, we aren't born with the knowledge that we need to operate
effectively in the physical environment to fulfill ourselves. However, we are
born with the need to know. This need to know operates as a driving force in our
lives coming from the innermost depths of who we are. Our natural sense of
curiosity compels us to explore and learn. For example, once we have learned the
nature of something or accomplished some task, we quickly become bored and
go on to something different. Boredom acts as an inner force compelling us to look
for something new to discover and learn about.
Attractions also act as an inner force, compelling us to move through the
environment to discover and create experience. Take the object of a child's
curiosity (something he is attracted to) away from him and what will happen? He
will usually start crying or even throw a fit His crying is an indication that his
inner needs are not being fulfilled. Crying is a form of grieving to compensate
for the lack of balance between the inner and outer environments. When we
have explored the object of our attraction to our satisfaction, it means the inside
has been filled with what the outside has to offer in terms of experience. When
that happens we simply lose interest, become bored, and start to scan the
environment for something else that might attract our attention.
There is another characteristic of our nature that supports our need to learn.
Whenever we learn a skill, the steps involved in the operation of that skill drop
down to an unconscious level of operation, so we are then free to learn something
new. To learn a skill, we usually have to break the skill down into a series of
small steps and concentrate on each individual step until we can put all the steps
together into a series of effective movements. By concentrating on each small
step, we narrow our focus of attention to the point where we are oblivious to
anything else going on in the environment. For example, think of a time in
your life when you were tying to learn a new skill, say, in some sport, and
109

while you were trying to put all the movements together, someone was
attempting to get your attention on some completely unrelated matter. In
such a situation we would find it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to
stay focused on one without destroying our concentration on the other.
However, after we have successfully made the skill a learned resource, we
could easily perform the movements while focusing our attention elsewhere.
Without this characteristic of our nature, where our skills drop to an
unconsciousness level of operation, we would find it nearly impossible to
move beyond the performance level of a typical infant. Just think what it
would be like if we had to concentrate on all the movements necessary just
to pick something up the way a typical infant does. We didn't always have
the eye/hand coordination that we take completely for granted. We had to
learn it. We learned it because we were attracted to things in the
environment we wanted to experience with our sense of touch. As we learn
each skill, we can automatically access the series of movements to execute
the skill so we don't have to concentrate on any of the individual steps,
which then frees our attention to explore and continually expand what we
can become aware of.
Learning is a function of our existence. It will occur quite naturally
through our powerful sense of curiosity and what we find ourselves
attracted to in the environment that we just need to know everything about.
At the most fundamental level, learning will happen just because we are
alive and have to interact with the environment to stay alive. So we will
learn something. However, that doesn't necessarily mean that what we
have learned is very useful with respect to how we might go about fulfilling
ourselves in some satisfactory way. We have very little control in our early
years over what we learn about the nature of the outside world and how it
works. I will discuss this in more detail in a moment.
As we expand our personal dot (as in the example) to learn more and
more of what the environment has to offer in the way of insight about itself,
we increase our level of correspondence with it When we learn, we change
the makeup and consistency of our inner environment. Each change we
make on the inside simultaneously changes our perspective and
perception of the outside. The outside environment is different because we
are operating out of new insights and understandings as a result of what has
been added to or changed on the inside. Each new insight makes available
to us new and different choices on how to interact more appropriately with
the environment to change the quality of our experiences.
This may seem like an obvious correlation between what we have learned
and how much satisfaction we experience in our lives, but I assure you it is
not. If it was so obvious, then most people wouldn't have such a difficult
time making the connection between the deteriorating conditions, lack of
happiness or satisfaction in their lives and their lack of insight, coupled
with a refusal to acknowledge there is something they don't know and
110
