
act of free will. They were instilled by other people.
And it probably won't come as a surprise to anyone that usually the beliefs that cause us the most
difficulty are those that were acquired from others without our conscious consent. By that I mean
beliefs that we acquired when we were too young and uninformed to realize the negative implications
of what we were being taught. Regardless of the source of our beliefs, once they are born into existence
they all basically function in the same way. Beliefs have certain characteristic ways in which they do
their jobs, not unlike the various parts of our bodies.
For example, if you compare my eyes and your eyes, or my hands and your hands, or my red blood
cells and your red blood cells, we can see that they are not exactly the same, but they have
characteristics in common that cause them to function in similar ways. By the same token, a belief that
"Life is wonderful" will perform its function in the same way as a belief that "Life is awful." The
beliefs themselves are different and the effect that each has on the quality of the holder's life will be
vastly different, but both beliefs will function in exactly the same manner.
BELIEFS AND THEIR IMPACT ON OUR LIVES
In the broadest sense, our beliefs shape the way we experience our lives. As I have already said, we're
not born with any of our beliefs. They're acquired, and as they accumulate, we live our lives in a way
that reflects what we have learned to believe. Consider how different your life would be if you had
been born into a culture, religion, or political system that has very little, if anything, in common with
the one you were born into. It might be hard to imagine, but what you would have learned to believe
about the nature of life and how the world works may not be remotely similar to what you currently
believe. Yet you would hold these other beliefs with the same degree of certainty as your current
beliefs.
How Beliefs Shape Our Lives
1. They manage our perception and interpretation of environmental information in a way that is
consistent with what we believe.
2. They create our expectations. Keep in mind that an expectation is a belief projected into some future
moment. Since we can't expect something we don't know about, we could also say that an expectation
is what we know projected into some future moment.
3. Anything we decide to do or any outward expression of behavior will be consistent with what we
believe.
4. Finally, our beliefs shape how we feel about the results of our actions.
There isn't much about the way we function that beliefs don't play a major role in. So what I am going

to do now is give you an example I used in my first book, The Disciplined Trader, to illustrate the
various functions of a belief. In the spring of 1987, I was watching a locally produced television
program called "Gotcha Chicago." It was about some local celebrities who played practical jokes on
one another. In one segment of the program, the TV station hired a man to stand on the sidewalk along
Michigan Avenue holding a sign that read "Free money. Today only." (For those of you who are not
familiar with Chicago, Michigan Avenue is home to many fashionable, exclusive department stores and
boutiques.) The TV station gave the man a considerable amount of cash, with instructions to give
money to anyone who asked for it.
Now, when you consider that Michigan Avenue is one of the busiest areas of the city, and if we assume
that most of the people who passed the man on the street could read the sign, how many people would
you think took him up on his offer and asked for some money? Of all the people who walked by and
read the sign, only one person stopped, and said, "Great! May I have a quarter to buy a bus transfer?"
Otherwise, no one would even go near the man. Eventually, the man grew frustrated because people
weren't reacting the way he expected them to. He started crying out, "Do you want any money? Please
take my money; I can't give it away fast enough." Everyone just kept walking around him as if he didn't
exist. In fact, I noticed that several people went out of their way to avoid him.
As a man wearing a suit and carrying a briefcase approached, he went right up to him and said, "Would
you like some money?" The man responded, "Not today." Really frustrated now, he shot back, "How
many days does this happen? Would you please take this?" as he tried to hand the man some cash. The
man responded with a terse "No" and walked on. What was going on here? Why wouldn't anyone
(except for the person who needed a bus transfer) ask for the money? If we assume that most or all of
the passersby could read the sign, but still didn't make any effort to get the money, then one possible
explanation for their behavior is that they just didn't care about money.
This is extremely unlikely, though, considering how much of our lives is devoted to the pursuit of
money. If we agree that people could read the sign and that money is very important to most of us, then
what could have stopped these people from helping themselves? The environment was making
available an experience that most people would love to have: someone giving them money with no
strings attached. Yet everyone walked by, oblivious to what was awaiting them. They must not have
been able to perceive what was available. That's hard to imagine, because the sign clearly stated "Free
money. Today only." However, it's not hard to imagine if you consider that most people have a belief
(an energized concept about how the world works) that "Free money doesn't exist." If free money really
doesn't exist, then how does someone reconcile the obvious contradiction between that belief and the
sign saying that it does? That's easy, just decide the man with the sign is crazy; what else could account
for such bizarre behavior if, in fact, free money doesn't exist? The reasoning process that could
compensate for the contradiction might go something like this: "Everyone knows getting money with
no strings attached rarely happens.
Certainly not from a stranger on one of the busiest streets in the city. In fact, if the man were really

giving away money, he would already be mobbed. He might even be endangering his life. He must be
crazy. I had better take a wide path around him; who knows what he might do?" Notice that every
component of the thought process described is consistent with the belief that free money doesn't exist.
1. The words "free money" were neither perceived nor interpreted as they were intended from the
environment s perspective.
2. Deciding the person with the sign must be crazy created an expectation of danger, or at least a
perception that caution was warranted.
3. Purposefully altering one's path to avoid the person with the sign is an action that is consistent with
the expectation of danger.
4. How did each person feel about the outcome?
That's difficult to say without knowing each person individually, but a good generalization would be
that they felt relieved that they successfully avoided an encounter with a crazy person. The feeling of
relief that resulted from avoiding a confrontation is a state of mind. Remember that how we feel (the
relative degree of positively or negatively charged energy flowing through our bodies and minds) is
always the absolute truth.
But the beliefs that prompt any particular state of mind may not be the truth with respect to the
possibilities available from the environment's perspective. Relief from confrontation was not the only
possible outcome in this situation. Imagine how different the experience would be if they believed that
"free money exists." The process described above would be the same, except it would make the belief
that "free money exists," seem self-evident and beyond question, just as it made the belief that "free
money doesn't exist," seem self-evident and beyond question. A perfect example would be the one
person who said "great, may I have a quarter for a bus transfer." When I saw this, I had the anybody for
a quarter. A panhandler is someone who definitely believes in the existence of free money. Therefore,
his perception and interpretation of the sign were exactly what was intended by the TV station.
His expectation and behavior were consistent with his belief that free money exists. And how would he
feel about the results? He got his quarter, so I would assume he felt a sense of satisfaction. Of course,
what he didn't know is that he could have gotten a lot more. There's another possible outcome for our
scenario. Let's look at a hypothetical example of someone who believes that "free money doesn't exist,"
but who takes a "what if approach to the situation. In other words, some people can be so intrigued and
curious about the possibilities that they decide to temporarily suspend their belief that "free money
doesn't exist." This temporary suspension allows them to act outside the boundaries created by a belief,
in order to see what happens.
So instead of ignoring the man with the sign, which would be our hypothetical person’s first
inclination, he walks up to him and says, "Give me ten dollars." The man promptly pulls a ten-dollar
bill out of his pocket and gives it to him. What happens now? How does he feel, having experienced
something unexpected that completely contradicted his belief? For most people, the belief that free
money doesn't exist is acquired through unpleasant circumstances, to put it mildly. The most common

