
Exhibit 7.1 A EUR/USD Trend Can Last for Months

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

In the EUR/USD’s move from a high of 1.50 in November 2009 to 1.19 by June 2010, 1.45, 1.40, 1.30, 1.25, and 1.20 all looked like good value
points. Eventually 1.19 was the best place to buy, but tops and bottoms are only obvious in hindsight. Yogi Berra had something to say about that.

Predicting is very hard, especially about the future.
If Sir John Templeton traded currencies, he would have probably waited until the moves became extreme and the valuation was off the charts
(either under- or overvalued) before picking a top or bottom. But unless you have extremely deep pockets like Templeton, you may not be able to sit
with a trade and wait for the currency to finally turn around. Most contrarians like Templeton and even some traders like John Paulson, who started
to position for a subprime crisis in 2006, have had to sit with their losing positions for weeks, months, and sometimes years on the hope that they
will capture most of their profits in one single period of collapse. Paulson made billions doing just that, but beneath the glamour, he fought against
significant skepticism from his peers who believed that it was too dangerous to bank the entire fund on one single bet that would be difficult to
unwind. Eventually Paulson’s bet paid off handsomely but not until a year later.
Most currency traders simply do not have the luxury of deep pockets and time. Forex brokers offer as much as 50 to 1 leverage, and even on a
very modest 10 to 1 leverage, a mere 10 percent negative move will wipe out the entire account. Paulson believed that his investors would be
willing to lose 8 percent a year on mortgage insurance for the opportunity to earn a lot more. However, 8 percent for a regular currency speculator
on a 10 to 1 lever factor can be debilitating.
So how can you tell when a currency is trending? There are many different ways to determine when a currency is in trend. One of the most
popular is to use a combination of the Average Directional Index (ADX) and moving averages. The ADX is a fancy indicator created by an
incredibly intelligent man named J. Welles Wilder and is used to evaluate the strength of a trend. When the ADX reading is greater than 25 and
pointing upward, it signals that the currency pair is in trend and the trend is strengthening. If the ADX is falling, it usually implies that the prior trend is
exhausting and by the time it dips back below 25, the currency pair is most likely range trading. Moving averages measure the momentum of a
move and are used to determine the direction of the trend. If the currency pair is trading comfortably above the moving average, then it means it is
in an uptrend. If it is trading well below the moving average, then it means it is in a downtrend.
Exhibit 7.2 shows a weekly chart of the EUR/USD and how the ADX and moving average can be used together to determine when a currency
pair has begun to trend. The up arrows in the chart point to when the trend begins and the down arrows point to when the trend ends, according to
the ADX. Remember, ADX above 25 and pointing upward signals trend and ADX below 25 or pointing downward signals exhaustion or range. The
moving average helps to determine the direction of the trend. Taking a look at the very first signal on the left, we can see that the ADX effectively
signaled the beginning and end of the uptrend (because the currency pair was trading above the 20 period moving average). The same is true for
the other examples in the chart. The only problem is that the ADX can give a late signal, as it did in the last two examples, and it does not always

provide effective entry and exit points.

Exhibit 7.2 Joining the Trend Using Average Directional Index (ADX) Signals

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

Another good option is to use Double Bollinger Bands to determine whether a currency pair is in trend. In Exhibit 7.3, arrows show the ADX
signals while the lines point to when the Bollinger Bands would have signaled a trend. The first two signals were given at the exact same time, but in
the last two signals, the Bollinger Band identified the currency pair as moving into a trend long before the ADX. In addition to providing information
on whether a currency pair is in trend and the direction of the trend, the Bollinger Bands can be traded in a number of different ways. The Double
Bollinger Bands are such a key component of my own trading that Chapter 8 is dedicated completely to understanding and using them to position
into trades.

Exhibit 7.3 Joining the Trend Using Bollinger Bands

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

Bag Your Winners Quickly
Although staying with the trend will give you an edge in trading forex, the real secret to developing consistency is to bag your winners quickly. Most
traders spend hours and hours looking for the perfect entry point and barely give their exits a passing thought, but it is the exits that can separate
the winners from the losers. When I was trading at a major investment bank, I sat between two experienced forex traders named Tom and Masa.
One day, they went long and short the EUR/USD at the exact time. By the end of the day, both were profitable. Why? Because Tom was only
looking to make 20 pips on a large position and remained in his trade for less than an hour while Masa nursed his trade for most of the day, rode
out the initial losses and waited for the currency to turn around and hit his profit target of 50 pips. The entry in this case did not matter at all because
Tom and Masa took opposing positions at the exact same time. Instead, what made them both winners was their exit.
In Trading or Investing 101, all of us are taught to maintain a strict 2 to 1 risk/reward ratio or better. In other words, for every $100 risked, we need
to look to make $200. The reason is that we need to be right only 50 percent of the time to be net positive and even less if the risk/reward ratio is
higher. For example, if you had a trading strategy that risked 50 points for a return of 150 points on every trade, you would only need to be
successful 30 percent of the time to be net positive. In other words, if 7 out of 10 trades were losers and 3 were winners, the net return would still be
100 points. Sounds attractive, right?
The standard trading advice is to have your winners be much larger than your losers, but anyone who has traded currencies has most likely
experienced the frustration of watching the trade turn profitable, but for one reason or another, the profits start to disappear like ice cubes in your
hand and eventually turn into a losing trade. The problem is that markets are generally not that generous, and for some traders, 2 to 1 risk/reward
ratios may be ideal but not realistic.
Imagine a short-term trader who is only looking to risk 35 pips on a given trade. To keep with a strict 2:1 ratio, he would need to make 70 pips on
the trade. However, on any given day, a currency pair only moves an average of 100 pips, which means that in the isolated amount of time that he is
available to monitor the trade, he is looking to make 70 percent of an average day’s move. Another possible scenario is that our trader plans to
make 20 pips per trade. Under a 2:1 ratio, he needs to set his stop at 10 pips. However a 10-pip stop can be clipped at the blink of an eye,
particularly since the spread reduces the stop by 2 to 3 pips, depending upon which currency is traded.
An overly ideal risk to reward ratio encourages traders to try and take more from the market than is being offered and may encourage scalpers to
use excessively tight stops. So how do you overcome this? By using the T1-T2 method.

To minimize the risk of letting profits melt in their hands like ice cubes on a hot sunny day, many professional traders like to bag their winners
quickly using a T1-T2 method to exit of their trades. T1 simply refers to Target 1 and T2 refers to Target 2. Not only have I met many traders who
say that the T1-T2 method has transformed their returns but I use this methodology in my own trading. The idea is to have a conservative, relatively
easy-to-achieve first target and a more ambitious second target. So if I am looking to risk 40 pips on my trade, my first target should be
approximately 40 pips. In order for me to be net positive, my strategy needs to hit 60 to 70 percent more winners than losers. However, with a
smaller first target of 40 pips, the chances of the limit being reached can be greater than a target of 70 pips. When the target is hit, I would close out
half of the position and move my stop to breakeven on the remainder of the position. The idea is to limit your losses to your initial entry point. If the
trade continues to move in my favor, then I will trail the stop to lock in more profits. If the trade moves backwards to stop me out at my initial entry
price, which is known as breakeven, the overall trade would still be a positive one because I banked profits on the first half of the position.
Why does this work? We have all heard the statement that 20 percent of employees generate 80 percent of a company’s output and 20 percent
of customers provide 80 percent of the revenue. To some degree, the same as true in trading. Trends can be strong and it is important to try to
capture as much of a trend move as possible, while at the same time limiting your risk. Floating profits are just that—floating. They can hit an
iceberg anytime, which is why I believe it is much better to take partial profits early and try to ride the rest to glory with only a part of the position.
When it comes to trading, a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
Human psychology is also a big reason why the T1-T2 method works well for many traders. My business partner, Boris Schlossberg, posed a
very good question to make an important point to our clients: “Suppose I gave you a choice. You can take ten trades, nine of which would lose you
$10,000 each or $90,000 in total and the tenth would make you $120,000 for a net profit of $30,000. Or you can take ten trades of which seven
would make you $20,000 each and three would lose you $40,000 each for a net profit of $20,000. Which would you prefer?”
On the surface the first strategy appears to make you more money but 90 percent of traders will most likely wind up losers under that method.
Why? Human beings hate to lose. Furthermore, they hate to lose consistently. If you deconstruct the first strategy, you basically have only 1 out of 10
chances to make a winning trade. These are lottery-like odds for an average trader. Here is what’s most likely to happen: You will quit after the third
trade and never catch the winning trade in the sequence. You will cut your winning trade short because you are so desperate to recoup some—any
—part of your money that the end result will still end up negative. Or worst of all, you will miss the one winning trade and will simply generate nine
losers in your account.
Flip the scenarios. In strategy number two, you have 7 out of 10 chances to win. That fact alone is likely to keep you on track and help you adhere
to your trading strategy. Furthermore, if you are lucky, you may even miss one of the large losers and improve your performance even more. That’s
the paradox of negative edge.
We trade with a negative edge not because we think it is mathematically superior—we know that it is not. In fact, in order for the T1-T2 method to
work, our strategy needs to be successful at least 60 to 70 percent of the time because trading more than one lot doubles the losers. We trade with
negative edge because we know that it is psychologically more palatable, and trading at its core is always more psychological than it is logical.
Academics never factor in human frailty as a variable and yet it is perhaps the most important element in achieving long-term trading success.

Know When to Say No
Finally the third trading edge is to know when to walk away. When trading with trend, chasing price is probably one of the most dangerous things
that you can do. If you have ever been involved in a bidding war on eBay and regretted it because you ended up paying twice the retail price for
some piece of secondhand garbage, you will know how it can get you in trouble. There will always be another trade, so know when to say NO.

Get It? Got It? Good!
Currency trends can be very strong, so try to find trades in the direction of the trend.
Throw out the notion of only following risk to reward ratios of 2:1 because they are not always realistic!
Don’t let your winners turn into losers. Bank some profits early in increments and use a smaller part of your position to participate in the trend.
If the trend has become overextended, avoid chasing the price move. That will only increase your risk of being stopped out.

Chapter Eight

So You’re an Investor?
Slow and Steady Wins the Race
Like a locomotive that is slowly traveling from one part of a country to another, slow and steady investing is about taking things easy—enjoying the
ride and not stressing about the time it takes to get where you’re going. Chapter 6 talked about how investing in the forex market is slightly different
from investing in the stock market. The high amount of leverage available to forex traders magnifies profits and losses, which is why the holding
period of currency investments tends to be shorter than that of equity investments. In this chapter, we will talk about different ways to join moves that
last for weeks.
One of the most memorable moments in my career was when John Bollinger, the mastermind and namesake behind Bollinger Bands, stood
behind a crowd and watched me show traders in Singapore the Double Bollinger Bands. He said to one of my colleagues that it was a “clever way
to use the bands.” Of the hundreds of technical indicators out there, the Double Bollinger Bands are hands down my favorite. Through the years, the
bands have become a critical component of my trading. The reason I really love the Double Bollinger Bands (BB bands for short) is they provide a
wealth of actionable information. They tell me whether a currency pair is in trend or range, the direction of the trend, and when the trend has
exhausted. More importantly, Bollinger Bands also identify entry points and proper places to put a stop.

Bollinger Band Basics
Before describing how the Double Bollinger Bands work, it is important to first explain them. Bollinger Bands consists of three lines—a 20-period
moving average, which is the center line and then the upper and lower lines, which are basically a specific standard deviation away from the moving
average. Just imagine a two-lane highway with a center divider that is the moving average and barriers on either side, which are the standard
deviations.
The default Bollinger Band parameters on most charting packages are 20 periods and two standard deviations. Although understanding the
math behind how the bands are created may be complicated for some, the way they are used is more important and simple to grasp.
The purpose of the bands is to determine how high or low a currency pair has moved in relation to the average price over the past 20 periods.
Two standard deviations is considered quite rare because in Statistics 101, it is said that 95 percent of all activity should fall within two standard
deviations of the average and only 5 percent should fall outside of that amount. Applying this to currencies means that when the currency pair
reaches the second standard deviation band, the move has hit an extreme point because the idea is that 95 percent of the time the currency pair
trades between the bands. However, the problem with this notion is that a quick look at currency charts overlaid with Bollinger Bands will show that
reaching the extremes happens more often than we would think. We know that currencies can move in one direction for a long period of time and
there will be times when it may touch the Bollinger Band five days in a row, making a rare event a common occasion. This is why we devised the
Double Bollinger Band Method, which we have found to be a much better use of Bollinger’s creation.
The Double Bollinger Band Method consists of using two sets of Bollinger Bands. In addition to the second standard deviation Bollinger Band
just mentioned, we also use a first deviation Bollinger Band. The centerlines (or medians) are excluded because otherwise the charts become very
messy and crowded. Exhibit 8.1 shows how the Bollinger Bands would look on a daily chart of USD/JPY. The two outside lines are the second
standard deviation Bollinger Bands and the two inside lines are the first standard deviation Bollinger Bands. Once the Double Bollinger Bands are
set up, they can be used for identifying whether the currency is in a range or trend, if and when a trend has exhausted, where to find value within the
trend, and how to get into a new trend.

Exhibit 8.1 Using Double Bollinger Bands with USD/JPY

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

The most important thing that the Double Bollinger Bands do is answer the $500 million question of whether the currency pair is in trend or range.
When a trend is very strong, most of the currency pair’s price action will be confined within the one and two standard deviation Bollinger Bands. The
Double Bollinger Bands also determine the direction of the trend. The two bands at the lower part of the chart capture the downtrend while the two
bands at the upper part of the chart capture the uptrend.
In other words, if the USD/JPY was trading between the upper one and two standard deviation bands, it is in an uptrend, and if it was trading
between the two lower bands, it is in a downtrend. Usually when the currency pair is in trend, it will not end the day outside of the first and second
bands unless the trend is exhausting. When the trend is weak, the price action will be confined within the first standard deviation bands (the two
centerlines) in the range-trading zone. If all four bands are very close together, we can see with the naked eye that the currency is range trading.
Only when the bands are moving away from each other or are far apart already will the trend indicators be useful.
For example, the right side of the USD/JPY chart in Exhibit 8.1 shows that during the move from 90 to 87, USD/JPY never traded above the
downtrend zone. The uptrend, downtrend, and range zones are all marked on the chart.

Knowing When the Trend Has Exhausted
When the currency pair moves outside the up- or downtrend zone and into the range-trading zone, it signals that the trend has exhausted. For
bottom-fishers and top pickers, the Bollinger Bands can be an easy-to-understand and useful tool. Rather than blindly picking a top or bottom
because the price looked expensive or cheap, the Bollinger Bands can be used to identify when a trend could be over. Take another look at the
USD/JPY chart in Exhibit 8.1. You may notice that when USD/JPY falls out of the uptrend zone, the move will frequently extend to the lower first
standard deviation Bollinger Band. In contrast, if USD/JPY rises out of the downtrend zone, the rally will frequently extend to the upper first standard
deviation Bollinger Band. It does not happen 100 percent of the time, but enough to make it meaningful. Therefore, if USD/JPY has been falling and
trading within the downtrend zone, a practical way to pick a bottom would be to wait for the currency pair to close above the lower first standard
deviation Bollinger Band with a stop at the most significant near-term low. Although the upper first standard deviation Bollinger Band could be a
target, usually it is a few hundred pips away. Instead it would be smarter to apply the T1-T2 method, which involves taking off half of the position
when the profits have reached a reasonable amount and then trailing your stop on the rest of the position. If you overlaid a 15-period moving
average onto the chart, you can see that most turns will reach the 15-period Simple Moving Average, which could be used as a place to exit the first
part of your position.

Finding Value within a Trend
The difficulty that most traders have with following trends is finding a proper place to enter. When trends are very strong, the moves can be very
deep; if you missed entering the trade when the trend first began, you could wind up buying the high or selling the low. Chasing a trade can be
dangerous because it also exposes the position to retrace risk, which occurs when a currency pair rebounds slightly after selling off aggressively (a
common occurrence) by just enough to stop you out and still remain within a downtrend. Jumping into a trend when the momentum is at its strongest
also makes it very difficult to place a technically significant stop at a reasonable rate. To resolve this problem, we use the Double Bollinger Bands
to find value within a trend. The idea is to basically wait for a bargain before buying because, as our coupon-clipping grandmothers will tell us, it is
always better to pay a discount than to pay a premium.
Instead of entering a trade at any random point simply because we want to participate in the move, it is generally better to wait for the currency
pair to “retrace” to the first standard deviation Bollinger Band. This plays off the previous idea that the trend has exhausted when the currency pair
closes outside of the uptrend or downtrend zones. If it does not close out of the zone, then the trend remains intact.
In an uptrend, the way to find value is to wait for the currency pair to dip and retrace to the upper first standard deviation Bollinger Band. At that
point, if we were looking to join the trend, we could go long with a stop placed slightly below the 15-day Simple Moving Average. Once again, a T1T2 method of managing the trade should be used because we never know how much further the trend could go.
In a downtrend where a currency pair is falling like a rock, we would wait for it to rally back toward the lower first standard deviation Bollinger
Band before joining the move. When it reaches that point, we could short with a stop placed slightly above 15-day moving average.
Exhibit 8.2 shows how Double Bollinger Bands can be used to find value within a trend. All of the entry points have been circled. Between June
and July of 2010, the GBP/USD was in a very strong uptrend that took it from 1.46 to a high of 1.54. Within the uptrend there were eight
opportunities to buy at value once the daily candle had closed, which is generally between 4 and 5 p.m. EST. If the currency pair closed outside of
the band, the trade should not be taken. In all but one of those trades, the GBP/USD continued its prior trend. This is the type of hit ratio that we
want to look for. No trading strategy will work 100 percent of the time, but we only want to trade strategies that yield far more profitable trades than
unprofitable ones.
