
However, he had promised Graham that he wouldn’t. Instead, he recommended it to his friends.30
So instead of buying more Post stock, Buffett—who had always believed in concentration—looked for new
opportunities and began filling his basket faster than an Easter egg hunt with huge quantities of a handful of
other stocks: National Presto, maker of pressure cookers and popcorn poppers,31 and a huge chunk of
Vornado Realty Trust, which put him on its board.32
Buffett had a set of legacy shareholders at Berkshire Hathaway who understood his investing approach and
would never question his judgment. Thus he had earned the luxury of ignoring Mr. Market, which had
marked down the value of his portfolio to a fire-sale price. Others were not so lucky. Bill Ruane’s Sequoia
Fund was headed for a terrible year, and Ruane’s main financial backer, Bob Malott, was apparently
unhappy. Malott knew Ruane from Harvard and they had shared an apartment when Ruane was working at
Kidder, Peabody in New York. But Malott was sold on Buffett’s approach and track record; he asked for
Buffett’s help with the pension fund of FMC Corporation, the company he now headed. So Buffett went to
San Diego and spent several days interviewing investment managers and explaining his thinking to FMC’s
investment people. In the process, he converted them to Grahamites with what would eventually become
powerful results. At first he said no to the request of managing the portfolio himself—then eventually agreed
to manage a portion.33 Along with his acceptance, however, he gave a warning: FMC would come last among
his priorities, after Berkshire and Diversified, and Warren and Susie Buffett. The canny Malott jumped at the
opportunity anyway, not mistaking the larger point: That Buffett was willing to do it at all meant that he
would do it well.34
***
Between his duties at FMC, Vornado, Blue Chip, and Wesco, and regular trips to New York, Buffett was
now traveling much of the time. He was also busy courting Katharine Graham and had made such a good
impression on her that she began to call him for advice. Susie made the rounds of Omaha, busy with the
board of the Urban League, still giving out her scholarships, and taking on her latest crusade, the Future
Central Committee, which was trying to save her alma mater, Central High School, from forced busing.35
As 1973 progressed, even Hamilton the dog must have noticed the silence and emptiness descending on the
Buffetts’ crazy, noisy home.36 Howie was two hundred and seventy-five miles away from Omaha at
Augustana College. Susie Jr., unhappy with Lincoln, had transferred to the University of California, Irvine,
where she was majoring in criminal justice.37 Peter, the child who had never required attention, was now a
sophomore in high school. Thinking of moving to California, Susie had taken him to look at schools in Orange
County. They stayed in Omaha, however, and now Peter spent much of his time in the basement, where
Susie, who had gotten him interested in photography, had built him a darkroom.38
Often now Susie stayed up late at night alone, listening to music that transported her to some different
place.39 She loved the jazz guitar of Wes Montgomery and great soul music, like the Temptations, who sang
of a world in which it was men who felt all the longing.40 She read books like I Know Why the Caged Bird
Sings, Maya Angelou’s autobiographical account of overcoming the forces of racism, sexual abuse, and
repression that made her early years a prison. “The idea of being confined in a place not of your choosing ran
deep for her,” Peter says—not surprising after her childhood shut away in a sickroom, and growing up with a
sister who was disciplined by being locked in a closet. Susie longed for romance, but now knew that she and
Milt were never going to get married. Nevertheless, she could not bring herself to give up her connection to
Milt.
She was also spending more time with her tennis crowd of younger people at Dewey Park. One, John
McCabe, a coach with a subdued personality, a sadness somewhat like her own, and a certain fragility,
resembled most of her other lonelyhearts, but she seemed particularly drawn to him.41 Now that Susie had

