
Stocks Influenced by Commodities
Now that commodities are moving and have attracted the attention of sophisticated hedge fund and commodity trading advisors, money has been
flowing back to this investment industry. Investors use fundamental information such as weather conditions and apply technical analysis techniques
to time entries and exits. Corporations, banks, and institutions are using
the markets to hedge against losses incurred in the cash markets, for example, the airline industry, where some companies were buying energy futures contracts to lock in prices prior to the big price surge. Smart move!
Higher prices in commodities such as crude oil certainly have an influence
on the airline stocks. Therefore, tracking commodity prices is important for
stock traders.
We will go over specific trading strategies as well as some back-testing
results that will substantiate a pretty good method for trading the futures
markets. This introduction was designed to show you that there is more to
commodity trading than meets the eye and to show you not only how you
can utilize price moves in the futures to profit from a futures contract but
also how you can apply that knowledge in other areas of investing. In fact,
stock traders can greatly benefit from information unique to the commodity markets. One such bit of information is released by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and is known as the Commitment of
Traders (COT) Report. It is referred to as legal “insider trading” information, which is covered in the next few pages; so read on!

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

59

FOREX, THE CURRENCY CASH MACHINE
Foreign exchange currency trading, otherwise known as the forex market,
offers an investment asset class that is completely different from stocks of
futures and offers leverage and virtually unrestricted access 24 hours a day.
Forex trades virtually around the clock, from when the Asian market opens
on Sunday night until the U.S. markets close on Friday afternoon. One of
the attractions from an individual trader’s perspective is that there is this
constant access to make a trade.
Forex is the simultaneous buying of one currency and selling of another.
In other words, currencies are always traded in pairs; in every transaction,
a trader is long one currency and short the other. A position is expressed
in terms of the first currency in the pair. For example, if you have purchased
euro and sold U.S. dollars, it would be stated as a euro/dollar pair.
The foreign exchange market (forex, or FX) is the largest and most liquid financial market in the world, with a volume of over $1.5 trillion daily—
more than three times the aggregate amount of the U.S. Equity and
Treasury markets combined. This means that a trader can enter or exit the
market at will in almost any market condition with minimal execution risk.
The forex market is so vast and has so many participants that no single entity, not even a central bank, can control the market price for an extended
period of time. Unlike other financial markets, the forex market has no
physical location, no central exchange. It operates through an electronic
network of banks, corporations, and individuals trading one currency for
another. The lack of a physical exchange enables the forex market to operate on a 24-hour basis, spanning from one zone to another, across the major
financial centers.

Margin and Leverage
The forex market allows traders to control massive amounts of leverage
with minimal margin requirements; some firms offer as much as 100-to-1
leverage. For example, traders can control a $100,000 position with $1,000,
or 1 percent. Obviously, leverage can be a powerful tool for currency
traders. While it does contribute to the risk of a given position, leverage is
necessary in the forex market because the average daily move of a major
currency is about 1 percent, while a stock typically sees much more substantial moves.
Leverage can be seen as a free short-term credit allowance, just as it is
in the futures markets, allowing traders to purchase an amount of currency
exceeding that of their account balance. As a result, traders are exposed to
an increased level of both risk and opportunity. Due to the nature of the

60

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

leverage in the forex markets, positions are normally short-lived. For this
reason, entry and exit points are crucial for success and must be based on
various technical analysis tools. While fundamental analysis focuses on
what should happen, technical analysis is based on what has or is happening at the current time.
Identifying the overall trend, whether it is short-term or long-term, is
the most fundamental element of trading with technical analysis. A weekly
or monthly chart should be used to identify a longer-term trend, while a
daily or intraday chart must be used for examining the shorter-term trend.
After determining the direction of the market, it is important to identify the
time horizon of potential trades and to apply those strategies to the appropriate trend. Therefore, the techniques covered in this book are highly effective in trading the forex markets.
Technical analysis is the study of historical prices in an attempt to
predict future price movements. There are two basic components on which
technical analysis is based: prices and volume. By having the proper understanding of how these two components exploit the impact of supply
and demand in the marketplace, with a stronger understanding of how indicators work, especially when combining candle charts and pivot analysis,
you will soon discover a powerful trading method to incorporate in the
forex market.

Long or Short
One of the advantages that the forex market has over equity markets is that
there is no uptick rule, as exists in the stock market, if one wants to take advantage of a price decline. Short selling in forex is similar to that in the futures market. By definition, when a trader goes short, he is selling a
currency with the expectation that the price will drop, allowing for a profitable offset. If the market moves against the trader’s position, he will be
forced to buy back the contract at a higher price. The result is a loss on the
trade. There is no limit to how high a currency can go, giving short sellers
an unlimited loss scenario. Theoretically, a short seller is exposed to more
risk than a trader with a long position; however, through the use of stoploss orders, traders can mitigate their risk regardless of long or short positions. It is imperative that traders are well-disciplined and execute
previously planned trades, as opposed to spontaneous trading based on a
“feeling that the price will decline.”

Benefits for Selling Short
There are obvious benefits to short selling. This aspect of the forex market
allows traders to profit from declining markets. The ease of selling con-

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

61

tracts before buying them first is in contrast to typical stock trading. Market prices have a tendency to drop faster than they rise, giving short sellers
an opportunity to capitalize on this phenomenon. Similarly, prices will
often rally gradually with increasing volume. As prices trend toward a peak,
trading volume will typically taper off. This is a signal that many short sellers look for to initiate a trade. When a reversal does occur, there will typically be more momentum than there was with the corresponding up move.
Volume will increase throughout the sell-off until the prices reach a point at
which sellers begin to back off.

Famous Short Plays
There have been quite a few milestone memories from famous currency
trades, with both short positions and long. For example, famed financier
George Soros “broke” the Bank of England by winning an estimated $10 billion bet that the British pound would lose value! How about Daimler
Chrysler, the parent company of Chrysler and Mercedes Benz—reportedly
it made more money in the forex markets than it did selling cars! On the
negative side, in early 2005, Warren Buffett announced the U.S. dollar was
in trouble and stated he was heavily short the U.S. currency. That did not
turn out well for him, as the dollar rallied for the most part during all of
2005. What turned the market around? There were many issues—mainly
political, geopolitical, and economic developments—that influenced the
dollar’s value. For starters, many U.S.–based multi-conflomerate corporations were prompted to bring money back into the United States due to the
Homeland Investment Act (HIA). The HIA is part of 2004 American Jobs
Creation Act and was intended to encourage U.S.–based companies to
bring money back home.
The window of opportunity afforded by the HIA prompted companies
to increase the pace at which funds are repatriated to the United States.
Since companies had only until the end of 2005, many analysts suspected
that companies would rush to repatriate foreign profits by year’s end and
that there would be a high dollar demand to convert foreign currencies.
Don’t forget, during the middle of 2005, there were riots in France. That
contributed to poor market sentiment toward the euro zone, thus giving
ground for a flight to safety, and helped foreign investors switch to buying
U.S. dollars. The tone was essentially dollar-positive and euro-negative,
which is indicative of politics having a negative effect on the euro. Meanwhile, the broader market was also most likely influenced by the high-profile move by Berkshire Hathaway, Inc.’s, Warren Buffett to cut back
speculative positions against the U.S. dollar after losing big on it due to surprising dollar strength.
Mr. Buffett had bet that the dollar would continue losing ground, as it

62

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

did in 2004, as he felt the massive U.S. current-account deficit would be dollar negative. But instead, monetary policy dictated otherwise as the Federal
Reserve continued to raise interest rates. That was helping to drive demand
as the interest rate differentials widened. In its third-quarter report in 2005,
Berkshire Hathaway said it had cut its foreign-currency exposure to $16.5
billion, down from $21.5 billion in June 2005.
As you can see from the dollar Index weekly chart in Figure 1.34, on a
year-to-year basis, the dollar did make an outstanding run. However, keep
in mind that the dollar was at a high of 120.80 back in 2002; so depending on
where Buffett was shorting the dollar, he could still be in a lucrative position. The focus of this story is how shifts in monetary and fiscal policies can
and do dictate price swings in the market, as happened in 2005.
Forex trading is considered the juggernaut in the investment world,
with more than 3.5 trillion in currency trading taking place per day, according to the Bank for International Settlements. There is more daily volume in the forex market than in all of the U.S. stock markets combined.
There is no doubt that that is one reason why foreign currency has become
so popular. Other reasons why forex attracts so many individual investors

FIGURE 1.34
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

63

are that the market has liquidity and favorable trading applications, such as
the ability to go long or short a position, and that it trends and trades well,
based off technical analysis studies.
In the past, currency trading was accessible for speculators through the
futures industry when the central marketplace in the banking arena was for
the privileged few. This has all changed now, and the competition is fierce.
The industry has expanded from what was an exclusive club of proprietary
traders and banks to a location where any and all individual traders who
want to participate have access in this 24-hour market from their home or
office computers or laptops.
The forex markets offer traders free commissions, no exchange fees,
on-line access, and plenty of liquidity. Unlike the futures products, the markets are standardized contract values, meaning a full-size position is
100,000 value across the board. The one main element that attracted investors is the commission-free trading. Plus, most forex firms require less
capital to initiate a start-up account than a futures account does. In fact, investors can open accounts on their debit and/or credit cards, and the practice of accepting payments online through PayPal exists.
Some firms offer smaller-size flexi accounts, allowing traders to start
applying their skills at technical analysis with as little as $500 and trading
ultraminiaccounts with leverage. This feature of what is known as miniaccounts allows individual investors to adjust their positions by not having
too big a contract value per position; they can add or scale into greater or
lesser positions to adjust the level of leverage according to their account
size. Smaller-size investors are not excluded from trading; they can participate with minicontracts. What is great about this feature is that a new
trader or an experienced trader who is testing a new system can trade the
market with real money, rather than simply paper trading, and benefit from
the actual experience of working out execution issues and, more important,
of seeing how they handle the mental or emotional side of trading. Having
real money on the line certainly helps teach people to learn about their
emotional makeup. This is one great way to overcome the fear-and-greed
syndrome that many traders seem to battle. Another excellent quality that
forex miniaccounts have is that traders with low-equity accounts can afford
to trade multiple positions without being exposed to excessive risks like
full-sized positions for scaling out of positions in order to let a portion of
the position ride a profitable position, while capturing profits on a partial
exit. We will go over more on that style of trading later.

What Benefits Do Forex Firms Offer?
Besides offering leverage accounts, other benefits that most forex companies offer are free real-time news, charts, and quotes with state-of-the-art

64

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

order-entry platforms; and some even have automated order-entry features
such as one cancels the other and trailing stops. All of these tools and
order-entry platforms come at no additional charge to the trader.
These features may sound too good to be true. With all the benefits
that the forex market offers, most newcomers want to know what the
catch is. There are some slight cost factors that relate to execution;
you pay a premium or a higher spread to buy and a higher spread to
sell. Also, most forex companies take the other side of your trade; you
do not have direct access to the interbank market, as it is called. Since
the forex market is decentralized, it is possible that five different companies are showing five different prices all at the same time within a few
points (PIPs—percentage in points). Since most forex traders are shortterm in nature, meaning they are quick in-and-out players, day trading
in the forex markets is beneficial for these traders due to the fact that
there are no commissions; but the PIP spreads can and do add up. There
lies the catch.

Buy and Sell the Spread
Forex prices, or quotes, include a “bid” and an “ask” similar to other financial products. The bid is the price at which a dealer is willing to buy and a
trader can sell a currency; and the ask is the price at which a dealer is willing to sell and a trader can buy a currency. In forex trading, unlike futures
or equities, you have to pay a percentage in price (PIP) spread on entering
a trade. The PIP spread is the point difference between the bid and the asking price of the spot currency price. This can vary between two and four
PIPs on a euro versus U.S. dollar spread. The spread varies on other currency pairs and is usually wider on more exotic cross markets, such as the
Canadian dollar versus the Swiss franc.
If you want to hold a position for several days, a rollover process is
necessary. In the spot forex market, all trades must be settled within two
business days at the close of business at 5 P.M. (EST). The only fee involved here is the interest payment on the position of currency held. At
times, depending on the position, a trader can receive an interest payment
as well. This is where the term tomorrow/next (Tom/Next) applies. It
refers to the simultaneous buying and selling of a currency for delivery the
following day.
As with futures, forex markets are now regulated to an extent and
come under the scrutiny of the self-imposed regulators, such as the National Futures Association after the CFTC Modernization Act passed in
2002; but since there is no centralized marketplace, many forex dealers can
and do make their own markets, as discussed earlier.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

65

Why Trade Spot Forex Markets?
Of all financial instruments traded, forex is believed by many professional
traders and analysts to be one of the best-suited markets to trade based off
technical analysis methods, for a number of reasons. First is its sheer size
in trading volume: According to the Bank for International Settlements, average daily turnover in traditional foreign exchange markets amounted to
$1.9 trillion in the cash exchange market and another $1.2 trillion per day in
the over-the-counter (OTC) foreign exchange and interest rate derivatives
market as of April 2005. Second, the rate of growth and the number of market participants in forex trading have grown some 2,000 percent over the
past three decades, rising from barely $1 billion per day in 1974 to an estimated $2 trillion by 2005. Third, since the market does not have an official
closing time, there is never a backlog or “pool” of client orders parked
overnight that may cause a severe reaction to news stories hitting the market at the U.S. Bank opening. This generally reduces the chance for price
gaps. Currencies tend to experience longer-lasting trending market conditions than other markets. These trends can last for months or even years, as
most central banks do not switch interest rate policies every other day.
This makes them ideal markets for trend trading and even breakout systems traders. This might explain why chart pattern analysis works so well
in forex trading. With such widespread groups playing the game around the
world, crowd behavior plays a large part in currency moves; and it is this
crowd behavior that is the foundation for the myriad of technical analysis
tools and techniques.
Due in part to its size, forex is less volatile than other markets. Lower
volatility equals lower risk. For example, the S&P 500 Index trading range
is between 4 percent and 5 percent daily, while the daily volatility range in
the euro is around 1 percent.
Trading veterans know that markets are interdependent, with some
markets more heavily influenced by certain markets than others. We covered some of these relationships looking at futures and certain stocks and
how changes in interest rates can move equity markets as well as the currencies markets. We will learn in coming chapters how to detect hidden yet
repeating patterns that occur between these related markets and how forex
traders can profit from these patterns.

Which Is Bigger—Stocks or Forex?
Forex is by far the largest market in dollar volume, is less volatile, experiences longer and more accentuated price trends, and does not have trading
commissions. Forex is the ideal market for the experienced trader who has

66

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

paid his or her “trading tuition” in other markets. However, there are no
free lunches. Traders must use all the trading tools at their disposal. The
better these fundamental and technical tools, the greater is their chance for
trading success. While intermarket and other relationships are often complex and difficult to apply effectively, with a little high-tech help, traders
and investors can enjoy the benefits of using them without having to scrap
their existing trading methods.

Forex versus Futures
The futures market through the International Monetary Market (IMM) of
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange has many benefits as well. Some believe
there are tighter spreads between the bid and the asking price, plus there is
no interest charge or rollover fee every other day. In addition, the futures
markets offer options for longer-term traders. There are transactions costs
that apply per round turn; but if the brokerage commission exchange, regulatory, and transaction charges are less than the PIP spread in forex, an
active speculator would be given a better cost advantage by using the futures markets instead of the forex spot markets.
Let’s compare a trade in forex to a trade with a similar-size contract
value on the futures exchange, using the example of a euro futures contract
on the CME, where it has a contract size of USD 125,000 worth of euros,
where each PIP would be 12.50 in value. If the commissions and related
fees are on a par with most discount brokerage firms, $20 is your transaction cost per round turn, that is, $10 to buy and $10 to sell out the position.
Keep in mind that the contract value is 25 percent higher than a fullsize forex position, too. If a day trader in forex does a $100,000 full-lot-size
contract and pays three PIPS on every transaction for both the entry and
the exit of each position, this trader would be charged $30 per round-turn
transaction.
The futures arena also has other interesting features and products; one
is the U.S. dollar Index® contract traded on the New York Board of Trade,
as was shown in Figure 1.34. That index is computed using a tradeweighted geometric average of six currencies. It virtually trades around the
clock—the trading hours are from 7 P.M. to 10 P.M., then from 3 A.M. to 8:05
A.M., and then from 8:05 A.M. to 3 P.M. Unlike the forex, there are daily limits on the price movement with 200 ticks above and below the prior day’s
settlement, except during the last 30 minutes of any trading session, when
no limit applies. Should the price reach the limit and remain within 100
ticks of the limit for 15 minutes, then new limits will be established 200
ticks above and below the previous price limit. Figure 1.35 shows a breakdown of the various currencies and their respective weights on the average.
The top four include the euro, which is the heaviest weight at 57.6 percent,
