
During this period we saw the same two indicators pointing to an uptrend, and price crossing the

50-day SMA and entering the DBB buy zone; but they were wrong twice within one month:
On February 15 we had the same signals as earlier giving dual confirmation of a new uptrend.
Price crossed over the 50-day SMA, and also closed within the upper DBB buy zone. Yet the
trend reversed lower five sessions later.
On March 1 price again not only had crossed its 50-day SMA a few days earlier but had also
now entered its BB buy zone, only to fall back lower six sessions later.
The point is again that indicators are only useful tools that increase the odds of being right; that's
all. So we stick to trading only when we have:
An entry near strong support to serve as a barrier against price moves against our position.
A risk-to-reward ratio (rrr) at least 1:2, preferably 1:3.
Under these conditions, the odds are heavily in our favor for gains being much larger than losses.
That way we can afford to be wrong a lot and still prosper.
While they can never eliminate the risk of loss, the right combination of analysis and RAMM can
greatly increase your odds of success.

Moving Averages Cross Each Other
The other type of trend reversal indicator using moving average crossovers is when:
A shorter-duration moving average crosses over a slower, longer-duration moving average,
signaling upward, bullish momentum.
A shorter-duration moving average crosses under a slower, longer-duration moving average,
signaling downward, bearish momentum.
That is, instead of price crossing over or under a moving average, two separate moving averages
cross.

Examples of Simple Trading Systems Using MA Crossovers
As mentioned earlier, your goal is to develop a trading system, which in its simplest form is just some
rules for when you enter and exit trades for a given currency pair or other asset. It doesn't have to be
complex. Typically even a simple system that you've found works most of the time with a given asset
is better than no system at all. To clarify, let's look at a few cases of very simple trading systems
using MA crossovers.
For example, if the 20-day MA crosses above the less responsive 50-day MA, it's a sign that the
trend is more likely to be moving higher. Similarly, if the 20-day MA crosses under the 50-day MA,
it's a sign that the trend is more likely to be moving lower.
The movements of the shorter-term moving averages are the trigger because, as noted earlier,
shorter-duration moving averages like the 20-period MA are more responsive to recent changes than
longer-duration ones like the 50-period MA. Thus when a shorter MA crosses above or below a
longer one, it's an alert that a longer-term change may be coming, even when this trend is not so clear
from the candlesticks themselves.
For example, look again at the daily gold chart we saw in Figure 8.10, reproduced in Figure 8.11.
Note that while I use a 20-day SMA here, I also use a 50-day exponential moving average (EMA)
(more responsive than SMAs) in order to make their interaction a bit more sensitive to recent price

action. You can do this kind of mix and match of EMAs and SMAs as experience warrants.
FIGURE 8.11 Gold Daily Chart February 26 to August 12, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Note how the 20-day SMA (used as part of the DBBs) crossed over the 50-day EMA on March 2,
2010 (A1). Even though gold continued to fall for a few more sessions, the MA crossover signaled
that the overall trend over the past 20 periods (days on a daily chart) was rising, and in fact this
crossover would have alerted you that gold might soon break higher, which it did.
If you did nothing else but stay long in gold until the 20-day SMA crossed below the 50-day EMA
on July 19, 2010 (A4), you'd have caught a long uptrend and gotten out before some of the downtrend
that followed.
Of course we don't rely on just one indicator. Depending on other indicators you may have used,
you might well have had better results. For example, having studied gold's past performance, you may
have added some rules that might have improved your performance over the February 26 to August 12
period. For example, you might have only added the application of DBBs along with the MA
crossover to form the following overly simple system:
The 20-day SMA is above the 50-day EMA.
Once that happens, apply the four rules of Double Bollinger Bands (DBBs). That is, once the 20day SMA has crossed the 50-day EMA and you are looking to be long gold:
Buy when gold has a daily close within or above its DBB buy zone.
Sell if gold has a daily close below its DBB buy zone.
Note how well combining just these two rules would have worked. Look again at Figure 8.11, and
at the continuation in Figure 8.12.
FIGURE 8.12 Gold Daily Chart, August 8, 2010, to January 24, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

A few choppy weeks after your initial entry on March 2 (A1), on March 31 (just before the candle
labeled A2) gold crossed and closed above both its 50-day and 20-day MAs, then the next day on
April 1 (A2) gold crossed into the DBB buy zone. By just using this simple rule of entering and
staying long while gold was in its DBB buy zone, and exiting when it closed below that zone, you
would have caught most of the uptrend in gold over the following eight months, avoided almost all of
the drop on July 1 (A3) and the choppy sideways movement from July to early August, and caught
virtually all of the uptrend from mid-August onward when the 20-day SMA crossed back over the 50day EMA on August 22 (D1). You'd have missed the first weeks of gold being back in the DBB buy
zone that began in early August (B and C), but that's the price you pay to avoid the choppy market.
Note what happened from mid-August to mid-October (D1 to D2).

Welcome to Back Testing
By the way, this kind of examining how different indicators have worked together in the past is a
simple example of what we call back testing. As we'll discuss later, any truly serious trader or
investor will adopt this practice with a passion. We'll revisit this topic in Chapter 9.
In the preceding simple example of back testing the combination of DBBs with MA crossovers, we
saw that this overly simple system did very well during this period of a strong trend. Afterward, it
clearly didn't work well, highlighting the need for further rules to deal with choppy, range-bound
markets. For dealing with such conditions, traders typically turn to oscillators. What are those? Funny
you should ask.

OSCILLATORS
Oscillators are a class of technical indicators that measure momentum by comparing the current price
to the price range over a given period. These are useful in range-bound markets because that's when
price highs and lows for a given period provide meaningful s/r, and thus are indicators that a reversal

is more likely when price approaches these limits.
Figure 8.13 is an example of a daily EURUSD chart with three of the more popular types of
oscillators, Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD) on top, Relative Strength Index
(RSI) in the middle, and Stochastic on the bottom.
FIGURE 8.13 EURUSD Daily Chart, April 12 to September 26, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

As their name implies, they oscillate between extreme levels or around a center line. Extremely low
readings indicate an exceptionally low price for a given period and theoretically oversold condition.
Extreme high readings suggest the opposite. Again, this information is very useful in range-bound
markets, but meaningless in strongly trending markets, when the highs and lows that the oscillators
depict are obsolete.
There are many oscillators, and there is plenty of good material on their theory and use online if you
just enter their names into your search engine of choice. Because our focus is more on providing
material on the practice and theory of profiting from forex that you can't easily find elsewhere, and
because so many of the oscillators are similar, we're going to keep this section brief and recommend
that you do some further study of these three so that you understand how they work, and include at
least one of them as part of your usual toolbox of four to seven indicators.
Regarding the oscillators shown in Figure 8.13:
MACD: This one deserves a bit more explanation. Assuming the following standard settings, the
histogram shows the difference between a 12-period EMA and a 26-period EMA. Its length and
direction show the strength of the bullish or bearish momentum. The signal line is a 9-period
SMA that serves as a trend change signal. For particularly good sources on MACD search
online, particularly for the books of Dr. Alexander Elder.
RSI and Stochastic: Both are variations on the basic idea of comparing current price to the price
range over a given period. There's plenty of material on both of these online that you can find by
just entering the names of these into your search engine of choice, or just search major financial
educational websites like investopedia.com or others noted in Appendix A.

How They're Used to Generate Buy/Sell Signals
Oscillators generate buy/sell signals by showing:
Crossovers: Crossing extreme overbought or oversold levels. With oscillators that use multiple
lines such as MACD and stochastics, the crossing of those lines can also generate a buy or sell
signal.
Divergences: When oscillators move in the opposite direction from the trend, that divergence
with the trend suggests price may soon change direction.

Crossovers
Crossovers occur when price crosses an indicator, or two indicator lines cross, for example:
Moving average crossovers: As we saw in Figure 8.13 with MACD, one or more moving
averages shown cross each other.
Oscillators cross extreme readings: If they show that price is high relative to prices over the
period they cover, that suggests the asset may be overbought and due for a pullback. If they show
that price is at the low end of the range for the period in question, that suggests the asset is
oversold and is due for a bounce. For example:
The RSI can generate buy and sell signals when it goes beyond the 70 and 30 lines shown in
Figure 8.13 and then reenters the middle zone between these lines, suggesting a reversal is
coming.
The stochastic does the same when it exceeds either the 20 line or the 80 line as shown in
Figure 8.13 and then reenters the middle zone between these lines. The crossing of the faster
line over or under the slower line also suggests a change in trend momentum that can signal a
coming bullish or bearish reversal.
When the MACD histogram crosses under the (usually red) signal line, that's bearish,
suggesting further reversal lower. When it crosses above the (usually red) signal line, that's
bullish, signaling possible reversal higher. Again, see Figure 8.13 for examples, with bullish
and bearish crosses highlighted and labeled.

When Price and Oscillator Trends Diverge
Momentum oscillators generally move in the same direction as price. However, because the
momentum oscillators are measuring not just the direction of price change but also the rate of change
in price, their direction will diverge from the direction of the price of the asset when the rate of
change slows. In other words, when price is moving higher or lower, so should the oscillator.
However, when the speed of that trend slows, the direction of the momentum oscillators will start to
diverge from that of price. Those divergences can be valuable leading indicators of a possible
trend reversal. For example, slowing momentum, as reflected by these divergences, suggests a
trend reversal may be coming. (See Figure 8.14.)
FIGURE 8.14 USDCAD Four-Hour Chart, February 3 to April 8, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Here's some explanation.
Lines A and A1: These are examples of how an oscillator typically moves in the same direction
as price, in this case reflecting the same downward momentum.
Lines A and A2: Even though the USDCAD is moving lower, A2 shows how the stochastic
oscillator is suggesting a reversal is coming, as it reflects increasing bullish momentum (or
fading bearish momentum). In other words, recent prices have been higher over the period it
measures, hence the uptrend in the stochastic that foretells the coming uptrend.
Lines B and B2: Again, while the USDCAD itself is moving higher, the momentum of the move is
weakening over the dates covered; hence, while the pair itself keeps moving higher, the
stochastic starts trending lower, forecasting the coming reversal.

When to Use Oscillators
We repeat: Oscillators are not that useful in strongly trending markets because prior highs or lows are
not especially relevant. The perception of value is changing, hence the irrelevance of old highs and/or
lows.
That said, in range-bound or gently trending markets they're very useful in providing evidence of
coming turns. The wider the trading range or channel, the lower the risk and the higher the potential
yield. As we noted earlier when discussing channels, be wary of trading against the direction of the
channel unless the channel is wide enough to allow you to profit even as time erodes your room to
profit and pulls resistance closer each day.

Other Oscillators to Consider
There are many. First do some more research on the ones we've mentioned. Not only are they as
useful as any, they are also among the most popular and thus help you to understand what other traders
are thinking and to anticipate their moves.
Here's a partial list of other very popular oscillators you should certainly consider:

Commodity Channel Index (CCI): Despite its name, the CCI works equally well with forex and
stocks, too, and provides both oversold/overbought as well as divergence indicators.
Rate of Change (ROC): This indicator measures the percent change from the price a given
number of periods ago. It is useful as both a divergence and an oversold/overbought indicator as
it oscillates around a zero line.
Williams %R: Generates buy/sell signals via overbought/oversold, crossover, and divergences.
It's very similar to Stochastic %K, except that Williams %R is plotted a bit differently, using
negative values ranging from 0 to –100. It's the creation of Larry Williams, who, in addition to
being a star commodities trader and investor, has published nine books on investing and won the
Robbins World Cup Championship of Futures Trading in 1987.

Designer Genes
Williams's daughter grew up watching him, was homeschooled by the man himself, and 10 years later
in 1997 won the cup herself—at age 17! Not only did she win it, but she also crushed the competition
and all that followed ever since then. No one has yet topped her returns of 1,000 percent. Talk about
talent; trading isn't even her focus. She's the actress Michelle Williams, whose credits include the TV
series Dawson's Creek and three Oscar nominations, if you don't mind, for her roles in Brokeback
Mountain, Blue Valentine , and My Week with Marilyn. Still, as Momma Wachtel would say, good
that she has something to fall back on in case acting doesn't work out.2

MOVING AVERAGE LAYERING INDICATES TREND
STRENGTH
If you insert 10-, 20-, 50-, 100-, and 200-period MAs on your chart, the way they are layered or
ordered can tell you a lot about the strength of the current trend.
Here are the basic rules.

The Stronger the Trend, the Clearer the MA Layering
By “clearer” we mean that the distance between the MAs will be greater and the slope will be
steeper.
Specifically:

The Stronger the Uptrend, the More the MAs Will Be Layered with
Shorter Durations on the Top
The most bullish MA layering is when the shortest (most responsive to price changes) duration MA is
on the top and the longest (least responsive to price changes) duration MA is on the bottom, and the
trend itself is sitting above them all. For example, see Figure 8.15.
FIGURE 8.15 Gold Weekly Chart, January 13, 2009, to August 9, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

In case you're wondering why I'm using a gold chart in a forex book, it's because gold is primarily a
currency hedge when markets are feeling concerned about the long-term buying power of the major
currencies, particularly of the USD and EUR. Thus forex traders often trade gold, and most retail
forex firms offer it along with other commodities. Demand for either of these currencies falls when
there's anxiety about their purchasing power, making gold a useful alternative way to play weakness
in either or both of these currencies.
Currency traders and investors may wind up trading gold (as well as oil, silver, copper, etc.) and
other currency-related commodities as another way of playing currency trends or hedging currency
bets, particularly those involving the EUR and USD. We'll look further at the relationship between
gold and the EUR and USD in Chapter 9.
Figure 8.16 is another example, which we include because it connects so well with the following
examples illustrating the other MA layering rules.
FIGURE 8.16 EURCHF Weekly Chart, July 16, 2006, to January 27, 2008
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Note how until the week of June 17, 2007, the EMAs were layered exactly as we'd want to see to
confirm a strong uptrend, with the 10-week EMA on top, followed by the 20-, 50-, 100-, and 200week EMAs, all sloping higher.
But wait! Note how from that point onward, the 10-week, then 20-week, then 50-week EMAs'
slopes flattened, then turned down. From early July to late October 2007 the 10- and 20-week EMAs
were flattening out, hinting at a trend reversal. By early December the EURCHF had begun a
downtrend (a series of lower highs and lower lows). By late December 2007 the 10-week EMA had
turned down and was about to cross beneath the now falling 20-week EMA, and both would then
cross the now descending 50-week EMA (see Figure 8.17). This brings us to our next rule.
FIGURE 8.17 EURCHF Weekly Chart, June 17, 2007, to March 21, 2010
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The Weaker the Trend, the More Mixed the MA Layering
By “mixed” we mean that the orderly EMA layering starts to break down, with the shorter-duration
EMAs flattening out and then crossing below or above the longer-term EMAs, signaling that the trend
is losing momentum (in either direction) in the trend and a possible reversal up or down. Such moving
average crossovers are classic momentum indicators.
For example, when previously rising shorter-term moving averages start falling and crossing
beneath longer-term EMAs, that's a classic sign that an uptrend is losing momentum and could be
reversing. Look what happened to the EURCHF from late December 2007 to mid-December 2009 in
Figure 8.17.
Note how the layering that began flattening and then reversing from July to December 2007
suggested that a much longer-term reversal was coming. This brings us to our third rule.

The Stronger the Downtrend, the More the MAs Will Be Layered with
Shorter Durations on the Bottom
The most bearish MA layering is when the longest-duration MA is on the top and the shortest-duration
MA is on the bottom, and the trend itself is sitting beneath them all. As we saw in Figure 8.17, the
downtrend was already well established by September 2008 as the world fell into recession and the
more safe haven CHF began a long-term uptrend versus the EUR; the process was already completed
by December 2009. Figure 8.18 better illustrates the completed layering confirming a classic strong
downtrend.
FIGURE 8.18 EURCHF Weekly Chart, December 13, 2009, to August 9, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Due to length limits for this book, I couldn't provide trade examples using momentum indicators.
Look for them at www.thesensibleguidetoforex.com under the Practice Trade Simulations tab and
other parts of the website where we'll feature trading ideas.

Notes
1. Kathy Lien, The Little Book of Currency Trading: How to Make Big Profits in the World of
Forex (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
2. Christine Jenkins, “Here's How Actress Michelle Williams Won the World Cup of Futures
Trading Award at Age 17,” Business Insider (January 2011), www.businessinsider.com/michellewilliams-trader-father-2011-1#ixzz1l9sYG3z3.

CHAPTER 9
Technical Analysis
Future Study
Acentral principle of good teaching is that it gives the student a clear path on which to continue once
the teacher exits. A common fault in trading books is that either they provide insufficient guidance
about what to learn next or they presume that they've taught you everything you need to succeed.
Unfortunately that's impossible to do.
Trading books tend to focus on what is most relevant to the author's own trading style, and there are
just too many ways to trade for any one book to possibly cover them all well.
After having studied this book, you're ready to start applying the specific methods and tools we've
taught on practice accounts, and then with real accounts. These are good starting points, but it's quite
possible that you'll grow in other directions.
Regarding what to learn next, this chapter is meant to introduce you to the next technical analysis
(TA) topics you'll want to learn as part of your continuing education, to expand your analytical skills
and find the trading style that best fits you.

CATCH A WAVE: TIMING OR CYCLE INDICATORS
Be it in surfing, comedy, investing, or anything else, the right timing is critical. In addition to
Fibonacci retracements, covered in Chapter 4, there are a number of other indicators that help you
understand the inner rhythm of price movements. Like electricity, we can use them effectively without
really understanding why they work. As with Fibonacci retracements, deploying these others
successfully depends on correctly identifying the relevant trend on which to draw your retracement
levels. It's not hard, but you do get better with practice. Fibonacci retracements are an excellent
starting point, but you eventually want to be comfortable with a few of the following, particularly
Elliott Wave analysis and Fibonacci extensions.

Meet the Fibonaccis
In addition to Fib retracements, there are also:
Extensions or expansions.
After retracements, they get my vote for next most useful fibonacci indicators. They are attempts to
indicate how far the next move in the direction of the trend will be, as opposed to Fibonacci
retracements, which indicate how far the pullback will retrace from the current trend.
There are also Fibonacci:

Time zones.
Arcs.
Fans.

…And the Ganns
From the work of William D. Gann we get:
Gann Lines.
and also:
Fans.
Grids.

Catch the Most Popular Wave: Elliott Wave Theory and More
Everyone should have some familiarity with Elliott Wave analysis, one of the oldest and most popular
forms of timing or cycle analysis. Again, popular indicators have the added bonus of telling you what
the crowd is thinking. Other approaches to surfing the waves of price movements include DiNapoli
levels, Goodman Wave Theory, and more, but let this much suffice. You've got enough to investigate
as time permits.
