
Forex for Beginners
Most forex brokers maintain an accessible list of rollover rates, which are
based on the short-term interest rates that they have negotiated with the
banks that hold their currency on your behalf. Some brokers will quote
rollover rates on specific currency pairs, while others will quote them on
individual currencies and leave the math to you. In any event, rates
differ—sometimes substantially—between brokers for reasons that are
unclear. The rollover rates for long and short positions are usually inverted,
but they are not symmetrical. In other words, while you can assume that
positive rollover for a long position would imply negative rollover for a short
position, the two rates will almost certainly differ.
Figure 9-4 shows the rollover rates that FXDD accountholders can expect to
pay/earn for a handful of currency pairs. Rates are quoted on a long and short
basis and are expressed in terms of the number of units assessed daily per
$100,000 lot. For example, a long position in the AUD/CAD would result in
a daily credit of $7.84 for every $100,000 lot. When you multiply 7.84 by the
number of days per year (365), the product, 2.9%, represents the annualized
interest rate differential that you will earn on an AUD/CAD long position.
On the other hand, a long position in the EUR/TRY would punish the
position-holder with a daily debit of $58 for every $100,000 lot, which
corresponds to an annualized rate of -21%. As a result, if you hold this
position for a year, you can expect to incur interest charges totaling a
whopping $21,000! Now you can understand why the carry trade is such a
compelling force in the currency markets!

Figure 9-4. Rollover rates for selected currency pairs (Source: FXDD)

219

220

Chapter 9 | Account Management
Even if you don’t use rollover rates as a basis for strategy, you must at the
very least make sure that you are aware of them. A daily debit of only a few
dollars might not justify a reaction. For a position that remains open for
many months, however, it can severely impact profitability, for better or for
worse.

Order Entry
Now that you understand margin and rollover, the next step is learning how
to properly key in an order. At this point, it should not come as a surprise to
you that there is more work involved here than simply clicking the “buy”
button. You can see from Figure 9-5 (from the Forex.com platform) that
entering in any order has several parameters.

Figure 9-5. Order entry screen (Source: Forex.com)

First of all, you must select the currency pair that you wish to trade in the
Product field. Here, I have selected the EUR/USD. Check the Associated
Order box if the order will impact an existing position. (Many platforms will
make the connection automatically.) Indicate whether you are inputting a buy
or a sell order, as well as the number of lots. (This platform assumes units of
10,000, as shown in the Quantity field.)
Next, you must indicate the order type from the dropdown menu. If you
select Market Order, then the order will be executed (instantly) at the current
bid/ask rates for sell/buy orders, respectively. If you enter a Single order
(often referred to as a limit order in equities lingo), you can dictate the price
that you would like to receive, in terms of the Order Rate itself or the
number of PIPs that it differs from the current price. In this case, I have
entered a rate of 1.34332, which is approximately 30 PIPs below the current
market rate, which you can deduce as 1.34032 (1.34332–0.0030).
Henceforth, your order will be executed only if the price declines by 30 PIPs.

Forex for Beginners
You must also enter an expiration date (one hour, one day, and so forth) or
indicate that the order is Good Till Cancelled (GTC).
You’re probably wondering, “Why wouldn’t everyone insist on more
favorable rates—rather than accept the current bid/ask rates—when keying in
orders?” The answer is that the further your rate is from the bid/ask, the less
likely it is to be executed. In the previous example, it could take an hour for
the EUR/USD price to drop 30 PIPs, if it drops at all! For some people, this
is perfectly acceptable, while for others, the possibility of losing out on a
good trade to save a couple PIPs might seem foolhardy. You could also enter
in a price that falls between the bid/ask spread and hope for execution. For
example, if the current spread is 1.3303 and 1.3307, you could try entering in
1.3306 and see if the order gets filled.
Bear in mind that some brokers will only show you the amalgamation of all
of their open orders, while others will show you their entire order book. For
example, imagine that your broker's order system contains all of the open
orders in the order book as seen in Figure 9-6.

Figure 9-6. An order book is either consolidated into a bid/ask quote or displayed as is.

The majority of forex brokers will amalgamate this information into a simple
bid/ask spread (like the one in Figure 9-6) that contains only the highest bid
and the lowest ask. In the interest in transparency, however, there are some
brokers that are generous enough to show you their entire order book. In this
case, if you want to buy more than 11 lots or sell more than 16 lots, part of
your order would be filled at the less favorable rate. For example, if you

221

222

Chapter 9 | Account Management
entered a market order to buy 15 lots, 11 would be filled at 1.3308 and the 4
remaining units would be filled at 1.3309. However, if you instead used a
single order and stipulated a price of 1.3308, you would ensure that all 15
lots of your order are filled at 1.3308 or better (or not at all).
Once you have determined whether you’d prefer a market order or a single
order, simply click the Submit Order button, and your order will move into
your Open Orders folder. As soon as it is executed (instantaneously, in most
cases), your order will show up in your Activities Log and in your Open
Positions folder. Most trading platforms also support one-click order entry.
By simply clicking on a quote or a price point in an open chart, you can
immediately open a long/short position, saving yourself the few seconds that
it takes to manually key in the order. In some cases, believe it or not, this
could make a difference!

Forex for Beginners

Figure 9-7. This order entry system enables simultaneous buy/sell orders and stops (Source:
OANDA)

Of course, you may have noticed that there are a handful of other types of
orders. Buy and sell stops are probably the most basic. Recall from the
discussion of strategy in Chapter 7 that stops are used to lock in profits and
limit losses. Some traders (especially those that plan to monitor their
accounts in real-time) may enter stops in separately, on an as-needed basis.
Others may enter them in as soon as they open their positions. Some order

223

224

Chapter 9 | Account Management
entry systems, like the one shown in Figure 9-7, were specifically designed
to facilitate this latter tactic.
In fact, this particular platform is incredibly well designed, since you don’t
need to manually calculate stop rates. Simply enter in the number of PIPs at
which you would like to Take Profit and/or the number of PIPs that you will
Stop Loss. You can even specify a Trailing Stop. Based on my indications in
Figure 9-7, the system will automatically close out my long EUR/USD
position if the rate rises by 50 PIPs or falls by 20 PIPs. In addition, as long as
the EUR/USD rate rises, my trailing stop will automatically adjust to 30 PIPs
below the most recent high, superseding my original stop order. For example,
if the price rises by 50 PIPs, from 1.3469 to 1.3519, the system will
automatically adjust my stop to 1.3499. If the price rises further, my trailing
stop will adjust proportionately. If the price falls from this level and breaches
1.3499, my trailing stop will likewise execute automatically.
There are a handful of other order types (some of which can be seen in the
drop-down menu in the order entry screen depicted in Figure 9-5), and some
of which are only available through certain brokers or advanced platforms. A
One-Cancels-Other order is exactly as it sounds: two orders are entered
simultaneously, and if one is executed, then the other is automatically
cancelled. For example, let’s say that you have a theory that the EUR/USD is
due for a breakout, but you’re not sure of the direction. You could indicate a
One-Cancels-Other order that either executes a buy if the EUR/USD rate
increases 30 PIPs or executes a sell if it falls 30 PIPs, whatever happens first.
An If-Then order, meanwhile, involves the entry of two simultaneous orders,
but the second order will only go into effect if the first order is executed.
This can be seen in Figure 9-8. I have entered an If-Then order for the
EUR/USD that will execute a buy only if the price first falls by 30 PIPs and
secondarily if the price falls by an additional 30 PIPs from that level. This
latter stop order will protect me from incurring big losses if the EUR/USD
slides below the level that I have anticipated.

Forex for Beginners

Figure 9-8. An example of an If-Then order (Source: FXCM)

Autocharting
In order to become a successful trader, you may also want to take advantage
of some of the other tools on your trading platform. The autochartist feature,
for example, is adept at picking up on technical patterns in charts, as seen in
Figure 9-9.

Figure 9-9. Autochartist tool (Source: FXCM)

You can see how my trading platform has identified dozens of such patterns
and catalogued their respective directions, time intervals, and quality, among
other aspects. In the EUR/CZK chart that is displayed on the right-hand side

225

226

Chapter 9 | Account Management
of Figure 9-9, you can see that the autochartist tool has identified a possible
Ascending Triangle. It is evidently of good quality and clarity, and the
autochartist suggests that the pair is due for an upswing.

Backtesting
Perhaps the most innovative tool available for your use is the automated
backtester. In an earlier era, technical analysts had to manually apply their
theories to historic price data in order to determine their validity. Even well
into the 2000s, computerized backtesting was slow, complex, and only
available to institutional investors with deep pockets and powerful
computers. Nowadays, you can simply pull up the backtesting tool and either
open a pre-defined strategy or develop your own customized strategy. Next,
key in your preferred currency pair, time interval, start date, and end date.
Click on the Backtest button, and voilà! Data is immediately forthcoming! In
Figure 9-10, you can see the results of a six-month backtest I performed on
the EUR/CHF.
The purpose of my backtest was to determine whether an exponential moving
average (EMA) crossover strategy would have been profitable for this pair at
a daily interval over the designated time period. You can see from the many
buy and sell arrows in the chart that each time the EMA crossed over the
moving average, the computer initiated a hypothetical buy or sell order. After
tallying the results of all of these trades, the program determined that this
trade was net profitable. (Total profits exceeded total losses, and percent
profit was positive.)
For those that are quantitatively inclined, the backtest also computes a
handful of performance metrics. The average monthly return for each of your
trades can be generated as well as the standard deviation (also known as
volatility) of this return. The program can also calculate about a dozen ratios,
which are designed to assess whether the strategy performed well from a
risk-adjusted standpoint. In other words, if the total return from the strategy
was large (but the variability of that return was also high), then the strategy
isn’t all that robust. For example, if my strategy generated an annualized
return of 25% (not bad!) but the return fluctuated wildly between -25% and
75%, then the risk-adjusted return is actually quite low. The risk-to-reward
ratio is the most basic of these ratios and simply compares gains to losses.
The Sharpe ratio compares the total return to volatility, while the Sortino
ratio compares the total return to the volatility in downside movements. (The

Forex for Beginners
logic behind this last ratio is that a currency pair shouldn’t be punished for
upside volatility.) As can be seen in Figure 9-10, my strategy produced an
overall profit but negative risk-to-reward ratios and Sharpe ratios. In short, I
should probably tinker with this strategy so that it maintains a similar level of
profit but at a lower risk.

Figure 9-10. Backtesting window within trading platform (Source: FXCM)

I cannot stress the usefulness of the backtest tool enough. As you can see, it’s
both complex and intricate and may take many practice attempts before a
backtest can be performed quickly and comprehensibly. Still, if you take the
time to become fluent in both the process and the concepts that I introduced
above, you will find the backtest to be an invaluable aid in developing
trading strategies. Think about it. Why would you want to speculate about
whether a strategy seems viable when you can definitively establish whether
or not it is, as well as the extent to which it actually was profitable? Take the
time to work through the software and test out customized strategies over
different intervals of time. You may be surprised to see how results differ
when you tweak the parameters of your strategy only slightly.

227

228

Chapter 9 | Account Management
Finally, if you feel confident in your strategy, you can consider automating it
so that your trading platform automatically executes buy and sell orders on
your behalf each time the conditions of the strategy present themselves. Of
course, there are certain downsides to using such an approach, as we’ll
discuss in Chapter 10.

Conclusion
You should now have a working knowledge base for using your trading
platform, managing your account, placing orders, and fine-tuning your
trading strategies. Unfortunately, this is only the starting point, and practice
makes perfect. Familiarize yourself with all of the tools that your platform
makes available. Customize the layout in a way that is most useful to you. In
order to avoid sensory overload, deselect all of the unnecessary windows and
indicators. Create customized chart templates and indicators, and practice
using the autocharting software. Develop a handful of different strategies and
backtest them. Begin to monitor economic indicators and other fundamentals
that will play a role in your trading strategies.
Before trading with real money, you should spend weeks (or even months)
with a demo account. In this way, you can practice keying in orders and get a
feel for order execution. Try to maintain discipline, even though there aren’t
real consequences for failed trades. Eventually, you may get to the point
where you feel comfortable using the trading platform and your trades are
generating net profits. Then—and only then—should you consider
transitioning to a real account.

CHAPTER

10
Pitfalls
and Risks
Understanding the Risks of Forex
and the Mistakes that New Traders
Make
While I’ve tried to offer a balanced portrayal of forex, I think it’s natural that
readers and aspiring traders will still have a rosy view of it. After all,
investors have been known to have tremendous overconfidence in their own
abilities, even in the face of contrary results. By definition, you wouldn’t
start trading currencies unless you believed—or even expected—that you
could earn a profit doing so, right?
Both because forex is a zero-sum game and because currency markets are
more opaque than other securities markets, you should be aware of the risks.
In this chapter, then, I’ll offer an overview of what can go wrong. As a forex
trader, it’s important to understand that you will be vulnerable to forces both
within and outside of your control.
I’ll also introduce some of the mistakes that new traders make, due both to
lack of experience and overconfidence. I’ll explain further how you can
avoid these pitfalls and the steps that you can take to minimize risk. Simply,
those that aspire to succeed must internalize the old adage, “Hope for the best
and prepare for the worst.”

230

Chapter 10 | Pitfalls and Risks

Currency Risk
The most obvious risk in any investing or speculative activity is that the
market will move against you, causing the value of your position to decline.
Quite simply, if you have a long position in the AUD/USD, the most basic
risk that you face is that the Australian dollar will decline relative to the US
dollar, immediately causing you paper losses and ultimately resulting in
actual losses. In forex, this risk is especially acute because the currency
market represents a zero-sum game. By definition, when one trader wins, one
or more other traders must lose. In short, as a forex investor, you must accept
the fact that you will lose money on some of your trades.
In fact, currency risk will always be present in any international investment.
When you own—or are exposed to price changes in—an asset or security
that is denominated in a foreign currency, you take on currency risk. For
example, if you are an American and you buy shares in Sony, you are
exposing yourself to Japanese yen risk. While Sony could boost its
profitability, causing its stock prices to rise in Japan, this would be a moot
development if the yen simultaneously depreciates. Figure 10-1 shows how
(net positive) currency fluctuations have contributed to asset price returns
over the last 12 years.

Figure 10-1. Breakdown of international returns between currency fluctuations and
movements in the underlying asset price (Source: Fidelity Investments).

Forex for Beginners
There are several things that you can do to limit your exposure to currency
risk. First of all, you should prepare yourself for the possibility that you will
lose all of the funds that you apply to currency investing. Accordingly, you
should only invest money that, if lost, would not materially impact your
standard of living or financial situation.
While no one in his or her right mind would plow ahead and invest in forex
with the expectation of losing, it is a possibility that nonetheless must be
accepted. As far as new traders are concerned, currency trading is not for the
unemployed or the cash-strapped. Losing sucks, period. What would be
worse than merely losing, however, is losing cash that you borrowed from
your brother or that you cannot afford to part with.
Second, reduce your leverage to the smallest amount possible. When it
comes to allowable leverage, currencies (and futures) are the exception in
finance—not the norm. Leverage of 50:1 is not recommended, let alone
leverage of 200:1. Simply, when you increase your leverage, you increase
your risk. Smaller ripples in the underlying currencies will cause massive
waves in your account balance, hopefully for the better, but potentially also
for the worse. If you find that striving to meet your trading goals necessitates
the use of excessive leverage (which I define as greater than 10:1), you
should scale back your expectations, adjust your trading strategy, or wait
until you have more risk capital before joining the currency trading fray.
Regardless of how much leverage you employ, you need to have a hedging
strategy. For the majority of traders, this is as simple as a fixed 1% stop-loss
order on all trades. Other traders may experiment with using options
contracts to hedge risk, especially on long-term positions. Regardless, you
need to have some method to limit potential losses. If you trade with little or
no leverage and have a long-term outlook, you may not be bothered by a 5%
paper loss in your position in the first month. On the other hand, if you are
swing trading with 5:1 leverage, a 5% decline in the underlying currency pair
would be unimaginable. By getting in the habit of using stops, you can nip
any losses in the bud before they wreak havoc on your account balance.
As part of your hedging strategy, you might also consider scaling out of
losing trades and scaling into positions that are in the black, perhaps with the
use of leverage. Used properly, this strategy is a win-win. If your (winning or
losing) position declines, you will have effectively decreased your losses. If
it recovers or continues rising, your position will similarly increase in value.

231

232

Chapter 10 | Pitfalls and Risks
Most importantly, you should always be aware of your potential exposure. If
your position moved against you suddenly, what would be the impact? Is
your position leveraged? Are you hedged? Can you afford this loss? These
are questions that you should be able to answer at all times. A simple way to
gauge your exposure is to look at the recent volatility of your currency pair(s)
for the applicable time interval. Pay particular attention to volatility spikes
that coincided with news releases.
In Figure 10-2, you can see that weekly volatility for the USD/CAD has
averaged about 100 PIPs (1%) for more than one year and never exceeded
135 PIPs. Volatility peaked at this level toward the end of 2011 and is
currently in a state of protracted decline. If you were to invest in the
USD/CAD with an intended hold period of 3 weeks, your approximate risk
exposure would be about 200 PIPs. While you can’t rule out the possibility
of large, long-tail moves (so-called due to their presence at the far ends of
any probability distribution curve), you can nonetheless develop an idea of
how much you could possibly lose if your position moves against you, and
plan accordingly.

Figure 10-2. USD/CAD volatility chart can be used to gauge risk exposure. (Source:
Forexticket.co.uk)

Volatility
In addition to being a useful tool for understanding risk, volatility can also be
a risk in and of itself. As I have explained on several occasions already,
volatility may spike around certain planned news releases. If you think that a
big move is likely and you can’t afford the loss that the news might trigger,
close your position or scale back your leverage. Even if you aren’t
deliberately trading the news, you should always be aware of its potential
impact on your portfolio.

Forex for Beginners
Volatility is also a risk insofar as it can trigger the premature execution of
stop orders. Remember that the main purpose of stops is to protect against
excessive losses. However, it’s possible that sudden volatility could cause the
currency pair to dip below your stop level due to otherwise unremarkable
fluctuations. For example, setting up a stop-loss 100 PIPs (about 1%) below
your entry price might seem like solid hedging. As you can see from Figure
10-2, however, a fluctuation in the USD/CAD of 100 PIPs would hardly be
considered exceptional, and placing a stop-loss at this level could
automatically lead to your position being closed before the pair has a chance
to rebound. The lesson here is simply to be aware of the impact of volatility
on your strategy and aim to strike a balance between aggressiveness and
conservativeness when configuring stop levels.
