
One Up on Wall Street 

 2 
 The Wall Street Oxymorons 
 To the list of famous oxymorons—military intelligence , learned professor, deafening silence, and jumbo shrimp—I’d add professional investing. It’s important for amateurs to view the profession with a properly skeptical eye. At least you’ll realize whom you’re up against. Since 70 percent of the shares in major companies are controlled by institutions, it’s increasingly likely that you’re competing against oxymorons whenever you buy or sell shares. This is a lucky break for you. Given the numerous cultural, legal, and social barriers that restrain professional investors (many of which we’ve nailed up ourselves), it’s amazing that we’ve done as well as we have, as a group. 
 Of course, not all professionals are oxymoronic. There are great fund managers, innovative fund managers, and maverick fund managers who invest as they please. John Templeton is one of the best. He is a pioneer in the global market, one of the first to make money all around the world. His shareholders avoided the 1972–74 collapse in the U.S. because he had cleverly placed most of his fund’s assets in Canadian and Japanese stocks. Not only that, he was one of the first to take advantage of the fact that the Japanese Dow Jones (the Nikkei average) is up seventeenfold from 1966 to 1988, while the U.S. Dow Jones has only doubled. 
 Max Heine (now deceased) at Mutual Shares fund was another ingenious freethinker. His protégé, Michael Price, who took over after Heine’s death, has continued the tradition of buying asset-rich companies at fifty cents on the dollar and then waiting for the marketplace to pay the full amount. He’s done a brilliant job. John Neff is a champion investor in out-of-favor stocks, for which he’s constantly sticking his neck out. Ken Heebner at Loomis-Sayles sticks his neck out, too, and the results have been remarkable. 
 Peter deRoetth is another friend who has done extremely well with small stocks. DeRoetth is a Harvard Law School graduate who developed an incurable passion for equities. He’s the one who gave me Toys “R” Us. The secret of his success is that he never went to business school—imagine all the lessons he never had to unlearn. 
 George Soros and Jimmy Rogers made their millions by taking esoteric positions I couldn’t begin to explain—shorting gold, buying puts, hedging Australian bonds. And Warren Buffett, the greatest investor of them all, looks for the same sorts of opportunities I do, except that when he finds them, he buys the whole company. 
 These notable exceptions are entirely outnumbered by the run-of-the-mill fund managers, dull fund managers, comatose fund managers, sycophantic fund managers, timid fund managers, plus other assorted camp followers, fuddy-duddies, and copycats hemmed in by the rules. 
 You have to understand the minds of the people in our business. We all read the same newspapers and magazines and listen to the same economists. We’re a very homogeneous lot, quite frankly. There aren’t many among us who walked in off the beach. If there are any high school dropouts running an equity mutual fund, I’d be surprised. I doubt there are any ex-surfers or former truck drivers, either. 
 You won’t find many well-scrubbed adolescents in our ranks. My wife once did some research into the popular theory that great inventions and great ideas come to people before they reach thirty. On the other hand, since I’m now forty-five and still running Fidelity Magellan, I’m eager to report that great investing has nothing to do with youth—and that the middle-aged investor who has lived through several kinds of markets may have an advantage over the youngster who hasn’t. 
 Nevertheless, with the vast majority of the fund managers being middle-aged, it cuts out all the potential genius on the earlier and the later ends of the geriatric spectrum. 
 STREET LAG 
 With every spectacular stock I’ve managed to ferret out, the virtues seemed so obvious that if 100 professionals had been free to add it to their portfolios, I’m convinced that 99 would have done so. But for reasons I’m about to describe, they couldn’t. There are simply too many obstacles between them and the tenbaggers. 
 Under the current system, a stock isn’t truly attractive until a number of large institutions have recognized its suitability and an equal number of respected Wall Street analysts (the researchers who track the various industries and companies) have put it on the recommended list. With so many people waiting for others to make the first move, it’s amazing that anything gets bought. 
 The Limited is a good example of what I call Street lag. When the company went public in 1969, it was all but unknown to the large institutions and the big-time analysts. The underwriter of the offering was a small firm called Vercoe & Co., located in Columbus, Ohio, where the headquarters of The Limited can also be found. Peter Halliday, a high school classmate of Limited chairman Leslie Wexner, was Vercoe’s sales manager back then. Halliday attributed the disinterest of Wall Street to the fact that Columbus, Ohio, was not exactly a corporate Mecca at the time. 
 A lone analyst (Susie Holmes of White, Weld) followed the company for a couple of years before a second analyst, Maggie Gilliam for First Boston, took official notice of The Limited in 1974. Even Maggie Gilliam might not have discovered it if she hadn’t stumbled onto the Limited store at Chicago’s Woodfield Mall during a snow emergency at O’Hare airport. To her credit, she paid attention to her amateur’s edge. 
 The first institution which bought shares in The Limited was T. Rowe Price New Horizons Fund, and that was in the summer of 1975. By then there were one hundred Limited stores open for business across the country. Thousands of observant shoppers could have initiated their own coverage during this period. Still, by 1979, only two institutions owned Limited stock, accounting for 0.6 percent of the outstanding shares. Employees and executives in the company were heavy owners—usually a good sign, as we’ll discuss later. 
 In 1981 there were four hundred Limited stores doing a thriving business and only six analysts followed the stock. This was seven years after Ms. Gilliam’s discovery. By 1983, when the stock hit its intermittent high of $9, long-term investors were up eighteenfold from 1979, when the shares had sold for 50 cents, adjusted for splits. 
 Yes, I know that the price fell nearly in half, to $5 a share in 1984, but the company was still doing well, so that gave investors another chance to buy in. (As I’ll explain in later chapters, if a stock is down but the fundamentals are positive, it’s best to hold on and even better to buy more.) It wasn’t until 1985, with the stock back up to $15, that analysts joined the celebration. In fact, they were falling all over one another to put The Limited on their buy lists, and aggressive institutional buying helped send the shares on a ride all the way up to $52⅞—way beyond what the fundamentals would have justified. By then, there were more than thirty analysts on the trail (thirty-seven as of this writing), and many had arrived just in time to see The Limited drop off the edge. 
 My favorite funeral home company, Service Corporation International, had its first public offering in 1969. Not a single analyst paid the slightest heed for the next ten years! The company made great efforts to get Wall Street’s attention, and finally it got noticed by a small investment outfit called Underwood, Neuhaus. Shearson was the first major brokerage firm to show an interest, and that was in 1982. By then the stock was a five-bagger. 
 True, you could have more than doubled your money once again by buying SCI at $12 a share in 1983 and selling it at the $30⅜ high in 1987, but that’s not quite as exciting as the fortybagger you’d have had if you’d invested back in 1978. 
 Thousands of people had to be familiar with this company if for no other reason than they’d been to a funeral, and the fundamentals were good all along. It turns out that the Wall Street oxymorons overlooked SCI because funeral services didn’t fall into any of the standard industry classifications. It wasn’t exactly a leisure business and it wasn’t a consumer durable, either. 
 Throughout the decade of the 1970s, when Subaru was making its biggest moves, only three or four major analysts kept tabs on it. Dunkin’ Donuts was a 25-bagger between 1977 and 1986, yet only two major firms follow it even today. Neither was interested five years ago. Only a few regional brokerages, such as Adams, Harkness, and Hill in Boston, got on to this profitable story, but you could have initiated coverage on your own, after you’d eaten the donuts. 
 Pep Boys, a stock I’ll be mentioning again, sold for less than $1 a share in 1981 and hit $9½ in 1985 before it caught the attention of three analysts. Stop & Shop soared from $5 to $50 as the ranks of its analysts swelled from one to four. 
 I could go on, but I think we both get the point. Contrast the above with the fifty-six brokerage analysts who normally cover IBM or the forty-four who cover Exxon. 
 INSPECTED BY 4 
 Whoever imagines that the average Wall Street professional is looking for reasons to buy exciting stocks hasn’t spent much time on Wall Street. The fund manager most likely is looking for reasons not to buy exciting stocks, so that he can offer the proper excuses if those exciting stocks happen to go up. “It was too small for me to buy” heads a long list, followed by “there was no track record,” “it was in a nongrowth industry,” “unproven management,” “the employees belong to a union,” and “the competition will kill them,” as in “Stop & Shop will never work, the 7-Elevens will kill them,” or “Pic ’N’ Save will never work, Sears will kill them,” or “Agency Rent-A-Car hasn’t got a chance against Hertz and Avis.” These may be reasonable concerns that merit investigation, but often they’re used to fortify snap judgments and wholesale taboos. 
 With survival at stake, it’s the rare professional who has the guts to traffic in an unknown La Quinta. In fact, between the chance of making an unusually large profit on an unknown company and the assurance of losing only a small amount on an established company, the normal mutual-fund manager, pension-fund manager, or corporate-portfolio manager would jump at the latter. Success is one thing, but it’s more important not to look bad if you fail. There’s an unwritten rule on Wall Street: “You’ll never lose your job losing your client’s money in IBM.” 
 If IBM goes bad and you bought it, the clients and the bosses will ask: “What’s wrong with that damn IBM lately?” But if La Quinta Motor Inns goes bad, they’ll ask: “What’s wrong with you?” That’s why security-conscious portfolio managers don’t buy La Quinta Motor Inns when two analysts cover the stock and it sells for $3 a share. They don’t buy Wal-Mart when the stock sells for $4, and it’s a dinky store in a dinky little town in Arkansas, but soon to expand. They buy Wal-Mart when there’s an outlet in every large population center in America, fifty analysts follow the company, and the chairman of Wal-Mart is featured in People magazine as the eccentric billionaire who drives a pickup truck to work. By then the stock sells for $40. 
 The worst of the camp-following takes place in the bank pension-fund departments and in the insurance companies, where stocks are bought and sold from preapproved lists. Nine out of ten pension managers work from such lists, as a form of self-protection from the ruination of “diverse performance.” “Diverse performance” can cause a great deal of trouble, as the following example illustrates. 
 Two company presidents, Smith and Jones, both of whom have pension accounts managed by the National Bank of River City, are playing golf together, as they always do. While waiting to tee off, they chat about important things such as pension accounts, and soon they discover that while Smith’s account is up 40 percent for the year, Jones’s account is up 28 percent. Both men ought to be satisfied, but Jones is livid. Early Monday morning he’s on the phone with an officer of the bank, demanding to know why his money has underperformed Smith’s money, when, after all, both accounts are handled by the same pension department. “If it happens again,” Jones blusters, “we’re pulling our money out.” 
 This unpleasant problem for the pension department is soon avoided if the managers of various accounts pick stocks from the same approved batch. That way, it’s very likely that both Smith and Jones will enjoy the same result, or at least the difference will not be great enough to make either of them mad. Almost by definition the result will be mediocre, but acceptable mediocrity is far more comfortable than diverse performance. 
 It would be one thing if an approved list were made up of, say, thirty ingenious selections, each chosen via the independent thinking of a different analyst or fund manager. Then you might have a dynamic portfolio. But the way it usually works is that each stock on the list has to be acceptable to all thirty managers, and if no great book or symphony was ever written by committee, no great portfolio has ever been selected by one, either. 
 I am reminded here of the Vonnegut short story in which various highly talented practitioners are deliberately held back (the good dancers wear weights, the good artists have their fingers tied together, etc.) so as not to upset the less skillful. 
 I’m also reminded of the little slips of paper that say “Inspected by 4” that are stuck inside the pockets of new shirts. The “Inspected by 4” method is how stocks are selected from the lists. The would-be decision-makers hardly know what they are approving. They don’t travel around visiting companies or researching new products, they just take what they’re given and pass it along. I think of this every time I buy shirts. 
 It’s no wonder that portfolio managers and fund managers tend to be squeamish in their stock selections. There’s about as much job security in portfolio management as there is in go-go dancing and football coaching. Coaches can at least relax between seasons. Fund managers can never relax because the game is played year-round. The wins and losses are reviewed after every third month, by clients and bosses who demand immediate results. 
 It’s a bit more comfortable on my side of the business, working for the general public, than it is for the managers who pick stocks for their fellow professionals. Shareholders at Fidelity Magellan tend to be smaller investors who are perfectly free to sell out at any time, but they don’t review my portfolio stock-by-stock to second-guess my selections. That’s what happens, though, to Mr. Boon Doggle over at Blind Trust, the bank that’s been hired to handle the pension accounts for White Bread, Inc. 
 Boon Doggle knows his stocks. He’s been a portfolio manager at Blind Trust for seven years, and during that time he’s made some very inspired decisions. All he wants is to be left alone to do his job. On the other hand, Sam Flint, vice president at White Bread, also thinks he knows his stocks, and every three months he casts a critical eye over Boon Doggle’s selections on White Bread’s behalf. Between these strenuous three-month checkups, Flint calls Doggle twice a day for an update. Doggle is so sick of Flint he wishes he’d never heard of him or of White Bread. He wastes so many hours talking to Flint about picking good stocks that he has no time left to do his job. 
 Fund managers in general spend a quarter of their working hours explaining what they just did—first to their immediate bosses in their own trust department, and then to their ultimate bosses, the clients like Flint at White Bread. There’s an unwritten rule that the bigger the client, the more talking the portfolio manager has to do to please him. There are notable exceptions—Ford Motor, Eastman Kodak, and Eaton to name a few—but in general, it’s true. 
 Let’s say that the supercilious Flint, in reviewing Doggle’s recent results for the pension fund, sees Xerox in the portfolio. Xerox currently sells for $52 a share. Flint looks across to the cost column and sees that Xerox was purchased for the fund at $32 per share. “Terrific,” Flint enthuses. “I couldn’t have done better myself.” 
 The next stock Flint sees is Sears. The current price is $34⅞ and the original price was $25. “Excellent,” he exclaims to Doggle. Fortunately for Doggle there is no date attached to these purchases, so Flint never realizes that Xerox and Sears have been in the portfolio since 1967, when bell-bottom pants were the national rage. Given how long Xerox has been sitting there, the return on equity is worse than it would have been in a money-market fund, but Flint doesn’t see that. 
 Then Flint moves along to Seven Oaks International, which happens to be one of my all-time favorite picks. Ever wonder what happens to all those discount coupons—fifteen cents off Heinz ketchup, twenty-five cents off Windex, etc.—after you clip them from the newspapers and then turn them in at your supermarket checkout counter? Your supermarket wraps them up and sends them off to the Seven Oaks plant in Mexico, where piles of coupons are collated, processed, and cleared for payment, much as a check is cleared through the Federal Reserve banks. Seven Oaks makes a lot of money doing this boring job, and the shareholders are well-rewarded. It’s exactly the kind of obscure, boring, and highly profitable company with an inscrutable name that I like to own. 
 Flint has never heard of Seven Oaks, and the only thing he knows about it is what he sees on the record—it was bought for the fund at $10 a share, and now it’s selling for $6. “What’s this?” Flint inquires. “It’s down forty percent!” Doggle has to spend the rest of the meeting defending this one stock. After two or three similar episodes, he vows never to buy another off-beat company and to stick to the Xeroxes and the Searses. He also decides to sell Seven Oaks at the earliest opportunity so that the memory of it will be expunged forever from his list. 
 Reverting to “group think,” and reminding himself that it’s safer to pick companies in a crowd, he ignores the words of wisdom that came either from Aeschylus the playwright, Goethe the author, or Alf, the TV star from outer space: 

 Two’s a company, three’s a crowd 
 Four is two companies 
 Five is a company and a crowd 
 Six is two crowds 
 Seven is one crowd and two companies 
 Eight is either four companies or two crowds and a company 
 Nine is three crowds 
 Ten is either five companies or two companies and two crowds 

 Even if there’s nothing terribly wrong with the fundamentals of Seven Oaks (I don’t think there is because I still own a small amount of it), and later it turns into a tenbagger, the stock will be sold out of White Bread’s pension account because Flint doesn’t like it, just as surely as stocks that ought to be sold will be kept. In our business the indiscriminate selling of current losers is called “burying the evidence.” 
 Among the seasoned portfolio managers, burying the evidence is done so quickly and efficiently that I suspect it’s already become a survival mechanism, and it will probably be inbred so that future generations can do it without hesitation, the way that ostriches have learned to stick their heads in the sand. 
 As it is, if Boon Doggle doesn’t bury the evidence himself at the first opportunity, then he’ll be fired, and the whole portfolio will be turned over to a successor who will bury it. A successor always wants to start off with a positive feeling, which means keep the Xerox and wipe out the Seven Oaks. 
 Before too many of my colleagues cry “foul,” let me once again praise the notable exceptions. The portfolio departments of many regional banks outside of New York City have done an outstanding job picking stocks for an extended period of time. Many corporations, especially the medium-sized ones, have distinguished themselves in managing their pension money. A nationwide review would certainly turn up dozens of outstanding stockpickers who work for insurance funds, pension funds, and trust accounts. 
 OYSTERS ROCKEFELLER 
 Whenever fund managers do decide to buy something exciting (against all the social and political obstacles), they may be held back by various written rules and regulations. Some bank trust departments simply won’t allow the buying of stocks in any companies with unions. Others won’t invest in nongrowth industries or in specific industry groups, such as electric utilities or oil or steel. Sometimes it gets to the point that the fund manager can’t buy shares in any company whose name begins with r, or perhaps the shares must be acquired only in months that have an r in their name, a rule that’s been borrowed from the eating of oysters. 
 If it’s not the bank or the mutual fund making up rules, then it’s the SEC. For instance, the SEC says a mutual fund such as mine cannot own more than ten percent of the shares in any given company, nor can we invest more than five percent of the fund’s assets in any given stock. 
 The various restrictions are well-intentioned, and they protect against a fund’s putting all its eggs in one basket (more on this later) and also against a fund’s taking over a company à la Carl Icahn (more on that later, too). The secondary result is that the bigger funds are forced to limit themselves to the top 90 to 100 companies, out of the 10,000 or so that are publicly traded. 
 Let’s say you manage a $1-billion pension fund, and to guard against diverse performance, you’re required to choose from a list of 40 approved stocks, via the Inspected by 4 method. Since you’re only allowed to invest five percent of your total stake in each stock, you’ve got to buy at least 20 stocks, with $50 million in each. The most you can have is 40 stocks, with $25 million in each. 
 In that case you have to find companies where $25 million will buy less than ten percent of the outstanding shares. That cuts out a lot of opportunities, especially in the small fast-growing enterprises that tend to be the tenbaggers. For instance, you couldn’t have bought Seven Oaks International or Dunkin’ Donuts under these rules. 
 Some funds are further restricted with a market-capitalization rule: they don’t own a stock in any company below, say, a $100-million size. (Size is measured by multiplying the number of outstanding shares by the current stock price.) A company with 20 million shares outstanding that sell for $1.75 a share has a market cap of $35 million and must be avoided by the fund. But once the stock price has tripled to $5.25, that same company has a market cap of $105 million and suddenly it’s suitable for purchase. This results in a strange phenomenon: large funds are allowed to buy shares in small companies only when the shares are no bargain. 
 By definition, then, the pension portfolios are wedded to the ten-percent gainers, the plodders, and the regular Fortune 500 bigshots that offer few pleasant surprises. They almost have to buy the IBMs, the Xeroxes, and the Chryslers, but they’ll probably wait to buy Chrysler until it’s fully recovered and priced accordingly. The well-respected and highly competent money management firm of Scudder, Stevens, and Clark stopped covering Chrysler altogether right before the bottom ($3½) and didn’t resume coverage until the stock hit $30. 
 No wonder so many pension-fund managers fail to beat the market averages. When you ask a bank to handle your investments, mediocrity is all you’re going to get in a majority of the cases. 
 Equity mutual funds such as mine are less restricted. I don’t have to buy stocks from a fixed menu, and there’s no Mr. Flint hovering over my shoulder. That’s not to say that my bosses and overseers at Fidelity don’t monitor my progress, ask me challenging questions, and periodically review my results. It’s just that nobody tells me I must own Xerox, or that I can’t own Seven Oaks. 
 My biggest disadvantage is size. The bigger the equity fund, the harder it gets for it to outperform the competition. Expecting a $9-billion fund to compete successfully against an $800-million fund is the same as expecting Larry Bird to star in basketball games with a five-pound weight strapped to his waist. Big funds have the same built-in handicaps as big anythings—the bigger it is, the more energy it takes to move it. 
 Yet even at $9 billion, Fidelity Magellan has continued to compete successfully. Every year some new soothsayer says it can’t go on like this, and every year so far it has. Since June, 1985, when Magellan became the country’s largest fund, it has outperformed 98 percent of general equity mutual funds. 
 For this, I have to thank Seven Oaks, Chrysler, Taco Bell, Pep Boys, and all the other fast growers, turnaround opportunities, and out-of-favor enterprises I’ve found. The stocks I try to buy are the very stocks that traditional fund managers try to overlook. In other words, I continue to think like an amateur as frequently as possible. 
 GOING IT ALONE 
