and weather forecasting are exceptions in that a larger number of
inputs is typically used. The ability to use a larger set of information can be explained by the fact that immediate and precise feedback is available, which enables the experts in these two domains
to learn. In other areas, like medical diagnosis, school admissions,
and financial forecasting, feedback is often delayed or never available. Hastie and Dawes's conclusion suggests why subjective technicians do not learn from their mistakes-precise feedback is not

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

469

available because of the lack of objective pattern definitions and
evaluation criteria.
2. For a wide range of judgment tasks, experts' judgments can be explained by an additive (linear) model of the inputs.
3. Few judges use nonlinearlconfigural thinking to combine inputs even
though they are under the impression that they are doing so. However, when they do use configural reasoning, they tend to do it
poorly.45
4. Experts do not understand how they arrive at their own judgments.

This problem is most pronounced among highly experienced experts.
As a result, their judgments are inconsistent when given the same set
of inputs on different occasions.
5. In many domains, judges do not agree with each other when given the
same set of information. The low level of interjudge agreement says
that someone is wrong.
H. When irrelevant information is added to the set of inputs, judges become more confident although accuracy does not improve. Clearly,
they are tillable to distinguish relevant from irrelevant variables.
7. There are very few judges who are demonstrably superior.
Hastie and Dawes's conclusions have received additional support
from Tetiock,4G who evaluated predictions from experts in different fields
and compares them to relatively simple statistical models that extrapolate recent trends. Tetlock's work, which appears to be the most rigorous
long-term study ever conducted of expert judgment in the political and
economic domains, does suggest that certain subjective cognitive styles
of decision making are superior. He calls this style the fox. However, he
shows that all human-based predictions, whatever their style, pale in
comparison to formal model-based predictions. Using a two-dimensional
framework for evaluating forecast accuracy, discrimination, and calibration, the accuracy of formal models, based on a method called generalized autoregressive distributed lags, far exceeds the performance of
human experts. 47

Why Are Experts' Subjective Predictions So Poor?
Although there is general agreement among those who study expert judgment, that it is rarely superior to objective forecasts, there is less agreement about why. A number of explanations have been proposed: the
intrusion of emotional factors, the lack of consistency in how factors are
weighted, excessive weight given to vivid concrete features that have little

470

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

predictive power, inadequate weight given to abstract statistics that possess predictive power, the failure to use configural rules properly, falling
prey to illusory correlations, failing to notice valid correlations, and being affected by the actions and statements of others. Many of these were
covered in Chapter 2, with respect to the birth and maintenance of erroneous beliefs, and in Chapter 7, with respect to information cascades
and herd behavior, and I will not repeat them here. Here, I will consider
the intrusion of emotional factors on the subjective forecaster, which
has not been discussed in prior chapters.
A number of investigators have considered the effect of emotions on
subjective judgments made under conditions of uncertainty. One model,
proposed by Loewenstein et al.,48 suggests that a subjective forecast is
impacted by the decision maker's anticipated emotional reaction to the
prediction's outcome. Even though the expert's anxieties about the
chance of being wrong have no valid role in a forecast, they appear to
playa role. Nofsinger4 9 presents Lowenstein's model in a diagram that I
have reproduced in Figure 9.10. Note that when a person is making a
prediction they are impacted by anticipating their emotions in response
to the possible outcomes. This affects both the cognitive evaluation of
information and the current emotional state of the decision maker. 5o
Slovic, Finucane, Peters, and MacGregor5 1 explain the intrusion of
emotions on the subjective decision maker in terms of affect. Affect refers
to the good or bad feelings associated with a stimulus. These feelings often operate unconsciously and produce rapid reflex-like behaviors that

Anticipated
Outcomes
Including
Anticipated
Emotions

~

,--------,
Cognition
'---_Ev_a_lu_a_t_io_n-----' ~

I

Subjective
Probability
Assessments

I

I B,h,v;o<

1/

1--

Outcomes
(Including
Emotions)

Feelings
/L------J

Other Factors;
Vividness
/'
Immediacy
Background
Mood

17 1G HE 9.10

~

Lowenstein's model of judgment impacted by affect.

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

471

are not under the decision maker's conscious control. Slovic points out
that feelings and images can weigh heavily in judgments that would be
better handled by a purely analytical and rational consideration of evidence. For example, a market analyst who has negative feelings associated with a declining market is likely to remain more bullish than the
evidence would warrant. However, not all judgments based on affect are
bad. Some situations are accurately represented by the feelings they provoke and do demand the fast reflex-like decisions produced by this mode
of thinking. Affective decision making was probably the dominant mode
of judgment during the evolution of the human species. In other words,
the speed of affective decision making had survival value. Fear of heights
or of large predators demanded faster choices than those that a conscious
weighing of pros and cons would have been able to produce. "However,
like other heuristics that provide generally adaptive responses but occasionally lead us astray, reliance on affect can also deceive US."52 This occurs when the relevant features of a situation are not well represented by
the feelings they stimulate. Financial market prediction is such a situation, yet the subjective forecaster remains vulnerable to the automatic
and subconscious judgments of a heuristic based on affect.
The model offered by Joseph Forgas further illuminates the futility of
subjective forecasting. 53 It explains that "the greater the complexity and
uncertainty in a situation, the more emotions will influence a decision."54
This characterizes the task faced by the subjective TA analyst who operates against insurmountable obstacles when trying to evaluate a multitude
of indicators in a rational manner. I contend that subjective forecasting is
no longer the analyst's proper role.

The Expert's Proper and Crucial Role
in Human-Machine Partnership
The proper role of the TA practitioner in the envisioned human-computer
partnership is twofold: (1) proposing an information-rich set of candidate inputs suitable for presentation to the data-mining software, (2)
specifying the problem to be solved by data-mining software (i.e., the
target variable. In other words, the TA expert's proper role is to supply
what the computer lacks, namely, expertise in the domain of TA and inventive talent.
It is somewhat ironic that in this high-tech era, the analyst's role has
now taken center stage. This is a result of the changed economics of data
mining. Within the last decade, the price of computing power and powerful data-mining software has declined sharply. Whereas these resources
had been the exclusive domain of well-financed research organizations as
recently as a decade or two ago, today they are commodities accessible to

472

CASE STUDY: SIGNAL RULES FOR THE S&P 500 INDEX

almost all market participants. These trends have democratized data mining. Most investors now have access to the same tools that once gave a
huge competitive advantage to the largest institutional investors. That advantaged has been greatly diminished. Consequently, the competitive advantage-the source of added value-has now shifted back to the human
analyst. The competitive advantage now lies with those TA experts possessing the best insights with regard to proposing indicators and specifying target variables. The TA practitioner who embraces the EBTA
philosophy is well positioned to play this role.
Indicator design and target specification is a huge topic suitable for
entire books. There are many books that cover indicators that are specific
to TA. 55 There is no need to duplicate that here. There are other books that
treat the more general problem of designing inputs (predictive variables)
that are suitable for specific types of data-mining algorithms. 56 Different
algorithms have different requirements. For example, although it is crucial that inputs to a neural net be properly scaled, inputs to decision-tree
algorithms need not be. Masters,57 Pyle,58 and Weiss and Indurkhya59 cover
these issues nicely.
Indicator design refers to the specification of transformations applied
to raw market data before it is presented to the data-mining tool. Data
miners often refer to this as preprocessing. The task of proposing a list of
information-rich and properly designed candidate indicators for a datamining problem requires the domain expertise and inventive talents of the
human analyst.
Anyone who has gotten their hands dirty in the data-mining trenches
knows the following truth: a necessary condition for success in data mining is a good set of candidate indicators. Good does not mean that all inputs have to be informative. However, some of the proposed variables
must contain useful information about the target variable. According to
Dorian Pyle, a noted authority on data mining, "after finding the right
problem to solve, data preparation is often the key to solving the problem.
It can easily be the difference between success and failure, between useable insights and incomprehensible murk, between worthwhile predictions and useless guesses."60 Dr. Timothy Masters, another data-mining
authority, says, "Preprocessing is the is the key to success ... even a primitive prediction model can perform well if the variables have been preprocessed in such as way as to clearly reveal the important information. "61
The message is amplified by Weiss and Indurkhya, in their book Predictive Data Mining. "The greatest gains in performance are often made by
describing more predictive features (indicators). It is the human who
specifies the set of features ... and who investigates how to transform the
original features into better features." "The computer is smart about deleting weak features, but relatively dumb in the more demanding task of

Case Study Results and the Future of TA

473

composing new features or transforming raw data into more predictive
forms ... the composition of features is a greater determining factor in
the quality of results than the specific prediction methods used to produce
those results. In most instances, feature composition is dependent on
knowledge of the application."62
The TA practitioner who understands data-mining methods and the
inlportant issues in indicator design will be well positioned to play this
crucial role in the human-machine partnership of twenty-first-century
technical analysis. With the computer as an intelligence amplifier and a
scientific orientation as the mindset, the EBTA practitioner is uniquely
well positioned to push the frontiers of market knowledge forward at an
accelerated pace. Given that human intelligence is essentially unchanging,
but computer intelligence is increasing at an exponential rate,63 no other
approach to TA makes sense.

Proof That
Detrending Is
Equivalent to
Benchmarking Based
on Position Bias

n order to compensate for market bias interacting with long-short bias,
one should compute the expected return of a random system with the
same long-short bias, and subtract this bias-related return from the return of the candidate system.
The expected value of a single raw return drawn from the population
of historical raw returns is, by definition, the mean of these returns.

I

(AI)

Let Pi signify the position of a trading system at opportunity i. This
will be long, short, or neutral. The expected return of a trading system in
which positions are random is:

L

ERandam =

E Raw -

P;=Long

L

E Raw

(A2)

P;=Shorf

The total return of the candidate system is the sum of the raw returns
at those times when the candidate system is long, minus the sum of the
raw returns when the system is short:
Total =

L R; - L R;
P,=Long

(A3)

P;:::.ShoYt

475

476

DETRENDING IS EQUIVALENT TO BENCHMARKING BASED ON POSITION BIAS

The total return of the candidate system (Equation (A.3)) is corrected
for long/short prejudice by subtracting the expectation of a similarly prejudiced random system (Equation (A.2)). Subtraction distributes over the
summation, giving:
Corrected =

L (R E
j -

Pj=Long

Raw) -

L (R E
j -

Raw)

(A.4)

Pi=Short

Notice that the corrected return of Equation (A.4) is identical to the
uncorrected return of Equation (A.3) except that the mean of the raw returns is subtracted from each individual raw return. In other words, to remove the effect of long/short imbalance in a biased market, all you need
to do is center the raw returns.

Notes

INTRODUCTION
1. Data typically considered by TA includes prices of financial instruments;
trading volume; open interest, in the case of options and futures; as well as
other measures that reflect the attitudes and behavior of market participants.
2. J. Hall, Practically Profound: Putting Philosophy to Work in Everyday Life
(Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2005).
3. Ibid., 4.
4. Ibid., 4.
5. Ibid.,5.
6. Ibid.,5.
7. Ibid.,5.
8. Ibid.,6.
9. Ibid., 5.
10. Ibid., 81.
11. RD. Edwards and J. Magee, Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 4th ed.
(Springfield, MA: John Magee, 1958).
12. For a complete description of Elliott wave theory see RR Prechter and A.J.
Frost, Elliott Wave Principle (New York: New Classics Library, 1998).
13. Any version of these methods that has been made objective to the point
where it is back testable would negate this criticism.
14. The professional association of technical analysts, the Market Technicians
Association (MTA), requires compliance with the National Association of
Securities Dealers and the New York Stock Exchange. These self-regulating
bodies require" that research reports have a reasonable basis and no unwarranted claims." Going even further, the MTA requires of its members
that they "shall not publish or make statements concerning the technical

position of a security, a market or any of its components or aspects unless such statements are reasonable and consistent in light of the available evidence and the accumulated knowledge in the field of technical
analysis."
15. Some peer-reviewed academic journals include Journal of Finance,
Financial Management Journal, Journal of Financial Economics, JOUTnal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, and Review of Financial
Studies.
477

478

NOTES

16. Outside of academia, there has been a move to greater emphasis on objective methods of TA, but often the results are not evaluated in a statistically
rigorous manner.
17. F.D. Arditti, "Can Analysts Distinguish Between Real and Randomly Generated Stock Prices?," Financial Analysts Journal 34, no. 6 (November/
December 1978), 70.
18. J.J. Siegel, Stocks for the Long Run, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998),
243.
19. G.R Jensen, RR Johnson, and J.M. Mercer, "Tactical Asset Allocation and
Commodity Futures: Ways to Improve Performance," Journal of Portfolio
Management 28, no. 4 (Summer 2002).
20. C.R Lightner, "A Rationale for Managed Futures," Technical Analysis ofStocks
& Commodities (2003). Note that this publication is not a peer-reviewed journal but the article appeared to be well supported and its findings were consistent with the peer-reviewed article cited in the prior note.
21. P.-H. Hsu and C.-M. Kuan, "Reexamining the Profitability of Technical Analysis with Data Snooping Checks," Journal of Financial Economics 3, no. 4
(2005), 606-628.
22. R Gency, "The Predictability of Security Returns with Simple Technical
Trading Rules," Journal of Empirical Finance 5 (1998), 347-349.
23. N. Jegadeesh, "Evidence of Predictable Behavior of Security Returns," Journal of Finance 45 (1990), 881-898.
24. N. Jegadeesh and S. Titman, "Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market Efficiency," Journal of Finance 48 (1993),
65-91.
25. T.J. George and C.-Y. Hwang, "The 52-Week High and Momentum Investing,"
Journal of Finance 59, no. 5 (October 2004),2145-2184.
26. B.R Marshall and R Hodges, "Is the 52-Week High Momentum Strategy
Profitable Outside the U.S.?" awaiting publication in Applied Financial
Economics.
27. C.L. Osler, "Identifying Noise Traders: The Head and Shoulders Pattern in
U.S. Equities," Staff Reports, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 42 (July
1998), 39 pages.
28. 1. Blume and D. Easley, "Market Statistics and Technical Analysis: The Role
of Volume," Journal of Finance 49, no. 1 (March 1994), 153-182.
29. V. Singal, Beyond the Random Walk: A Guide of Stock Market Anomalies
and Low-Risk Investing (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004). These
results are discussed in Chapter 4, "Short Term Price Drift." The chapter also
contains an excellent list of references of other research relating to this
topic.
30. A.M. Safer, "A Comparison of Two Data Mining Techniques to Predict Abnormal Stock Market Returns," Intelligent Data Analysis 7, no. I (2003),3-14;
G. Armano, A. MuITU, and F. Roli, "Stock Market Prediction by a Mixture of
Genetic-Neural Experts," International Journal of Pattern Recognition &
Artificial Intelligence 16, no. 5 (August 2002), 501-528; G. Armano, M.
Marchesi, and A. Murru, "A Hybrid Genetic-Neural Architecture for Stock In-

479

Notes

dexes Forecasting," Information Sciences 170, no. 1 (February 2005), 3-33;
T. Chenoweth, Z.O. Sauchi, and S. Lee, "Embedding Technical Analysis into
Neural Network Based Trading Systems," Applied Artijicial Intelligence 10,
no. 6 (December 1996), 523-542; S. Thawornwong, D. Enke, and C. Dagli,
"Neural Networks as a Decision Maker for Stock Trading: A Technical Analysis Approach," International Journal of Smart Engineering System Design
5, no. 4 (OctoberlDecember 2003), 313-325; A.M. Safer, "The Application of
Neural-Networks to Predict Abnormal Stock Returns Using Insider Trading
Data," Applied Stochastic Models in Business & Industry 18, no. 4 (October
2002), 380-390; J. Yao, C.L. Tan, and H.-L. Pho, "Neural Networks for Technical Analysis: A Study on KLCI," International Journal of Theoretical & Applied Finance 2, no. 2 (April 1999), 221-242; J. Korczak and P. Rogers, "Stock
Timing Using Genetic Algorithms," Applied Stochastic Models in Business
& Industry 18, no. 2 (April 2002), 121-135; Z. Xu-Shen and M. Dong, "Can
Fuzzy Logic Make Technical Analysis 20/20?," Financial Analysts Journal
60, no. 4 (July/August 2004),54-75; J.M. Gorriz, C.G. Puntonet, M. Salmeron,
and J.J. De la Rosa, "A New Model for Time-Series Forecasting Using Radial
Basis Functions and Exogenous Data," Neural Computing & Applications
13, no. 2 (2004), 100-111.
31. This firm was acquired by Goldman Sachs in September 2000.

CHAPTER t

Objective Rules and
Their Evaluation

1. A long position in a security means the investor owns the security and hopes

to benefit by selling it in the future at a higher price.
2. A short position in a security means the investor has sold the security with-

out owning it but is obligated to buy it back at a later point in time. The
holder of a short position therefore benefits from a subsequent price decline,
thereby permitting the repurchase at a lower level than the selling price,
earning a profit.
3. Neutral refers to the case where the investor holds no position in the market.
4. It is assumed that all market information required by the method is known
and publicly available at the time the method produces the recommendation.
5. The possibility of the time series being equal to the moving average is eliminated by computing the value of the moving average to a greater degree of
precision than the price level.
6. J. Bollinger, Bollinger on Bollinger Bands (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002).
7. T. Hayes, The Research Driven Investor: How to Use Information, Data and
Analysis for Investment Success (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001), 63.
8. A diffusion indicator is based on an analysis of numerous market time series
within a defined universe (e.g., all NYSE stocks). The same rule, such as a
moving average cross, is applied to all the series comprising the universe.
Each series is rated as in an uptrend or downtrend, depending on its position

480

NOTES

relative to its moving average. The value of the diffusion indicator is the percentage of time series that are in an upward trend. The indicator is confined
to the range 0 to 100.
9. This analysis does not make clear how many rule variations were explored
to attain this level of discrimination. As will be pointed out in Chapter 6, it is
impossible to evaluate the significance of these findings without information
on the amount of searching that led to the discovery of a rule.
10. Many of the rules tested in this book use data series other than the S&P 500
to generate signals on the S&P 500.
11. This law of statistics is discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
12. (0.9) X 0.035% - (0.1) X 0.035% = 0.028% per day or 7.31% annualized.
13. (0.60) X 0.035% - (0040) X 0.035% = 0.007% per day or 1.78% annualized.
14. The look-ahead bias is discussed by Robert A. Haugen, The Inejficient Stock
MaTket: What Pays Off and Why (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1999),66.
15. The percentage of fund portfolios invested in interest-bearing cash instruments such as T-bills, commercial paper, and so forth.

CHAPTER 2

The Illusory Validity of Subjective
Technical Analysis

1. J. Baron, Thinking and Deciding, 3rd ed., (Canlbridge, UK: Canlbridge University Press, 2000), 12.
2. This figure, redrawn by the author, is similar to and inspired by one found in
G. Gigerenzer, Calculated Risks: How to Know When NumbeTs Deceive You
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 2002). That book cites as the original source
of the illustration R.N. Shepard, Mind Sights: Onginal Visual Illusions
(New York: W.H. Freeman & Company, 1990).
3. T. Gilovich, How We Know What Isn't So: The Fallibility of Human Reason
