
Where the real money comes from:
Options and restricted stock
Just as restaurants make most of their money on the drinks, not the food,
CEOs don’t make most of their money from where you might think. Salaries
for most executives, by and large, aren’t where the vast majority of CEOs’

14 506455-ch09.indd 152

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

153

compensation comes from. Instead, it’s from stock options. Stock options are
financial instruments that give their owners the right, but not the obligation,
to buy a stock at a predetermined price.
Options are common tools to incentivize executives. For instance, a CEO
might get an option to buy 100,000 shares of a stock for $30 a share when the
company’s stock price is $30. If the CEO is successful and the stock price rises
to $50 a share, the CEO may exercise the option and buy 100,000 shares of
stock worth $5 million, for $3 million. The difference, the $2 million, goes to
the executive as compensation.
CEOs might also receive restricted stock. These shares are given to an executive, but cannot be sold unless certain criteria are met, typically after a
period of time has lapsed. Restricted stock is designed to dangle a carrot in
front of the CEO as an incentive to keep them at the company and working
hard to increase the stock price and returns to shareholders.

Checking In on Your Fellow Shareholders
When you buy a stock, you don’t get a directory of all the other investors in
the company. You’re free to attend a company’s shareholders’ meeting and
do some glad-handing. But with that said, the proxy statement can be a useful
tool in figuring out what executives are also big shareholders in the company.

Finding out who else owns the stock
Determining other investors who own a stock can be somewhat telling. For
instance, if you are a value investor, looking to buy stocks at low valuations, you
might take comfort in seeing whether any well-known mutual fund managers own
a stock. You’ll find out how to check in on these investors’ moves in Chapter 17.
But some investors take comfort when the officers and directors own large
positions in a stock, since they have some skin in the game and therefore
stand to lose personally if the stock price falls.
The proxy is again your best friend in finding out whether the company’s
management is willing to eat its own cooking, so to speak. Most proxy statements contain a table, usually close to the bottom of the document, which
spells out how many shares the officers and directors of the company own.
Some officers and directors feel so strongly a company’s stock price is about
to rise that they may buy the company’s stock with their own money. These
types of buys are viewed as bullish signals, because executives are reaching
into their own pockets to buy shares, rather than receiving handouts as part
of compensation packages.

14 506455-ch09.indd 153

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

154 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
These purchases are often disclosed and summarized in the proxy statement, described usually as open market purchases. GE’s Immelt, for instance,
bought 317,000 shares of the company in 2008, and at the end of the year
owned 1.6 million shares, the proxy says. Additionally, Immelt has not sold
any of the shares he received connected to stock options. You can learn
more about the importance of watching what insiders do with their stock in
Chapter 17.

What’s on other investors’ minds:
Shareholder proposals
The proxy lists all the items of business that are up for a shareholder vote.
The items may be presented by either the company or shareholders.
Generally, the issues presented by companies are pretty mundane. More
often than not, they pertain to one of the following items:
✓ Vote for board members up for re-election. Shareholders may either
vote for each nominated candidate or withhold their vote.
✓ Approve the company’s auditing firm. Often, this is just an exercise
of going through the motions, since companies tend to use the same
accounting firm each year.
✓ Authorize the issuance of shares connected with stock incentive plans.
The most interesting proposals in the proxy are almost always the ones
brought up by shareholders, called shareholder proposals. Some shareholders
will go to the time and trouble to add items to the proxy for other shareholders to consider. While many of the items can be frivolous, many times they can
signal to you, the fundamental analyst, concerns that other investors might
have. These items might direct you to do further analysis on some portion of
the financial statements.
Following the stock market crash in 2008, a number of shareholder proposals were directed at companies for issues ranging from excessive executive
pay to concern about board with over-boarded directors. Many 2008 proxies
raised the issue of say on pay, a proposal which would allow shareholders to
directly approve the pay packages offered to executives. Shareholder resolutions also often target golden parachutes, or lucrative payouts to executives
after they lose their job, including following a buyout by another firm. These
proposals might be a gentle nudge for you to expand your fundamental analysis to check how reasonable the executives’ pay is.

14 506455-ch09.indd 154

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

Chapter 9: Mining the Proxy Statement for Investment Clues

155

Don’t discount and skip reading the shareholder proposals, especially the
more outlandish-sounding ones. In the proxy, the company will generally urge
shareholders to vote down such proposals and offer somewhat detailed
insight on why the proposals are a bad idea. The defenses companies provide
can offer useful insight for fundamental analysts. For instance, in GE’s 2008
proxy, one investor called for the company to conduct a study on whether to
cut itself up into four different businesses. The shareholder claimed the four
separate companies housed inside GE would be worth 30% more than the
combined GE. The company’s defense outlined a number of divestitures the
company made to streamline itself. And in the course of rejecting the idea, GE
went into detail on how its business model, which tied together seemingly different businesses, continues to work.

14 506455-ch09.indd 155

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

156 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

14 506455-ch09.indd 156

9/24/09 10:31:52 PM

Part III

Making Money
from Fundamental
Analysis

15 506455-pp03.indd 157

9/24/09 10:34:32 PM

Y

In this part . . .

ou probably wouldn’t be taking the time to read
about fundamental analysis unless you thought
you could somehow benefit personally from it. And in
this part, I show you how to apply the tools of fundamental analysis to how you manage your portfolio. You can
use fundamental analysis for clues on when you might
think about buying or selling an investment, for instance.
I also show you how to do some of the more advanced
types of fundamental analysis such as a discounted cash
flow analysis and digging into the annual report of a company.
You can also get clues on how to lean on the fundamental
analysis done by professional analysts and also how to
interpret pertinent comments made by a company’s
management team.

15 506455-pp03.indd 158

9/24/09 10:34:33 PM

Chapter 10

Looking for Fundamental
Reasons to Buy or Sell
In This Chapter
▶ Exploring fundamental indicators that give you some insights into an investment’s

attractiveness
▶ Understanding how to determine which companies have resources to endure tough times
▶ Uncovering warning signals of when might be a good time to consider selling
▶ Considering the importance of dividends and what they tell you about the value of a stock

W

ouldn’t it be nice if newspapers or financial Web sites put a big red
dot next to the stocks that are going to fall in the next six months
and a green dot next to the ones that are going to rise? Investing would be so
simple.
Unfortunately, though, that’s not the case. Deciding whether to buy or sell a
stock is an excruciatingly difficult thing to do. There are dozens, if not more
variables that go into this very important decision. You not only need to size
up the health of the business and evaluate whether or not it has enough cash
to survive, but also consider whether the stock price is attractive.
Fundamental analysis may not be a crystal ball. Cheap stocks can get
cheaper and pricey stocks can soar. But fundamental analysis can at least
give you some guidance on buying and selling. This section of the book
explores some of the aspects of fundamental analysis that can help you intelligently approach investing with your eyes wide open. You’ll discover how
to apply many of the tools discussed in the early sections of the book to
help you determine if you should be intrigued by investments, and when you
should avoid them.

16 506455-ch10.indd 159

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

160 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
Looking For Buy Signals
from the Fundamentals
When you go shopping for any big-ticket item, there’s probably not one single
factor that makes your decision. Before you buy a car, for instance, you don’t
just consider the color. You probably weigh all sorts of factors ranging from
the reliability of the model to the quality of the interior and, perhaps most
importantly, the price.
The same multistep approach applies when you’re shopping for stocks. Very
rarely is there a single factor that flashes a bright light to tell you that it’s
time to buy. As a fundamental analyst, you need to consider a variety of traits
that, together, might give you an idea if it’s worth taking a shot on a stock.
Fundamental analysts often concentrate on a few aspects of a stock, which
might make it an attractive investment, including:
✓ Staying power: You want to make sure a company has the financial
resources to endure a downturn and come out on the other side.
✓ The trajectory of the fundamentals: Since a stock price, over time, is
connected to a company’s revenue and earnings, fundamental analysts
try to see improving trends in the company’s revenue and profit. Trend
spotting will be discussed at more length in Chapter 17.
✓ Evidence of skilled management: A management team with experience
navigating through the ups and downs of a business may give the fundamental analyst more confidence in the company’s future. Skilled managers can protect their company’s business from competition with strong
brands, service or quality.
✓ Valuation: Even if a company is performing poorly, the stock can still
be a good investment if the bad news is already reflected in the price.
Fundamental analysts spend a great deal of their time comparing a
company’s current stock price to its real value, based on what they
think it’s worth. You discovered how to use the P-E as a valuation tool
in Chapter 8, and in this chapter you’ll find out about the earnings yield.
Fundamental analysts also look for good values using the discounted
cash-flow model, explored in Chapter 11.
✓ Dividend payments: These seemingly small cash payments can quickly
add up and become a significant consideration for a fundamental analyst. Fundamental analysts also use these dividends as a way to measure
the attractiveness of some stocks, as will be discussed at the end of this
chapter.

16 506455-ch10.indd 160

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

161

Now it’s time for a disclaimer
Before you get too far into this chapter, it’s a
good time for a big fat disclaimer. Here goes.
Fundamental analysis doesn’t guarantee that
you’ll always make money on stocks by buying
and selling at the exact right times. I know,
that’s not the kind of statement that’s going to
make this book a best-seller.
Just remember there’s a paradox to using fundamental analysis as a tool to tell you when to
buy or sell stocks, and you need to be mindful
of it from the start. You’re not the only one with
instant access to a company’s financial statements and performance. Scores of mutual fund
companies, hedge funds, and other large investors get the same fundamental data you do and
comb through them with armies of analysts and
computers. If they see a stock that’s undervalued, they may move quickly and push the stock
price up. And when a stock moves up, other
investors may pile on and push it higher.
All this means that many investors who try to
buy and sell individual stocks at just the right
times are often unsuccessful. And that’s why
it’s often best for many investors to simply buy
every stock on a stock market index, such as

the Standard & Poor’s 500, through an index
fund, rather than try to time the market. Even the
king of fundamental analysis, Warren Buffett,
wrote in his 1996 letter to shareholders: “Most
investors, both institutional and individual, will
find that the best way to own common stocks
is through an index fund that charges minimal
fees.”
Despite the warning above, fundamental analysis is still extremely valuable for many investors.
There’s no harm in understanding how investments you own are valued. And the market
certainly has periods of indigestion. During
asset bubbles, for instance, market prices can
get pushed to extremes relative to their fundamentals. The 2000s have provided extraordinary
examples of bubbles, including the dot-com
bubble, tech-stock bubble and housing bubble.
Fundamental analysis can be a tool of reason,
helping you to at least recognize when investors appear to be paying more for an asset than
they have historically or are betting on an overly
optimistic future. Fundamental analysis is that
one tool that may help save you from falling
prey to a bubble, too.

Finding companies that
have staying power
Let’s face it. Capitalism isn’t pretty. There are times of tremendous affluence
when companies are reporting stellar profits. Fundamental analysis may help
you find the companies that stand to steal away business from rivals during
these boom times.
But, as a normal part of the ups and downs of business, or the business cycle,
there will eventually be a downturn. And it’s often during these tough times
that companies demonstrate their lasting power. Since many investors give up
on companies when they’re down or out of favor, that can present tremendous

16 506455-ch10.indd 161

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

162 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
opportunity to you as a fundamental analyst, too. If you take the time to find
companies that are just down, and have the ability to recover, you can pick
up good companies for low prices.
Typically, when you’re looking for companies that have the resources to survive, you want to consider some key elements.

Liquidity: Cash is king
If you’re trying to buy into a company on the cheap, you want to make sure it
has the ability to weather the difficult times. And that calls for a close examination of liquidity, or ready access to cash. Make sure you pay close attention to a company’s current ratio, as described in Chapter 6. This is a good
approximation of whether a company will be able to raise enough cash to pay
its bills due in a year.
There’s a very important pecking order to investing you need to be very aware
of. When you buy stock in a company that’s on the decline, you’re playing a
bit of a game of chicken. In the case that the company defaults, or fails to pay
its interest back to lenders, there’s a chance that the company may be restructured or sold off. And if that happens, as a stock holder, you’re the very last
one in line at the asset buffet. Stock investors come behind everyone, including employees owed their salaries and bond holders, for any money that’s left
over. That’s why when you invest in a company that is dangerously faltering,
you must be absolutely sure that you’ve carefully measured whether or not it
has enough liquidity to keep going.

Low debt loads and big piles of cash
When you’re looking for cheap stocks of companies that may survive, be
certain to consider the companies that have little to no debt. Companies
that don’t have an enormous amount of money to repay can tread water and
get their operations in order before they have to worry about meeting onerous interest costs. Pay close attention to a company’s interest coverage ratio,
described in Chapter 8. The lower this ratio, the better the company will be
able to handle a downturn. And make sure the total amount of debt a company owes is reasonable. Again, Chapter 8 will help you access this by considering the debt-to-equity ratio.
Don’t think it’s possible to run a company without borrowing? Believe it.
Table 10-1 shows some of the largest U.S. companies in the S&P 500 that had
no long-term debt at the end of 2008 and that also saw their shares outperform the market. Many of these companies were in relatively strong financial
shape going into the brutal market correction of 2008 and 2009.

16 506455-ch10.indd 162

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

Table 10-1

163

Flush Companies With No Debt in 2008

Company

Stock change in 2008

Apollo Group

9.2%

CH Robinson

1.7%

QLogic

-5.4%

McAfee

-7.8%

Genzyme

-10.8%

S&P 500

-38.5%

Source: S&P’s Capital IQ

Just because a company has no debt doesn’t mean the stock will rise. That
point is painfully clear in what you don’t see in Table 10-1. There were plenty
of companies with no debt that saw their shares fall. Apple and Google, for
instance, had no debt at the end of 2008, but still saw their shares fall 57%
and 56%, respectively. Again, I stress, there’s no single indicator to tell you
whether or not to buy a stock.
One trick that some fundamental analysts use to get a decent idea of the financial bedrock of a company is to compare its stock price to the amount of cash
per share it has. Sometimes stocks get beaten up so badly, the company actually has more cash in the bank than its value in the stock market. This analysis
is a good complement to studying a company’s price-to-book ratio, which also
considers how much debt a company has, as discussed in Chapter 8.
To compare a stock’s price to its cash per share, follow these steps:
1. Obtain a company’s total cash and cash equivalents. These data are
available on a company’s balance sheet. If you’re not sure how to get
this information, there are detailed instructions in Chapter 6.
2. Divide the number from Step 1 by the number of shares outstanding.
You can get a company’s number of shares outstanding from the balance
sheet, too. The step gives you the company’s cash per share.
3. Divide the answer from Step 1 by the answer in Step 2. If the answer
is a negative number, that means the company has more in cash than its
value in the stock market. Some consider this to be a potential sign the
stock is undervalued.

16 506455-ch10.indd 163

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

164 Part III: Making Money from Fundamental Analysis
When a stock price falls below a company’s cash per share, don’t assume it’s a
screaming buy. Sometimes a stock price gets beaten below cash levels due to
excessive debt. In that case, the cash doesn’t really belong to the company,
but to the lenders. That’s why the price-to-book ratio is so helpful, since it
considers the role of debt. A stock with a low stock price to debt might also
indicate investors have no confidence in the management team.

Stable cash flows
If a company is in a stable business where demand is relatively reliable,
it may generate ample cash flow to undo many of the challenges it faces.
You can discover how to measure a company’s cash flow in Chapter 7.
Unfortunately, many companies with stable cash flow feel inclined to boost
their profitability by borrowing. Unfortunately, though, these piles of debt
can haunt companies if business slows. Fundamental analysts may look for
companies that have stability and the discipline to avoid excessive debt.

Case study of a survivor: Cisco
Sometimes it’s helpful to consider history to see
how fundamental analysis can help you identify
attractive opportunities. Think back to 2002. A
“Beautiful Mind” won the Best Picture in the
Academy Awards. The soundtrack from “O
Brother, Where Art Thou?” won a Grammy. But
a less- pleasurable development was the brutal
bear market in which technology stocks were
suffering. The Nasdaq composite index, which
is loaded with technology stocks, crashed 78%
between March 10, 2000 and Oct. 9, 2002. Many
investors gave up hope on technology stocks,
figuring they were just overinflated fluff.
But fundamental analysts who took the time
to find companies with staying power benefitted. One tech stock that fit the bill was Cisco
Systems. Cisco was one of the darling stocks
during the Internet bubble and suffered, too, as
a result. As companies cut back on the amount
of gear they bought, Cisco went from making a
profit of $2.7 billion in fiscal 2000, ended in July,
to losing $1.0 billion in fiscal 2001. And revenue

16 506455-ch10.indd 164

dropped off 15% to $18.9 billion in fiscal 2002.
The stock was punished brutally as investors
questioned the industry’s future.
Fundamental analysts, though, knew better.
Thanks to cost-cutting, the company still
reported a profit of $1.9 billion in fiscal 2002,
during the industry’s darkest days. In addition,
Cisco had a pile of cash and no debt during
the entire tech crisis in the early 2000s, meaning it had no interest expense to deal with. And
Cisco’s cash flow from operations, discussed in
Chapter 7, actually increased during the tech
crisis between fiscal 2000 and fiscal 2002.
Fundamental analysts who decided in 2002
that Cisco would be a survivor were richly
rewarded. Investors who bought Cisco in late
July 2002, after the end of the company’s fiscal
year, ended up seeing their investment rise in
value by nearly 120% over the next five years,
nearly twice the return of the S&P 500.

9/24/09 10:33:49 PM

Chapter 10: Looking for Fundamental Reasons to Buy or Sell

165

Looking for a company on the rise
If there’s one thing many investors can agree on, it’s that they want to see a
company they’re investing in is stable, if not growing. Companies with growing
earnings and revenue can be attractive investments if the price isn’t too high.
Fundamental analysis can be extremely helpful in pinpointing companies
where the earnings and revenues are in an upswing. Some investors, called
momentum investors, like to buy into companies when they’re reporting faster
and faster growth. These investors are betting they can grab on to a company
with lots of good things going for it. But even value investors, who try to buy
stocks on the cheap, are betting that a company will eventually start to do
better, and the stock will catch up.
Finding companies that are growing rapidly is usually done using trend analysis, which is described in detail in Chapter 17.
