
Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
 It isn’t useful as a short-term timing vehicle. The P/E model isn’t a
short-term trading model and hence may hurt swing traders that depend
on short-term price movements. It tells you the direction the wind is
blowing, but sometimes the market ignores reality and marches the
wrong way. Eventually, the market gets it right. But in the near term, this
gap in accuracy may cost you a lot of money.
Solve this lag by incorporating charts with the P/E model. If the P/E
model indicates that the market is undervalued but the trend is
down according to the charts, don’t fight the tape. Instead, short the
security in question. However, be alert for signals of a trend change.
The near-term weakness may not be sustainable, and the market may be
due for a rebound. Similarly, if the P/E model indicates the market is
overvalued but the trend is definitively up, don’t argue with the market.
Go long, but keep tight stop loss orders to protect yourself when the
fundamentals prove out and the market takes a swoon. Be on the
lookout for divergences in technical indicators.
The major indexes may be going in one direction while the majority of stocks
are heading in a different direction. Believe it or not, the market indexes
can be led by a small number of securities. Indicators such as the Advance/
Decline Line or the New High/New Low Index can tip you off to a deteriorating
or strengthening market when they diverge from the major averages. (The
Advance/Decline Line and the New High/New Low Index can be plotted in
most major charting programs, such as TradeStation and High Growth
Stock Investor.)

Computing a “fair value” estimate: The Fed Model
The Fed Model compares the yield of the market to the yield of the 10-year
U.S. Treasury Note. So essentially it compares the return you may expect to
earn in stocks with a major competing asset class so that you aren’t examining stocks in a vacuum. As a result, you have a reference point from which to
base your estimation of the market’s current value. For example, when the
stock market is offering a higher yield than bonds, this model assumes that
investors will migrate to stocks. When bonds are offering a higher yield than
stocks, the model presumes that investors will flock there.
Here’s how to reach the point of comparison:
1. Determine the market’s P/E and calculate its inverse.
This number isn’t reported by most research providers. Fortunately,
you can find the market’s P/E on the S&P 500 Web site.
2. Calculate the inverse of the market’s P/E to determine the market’s
earnings yield.
The math is easy here. If the P/E is 12, calculate the inverse by taking 1
and dividing it by 12 (that is, 8.33 percent). If the P/E is 20, the inverse is
5 percent.

167

168 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Estimating the S&P 500 Index’s fair value
To estimate where the S&P 500 Index should be
trading at — according to the Fed Model —
translate the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury
Note and then multiply that implied P/E by the
expected earnings of the S&P 500 Index.

500 Index (see the earlier section, “Taking the
easy path: Long-term P/E ratio,” for where to
find this info). If the Index’s expected earnings
for the coming year are $80, then its fair value is
1,777.60.

Say that the yield on the 10-year Treasury Note
is 4.50 percent. Translate that yield into a P/E
ratio by dividing 1 by 0.045 to get 22.22. Multiply
that P/E by the expected earnings of the S&P

I don’t put much stock in this method of computing an index level because yields change daily.
I prefer instead to simply know whether the
market is over- or undervalued.

3. Find the yield on the 10-year Treasury Note.
You can locate this number online (try www.bloomberg.com/
markets/rates/) or you can look it up in The Wall Street Journal.
Suppose the P/E of the S&P 500 Index today is 15. That means the earnings
yield is 1 divided by 15, or 6.67 percent. For purposes of this example, say the
yield on the 10-year Treasury Note is 4.50 percent. Based on the Fed Model,
stocks are undervalued relative to bonds because the yield on the S&P 500
Index is higher than the yield on the Treasury Note.
Some swing traders take this model one step further to calculate what the S&P
500 Index should be trading at. The math is simple, but you don’t have to do it
to know whether the equity market is over- or undervalued. But if you want to
know anyway, check out the nearby sidebar.
One criticism of the Fed Model is that U.S. Treasury government bonds provide lower yields than other bonds. (The lower the yield, the more attractive
stocks look when compared to bonds.) U.S. Treasury government bonds are
considered “risk free” because the U.S. government has the power to print
dollars. Therefore, the U.S. government is unlikely to default on bonds it
issues. The yield, or return, on these bonds is lower than bonds issued by
states or corporations, which can default.

Improving the ol’ standard: The adjusted Fed Model
The adjusted Fed Model compares the earnings yield on stocks to corporate
bonds. But you can’t compare yields to just any bonds; different types of
bonds carry different levels of default. The higher the potential default,
the higher the yield the bond pays. It’s unfair to compare buying shares of
Coca-Cola to buying a bond issued by a troubled home lender likely to
default on its obligations.

Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
Rating agencies, primarily Standard & Poor’s (S&P) and Moody’s, measure
the likelihood of a company defaulting on its obligations and assign rankings
to different bonds. S&P’s scale ranges from AAA (representing the highestquality bonds) to D (representing ready-to-default bonds). Moody’s scale
ranges from Aaa (highest) to C (lowest).
Figure 8-2 highlights a table taken from Yahoo! Finance’s Bond Center that
breaks down the different bond rankings assigned by S&P and Moody’s.
Investment-grade bonds, which many institutional investors are restricted
to, have ratings between AAA and BBB on the S&P scale and Aaa and Baa
on the Moody’s scale. These bonds tend to be higher-quality bonds and have
a low risk of default. Bonds that are below investment grade have a higher
frequency of default (often higher than 1 percent).
When using the adjusted Fed Model, you should examine the yield on 10-year
AA Corporate Bonds. These bonds are high quality, attract investment dollars
from institutional investors, and represent a competitor to stocks. The higher
the yield on corporate bonds, the less likely stocks are to be preferred over
bonds. But don’t just take the yield of any AA-rated Corporate Bond. Instead,
use a composite or average of all AA Corporate Bonds.
So where can you get this information? Fortunately, it’s provided free of
charge in this Internet age. Figure 8-3 shows a snapshot from the Yahoo!
Finance site that provides the yield on bonds with different ratings and maturities (the term of the bond). Notice that the yield on 10-year AA-rated
Corporate Bonds is 5.60 percent.

Figure 8-2:
A
comparison
of bond
rankings in
the S&P and
Moody’s
scales.
Source: Yahoo! Finance

169

170 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Figure 8-3:
Find out
the yield of
corporate
bonds with
different
maturities
and S&P
ratings by
surfing the
Internet.
Source: Yahoo! Finance

Now that you know the yield on 10-year AA Corporate Bonds, you can
compare that to the yield on stocks. Suppose the P/E of the S&P 500 Index
is 19 today. That means the earnings yield is 1 divided by 19, or 5.26 percent.
Using the information provided in Figure 8-3, you know that the yield on
10-year AA Corporate Bonds is 5.60 percent. Based on the adjusted Fed
Model, stocks are overvalued relative to bonds because the yield on 10-year
AA Corporate Bonds is higher than the earnings yield on the S&P 500 Index.
As a swing trader, you should be alert for weakness in stocks.
As with the regular Fed Model, you can take this model one step further and
calculate a fair value (what the fundamental analysis measures say the index
should be trading at) of the underlying index by converting the yield on
10-year AA Corporate Bonds into a P/E ratio. A yield of 5.60 percent converts
into a P/E of 17.86. To calculate the fair value, multiply the P/E of 17.86 by the
expected earnings on the S&P 500 Index.

Assessing industry potential
Industries largely determine the profits of companies. Naturally, profits
differ between Dell and Hewlett-Packard, but even larger differences
exist between a grocery store chain and a PC manufacturer. Therefore,
take special care in determining the attractiveness of an industry using
fundamental characteristics.
You can identify which industries to focus on by looking at
 Historical performance: Certain industries tend to shine when the
overall economy’s growing; others sparkle when the overall economy’s
contracting. Technology stocks, for example, tend to do well when the
economy is in its early or middle expansion period. Financial stocks

Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
tend to perform well in late contraction (as the economy emerges from
a recession). For suggestions on how to find this historical information,
flip to Chapter 9.
 Industry fundamentals: Just as you determine whether a stock is cheap
or expensive based on items like P/E, return on equity, and expected
earnings growth rates, so too can you value industries based on these
same factors. The two best places to get this information are Yahoo!
Finance (free) and HGS Investor software (paid).
Yahoo! Finance reports the following statistics on major industry groups
(data from biz.yahoo.com/p/s_conameu.html):
• 1-day price change: The percentage change of a security over
one day.
• Market capitalization: The value of a firm as determined by its
market price.
• P/E: A security’s price divided by its earnings per share.
• Return on equity: A company’s total profits during a year divided
by shareholders’ equity. This figure represents shareholders’
“return” on their investment.
• Dividend yield: Total dividends paid in a year divided by the
current share price. The dividend yield tells you how much return
you can expect to make from the dividend payments.
• Long-term debt to equity: Dividing long-term debt by shareholders’ equity tells you whether a company’s capital structure
is heavily leveraged.
• Price to book value: Market capitalization divided by book value.
This figure measures how expensive or cheap a security is based
on its net assets.
• Net profit margin: The amount of profit a company can squeeze
out for every dollar of sale.
• Price to free cash flow: A company’s market capitalization divided
by its free cash flow during the last 12 months — or the amount of
excess cash the company generates that it can use however it
wants.
Price to free cash flow, which compares a company’s market price to its level
of annual free cash flow, is my favorite measure on an industry-wide basis. If
you’re looking to buy strong securities, search for industries that have low
price to free cash flow ratios — as long as they’re above zero. If you want
to short weak securities, seek out price to free cash flow ratios that are high
or negative. Negative free cash flow identifies industries in distress. Notice
that in Figure 8-4, the financial sector has the lowest P/E among the major
sectors — generally a good sign — but has a price to free cash flow ratio
that’s negative. This low ratio is a red flag that the earnings in the P/E ratio
may be inaccurate.

171

172 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Figure 8-4 is a snapshot taken from Yahoo! Finance that shows various
fundamental measures for the major market sectors. As a swing trader, you
want to choose sectors with low P/E, low price to free cash flow ratios, and
high return on equity statistics.
Additional data sources such as HGS Investor software and the Daily Graphs
service of Investor’s Business Daily (both paid services) provide earnings
growth rates on a sector or industry basis. You should examine this information because industries experiencing the highest earnings growth rates and
trading at the lowest valuation levels tend to outperform industries with low
earnings growth rates and/or high valuations. These specific vendors can also
assist you in identifying promising industry groups ripe for swing trading.
By using these fundamental criteria in conjunction with the economic cycle
chart shown in Chapter 9 (and on the Cheat Sheet), you can determine which
industry group is likely to perform best.
For example, look for industries with low price to free cash flow ratios that
may present compelling opportunities. Also look for industries with expanding profit margins or higher-than-average earnings growth rates. Just make
sure that the price action of the industry is in harmony with the fundamental
measures. Otherwise, the apparent rally or weakness may be short-lived.
After identifying the strong or weak industry group you want to swing trade,
drill down into the companies that make up that industry to find the most
over- or undervalued candidate based on the Six Step Dance explained in
Chapter 9

Figure 8-4:
This snapshot shows
various
fundamental
measures
on all major
sectors.

Source: Yahoo! Finance

Starting from the Grassroots Level:
The Bottom-Up Approach
The bottom-up approach is starkly different from the top-down approach,
which I describe earlier in this chapter. Instead of beginning with the overall
stock market and moving to the industry group, the bottom-up approach

Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
places less emphasis on overall economic cycles by beginning at the company level and working its way up. If you favor fundamental analysis over
technical analysis or are trying to find promising long candidates in a weak
market (or weak candidates in a strong market), you may favor the bottomup approach over the top-down one.
The bottom-up approach usually begins with some type of screen, which you
use to identify promising long and short candidates. Some screens are very
liberal — they generate dozens of possible candidates, diluting the amount
of time you can spend on any one. Other screens are very conservative —
the criteria used are so stringent that you may have only five or six possible
candidates to evaluate. Think of using a fundamentals-based screen as sifting
for gold. A lot of garbage surrounds those valuable nuggets, and your job is
to find them amid all the trash. In the following sections, I show you how to
do just that.

Using screens to filter information
Fundamental screens can consider everything from earnings growth rates
to average daily volume to analyst estimate changes. Sometimes this variety
leads to information overflow, which may be discouraging if you’re using
a fundamental screen for the first time. Fortunately, because you create
your own screen using the criteria you want to focus on, you don’t need to
bother with the premade, too-much-information batches vendors peddle
to the public.
In addition to covering the general screening criteria to use, I delve into
two screens on the long side: a growth-oriented screen and a value-oriented
screen. I show you which criteria you really need to examine for each type
of screen in order to sift effectively. Note: These screens are for illustrative
purposes only to guide your development of your own screens.
Take advantage of both value and growth screens in your swing trading. When
growth is outperforming value stocks, use the growth screen. And when value
is what’s in, focus on the value screen. Determine which is in the lead by plotting a ratio chart (explained in Chapter 6) of a growth and value index.
Figure 8-5 highlights the one-year and five-year returns for growth and value
stocks in the large (Russell 1000), mid (Russell Mid Cap), and small (Russell
2000) cap arenas.
Notice the striking differences in returns. Over the five-year period ending
December 31, 2006, the Russell 1000 Value Index (large cap value) generated
an annualized return of 10.86 percent versus the Russell 1000 Growth Index’s

173

174 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
(large cap growth) 2.69 percent return. If you convert the annualized return
(which is like an average return over the period) into a total return (how
much the index rose in total over the five-year period), the figures look even
more astonishing: The large cap value index rose 67.45 percent during the
five years while the large cap growth index rose 14.19 percent.

Figure 8-5:
The oneyear and
five-year
returns for
growth and
value stock
indexes.
Source: Russell.com

You can see why knowing which horse is in the lead matters. When value’s in
favor, as it clearly was during these time periods, swing trading value stocks
is like flying a plane with strong tailwinds. Swing trading growth stocks can
be profitable as well, but the headwinds lower your overall return.
In 2007, for the first time in seven years, the winds blew in the other direction
and growth stocks began to outperform value (see Figure 8-6). Whether this
change is the beginning of a trend or a one-off event tied largely to the meltdown in the financial services sector (financial services make up the largest
industry weighting in the value indexes) remains to be seen. But keeping tabs
on these changes will place you in the right stocks.

Figure 8-6:
In 2007,
growth
stocks
began to
outperform
value stocks
for the first
time in
several
years.

Source: Russell.com

Chapter 8: Finding Companies Based on Their Fundamentals
What you should know about basic screening criteria
Before you start working with screens, you should note that value and
growth screens tend to have similar characteristics. For example, both
screens should exclude low-priced securities and securities that trade infrequently. When looking for candidates on the long side, they should both
include a field for high return on equity.
A major difference between value and growth screens is that growth screens
tend to focus on earnings growth rate fields, whereas value stocks focus on
valuation metrics like P/E ratios. Additionally, some fields differ between the
two. For example, low-priced stocks are often identified using the price to
sales ratio. Growth stocks are rarely found using that measure.
Don’t be surprised if you see the same fields in both growth and value stocks
with different filter values. For instance, the return on equity criteria is
present in both the value and growth screens, because return on equity is
an important measure in all companies you buy or sell. The higher this
statistic, the more profit the company is able to squeeze out from every dollar
of equity.
When inputting your screening criteria, take care not to be on either the
liberal or conservative extreme. You want your screen to capture companies
from several industries, not just one that happens to be on hard times. If members of one industry group dominate a screen, one of your criteria is likely too
strict. But you don’t need every industry to be represented to have a good
screen. When one industry is on hard times, then it may be understandable
that few, if any, members of that group appear in screens identifying potential
buy candidates.

When growth is on the rise
The important criteria to include in a growth screen include:
 A share price measure: This number allows you to exclude stocks
trading below some value you input, such as $5 per share.
 Average daily volume: This part of the screen helps you avoid securities that trade a few hundred shares a day and are thus difficult to enter
or exit. No doubt these securities hold opportunities, but I don’t believe
the potential return makes up for the risk.
Growth stocks typically reside in the technology, healthcare, and consumer
discretionary sectors, but they can reside in other parts of the market as
well. Following are the factors that characterize growth companies:
 Earnings growth rates above the market average (for example, above
25 percent)
 Sales growth rates above the market average (such as above 10 percent)

175

176 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
 New products and new management
 Low or no-dividend payment
 High price to book ratios
 Higher-than-average P/E
Use the growth screen when growth is outperforming value stocks. In constructing your growth screen, be restrictive enough that you have just a
handful of companies to work from, but not so restrictive that you exclude
potential opportunities.

Using a growth screen to find fast-growing companies
Growth stocks exhibit high earnings growth rates. Therefore, the following
growth screen, which can be implemented with most popular screening programs, focuses on earnings growth recently and historically. Although the
method of inputting these screening functions is largely dependent on the
screening program you use, I recommend you always input these numbers:
 Last closing share price ≥ $5: I consider stocks below $5 to be penny
stocks.
 Average daily volume (last 50 days) ≥ 100,000 shares: Unless you’re
trading $5 million or more, average daily volume of 100,000 shares with
securities priced $5 or higher should allow you to get in and out without
too much trouble.
 Earnings per share (EPS) growth (most recent quarter versus year-ago
quarter) ≥ 25 percent: This is the figure recommended by William J.
O’Neil, founder of Investor’s Business Daily.
 Annualized five-year historical EPS growth rate ≥ 10 percent: O’Neil
recommends this number as well.
 Relative strength rating ≥ 80: Another recommended figure from the
Investor’s Business Daily founder.
 Return on equity ≥ 18 percent: Based on my experience, 18 percent is
the minimum return on equity I’d look for in companies I want to swing
trade on the long side.
I consider these criteria to be important in growth stocks. The first two fields
ensure that you’re looking at liquid stocks that trade above $5 per share,
which excludes penny stocks from your analysis. The next two focus on earnings growth rates: the lifeblood of the growth stock. The fifth field examines
price performance relative to the overall market. (Growth stocks that you buy
should be performing in the top 20 percent of the overall market.) The final
criterion, the return on equity field, limits your analysis universe to companies
that are being run well, meaning their earnings growth is driven by management effectiveness and not necessarily by overall industry fundamentals.
