
10 506455-ch05.indd 87

9/24/09 10:28:35 PM

88

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
It’s true that over time, a company with rising revenue and earnings will likely
see its stock price rise, too. And as discussed in Chapter 3, correctly forecasting how to determine how much a company will earn and how much it will be
worth in the future can be great for long-term success. Fundamental analysts
can help you determine whether a stock is cheap or expensive relative to the
company’s revenue and earnings.
But in the short term, stock prices and earnings can seemingly have nothing
to do with each other. And that’s where the skill, and a bit of luck, comes in
when you try to match fundamental analysis with stock prices. The fact is
that in the short term, stocks rise and fall largely based on how a company’s
earnings compare with what’s expected.

The importance of investors’ expectations
Remember, when you’re studying a company’s income statement, you’re not
alone. There are hundreds, if not thousands of other investors looking at the
same numbers and trying to place a price on the stock. They then buy and
sell based on their fundamental analysis, to establish the current price.
If the company’s revenue and earnings match what most people were expecting, that means the current stock price was likely correctly set. Only if the
other investors were way off will the stock move much higher or lower after a
company releases its income statement. You will discover more on this topic
later in the book. But the role of expectations for earnings is important to discuss now since it shows that just because you master the income statement
doesn’t mean you’ll necessarily be a successful investor.

Comparing actual financial
results with expectations
Even before a company puts out its income statement, analysts and other
investors have had a chance to guess what they think the company will earn.
These earnings estimates are usually based on diluted earnings per share.
These estimates are available online at many places, but below are instructions on how to find them at MSN Money.
1. Log into MSN Money at moneycentral.msn.com/investor.
2. Enter the symbol of the stock you’re interested in the box in the upper
left-hand corner of the screen and click the “Get Quote” button.

10 506455-ch05.indd 88

9/24/09 10:28:35 PM

Chapter 5: Analyzing a Company’s Profitability Using the Income Statement

89

3. Click on the “Earnings Estimates” option listed in the navigation bar
on the left-hand side of the screen.
4. Find the earnings number in the “Average Estimate” row under the
quarter you’re interested in. That’s the earnings estimate.
Once the company reports its earnings, you can then compare the actual
earnings with the estimate.
It can be tricky to get an apples-to-apples comparison between the analysts’
EPS estimate and the actual reported EPS from the company. While analysts
will usually forecast operating earnings, companies may sometimes include
unusual and nonrecurring items that make comparison with the estimate
problematic. For that reason, many companies attempt to help investors by
offering pro forma earnings. Pro forma earnings don’t follow GAAP. Instead,
adjustments are made by the company to make the reported EPS match the
estimate.
Pro forma earnings can be helpful when you’re trying to see if a company’s
earnings beat, matched or missed earnings estimates. But pro forma earnings can also be abused by companies. By not following GAAP, companies
have great leeway in adding certain one-time gains and ignoring charges
they’d rather you not see. The Securities and Exchange Commission in 2002,
for instance, said Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts departed from accounting
rules and gave a misleading impression the company beat estimates when
it reported quarterly results in October 1999. While the company told investors it was leaving out a one-time $81.4 million charge, it didn’t disclose it also
added a one-time gain of $17.2 million to its results. Investors assumed the
company beat estimates due to strong performance, the SEC said, when in
fact, Trump’s numbers were lifted by the gain.

10 506455-ch05.indd 89

9/24/09 10:28:35 PM

90

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

10 506455-ch05.indd 90

9/24/09 10:28:35 PM

Chapter 6

Measuring A Company’s Staying
Power with the Balance Sheet
In This Chapter
▶ Calculating the size of a company’s financial resources using the balance sheet
▶ Discerning the difference between a company that is financed by debt or stock
▶ Realizing the importance of watching a company’s working capital
▶ Gaining awareness of companies’ ability to water down your holding with dilution

F

or many investors, following how companies are doing each quarter is
almost a sport. Some investors may read about companies’ earnings and
revenue, just as sports fans follow the track records of their favorite teams.
And certainly, knowing how well a company is doing, or how strong its business is operating, is an important part of fundamental analysis. But knowing
about earnings and revenue is just the tip of the fundamental analysis iceberg. Fundamental analysts not only know how a company is doing, but what
kind of financial shape it’s in.
And that’s why it’s important for you to understand how to dig into a company’s balance sheet. The balance sheet is a financial statement that tells you
if a company is financially healthy. A strong balance sheet, or one that’s rich
in cash and low on debt, can help a company endure a severe but temporary
downturn in its business.
In this chapter, you’ll take a tour of the balance sheet and gain an understanding of how this financial statement can help improve the results of your
fundamental analysis.

11 506455-ch06.indd 91

9/24/09 10:29:18 PM

92

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

Familiarizing Yourself with
the Balance Sheet
If you’ve ever calculated your personal net worth, you already have a pretty
good understanding of what a company’s balance sheet is. When you tally
up your net worth, you generally perform a quick calculation that might look
something like this:
Value of things you own – value of things you owe = net worth
Consider this simple personal finance situation: You bought a $200,000 house,
put 20% down ($40,000) and borrowed the rest ($160,000). Meanwhile, you
have $20,000 in your savings account. You would calculate your net worth
like this:
$200,000 (home value) + $20,000 (savings) – $160,000 (loan amount) =
$60,000 net worth
Keep this example in mind as you learn about how a company measures its
assets, liabilities, and equity, as explained next.

Separating your assets
from your liabilities
Just as biologists classify living creatures by placing them in a genus and
species, accountants attempt to put everything companies own and owe into
three buckets. Those buckets are:
✓ Assets: Things a company owns. These might include tangible assets,
such as physical manufacturing plants or raw materials sitting in a warehouse. Assets, too, might be intangible. Intangible assets are things like
patents and trademarks, which have value even though you can’t touch
them.
✓ Liabilities: Things a company owes. Usually, liabilities include debt the
company is on the hook for.
✓ Shareholders’ equity (or just equity): What’s left of a company’s assets
after accounting for its liabilities. Technically, equity represents all the
money put into the company by investors and the portion of the profits
the company has held onto. When companies hold onto earnings, rather
than returning them to shareholders (often in the form a dividend), they
are called retained earnings. It’s the equivalent to your own net worth.

11 506455-ch06.indd 92

9/24/09 10:29:18 PM

Chapter 6: Measuring A Company’s Staying Power with the Balance Sheet

93

The most basic equation of business
Once accountants place a company’s assets and liabilities into the proper
buckets, it’s possible to apply some basic math. And the calculation you use
to measure your net worth is practically identical to how companies measure
their shareholders’ equity. The formula companies use is just rearranged a
bit and the terms are different.
Companies don’t necessarily refer to net worth. Net worth is more of a term
used in personal finance. Instead, the difference between what companies own
and what they owe is called shareholders’ equity.
So, here’s the most basic formula used in business and the fundamental
building block behind the balance sheet:
Assets = Liabilities + Equity
As you can see, this formula states a company’s assets must equal the sum
of what it owes and what the shareholders own (shareholders’ equity). At all
times, a company’s assets must equal the sum of its liabilities and equity. The
fact that both sides of this equation must be equal, or balance, is where the
balance sheet gets its name. Clever, I know.
Some investors have an easier time understanding the fundamental formula
used on the balance sheet by picturing it visually. For you right-brained readers out there, below in Table 6-1 is a diagram that’s often scribbled on the
blackboard in Accounting 101 classes.

Understanding the Parts
of the Balance Sheet
Now that you understand the basic structure of the balance sheet, it’s time
to start picking it apart. To do this, first know assets, liabilities, and equity
can each be broken down further into smaller, more telling components.
Deconstructing a company’s assets, liabilities and equity can be extremely
useful in understanding how a company funds itself and keeps paying the
bills by managing its ready-and-available cash, called working capital.
When you dissect a balance sheet, you begin to gain deeper knowledge about
all the moving parts that make up a company. The balance sheet tells you
what a company owns, what it’s borrowing, and where it gets the money to
keep itself in operation.

11 506455-ch06.indd 93

9/24/09 10:29:18 PM

94

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

Table 6-1
Assets

Visual Take on the Balance Sheet
Liabilities
+
Equity

Covering your bases with assets
The best place to start exploring a company’s balance sheet is its list of
assets. The portion of the balance sheet that records a company’s assets
typically has the following parts:
✓ Current assets: A company’s current assets are things it owns that could
theoretically be sold for cash within a year. These assets, also called
short-term assets, are those the company can tap reasonable quickly to
meet immediate cash obligations. Current assets can be further broken
down into:
• Cash: This is the easiest asset to understand. Companies have savings accounts, too, and keep cash handy to pay bills.
• Cash equivalents: Companies will sometimes invest cash that’s
stockpiled in short-term and high-quality investments that can
be quickly sold. These investments give companies liquidity, or
access to cash, but allow them to earn a slightly higher return that
just holding cash.
When many fundamental analysts refer to a company’s cash, they
are usually including cash equivalents in addition to cold-hard cash.
• Marketable securities: Sometimes companies have cash available
that they don’t need immediately, but expect they might need
within a year. They might invest this cash in high-quality debt that
matures in a quarter or two. These investments are relatively safe,
but not as readily accessible as actual cash or cash equivalents.
• Accounts receivable: When companies sell a product, they often
don’t collect the cash right away. If you buy a book, for instance,
you might use your credit card and the merchant isn’t paid immediately. These short-term IOUs are called accounts receivable.
• Inventories: Companies must spend money to accumulate the
things they plan to sell. Nearly all manufacturing companies, for
instance, must buy raw materials to make their products. The
value of these assets show up in the inventories line.
• Prepaid expenses. If a company pays a bill ahead of time, it has a
credit with the supplier or merchant. That credit is an asset, since
it reduces what the company must spend in the future.

11 506455-ch06.indd 94

9/24/09 10:29:18 PM

Chapter 6: Measuring A Company’s Staying Power with the Balance Sheet

95

✓ Long-term liabilities:
• Property, plant and equipment. Assets that cannot be turned
into cash in a year are called long-term assets. One of the biggest
groups of long-term assets include a company’s property, plant and
equipment, nicknamed PP&E. These assets include buildings and
other machinery and computers a company might own. For an oil
company, for instance, PP&E might be oil rigs used to pull crude
out of the earth.
• Goodwill. Goodwill is an asset you can’t feel or touch, making it
intangible. Goodwill usually appears on a company’s balance sheet
after it buys another company. Goodwill is the amount paid for
another company, above that company’s actual value according to
accounting rules. The extra amount paid is considered an asset on
the acquiring company’s balance sheet.
• Other intangibles. Goodwill isn’t the only asset a company might
have that can’t be touched or seen. Patents, brands and trademarks, for instance, have value even though they’re not physical
items.
• Total assets. All of the assets are added up to create a grand total
of everything the company owns. This is called total assets and
will be a number that’s used frequently in analysis, especially with
financial ratios discussed in Chapter 8.
Total assets is an important number on the balance sheet. It must, and will,
match the total of the company’s liabilities and equity.
Just to give you an idea of what to expect when perusing the asset section of
a balance sheet, Figure 6-1 shows you the top section of Hershey Food’s 2007
balance sheet.

Getting in touch with a
company’s liabilities
Just like it seems there’s always a bill in your mailbox when you open it, the
same goes for companies. During the normal course of business, companies
have hungry suppliers and service providers who demand to be paid for
their products or services. But bills are just one form of liabilities companies
have. The liabilities section of a balance sheet breaks down everything companies owe into these parts:
✓ Current liabilities: If a company has bills that are due within a year’s
time, they’re considered to be current liabilities. Not paying these bills
usually means trouble for a company. Current liabilities come in several
flavors fundamental analysts need to be aware of:

11 506455-ch06.indd 95

9/24/09 10:29:18 PM

96

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
• Accounts payable: Companies don’t typically have to pay right
away for things they buy. Suppliers will usually extend trade credit
to companies, giving them at least 30 days or even longer to pay
for certain supplies, raw materials or services.
• Short-term debt: This is the amount of debt the company must pay
back within a year.
• Current portion of long-term debt: Typically companies arrange
to borrow money for many years. A portion of that long-term debt,
though, is generally due within a year and is called the current portion of long-term debt.
• Other current liabilities. Here’s the catch-all bucket for liabilities
that don’t quite fit anywhere else.
✓ Long-term liabilities:
• Long-term debt: The costs of starting and maintaining a business
can be massive. As a result, some companies turn to lenders to
borrow money from, and if they’re lucky, they can line up long-term
debt that doesn’t have to be paid for more than a year or longer.
Keeping an eye on a company’s long-term debt load is critical.
While only the current portion is due within a year, the year of
debt may come due shortly. If the company is unable to pay the
debt or refinance it by borrowing from someone else, the company
may default. When a company defaults, the lenders may threaten to
take control of the company.
• Other long-term liabilities: This includes liabilities, due in more
than a year, that don’t fit in any of the other categories. A company
will break down liabilities that are in here in the footnotes to the
financial statements. The footnotes, typically available in a company’s 10-Q or 10-K, provide a more detailed breakdown of liabilities.
• Deferred income taxes: Companies must keep two sets of financial
statements. There’s the version you see, which is presented in this
book, and a version for tax purposes for the IRS. Sometimes the
accounting for taxes can be quite different in the two sets of books.
Deferred income taxes help reconcile the differences. If a company
has deferred income taxes, that means it may owe taxes in the future.
The liabilities section of the balance sheet might often look like Figure 6-2,
which is from Hershey’s 2007 10-K.

11 506455-ch06.indd 96

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

Chapter 6: Measuring A Company’s Staying Power with the Balance Sheet

97

Hershey’s Assets on 2007 Balance Sheet
Current assets

In $ thousands
Cash and cash equivalents

$129,198

Accounts receivable

487,285

Inventories

600,185

Prepaid expenses and other

209,906

Total current assets

1,426,574

Property, plant and equipment

1,539,715

Goodwill

584,713

Other intangibles

155,862

Other assets

540,249

Long-term assets

Figure 6-1:
Hershey’s
assets on
the balance
sheet in
2007.

Total assets

4,247,113

Hershey’s Liabilities on the Balance Sheet in 2007
Current liabilities

In $ thousands
Accounts payable

$223,019

Short-term debt

850,288

Current portion of long-term debt

6,104

Other current liabilities

539,359

Total current liabilities

1,618,770

Long-term debt

1,279,965

Other long-term liabilities

544,106

Deferred income taxes

180,842

Long-term liabilities
Figure 6-2:
Hershey’s
liabilities on
the balance
sheet in
2007.

11 506455-ch06.indd 97

Total liabilities

3,623,593

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

98

Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

Taking stock in a company’s equity
Shareholders’ equity represents the total claim investors have on a company’s assets, free-and-clear of debt. That includes money investors injected
into a company, in addition to profits that the company has held back, or
retained. The equity section of many companies’ balance sheets include the
following sections:
✓ Preferred stock: Companies may issue ownership stakes that are kind of
a blend between debt and equity. Like debt, preferred stock pays a cash
payment that’s arranged ahead of time. However, as with common stock
dividends, companies may suspend these preferred stock payments at
any time.
✓ Common stock: When you’re looking to buy a stake of a company, typically these are the shares you’re buying. When you look up a stock
quote, most of the time you’re getting the price of a share of a company’s common stock.
✓ Retained earnings: It’s up to a company whether or not to return its
profits to shareholders in the form of dividends. If the company keeps
earnings, it records the sum here.
✓ Treasury stock: Sometimes not all of a company’s shares are available to
bought or sold. A company might buy back its stock when it thinks it’s
cheap, and put it aside. A company might also authorize to issue stock,
but not actually issue it. Either way, the pool of unused shares are called
treasury stock.
✓ Total shareholders equity: The shareholders equity line of the balance
sheet measures the value of shareholders’ stake in the company.
A summary of the equity section of Hershey’s balance sheet appears below in
Table 6-2.

Table 6-2

Hershey’s Equity on the Balance Sheet
$ thousands

11 506455-ch06.indd 98

Preferred stock

N/A

Common stock

$299,095

Retained earnings

$3,927,306

Treasury stock

–$4,001,562

Total shareholders’ equity

$592,922

Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity

$4,247,113

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

Chapter 6: Measuring A Company’s Staying Power with the Balance Sheet

99

Analyzing the Balance Sheet
Now that you understand the pieces and parts that make up the balance
sheet, it’s time to start applying fundamental analysis. Just as you dug more
deeply into the income statement in Chapter 5, in this section you’ll develop
tools to glean insight from the balance sheet.

Sizing up the balance sheet
with common sizing
If you noticed while looking at Hershey’s balance sheet above, just looking at
the numbers in isolation isn’t particularly useful. It’s helpful to put the assets,
liabilities, and equity into perspective by comparing them with something.
That’s why common sizing, a fundamental analysis tool applied with the
income statement in Chapter 5, can be equally helpful when analyzing the
balance sheet.
When common sizing a balance sheet, you are attempting to show how significant a company’s different assets, liabilities and forms of equity are to the
entire firm. You only need three formulas to common size the entire balance
sheet:
✓ Assets: Divide each type of asset by the company’s total assets.
✓ Liabilities: Divide each type of liability by the company’s total liabilities
and stockholder’s equity.
✓ Equity: Divide each category of equity by the company’s total liabilities
and stockholders’ equity.
Multiply the results of the three items above by 100 to convert the figures into
a percentage.
Imagine if you wanted to see how much Hershey relies on borrowed money,
versus money raised from stock investors, to fund itself. That’s a perfect
reason to common size the liabilities portion of Hershey’s balance sheet.
To do this, you start with Hershey’s accounts payable ($223,019) and divide it
by total liabilities and stockholders’ equity ($4,247,113). The result is 5.3%, and
I’ll explain what that means in a bit. First, you might want to finish common
sizing the whole statement. Table 6-3 shows you the results of common sizing
the key parts of the liabilities and equity portion of Hershey’s balance sheet.

11 506455-ch06.indd 99

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

100 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Table 6-3

Common-Size Analysis of Hershey
% of liabilities and shareholders’ equity

Accounts payable

5.3%

Short-term debt

20%

Current portion of long-term debt

0.1%

Total current liabilities

38.1%

Long-term debt

30.1%

Total shareholders’ equity

14%

Common sizing a company’s liabilities gives you an instant view of where
Hershey gets the money to keep itself going, or its capital structure.
Understanding a company’s capital structure is key to understanding how well
it’s positioned to withstand an economic downturn or how profitable it will be
during strong economic growth.
Just by doing a few multiplication problems, you get a very unique fundamental look into Hershey. You can see Hershey receives its financing from a
balanced number of sources, but leans toward relying more on debt. Hershey
gets 20% of its financing from short-term loans, more than 30% from longterm loans and 14% from equity.
When companies rely on borrowed money to pay for their operations, it’s
called leverage. Leverage can greatly enhance a company’s returns for stock
holders as long as the company can comfortably keep up with its interest
payments. Interest on debt is largely fixed, much like a monthly payment on a
30-year fixed mortgage is static. Interest also has a tax benefit of being deductible. The question, though, is whether or not a company has borrowed too
much. You can find out if a company is overleveraged by analyzing working
capital, later in this chapter, and financial ratios in Chapter 8.
