
2. ¢. A doji is synonymous with indecision. In such conditions, the market
becomes vulnerable to correction. Doji often work better as markers of
top reversals than bottom reversals.

3. a. Although the ideal doji has the opening and closing at the same level,
if the real body is small enough, It has the same implications as a doji.
How do you deeide whether a near~loji day (Le., the open and close are
very close, but not exactly the same) should be considered a doji? One
method I recommend is to compare a near-doji day to recent action. If
there are a series of very small real bodies, I would not view the near-doji
day as significant, since so many recent periods had small real bodies or
doji.

4. ¢. The dragonfly doji completes its formation with the open, high, and
close all at the session's high. As such, it might have more bullish impli-
eations than a regular doji. The long lower shadow of the dragonfly doji
illustrates the market selling off steeply during the session and then
springing back to close at the highs of that session.

5. a. A dojiis more effective if it appears in an extended rally or uptrend, es-
pecially if the market is overbought (meaning it has moved up too far, too
fast). Its signal is even more powerful if it appears at a resistance level.

6. a. The gravestone doji completes its formation with the open, low, and
close all at the session's low. Therefore, it has slightly more bearish im-
plications than a regular doj). As its name implies, this doji sets a negative
tone with its long, upper shadow. It tells you that the market opened,
then moved up to an intrasession high, but fell to close at the opening
price.

7. a. As a hammer’s real body becomes smaller, it may become a dragonfly
doji, since such a doji displays the open, high, and close at the high of the
session. Consequently, with a hammer's small real body at the top end of
the trading range, when the real body gets smaller and smaller (meaning
the open and close get closer to one another), the trend culminates in the
formation of a dragonfly doji.


a.

12

12

12

13.

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

c. The gravestone doji has the open, low, and close at the low of the ses-
sion. A shooting star, with its real body near the bottom end of the trad-
ing range, would become a gravestone doji as its real body shrinks.

. da. In this question, we're comparing the size of the real bodies. Conse-

quently, a spinning top has a smaller real body than a long real body. Con-
tinuing this analogy, a doji session has a smaller real body than a spinning
top session. Remember, a spinning top 1s the nickname for a small real
body.

d. As opposed to a doji in a descending market (a Southern dojf), a doji
in an ascending market is called a Northern doji. In my experience,
Northern doji are more effective at calling top reversals than Southern
doji are at calling bottom reversals.

d. When a doji appears in the middle of the trading range, I suggest you
ignore it. Doji, like most candlestick signals, are reversal indicators;
therefore, they need a trend to reverse. If the market 1s In a lateral (Le.,
box range), there is no trend to reverse; the doj) would not be a signal to
place a trade. The odds of a turn for a Northern doji are enhanced tf the
market Is overextended and js near resistance. It's important to remem-
ber that the more signals you have confirming the same support or resis-
tance level, the more likely a reversal is. Consequently, if a doji appears
to confirm a resistance area, the odds of a tur is higher than if no prior
resistance js in place. This underscores the critical aspect of always con-
sidering candle signals in the context of recent price pattern history. In
this instance, if the market moved in a lateral range before the doji ap-
peared, we would not use it as a trading signal. But if a doji developed
after a rally, and especially if the doj) confirmed a prior resistance area,
it has a high probability of being a reversal signal.

(A). 2. The gravestone doji has the open, low, and close of the bottom
end of the trading range and a long upper shadow.

(B). 1. A long-legged doji has very long upper lower shadows. It’s also
sometimes called a high wave dojt.

ic). 3. A dragonfly doji has the open, high, and close at the high of the
session. It’s probably called a dragonfly since it resembles the insect of
that name, with very long wings at the top of its body.

a. Normally a doji in a downtrend (a Southern doji) doesn’t work as well

as a Northern doji. However, all candle signals must be observed in the
context of the overall market picture. In this example the doji is con-


Single Candie Lines 3

firming potential support. As such, this doji takes on more significance
and should be heeded.

14. a. Since the high of the doji is at 2, we use a close above that level on
which a bullish breakout would be signaled.

15. a.1
b.3
75
4.2
e4
1.6


SECTION THREE

Long Real Bodies, the Consummate
Storytellers

Nn previous sections, we focused on single candle lines that incorporate

small real bodies. These small real bodies project indecision on the part of

market participants, especially when they form at support and resistance
areas.
Now, we'll switch gears and talk about long real bodies Candle lines
with extended real bodies can also display strong signals, espectally when
they touch support and resistance zones. Toward the end of this section,
we'll summarize market psychology as it pertains to single candle lines and
their shadows, as well as their real bodies.

In this section you will learn... .

* Market sentiment that underpins long white or black real bodies

Bullish and bearish belt-holds, what they look like, and what they mean
The importance of belt-hold lines when they develop at support and re-
sistance areas

How belt-hold lines add to your money management skills

The significance of upper and lower shadows on all candle lines

kev terms to watch for:

* Bullish belt-hold

Bearish belt-hold

White opening shaven bottom
Black opening shaven top
Belt-hold candle line
Blow-off


36 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

GETTING STARTED

A candle chart displaying small real bodies at the culmination of an uptrend
or downtrend—or even intermediate moves to the upside or downside—
indicates that bulls and bears are fighting in a dead heat. The flip side of
these small-bodied candle line reversals, which include spinning tops, high
wave candles, and doji, are single candle lines incorporating long black or
white real bodies. The Japanese refer to the candle line featuring this ex-
tended real body as a belt-hold.

As Exhibit 2.13 illustrates, the bullish belt-kold \s a tall, white candle that
opens on (or very near) the low of the session and closes at, or near, the high
of the session. When it appears in a decline, it forecasts a potential rally.
When it appears during an ascent, it keeps the bull trend intact.

4] SIDE LIGHT

The Japanese name for the belt-hold is derived from the sumo wrestling term,

yorikiri. Yorikiri means “pushing your opponent out of the ring while holding onto his
belt."

Bullish belt-hold Bearish belt-hold

EXGEBIT 2.13 Belt-Hold Lines


Single Candle Lines 57

The Japanese say, “A single arrow is easily broken, but not ten in a bundle.” So it is
with volume and candles. Volume is a significant component of market psychology.
Strong volume fuels a security's move to the upside or downside and even helps to
confirm trends. Conversely, a security's move up or down on low volume will often
fail, as investor conviction is lacking.

A bearish belt-hold has significant power in foretelling a trend reversal if it opens
near resistance, then falls to close at or near the close many points down, fed by
strong volume. Conversely, a bullish belt-hold that rises off support on strong volume
has more fuel to initiate an uptrend if it forms on high volume and closes at or near
the high of the session.

As you ean see in Exhibit 2.13, the bearish belt-hold 1s a long, black can-
die that opens at, or near, the high of the session, then tumbles lower as the
session unfolds. If this candle line appears in the context of a mature up-
trend, it may form a top reversal.

Generally speaking, the longer the height of the belt-hold candle line, the
more important 1s the signal it gives. That makes sense, because an extended
range culminating in a session's closing at the oppasite end from the opening
means that either the bulls or the bears dominate that session.

As you can see by the support and resistance lines in Exhibit 2.13, belt-
hold lines that appear at prior support or resistance areas, thereby confirm-
ing the strength of those areas, are extremely valuable signals since they
increase the chances of a reversal. Belt-hold lines also gain value as a rever-
sal signal when they have not appeared regularly on the chart’s recent time
frame.

Like many candle trend reversal signals, bullish and bearish belt-holds
ean play an important role in sound money-management prinetples. Say you
are long and your stock rises nicely in an uptrend. Soon, a doji or spinning top
appears, then a bearish belt-hold forms. The doji was a warning to scale back
on longs, but the bearish belt-hold completely confirms the reversal and could
signal a time to consider closing your entire position and taking profits.

The reverse scenario occurs if you are holding a short position in the con-
text of a downtrend. Perhaps the decline slows, and a bullish belt-hold forms
at a prior support area. You may choose to cover part or all of your position,

thus preserving your gains.


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

ni) KEY POINT
iS

While we are on the subject of shacows, trend lines drawn on acandlestick chart are
drawn the same way as they are on a bar chart—by connecting a session's lows fora
support line and the session's highs for a resistance line. There the top of the upper
shadow and bottom of the lower shadow are the areas used for trend lines.

We've explored the size of real bodies thoroughly in previous pages. Still,
the candle's upper and lower shadows—or lack of them—also tell a story. In
the last section, we looked at the long lower shadows of hammers and the
long upper shadows created by shooting stars. The long lower shadow of the
hammer echoed the fact that at some time during the session the market had
sold off sharply, but by session's end the market had regained all the lost
ground and closed at or near the high of the session. In other words, the long
lower shadow visually shows that the market had rejected lower price levels.
Along upper shadow, such as that in a shooting star, illustrates a market that
tests and then rejects higher prices.

Likewise, if there 1s a tall white candle that also has an extended upper
shadow, that upper shadow offsets some of the bullish implications of the tall
white candle. Conversely, the bearish implications of a long black candle are
mitigated by a long lower shadow. Consequently, when analyzing candle
lines, one should consider both the real bodies and shadows.

Conversely, imagine you see a market stabilizing at prior lows or a sup-
port zone, then stabilize. At that time, many of the shadows develop with de-
finable long, lower bullish shadows—despite the size of the real body. That
tells you that buyers are accumulating each time the price comes down to
that support level. As a trader or investor, you might monitor that stock for a
possible basing move and subsequent long entry, if and when it penetrates re-
sistance on strong volume.

You've learned how powerful single candle lines can be. When they de-
velop near support or resistance, they can become even more potent.

In the next chapter, we'll study candle patterns. These patterns, con-
structed of two or more candle lines, give incredibly powerful signals that
help foretell trend reversals. Like their single candle line colleagues, patterns
eome with highly descriptive names, including dark cloud cover, tweezers,
and three white soldiers.


Single Candie Lines ”

CHECK VOLR LADERSTAADING

Questions for Chapter Two, Section Three: Long Real
Bodies, the Consummate Storytellers

What is a bullish belt-hold line?

a. A tall, white candle with a long upper shadow

b. A tall, white candle with a long lower shadow

c. A tall, white candle with the same open and close

a. A tall, white candle that opens near the low of the session and closes
at or near the high of the session

What is a bearish belt-hold line?

a. Along, black real body that opens at the high of the session and closes
at or near the low of the session

b. Along, black candle with a longer upper shadow

c. Along, black candle that plunges below the prior box range

a. A long, black real body that clases below the prior candle's low
When does a bearish belt-hold line become more significant?

a. When the major trend 1s sideways

b. When the major trend 1s up

c. When the belt-hold ts near resistance

4d. When the belt-hold is near support

The longer the height of the belt-hold candle line, the the
signal it gives.

a. less important

Db. more important

c. later

d. less consistent

On a candlestick chart, what points do we use to draw a support line?
a. From the bottom of the real bodies

b. From the top of the real bodies


THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

¢. From the bottom of the lower shadows
d. From the top of the upper shadows
6. The smaller the real body, the
a. greater the force behind the move.
b. more the market has bounced off its lows.
¢. more the market has sold off its highs.
d. less the force behind the move.

7. Imagine you held 500 shares of XYZ as a short position. The stock moved
down in a sharp decline, until it neared the same price zone as the most
recent low. At that support point, it rallied, forming a bullish belt-hold.
This candle formation suggests that you should

a. cover at least part, of your short position.
b. add to your short position.
¢. wait for the 3&P 500 to make a new high.
d. buy puts to hedge your position.
8. Aseries of long lower shadows as the market is descending
a. strengthens the outlook for a bearish scenario.
b. shows that demand 1s easily overcoming supply.
¢. shows that the market 1s descending reluctantly.
4d. None of the above.
9. When analyzing a single candle line, one should consider
a. only the real body.
b. the upper and lower shadows.
c. the real body and shadows.
d. the real body and the upper shadow.
10. In Exhibit 2.14, what is the market telling us?

Ld
yt

EXGEBIT 2.14 Question 10


Single Candie Lines 61

a. The trend ts fully up, as shown by higher highs.
b. The trend ts slightly lower, due to higher lows.
¢. The trend is neutral.

4d. The trend is mostly higher, but caution is warranted due to long upper
shadows.

Answers for Chapter Two, Section Three: Long Real Bodles,
the Consummate Storytellers

1. d. A bullish belt-hold line is a tall white candle that has very little or no
lower shadow and little or no upper shadow.

2. a. A bearish belt-hold line is a long, black real body that opens at the high
of the session and closes at or near the low of the session. It has small or
nonexistent upper or lower shadows.

3. ¢. A bearish belt-hold line displays added bearishness when it confirms a
resistance area by opening near resistance, then plunging lower into the
close. This indicates heavy supply at the resistance zone.

4. b. Generally speaking, the wider the price range of the belt-hold candle
line, the more important the signal it gives.

5. ¢. In candlestick charting, we draw support or resistance lines the same
way we draw it on a bar chart. Consequently, when we draw a support
line, we connect the lows of the lower shadows on the candle chart, Just
as we would connect the lows on a bar chart. This brings out an impor-
tant point about candle charts: Because they use the same data as a bar
chart, we use the same techniques on a candle chart as we do on a bar
chart, including an indicator as basic as a trend line.

6. d. One of the major attributes of candle charts is that they serve as a
quick visual clue telling you whether the bulls or bears are In control of
the market. When you see a tall, white candle, the bulls are in charge.
When a tall, black real body forms, the bears are in charge. A spinning top
(small real body), however, suggests the market is undecided and tells us
the prior trend may be losing some momentum.

7. a. When you are holding a short position and wish to retain your profits,
eonsider covering all or part of your short position when a bullish belt-
hold appears at support.

8. ¢. A tall lower shadow shows that the market is rejecting the lower
prices of the session. A series of long lower shadow candles, even


62

THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

though the market may be falling, signals that the bears do not have full
control.

c. The real body 1s called the essence of the price movement because of
all the information it provides about the demand-supply situation, but
shadows are also an important aspect. For example, a tall white candle
without an upper shadow could be viewed as more positive than a tall
white candle line with an extended upper shadow.

4d. Although the market is ascending, as shown by higher highs and higher

lows and higher closes, the consecutive long upper shadows tell us that
the bulls cannot hold onto control into the close of the session. This

should make one more cautious about following a fully bullish stance.


The Power of
Candle Patterns

SECTION ONE

Close Cousins: Piercing, Dark Cloud
Covers, Engulfing. and Counterattacks

bine In a candle pattern. Just as the Japanese endowed single candle

lines with Imaginative names, they also bestowed colorful deseriptions
on candle patterns. These deseriptive monikers underscore the nature of the
pattern’s signals. For example, dark cloud cover 1s a bearish signal consisting
of a two-candle pattern that Indicates a top reversal. Of course, when dark
clouds cover the sky, it is the warming before the storm.

In this unit, we'll discuss patterns that include two or three candle lines.
We'll also discuss windows, which the Japanese call disjointed candles.

The section that follows explains dark cloud covers and engulfing, pierc-
ing, and counterattack patterns. Readily recognizable on charts, these candle
patterns offer potent signals of possible trend changes and reversals. Use
them in conjunction with Western indicators to find buy/sell setups and in-
corporate therm into your money-management tactics.

C andle charts are most powerful when two or more candle lines com-

oo


64 THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

In this section you will learn... .

«* An overview of multiple candle patterns

* Howto recognize the bullish piercing pattern

* Howto recognize the dark cloud cover pattern

* The importance of bullish and bearish engulfing patterns

* How bullish and bearish counterattack patterns can lead to quick trend
changes

kev terms to watch for:

Bullish piercing pattern

Dark cloud cover

Bullish engulfing pattern
Bearish engulfing pattern
Bullish counterattack pattern
Bearish counterattack pattern

GETTING STARTED

In earlier units, we learned about the power of single candle lines. Now we'll
discuss why multiple candle patterns display even more intense signals.

Just as individual candle lines send important signals about the market’s
health, two- and three-candle patterns that emerge during uptrends and
downtrends often presage a trend reversal, or change. Typically, a two-candle
pattern begins with the topping or bottoming candle; the next candle con-
firms the reversal. A three-candle pattern may start with the formation of a
eandle in the context of a trend, followed by the topping or bottoming candle.
The third candle's appearance verifies the reversal signal.

First, we'll discuss the two-candle pattern referred to as the bullisk
piercing pattern (Exhibit 3.14), which appears in the context of a decline, or
downtrend. Naturally, the more oversold the decline, the more significant the
signal may be. The bullish piercing pattern consists of a black body forming
in the downtrend; the next real body culminates In a white real body that
closes within the prior black body, preferably more than one-half of the black
body's length. The white real body “pierces” the recent downtrend, with the
bulls overwhelming the bears. Subsequent price action should confirm this
pattern.


The Power of Candle Patterns 65

Piercing pattern Dark cloud cover

a

A B
EXBIBIT 3.4 Piercing Pattern and Dark Cloud Cover

You might expect the counterpart to the bullish plercing pattern to be
ealled a bearish piercing pattern. However, the opposite pattern is a power-
ful top reversal pattern known as dark cloud cover.

As illustrated in Exhibit 3.1B, a dark cloud cover forms a top reversal
pattern. The first session should be a strong, white real body. The second
session's price opens over the prior session's high (or above the prior
session's close). By the end of the second session, it closes near the low of
the session. The black candle should ideally close below the center of the
prior white candle.

This foreboding pattern graphically indicates that the bears constrained
the bulls. If the black real body does not close below the halfway point of the
prior white candle, consider waiting for bearish confirmation on the follow-
ing session. This could be a lower close on the next session.

ey SIDE LIGHT

If you're waiting for a good shorting setup, pay attention when a security in a steep
uptrend that’s overbought gets to a resistance area and forms dark cloud cover.
When that scenario takes place, especially with high volume, you may wish to survey
your other technical indicators to see if a shorting setup is at hand. Of course, aclose
over the highs of the dark cloud cover would be a reason to exit any shorts. Re
member the concepts of stops!



THE CANDLESTICK COURSE

Here's an example of how candle patterns add to your money-management
skills by giving early warning of trend change. If you were holding a long po-
sition of a security in an uptrend and you saw the strong, white real body of
the first candle soaring into the uptrend, you would surely remain bullish. On
the next session, the security opens at a new high, confirming your bullish-
ness. By the end of that session, however, the price has fallen well within the
prior session's real body, indicating that the new price high failed to hold:
Supply overcame demand. At this point, your bullishness may change to cau-
tion, and wisdom tells you to take profits. This is a prime example of how
eandle signals offer early reversal information and can aid you in locking in
profits.
