
Recognizing Major Trending Indicators
The number of trending indicators out there is mind-boggling, but all trending
indicators are based on price, volume, or both. So using several trending indicators on a single chart doesn’t give you an advantage. To get the most benefit
from trending indicators, never use more than two or three.
Unlike non-trending indicators, trending indicators tend to have no upper
or lower limits. The higher an indicator’s reading, the stronger the underlying trend. You should only apply trending indicators after you’ve determined that a security is in fact trending either by eyeballing the chart or by
using the ADX indicator, which I explain in the earlier section, “Determining
Whether a Security Is Trending.”
The last item you want to remember about trending indicators is that they
can be applied to all securities: stocks, commodities, mutual funds, ETFs, and
so on. You can even apply them to price derivatives, such as the ratio between
two securities. How you interpret trending indicators is the same regardless of
whether you apply the indicators to prices or to some derivative of prices.

97

98

Par t II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
The following sections help you get up close and personal with three major
trending indicators:
 Directional Movement Index (DMI)
 Moving averages
 Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD)

The compass of indicators: Directional
Movement Index (DMI)
The Directional Movement Index (DMI) is a powerful technical indicator. Not
only does it reveal whether a security is trending, but it also reveals the
direction of that trend, whether it’s increasing in strength, and when it ends.
DMI is composed of three plots:
 +DMI: The positive directional movement index (+DMI) plot indicates how
effective bulls were in pushing prices above the previous day’s high. +DMI
ranges between 0 and 100. The higher the reading, the stronger the bulls.
 –DMI: The negative directional movement index (–DMI) plot shows how
efficient bears were in pushing prices below the previous day’s low. –DMI
ranges between 0 and 100. The higher the reading, the stronger the bears.
 ADX: ADX measures the difference between +DMI and –DMI. So basically
it measures the strength — or lack thereof — of a trend. (For more on
ADX, see “Determining Whether a Security Is Trending,” earlier in this
chapter.)
Swing traders use crossovers in +DMI and –DMI as trading signals. When +DMI
crosses above –DMI, buyers have wrestled control of shares. When –DMI crosses
above +DMI, on the other hand, sellers have wrestled control of shares. Frequent
crossovers between +DMI and –DMI signify that neither bulls nor bears have control of shares, a fact that’s reflected in an ADX reading below 20.
Most charting software calculates DMI over 14 days and uses 25 as the
standard ADX average. Both settings are worthwhile.
Figure 5-5 provides a sample of what DMI looks like in shares of Alvarion
(symbol: ALVR). When –DMI crosses above +DMI, as it did on October 8, a
sell signal is generated. Notice that ADX remains above 20 throughout the
crossover.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions

Figure 5-5:
A chart
of ALVR
includes a
chart of the
DMI.

I don’t trade off of the crossovers of +DMI and –DMI, nor do I recommend you
do so. Although practically every uptrend and downtrend is preceded by the
corresponding +DMI or –DMI crossing above the other, whipsaws occur frequently. It’s difficult to tell when a crossover occurs whether the security’s
still trending or is entering a trading range. That’s why I find DMI to be of
more value when used as an exit indicator than when used as an entry indicator. While I’m long shares of XYZ Corp., for example, I don’t want to see –DMI
cross over +DMI — ever. If it does, I exit as quickly as possible. The reverse is
true if I’m short shares of ABC Corp.
Use DMI in the following manner to get the most bang for your investing buck:
1. Confirm that a trend is in place by using the ADX plot in the DMI.
2. If a trend exists, enter a trade using moving averages or MACD.
For more on either of these trend-following indicators, check out the following sections in this chapter.
3. Enter in the direction of +DMI or –DMI.
If +DMI is above –DMI, enter on the long side. If –DMI is above +DMI,
enter on the short side.
4. Exit when +DMI or –DMI crosses above its counterpart.

99

100 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
A mean, lean revelation machine:
Moving averages
Moving averages — rolling averages of price data designed to reveal the underlying trend in that data — are the most widely used technical indicators. When
you use them, understand that the shorter the average, the more frequently
the average generates signals.
A ten-day moving average, for example, averages the last ten days of price
history. On the eleventh day, the moving average drops the oldest day and
uses the new day in its formula. (Note: The simple moving average equally
weights all bars in its calculation.)
You’ll encounter two types of moving averages in your swing-trading ventures,
and whether you use one more than the other is entirely up to you:
 Simple moving averages: This indicator reveals the consensus price
agreement over X number of days, where X represents the length of the
moving average. When prices rise above their ten-day moving average,
for example, you can conclude that market participants believe the security’s value is rising above the average of the last ten days. Conversely,
when a security’s price falls below its ten-day moving average, the security’s value is falling below the consensus price over the last ten days.
 Exponential moving averages (EMA): This indicator also shows consensus price agreement over a certain time frame, but it weights historical
prices differently. Exponential moving averages respond faster than
simple moving averages because they weight recent price action more
heavily than older price action. The downside to this responsiveness is
an increase in the number of false signals.
Figure 5-6 provides a comparison of the two moving averages using a chart
with a nine-day simple moving average and a nine-day EMA. This chart shows
shares of Smith International (symbol: SII) in late 2007 and early 2008. The
slope of the EMA changes before the slope of the simple moving average, as
highlighted on January 3, 2008, and February 7, 2008. On both days, the EMA
gave a signal one day before the simple moving average. But this quickness
came at the cost of whipsaws. Notice that on December 17, 2007, the slope
of the EMA turned negative prematurely, whereas the slope of the simple
moving average remained positive. A swing trader relying on the EMA may
have exited too early and missed out on a price gain of 10 percent in 10 days.
The most important part of both moving averages is slope. The slope can be
positive (the moving average is rising), negative (the moving average is falling),
or zero (the moving average is flat).

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions
You should always trade in the direction of the slope. If you’re looking to buy
a security, the slope of that security’s moving average must be positive — no
exceptions. If you’re looking to short a security, the slope of that security’s
moving average must be negative — no exceptions. You can trade a security
either when the slope of the moving average turns positive or negative —
depending on whether you’re buying or shorting — or when multiple moving
averages cross.

Figure 5-6:
A comparison of the
simple moving average
and the
EMA using
shares of
SII.

Swing trading securities based on a moving average isn’t a complete trading system. The moving average is simply an entry signal. It doesn’t tell you
how much of your capital to allocate to the position, where you should place
your stop loss, or when you’ll take profits. For more on these topics, flip to
Chapter 10.
In the next couple of sections, I show you how to swing trade using slope
changes and moving average crossovers.

Riding the roller coaster: Trading slope changes
The first question you must consider when trading securities based on the
slope changes of moving averages is what moving-average length, or the
number of days, to use. Assuming you’re using daily charts, stick to a movingaverage length of 18 days or fewer. (I’m partial to the nine-day moving average myself.)
After you’ve determined the number of days you’re looking at, follow these
steps to buy a desired security using slope changes:
1. Find a security that’s trending, as shown by the ADX indicator.

101

102 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
When the ADX indicator is above 20, the security’s trending. But you
still don’t know the direction of that trend. You can figure it out by
simply examining the chart and determining whether prices are forming
a series of higher lows and higher highs or a series of lower highs and
lower lows. Or you can use the DMI indicator described previously in
this chapter.
Trade only in the direction of the trend. If the trend is up and the nineday moving average slope turns negative, don’t short the security. While
the slope of the moving average is negative, the overall trend is positive;
shorting in these situations can be like swimming against the tide.
2. After you’ve determined that a trend is in place and that the direction
is up, buy when the slope of the moving average changes from flat or
negative to positive.
If you trade during market hours, the slope may change to positive at
10 a.m., only to be reversed by closing time at 4 p.m. If you can watch
the market intraday, I recommend trading in the last half hour, when it’s
likely the slope change won’t be reversed. Wait to trade on the day following the slope change if you can’t watch the market intraday.
3. Place the stop loss level below a recent low.
Some swing traders place their stop loss order below the low of the day
when the buy signal occurred, which represents the exit in the event of
loss.
4. Exit after the moving average turns flat or negative.
In the event of profit, you may exit when the slope of the moving average
turns from positive to negative, when a certain return objective is met,
or after a certain period of days. However, I prefer the method recommended in this step.
The process for shorting securities based on slope changes isn’t all that different from the process for buying. Follow these steps:
1. Identify that a trend exists by using ADX or the eyeball approach.
2. Confirm that the direction of the trend is down by using DMI or the
eyeball approach.
3. Short when the moving average slope turns negative after being flat
or positive.
4. Place a stop loss above a recent peak.
5. Exit based on time, return objective, or the slope turning positive.
Figure 5-7 highlights buying shares of a security on the upswing of the
slope of a nine-day simple moving average in shares of Axsys Technologies
(symbol: AXYS). With the ADX above 30, you can see that shares of Axsys

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions
Technologies are trending, so trending indicators are appropriate. In this
case, you’d wait for the slope to turn positive (if the slope is already positive,
you’ve missed the opportunity and should pass on the trade). After the slope
turns positive, buy the security with a stop loss below a recent trough (in
this scenario, $19.95 marks a recent trough). Your exit would depend on your
trading strategy.

Figure 5-7:
Shares of
AXYS in
mid-2007
plotted with
a nine-day
moving
average and
ADX.

Crissing and crossing: Trading moving average crossovers
Another way to use a moving average is by trading crossovers. Moving average crossovers occur more frequently than slope changes, which means
swing traders using crossovers may enter or exit a trade earlier than traders
relying on changes in the slope of a moving average. But nothing in this world
is free — that added earliness comes at the cost of increased whipsaws.
Multiple moving averages convey information on the value of a security over
several time periods. When a short-term moving average crosses above a
moving average of longer length, market participants are beginning to change
their opinion of the security. Specifically, the company’s short-term value is
increasing over its long-term value, a move that may signal the beginning of a
new trend or the continuation of a previous trend.
When a short-term moving average crosses below a long-term moving average, the security’s value is declining relative to price consensus established
over the long-term moving average, which may precede a price decline.
The basic method of trading moving average crossovers on the buy side is as
follows:
1. Determine whether a trend exists by using ADX or the eyeball
approach.
2. Confirm that a moving average crossover occurs in the direction of
the trend by using DMI or the eyeball approach.

103

104 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
3. Buy when the short-term moving average crosses above the long-term
moving average.
4. Place a stop loss order below a recent trough.
5. Exit based on time, return objective, or when the short-term moving
average crosses below the long-term moving average.
Stick to moving averages that are 18 days in length or fewer. Although longerterm moving averages — such as the 50-day moving average — are more
meaningful than shorter-term moving averages, they generate signals too
infrequently for swing traders.
I recommend you use the crossover of the four-day moving average and nineday moving average. When the four-day moving average crosses
 Above the nine-day moving average in an established uptrend, you
should buy the underlying security
 Below the nine-day moving average in an established downtrend, you
should short the underlying security
Figure 5-8 highlights a long trade in shares of Western Digital (symbol: WDC)
based on the crossover of the four-day moving average above the nine-day
moving average. If you’d found this potential trade when the four-day moving
average had already crossed above the nine-day moving average, you’d be
too late to buy it.

Figure 5-8:
A four-day
moving
average
and a nineday moving
average
crossing
over in
shares of
WDC.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions

A meeting of the means: MACD
Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD), a variation on the moving
average crossover covered in the preceding section, is a third popular trending
indicator. Unlike standard trending indicators, MACD shows the direction of a
trend as well as its intensity and measures the strength of buyers and sellers.
MACD is a plot of the difference between two exponential moving averages:
the 12-day exponential moving average (EMA) and the 26-day EMA. The MACD
line rises and falls as the difference between the 12-day EMA and the 26-day
EMA expands and contracts. When the 12-day EMA crosses above the 26-day
EMA, the MACD line crosses above 0. When the 12-day EMA crosses below the
26-day EMA, the MACD line crosses below 0.
But the difference of these two exponential moving averages isn’t the only
plot in the MACD indicator. Believe it or not, the MACD line has a moving average applied to it — an average of an average, if you will. And the difference
between the MACD line and its moving average is plotted as a histogram — a
graphical representation of this difference. A rising histogram is a sign that
buyers are increasing in strength. A falling histogram is a sign that sellers are
increasing in strength.
The standard settings for the MACD indicator are to use the 12-day and 26-day
exponential moving averages and to smooth out the MACD line using a 9-day
moving average. Go with ’em.
To see MACD in action and to fully understand its moving parts, take a look
at Figure 5-9, which shows MACD applied to shares of First Solar (symbol:
FSLR). The MACD line plot is shown along with the nine-day moving average of the MACD line. The difference between these two plots is represented
graphically in the form of a histogram below the two lines.

Figure 5-9:
This chart
shows
shares of
FSLR with
the MACD
indicator
applied.

105

106 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
MACD can generate trading signals in three ways:
 Positive and negative divergences
 MACD crossover above or below its nine-day moving average
 MACD line crossing above or below the 0 line
I don’t recommend trading securities based off of the MACD line’s crossing of
the 0 line. Doing so is identical to trading a security based off of the crossover
of the 12-day and 26-day exponential moving averages. (For a refresher on EMAs,
see “A lean, mean revelation machine: Moving averages,” earlier in this chapter.)
The following sections delve into the ins and outs of trading using MACD.

Marking highs and lows: Positive and negative divergences in MACD
A positive divergence in MACD occurs when a security makes a new low
but the MACD histogram fails to confirm that low, indicating that sellers are
weakening in strength and that a trend change is imminent. A negative divergence develops when a security’s price reaches a new high but the MACD
histogram fails to confirm that high, indicating that buyers are weakening and
that a trend change is looming.
Figure 5-10 depicts a positive divergence in the MACD histogram on a
mid-2007 chart of streetTRACKS Gold (symbol: GLD), an exchange traded
fund that tracks the prices of gold bullion. The positive divergence developed
in late June as the price of streetTRACKS Gold fell to new lows while the
MACD histogram made higher lows. The chart also shows an opportunity to
trade off of the crossover in the MACD line. In late April, this line fell below
its nine-day moving average, generating a sell signal.

Figure 5-10:
This chart
of GLD in
mid-2007
shows the
different
ways you
can use
MACD.

Chapter 5: Asking Technical Indicators for Directions
If you use divergences, you must use a stop loss order after entering your
orders. Also, enter the position only after the MACD histogram turns in the
direction of the trade. If you’re looking to buy a positive divergence in MACD,
wait for the histogram to stop falling and turn up — that’s your signal to enter
the trade. If you’re looking to short a negative divergence in MACD, do the
opposite — wait for the histogram to stop rising and turn down.

Crossing the line: MACD crossover of its nine-day moving average
The MACD line often crosses over its nine-day moving average. When the
MACD line crosses above this moving average, you have a buy signal (assuming trending markets). When the MACD line crosses below it, you have a sell
signal (again, assuming trending markets). You can interpret a moving average crossover the same as you would a standard moving average crossover
(see the earlier section, “Crissing and crossing: Trading moving average
crossovers,” for details).
Follow these steps to enter your trade:
1. Verify whether a trend is in place by using ADX or the eyeball
approach.
2. Wait for an MACD line to cross above (if you’re buying) or below (if
you’re shorting) its nine-day moving average.
3. Enter the day of the crossover (if you watch markets intraday) or the
day after the crossover (if you trade using end-of-day figures).
4. Place a stop loss below a recent low (if you’re buying) or above a
recent high (if you’re shorting).
5. Exit when the MACD line crosses back below (if you’re long) or above
(if you’re short) the nine-day moving average.
Refer to Figure 5-9 to see a moving average crossover signal highlighted in
shares of streetTRACKS Gold. Notice that in late April, the MACD line crossed
below its nine-day moving average, generating a sell signal.

Spotting Major Non-Trending Indicators
Non-trending indicators, also called oscillators, are designed to track swings
in trading ranges. Securities are in trading ranges more often than they trend.
Trading ranges represent a stalemate. Neither bulls nor bears can meaningfully
push prices past the battle lines. The bulls’ home front is the support zone.
The bears’ home front is the resistance zone. Both groups are struggling to
push prices deep into the other’s territory. And yet, every attempt is rebuffed.

107

108 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Non-trending indicators are banded between two extreme values: one overbought and the other oversold. When bulls push prices to the area of resistance,
the security is overbought and is likely to reverse (otherwise, a trend would begin
and non-trending indicators wouldn’t be appropriate). The key to determining
whether a trend exists is to use the tried-and-true method of the ADX indicator or
the eyeball approach (see “Determining Whether a Security Is Trending” for how
to use the eyeball approach).
When ADX is below a value of 20, a trading range is in force, so you want
to use non-trending indicators to stay on the right side of the trade as you
attempt to profit from the back-and-forth swings in the trading range. The
wider the trading range, the more potential profit you can extract. A range
between $50 and $60 is more lucrative than one between $55 and $60 because
you have an opportunity to profit off of $10 in the range versus only $5 in the
narrower range.
The non-trending indicators you should get to know are stochastics and the
Relative Strength Index, both of which I cover in the next two sections.

Stochastics: A study of change over time
The most popular non-trending indicator is stochastics, which calculates the
position of today’s close relative to a range established over a time period
specified by the user. The higher the close today relative to the range, the
more overbought the security. An overbought security is expected to revert
to its mean. The best way to explain this phenomenon is to imagine stretching a rubber band as far as you can. If you let go, the rubber band snaps back
into place. Stochastics measures how far the rubber band stretches.
This particular indicator also points out when the rubber band is beginning
to contract and return to its starting position. Just because a security is overbought doesn’t mean it must immediately turn around and march back to the
oversold territory. Oh how easy trading would be if things were that simple!
Following are the two major components of the stochastics indicator:
 %K plot: This plot measures where the current close of the security’s
price relates to the highest high and lowest low over a period.
 %D plot: This plot is simply a three-day average of the %K plot.
Common swing trading practice calls for traders to use a 14-day stochastics
period. I see no reason to disagree.
