
To carry on in proper chronological order the history of the witch delusion in the British
isles, it will be necessary to examine into what was taking place in Scotland during all
that part of the sixteenth century anterior to the accession of James VI. to the crown of
England. We naturally expect that the Scotch, -- a people renowned from the earliest
times for their powers of imagination, -- should be more deeply imbued with this gloomy
superstition than their neighhours of the South. The nature of their soil and climate
tended to encourage the dreams of early ignorance. Ghosts, goblins, wraiths, kelpies, and
a whole host of spiritual beings, were familiar to the dwellers by the misty glens of the
Highlands and the romantic streams of the Lowlands. Their deeds, whether of good or ill,
were enshrined in song, and took a greater hold upon the imagination because "verse had
sanctified them." But it was not till the religious reformers began the practice of straining
Scripture to the severest extremes, that the arm of the law was called upon to punish
witchcraft as a crime per se. What Pope Innocent VIII. had done for Germany and
France, the preachers of the Reformation did for the Scottish people. Witchcraft, instead
of being a mere article of faith, became enrolled in the statute book; and all good subjects
and true Christians were called upon to take arms against it. The ninth Parliament of
Queen Mary passed an act in 1563, which decreed the punishment of death against
witches and consulters with witches, and immediately the whole bulk of the people were
smitten with an epidemic fear of the devil and his mortal agents. Persons in the highest
ranks of life shared and encouraged the delusion of the vulgar. Many were themselves
accused of witchcraft; and noble ladies were shown to have dabbled in mystic arts, and
proved to the world that, if they were not witches, it was not for want of the will.
Among the dames who became notorious for endeavouring to effect their wicked ends by
the devil's aid, may be mentioned the celebrated Lady Buccleugh, of Branxholme,
familiar to all the readers of Sir Walter Scott; the Countess of Lothian, the Countess of
Angus, the Countess of Athol, Lady Kerr, the Countess of Huntley, Euphemia Macalzean
(the daughter of Lord Cliftonhall), and Lady Fowlis. Among the celebrated of the other
sex who were accused of wizzardism was Sir Lewis Ballantyne, the Lord Justice Clerk
for Scotland, who, if we may believe Scot of Scotstarvet, "dealt by curiosity with a
warlock called Richard Grahame," and prayed him to raise the devil. The warlock
consented, and raised him in propria persona, in the yard of his house in the Canongate,
"at sight of whom the Lord Justice Clerk was so terrified that he took sickness and
thereof died." By such idle reports as these did the envious ruin the reputation of those
they hated, though it would appear in this case that Sir Lewis had been fool enough to
make the attempt of which he was accused, and that the success of the experiment was
the only apocryphal part of the story.
The enemies of John Knox invented a similar tale, which found ready credence among
the Roman Catholics; glad to attach any stigma to that grand scourge of the vices of their
church. It was reported that he and his secretary went into the churchyard of St. Andrew's
with the intent to raise "some sanctes;" but that, by a mistake in their conjurations, they
raised the great fiend himself, instead of the saints they wished to consult. The popular
rumour added that Knox's secretary was so frightened at the great horns, goggle eyes, and
long tail of Satan, that he went mad, and shortly afterwards died. Knox himself was built
of sterner stuff, and was not to be frightened.

The first name that occurs in the records of the High Court of Justiciary of persons tried
or executed for witchcraft is that of Janet Bowman, in 1572, nine years after the passing
of the act of Mary. No particulars of her crimes are given, and against her name there
only stand the words, "convict and brynt." It is not, however, to be inferred that, in this
interval, no trials or executions took place; for it appears on the authority of documents of
unquestioned authenticity in the Advocates' Library at Edinburgh, [Foreign Quarterly
Review, vol. vi. page 41.] that the Privy Council made a practice of granting
commissions to resident gentlemen and ministers, in every part of Scotland, to examine,
try, and execute witches within their own parishes. No records of those who suffered
from the sentence of these tribunals have been preserved; but if popular tradition may be
believed, even to the amount of one-fourth of its assertions, their number was fearful.
After the year 1572, the entries of executions for witchcraft in the records of the High
Court become more frequent, but do not average more than one per annum; another proof
that trials for this offence were in general entrusted to the local magistracy. The latter
appear to have ordered witches to the stake with as little compunction, and after as
summary a mode, as modern justices of the peace order a poacher to the stocks.
As James VI. advanced in manhood, he took great interest in the witch trials. One of
them especially, that of Gellie Duncan, Dr. Fian, and their accomplices, in the year 1591,
engrossed his whole attention, and no doubt suggested in some degree, the famous work
on Demonology which he wrote shortly afterwards. As these witches had made an
attempt upon his own life, it is not surprising, with his habits, that he should have
watched the case closely, or become strengthened in his prejudice and superstition by its
singular details. No other trial that could be selected would give so fair an idea of the
delusions of the Scottish people as this. Whether we consider the number of victims, the
absurdity of the evidence, and the real villany of some of the persons implicated, it is
equally extraordinary.
Gellie Duncan, the prime witch in these proceedings, was servant to the Deputy Bailiff of
Tranent, a small town in Hadingtonshire, about ten miles from Edinburgh. Though
neither old nor ugly (as witches usually were), but young and good-looking, her
neighbours, from some suspicious parts of her behaviour, had long considered her a
witch. She had, it appears, some pretensions to the healing art. Some cures which she
effected were so sudden, that the worthy Bailiff, her master, who, like his neighbours,
mistrusted her, considered them no less than miraculous. In order to discover the truth, he
put her to the torture; but she obstinately refused to confess that she had dealings with the
devil. It was the popular belief that no witch would confess as long as the mark which
Satan had put upon her remained undiscovered upon her body. Somebody present
reminded the torturing Bailie of this fact, and on examination, the devil's mark was found
upon the throat of poor Gellie. She was put to the torture again, and her fortitude giving
way under the extremity of her anguish, she confessed that she was indeed a witch -- that
she had sold her soul to the devil, and effected all her cures by his aid. This was
something new in the witch creed, according to which, the devil delighted more in laying
diseases on, than in taking them off; but Gellie Duncan fared no better on that account.
The torture was still applied, until she had named all her accomplices, among whom were

one Cunningham, a reputed wizard, known by the name of Dr. Fian, a grave and matronlike witch, named Agnes Sampson, Euphemia Macalzean, the daughter of Lord
Cliftonhall, already mentioned, and nearly forty other persons, some of whom were the
wives of respectable individuals in the city of Edinburgh. Every one of these persons was
arrested, and the whole realm of Scotland thrown into commotion by the extraordinary
nature of the disclosures which were anticipated.
About two years previous to this time, James had suddenly left his kingdom, and
proceeded gallantly to Denmark, to fetch over his bride, the Princess of Denmark, who
had been detained by contrary weather in the harbour of Upslo. After remaining for some
months in Copenhagen, he set sail with his young bride, and arrived safely in Leith, on
the 1st of May 1590, having experienced a most boisterous passage, and been nearly
wrecked. As soon as the arrest of Gellie Duncan and Fian became known in Scotland, it
was reported by everybody who pretended to be well-informed that these witches and
their associates had, by the devil's means, raised the storms which had endangered the
lives of the King and Queen. Gellie, in her torture, had confessed that such was the fact,
and the whole kingdom waited aghast and open-mouthed for the corroboration about to
be furnished by the trial.
Agnes Sampson, the "grave and matron-like" witch implicated by Gellie Duncan, was put
to the horrible torture of the pilliewinkis. She laid bare all the secrets of the sisterhood
before she had suffered an hour, and confessed that Gellie Duncan, Dr. Fian, Marion
Lineup, Euphemia Macalzean, herself, and upwards of two hundred witches and
warlocks, used to assemble at midnight in the kirk of North Berwick, where they met the
devil; that they had plotted there to attempt the King's life; that they were incited to this
by the old fiend himself, who had asserted with a thundering oath that James was the
greatest enemy he ever had, and that there would be no peace for the devil's children
upon earth until he were got rid of; that the devil upon these occasions always liked to
have a little music, and that Gellie Duncan used to play a reel before him on a trump or
Jew's harp, to which all the witches danced.
James was highly flattered at the idea that the devil should have said that he was the
greatest enemy he ever had. He sent for Gellie Duncan to the palace, and made her play
before him the same reel which she had played at the witches' dance in the kirk.
Dr. Fian, or rather Cunningham, a petty schoolmaster at Tranent, was put to the torture
among the rest. He was a man who had led an infamous life, was a compounder of and
dealer in poisons, and a pretender to magic. Though not guilty of the preposterous crimes
laid to his charge, there is no doubt that he was a sorcerer in will, though not in deed, and
that he deserved all the misery he endured. When put on the rack, he would confess
nothing, and held out so long unmoved, that the severe torture of the boots was resolved
upon. He endured this till exhausted nature could bear no longer, when Insensibility
kindly stepped in to his aid. When it was seen that he was utterly powerless, and that his
tongue cleaved to the roof of his mouth, he was released. Restoratives were administered;
and during the first faint gleam of returning consciousness, he was prevailed upon to sign,

ere he well knew what he was about, a full confession, in strict accordance with those of
Gellie Duncan and Agnes Sampson. He was then remanded to his prison, from which,
after two days, he managed, somehow or other, to escape. He was soon recaptured, and
brought before the Court of Justiciary, James himself being present. Fian now denied all
the circumstances of the written confession which he had signed; whereupon the King,
enraged at his "stubborn wilfulness," ordered him once more to the torture. His finger
nails were riven out with pincers, and long needles thrust up to the eye into the quick; but
still he did not wince. He was then consigned again to the boots, in which, to quote a
pamphlet published at the time, [News from Scotland, declaring the damnable life of Dr.
Fian.] he continued "so long, and abode so many blows in them, that his legs were
crushed and beaten together as small as might be, and the bones and flesh so bruised, that
the blood and marrow spouted forth in great abundance, whereby they were made
unserviceable for ever."
The astonishing similarity of the confessions of all the persons implicated in these
proceedings has often been remarked. It would appear that they actually endeavoured to
cause the King's death by their spells and sorceries. Fian, who was acquainted with all the
usual tricks of his profession, deceived them with pretended apparitions, so that many of
them were really convinced that they had seen the devil. The sum of their confessions
was to the following effect:Satan, who was, of course, a great foe of the reformed religion, was alarmed that King
James should marry a Protestant princess. To avert the consequences to the realms of
evil, he had determined to put an end to the King and his bride by raising a storm on their
voyage home. Satan, first of all, sent a thick mist over the waters, in the hope that the
King's vessel might be stranded on the coast amid the darkness. This failing, Dr. Fian,
who, from his superior scholarship, was advanced to the dignity of the devil's secretary,
was commanded to summon all the witches to meet their master, each one sailing on a
sieve on the high seas.
On All-hallowmas Eve, they assembled to the number of upwards of two hundred,
including Gellie Duncan, Agnes Sampson, Euphemia Macalzean, one Barbara Napier,
and several warlocks; and each embarking in a riddle, or sieve, they sailed "over the
ocean very substantially." After cruising about for some time, they met with the fiend,
bearing in his claws a cat, which had been previously drawn nine times through the fire.
This he delivered to one of the warlocks, telling him to cast it into the sea, and cry
"Hola!" This was done with all solemnity, and immediately the ocean became convulsed
-- the waters hissed loudly, and the waves rose mountains high,
"Twisting their arms to the dun-coloured heaven."
The witches sailed gallantly through the tempest they had raised, and landing on the coast
of Scotland, took their sieves in their hands, and marched on in procession to the haunted
kirk of North Berwick, where the devil had resolved to hold a preaching. Gellie Duncan,
the musician of the party, tripped on before, playing on her Jew's harp, and singing,

"Cummer, go ye before, Cummer, go ye; Gif ye will not go before, Cummer, let me!"
Arrived at the kirk, they paced around it withershins, that is, in reverse of the apparent
motion of the sun. Dr. Fian then blew into the key-hole of the door, which opened
immediately, and all the witches entered. As it was pitch dark, Fian blew with his mouth
upon the candles, which immediately lighted, and the devil was seen occupying the
pulpit. He was attired in a black gown and hat, and the witches saluted him, by crying,
"All hail, master!" His body was hard, like iron; his face terrible; his nose, like the beak
of an eagle; he had great burning eyes; his hands and legs were hairy; and he had long
claws upon his hands and feet, and spake with an exceedingly gruff voice. Before
commencing his sermon, he called over the names of his congregation, demanding
whether they had been good servants, and what success had attended their operations
against the life of the King and his bride.
Gray Meill, a crazy old warlock, who acted as beadle or doorkeeper, was silly enough to
answer, "that nothing ailed the King yet, God be thanked;" upon which the devil, in a
rage, stepped down from the pulpit, and boxed his ears for him. He then remounted, and
commenced the preaching, commanding them to be dutiful servants to him, and do all the
evil they could. Euphemia Macalzean and Agnes Sampson, bolder than the rest, asked
him whether he had brought the image or picture of King James, that they might, by
pricking it, cause pains and diseases to fall upon him. "The father of lies" spoke truth for
once, and confessed that he had forgotten it; upon which Euphemia Macalzean upbraided
him loudly for his carelessness. The devil, however, took it all in good part, although
Agnes Sampson and several other women let loose their tongues at him immediately.
When they had done scolding, he invited them all to a grand entertainment. A newly
buried corpse was dug up, and divided among them, which was all they had in the way of
edibles. He was more liberal in the matter of drink, and gave them so much excellent
wine that they soon became jolly. Gellie Duncan then played the old tune upon her
trump, and the devil himself led off the dance with Euphemia Mac alzean. Thus they kept
up the sport till the cock crew.
Agnes Sampson, the wise woman of Keith, as she was called, added some other
particulars in her confession. She stated, that on a previous occasion, she had raised an
awful tempest in the sea, by throwing a cat into it, with four joints of men tied to its feet.
She said also, that on their grand attempt to drown King James, they did not meet with
the devil after cruising about, but that he had accompanied them from the first, and that
she had seen him dimly in the distance, rolling himself before them over the great waves,
in shape and size not unlike a huge haystack. They met with a foreign ship richly laden
with wines and other good things, which they boarded, and sunk after they had drunk all
the wine, and made themselves quite merry.
Some of these disclosures were too much even for the abundant faith of King James, and
he more than once exclaimed, that the witches were like their master, "extreme lyars."
But they confessed many other things of a less preposterous nature, and of which they
were, no doubt, really guilty. Agnes Sampson said she was to have taken the King's life
by anointing his linen with a strong poison. Gellie Duncan used to threaten her

neighbours by saying she would send the devil after them; and many persons of weaker
minds than usual were frightened into fits by her, and rendered subject to them for the
remainder of their lives. Dr. Finn also made no scruple in aiding and abetting murder, and
would rid any person of an enemy by means of poison, who could pay him his fee for it.
Euphemia Macalzean also was far from being pure. There is no doubt that she meditated
the King's death, and used such means to compass it as the superstition of the age
directed. She was a devoted partizan of Bothwell, who was accused by many of the
witches as having consulted them on the period of the King's death. They were all found
guilty, and sentenced to be hanged and burned. Barbara Napier, though found guilty upon
other counts, was acquitted upon the charge of having been present at the great witchmeeting in Berwick kirk. The King was highly displeased, and threatened to have the jury
indicted for a wilful error upon an assize. They accordingly reconsidered their verdict,
and threw themselves upon the King's mercy for the fault they had committed. James was
satisfied, and Barbara Napier was hanged along with Gellie Duncan, Agnes Sampson, Dr.
Fian, and five-and-twenty others. Euphemia Macalzean met a harder fate. Her connexion
with the bold and obnoxious Bothwell, and her share in poisoning one or two individuals
who had stood in her way, were thought deserving of the severest punishment the law
could inflict. Instead of the ordinary sentence, directing the criminal to be first strangled
and then burned, the wretched woman was doomed "to be bound to a stake, and burned in
ashes, quick to the death." This cruel sentence was executed on the 25th of June 1591.
These trials had the most pernicious consequences all over Scotland. The lairds and
ministers in their districts, armed with due power from the privy council, tried and
condemned old women after the most summary fashion. Those who still clung to the
ancient faith of Rome were the severest sufferers, as it was thought, after the disclosures
of the fierce enmity borne by the devil towards a Protestant King and his Protestant wife,
that all the Catholics were leagued with the powers of evil to work woe on the realm of
Scotland. Upon a very moderate calculation, it is presumed that from the passing of the
act of Queen Mary till the accession of James to the throne of England, a period of thirtynine years, the average number of executions for witchcraft in Scotland was two hundred
annually, or upwards of seventeen thousand altogether. For the first nine years the
number was not one quarter so great; but towards the years 1590 to 1593, the number
must have been more than four hundred. The case last cited was one of an extraordinary
character. The general aspect of the trials will be better seen from that of Isabel Gowdie,
which, as it would be both wearisome and disgusting to go through them all, is cited as a
fair specimen, although it took place at a date somewhat later than the reign of James.
This woman, wearied of her life by the persecutions of her neighbours, voluntarily gave
herself up to justice, and made a confession, embodying the whole witch-creed of the
period. She was undoubtedly a monomaniac of the most extraordinary kind. She said that
she deserved to be stretched upon an iron rack, and that her crimes could never be atoned
for, even if she were to be drawn asunder by wild horses. She named a long list of her
associates, including nearly fifty women and a few warlocks. They dug up the graves of
unchristened infants, whose limbs were serviceable in their enchantments. When they
wanted to destroy the crops of an enemy, they yoked toads to his plough, and on the
following night Satan himself ploughed the land with his team, and blasted it for the
season. The witches had power to assume almost any shape; but they generally chose

either that of a cat or a hare, oftenest the latter. Isabel said, that on one occasion, when
she was in this disguise, she was sore pressed by a pack of hounds, and had a very narrow
escape with her life. She reached her own door at last, feeling the hot breath of the
pursuing dogs at her haunches. She managed, however, to hide herself behind a chest,
and got time to pronounce the magic words that could alone restore her to her proper
shape. They were :-"Hare! hare! God send thee care! I am in a hare's likeness now; But I shall be a woman
e'en now! Hare! hare! God send thee care!"
If witches, when in this shape, were bitten by the dogs, they always retained the marks in
their human form; but she had never heard that any witch had been bitten to death. When
the devil appointed any general meeting of the witches, the custom was that they should
proceed through the air mounted on broomsticks, or on corn or bean-straws, pronouncing
as they went:-"Horse and partook, horse and go, Horse and pellats, ho! ho! ho!"
They generally left behind them a broom, or a three-legged stool, which, when placed in
their beds and duly charmed, assumed the human shape till their return. This was done
that the neighhours might not know when they were absent.
She added, that the devil furnished his favourite witches with servant imps to attend upon
them. These imps were called "The Roaring Lion," "Thief of Hell," "Wait-upon-Herself,"
"Ranting Roarer," "Care-for-Naught," &c. and were known by their liveries, which were
generally yellow, sad-dun, sea-green, pea-green, or grass-green. Satan never called the
witches by the names they had received at baptism; neither were they allowed, in his
presence, so to designate each other. Such a breach of the infernal etiquette assuredly
drew down his most severe displeasure. But as some designation was necessary, he rebaptized them in their own blood by the names of "Able-and-Stout," "Over-the-dikewith-it," "Raise-the-wind," "Pickle-nearest-the-wind," "Batter-them-down-Maggy,"
"Blow-Kale," and such like. The devil himself was not very particular what name they
called him so that it was not "Black John." If any witch was unthinking enough to utter
these words, he would rush out upon her, and beat and buffet her unmercifully, or tear her
flesh with a wool-card. Other names he did not care about; and once gave instructions to
a noted warlock that whenever he wanted his aid, he was to strike the ground three times
and exclaim, "Rise up, foul thief!"
Upon this confession many persons were executed. So strong was the popular feeling,
that no one once accused of witchcraft was acquitted; at least, acquittals did not average
one in a hundred trials. Witch-finding, or witch-pricking became a trade, and a set of
mercenary vagabonds roamed about the country, provided with long pins to run into the
flesh of supposed criminals. It was no unusual thing then, nor is it now, that in aged
persons there should be some spot on the body totally devoid of feeling. It was the object
of the witchpricker to discover this spot, and the unhappy wight who did not bleed when
pricked upon it, was doomed to the death. If not immediately cast into prison, her life was
