
Emotional Trading

Most people crave excitement and entertainment. Singers, actors, and professional athletes command much higher incomes in our society than do such
mundane workmen as physicians, pilots, or college professors. People love
to have their nerves tickled- they buy lottery tickets, fly to Las Vegas, and
slow down to gawk at road accidents.

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

Trading is a heady experience and can be very addictive. Losers who drop
money in the markets receive a tremendous entertainment value.
The market is among the most entertaining places on the face of the Earth.
It is a spectator sport and a participant sport rolled into one. Imagine going to
a major-league ball game in which you are not confined to the bleachers. For
a few hundred dollars you can run onto the field and join the game. If you hit
the ball right, you will get paid like a professional.
You would probably think twice before running onto the field the first few
times. This cautious attitude is responsible for the well-known "beginner's
luck." Once a beginner hits the ball well a few times and collects his pay, he
is likely to get the idea that he is better than the pros and could make a good
living at it. Greedy amateurs start running out onto the field too often, even
when there are no good playing opportunities. Before they know what hit
them, a short string of losses destroys their careers.
Emotional decisions are lethal in the markets. You can see a good model
of emotional trading by going to a racetrack, turning around, and watching
the humans instead of the horses. Gamblers stomp their feet, jump up and
down, and yell at horses and jockeys. Thousands of people act out their emotions. Winners embrace and losers tear up their tickets in disgust. The joy,
the pain, and the intensity of wishful thinking are caricatures of what h a p
pens in the markets. A cool handicapper who tries to make a living at the
track does not get excited, yell, or bet the bulk of his roll on any race.
Casinos love drunk patrons. They pour gamblers free drinks because
drunks are more emotional and gamble more. Casinos try to throw out intelligent card-counters. There is less freg liquor on Wall Street than in a casino,
but at least here they do not throw you out of the game for being a good
trader.

In Charge of Your Life

When a monkey hurts its foot on a tree stump, he flies into a rage and
kicks the piece of wood. You laugh at a monkey, but do you laugh at yourself when you act like him? If the market drops while you are long, you
may double up on your losing trade or else go short, trying to get even.
You act emotionally instead of using your intellect. What is the difference
between a trader trying to get back at the market and a monkey kicking a
tree stump? Acting out of anger, fear, or elation destroys your chance of

11. WINNERS AND LOSERS

41

success. You have to analyze your behavior in the market instead of acting
out your feelings.
We get angry at the market, we become afraid of it, we develop silly
superstitions. All the while, the market keeps cycling through its rallies and
declines like an ocean going through its storms and calm periods. Mark
Douglas writes in The Disciplined Trader that in the market, "There is no
beginning, middle, or end-only what you create in your own mind. Rarely
do any of us grow up learning to operate in an arena that allows for complete
freedom of creative expression, with no external structure to restrict it in any
way."
We try to cajole or manipulate the market, acting like the ancient emperor
Xerxes, who ordered his soldiers to horsewhip the sea for sinking his fleet.
Most of us are not aware how manipulative we are, how we bargain, how we
act out our feelings in the market. Most of us consider ourselves the center of
the universe and expect every person or group to be either good or bad to us.
This does not work in the market which is completely impersonal.
Leston Havens, a Haward University psychiatrist, writes: "Cannibalism
and slavery are probably the oldest manifestations of human predation and
submission. Although both are now discouraged, their continued existence in
psychological forms demonstrates that civilization has achieved great success in moving from the concrete and physical to the abstract and psychological, while persisting in the same purposes." Parents threaten their children,
bullies hit them, teachers try to bend their will in school. Little wonder that
most of us grow up either hiding in a shell or learning how to manipulate
others in self-defense. Acting independently does not feel natural to us - but
that is the only way to succeed in the market.
Douglas warns, "If the market's behavior seems mysterious to you, it's
because your own behavior is mysterious and unmanageable. You can't
really determine what the market is likely to do next when you don't even
know what you'll do next." Ultimately, "the one thing you can control is
yourself. As a trader, you have the power either to give yourself money or to
give your money to other traders." He adds, "The traders who can make
money consistently . . . approach trading from the perspective of a mental
discipline."
Each trader has his own demons to exorcise on the journey to becoming a
successful professional. Here are several rules that worked for me as I grew
from a wild amateur into an erratic semiprofessional and finally into a professional trader. You may change this list to suit your personality.

42

INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY

1. Decide that you are in the market for the long haul- that is, you want
to be a trader even 20 years from now.
2. Learn as much as you can. Read and listen to experts, but keep a
degree of healthy skepticism about everything. Ask questions, and do
not accept experts at their word.
3. Do not get greedy and rush to trade - take your time to learn. The markets will be there with more good opportunities in the months and
years ahead.

4. Develop a method for analyzing the market- that is, "If A happens,
then B is likely to happen." Markets have many dimensions -use several analytic methods to confirm trades. Test everything on historical
data and then in the markets, using real money. Markets keep changing-you need different tools for trading bull and bear markets and
transitional periods as well as a method for telling the difference (see
the sections on technical analysis).

5. Develop a money management plan. Your first goal must be long-term
survival; your second goal, a steady growth of capital; and your third
goal, making high profits. Most traders put the third goal first and are
unaware that goals 1 and 2 exist (see Chapter 10, "Risk Management").
6. Be aware that a trader is the weakest link in any trading system. Go to
a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous to learn how to avoid losses or
develop your own method for cutting out impulsive trades.

7. Winners think, feel, and act differently than losers. You must look
within yourself, strip away your illusions, and change your old ways
of being, thinking, and acting. Change is hard, but if you want to be a
professional trader, you have to work on changing your personality.

Mass Psychology

12. WHAT IS PRICE?
Wall Street is named after a wall that kept farm animals from wandering
away from the settlement at the tip of Manhattan. The farming legacy lives
on in the language of traders. Four animals are mentioned especially often on
Wall Street: bulls and bears, hogs and sheep. Traders say: "Bulls make
money, bears make money, but hogs get slaughtered."
A bull fights by striking up with his horns. A bull is a buyer-a person
who bets on a rally and profits from a rise in prices. A bear fights by striking
down with his paws. A bear is a seller - a person who bets on a decline and
profits from a fall in prices.
Hogs are greedy. They get slaughtered when they trade to satisfy their
greed. Some hogs buy or sell positions that are too large for them and get
destroyed by a small adverse move. Other hogs overstay their positionsthey keep waiting for profits to get bigger even after the trend reverses.
Sheep are passive and fearful followers of trends, tips, and gurus. They
sometimes put on a bull's horns or a bearskin and try to swagger. You recognize them by their pitiful bleating when the market becomes volatile.
Whenever the market is open, bulls are buying, bears are selling, hogs and
sheep get trampled underfoot, and the undecided traders wait on the sidelines. Quote machines all over the world show a steady stream of quotesthe latest prices for any trading vehicle. Thousands of eyes are focused on
each price quote as people make trading decisions.

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

Arguing About Price

When I ask traders at a seminar, "What is price?" some answer, "Price is a
perceived value." Others say, "Price is what a person at one particular point
in time is willing to pay another person for a commodity." Someone says,
"Price is what the last person paid for it. That's the price right now." Another
suggests, "No, it's what the next person will pay."
Traders who cannot give a clear definition of price do not know what they
are analyzing. Your success or failure as a trader depends on handling
prices-and you had better know what they mean! Some attendees at the
seminars I give become agitated as they search for an answer to a seemingly
obvious question. Arguments fly back and forth, as in this discussion:
I'll give you the worst-case example. In the 1929 crash, Singer stock was
selling for $100 and all of sudden there's no bid, no bid, no bid, and
somebody comes forth-"I gotta sell, what am I bid?" and one of the
floor clerks said "one dollar" and he got it. He got the stock.
Price is what the greater fool is ready to pay.
Take the '87 market. All of that 500-point decline - stocks weren't worth
any less after the decline than before. So it was the difference in the
perception and the willingness of the next person to pay for it.
You might carry that one step further. What you're paying for is absolutely worthless. It is just a piece of paper. The only value that it does
have is the intrinsic dividend value, compared to government paper at
that time.
It still has the value of whatever anybody will pay you. If no one wants to
pay you for it, it has no value.
It'll pay you for a yield.
What if you trade soybeans? You can eat them.
How about a stock that has no yield?
But doesn't it have assets?
The company that issued the stock has value, cash flow.
I give you one share of IBM; if no one wants to buy it, you can light a
cigarette with it.

12. WHAT IS PRICE?

45

There is no such thing that no one wants to buy IBM. There is always a
bid and an ask.
Take a look at United Airlines. One day the paper says it's $300 and the
next day it's $150.
There's no change in the airline, they're still making the same cash flow,
they've still got the same book value, and the same assets-what's the
difference?
The price of stock has very little to do with the company it represents. The
price of IBM stock has very little to do with IBM. As I visualize it, the
price of stock is connected by a mile-long rubber band to IBM and it
can be wildly higher and wildly lower- IBM just keeps chugging
along and it's a very, very remote connection.
Price is the intersection of supply and demand curves.
Each serious trader must know the meaning of price. You need to know what
you analyze before you go out and start buying and selling stocks, futures, or
options.

Resolving Conflict

There are three groups of traders in the market: buyers, sellers, and undecided traders. "Ask" is what a seller asks for his merchandise. "Bid" is what
a buyer offers for that merchandise. Buyers and sellers are always in conflict.
Buyers want to pay as little as possible, and sellers want to charge as
much as possible. If members of both groups insist on having their way, no
trade can take place. No trade means no price - only wishful quotes of buyers and sellers.
A seller has a choice: to wait until prices rise, or to accept a lower offer
for his merchandise. A buyer also has a choice: to wait until prices come
down, or to offer to pay more to the sellers.
A trade occurs when there is a momentary meeting of two minds: An
eager bull agrees to a seller's terms and pays up, or an eager bear agrees to a
buyer's terms and sells a little cheaper. The presence of undecided traders
puts pressure on both bulls and bears.
When a buyer and a seller bargain in private, they may haggle at a

46

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

leisurely pace. The two must move much faster when they bargain at the
exchange. They know that they are surrounded by a crowd of other traders
who may butt in on their deal at any moment.
The buyer knows that if he thinks for too long, another trader can step in
and snap away his bargain. A seller knows that if he tries to hold out for a
higher price, another trader may step in and sell at a lower price. The crowd
of undecided traders makes buyers and sellers more anxious to accommodate
their opponents. A trade occurs when there is a meeting of two minds.
A Consensus of Value

Each tick on your quote screen represents a deal between a buyer and a
seller. Buyers are buying because they expect prices to rise. Sellers are selling because they expect prices to fall. Buyers and sellers trade while surrounded by crowds of undecided traders. They may become buyers or sellers
as prices change or as time passes.
Buying by bulls pushes markets up, selling by bears pushes markets
down, and undecided traders make everything happen faster by creating a
sense of urgency in buyers and sellers.
Traders come to the markets from all over the world: in person, via computers, or through their brokers. Everybody has a chance to buy and to sell.
Each price is a momentary consensus of value of all market participants,
expressed in action. Price is a psychological event - a momentary balance of
opinion between bulls and bears. Prices are created by masses of tradersbuyers, sellers, and undecided people. The patterns of prices and volume
reflect the mass psychology of the markets.
Behavior Patterns

Huge crowds converge on stock, commodity, and option exchanges - either
in person or represented by their brokers. Big money and little money, smart
money and dumb money, institutional money and private money, all meet on
the exchange floor. Each price represents a momentary consensus of value
between buyers, sellers, and undecided traders at the moment of transaction.
There is a crowd of traders behind every pattern in the chartbook.
Crowd consensus changes from moment to moment. Sometimes it gets
established in a very low-key environment, and at other times the environ-

13. WHAT IS THE MARKET?

47

ment turns wild. Prices move in small increments during quiet times.
When a crowd becomes either spooked or elated, prices begin to jump.
Imagine bidding for a life preserver aboard a sinking ship- that's how
prices leap when masses of traders become emotional about a trend. An
astute trader tries to enter the market during quiet times and take profits
during wild times.
Technical analysts study swings of mass psychology in the financial markets. Each trading session is a battle between bulls, who make money when
prices rise, and bears, who profit when prices fall. The goal of technical analysts is to discover the balance of power between bulls and bears and bet on
the winning group. If bulls are much stronger, you should buy and hold. If
bears are much stronger, you should sell and sell short. If both camps are
about equal in strength, a wise trader stands aside. He lets bullies fight with
each other and puts on a trade only when he is reasonably sure who is likely
to win.
Prices, volume, and open interest reflect crowd behavior. So do the indicators that are based on them. This makes technical analysis similar to poll-taking. Both combine science and art: They are scientific to the extent that we
use statistical methods and computers; they are artistic to the extent that we
use personal judgment to interpret our findings.

13. WHAT I S THE MARKET?
What is the reality behind market symbols, prices, numbers, and graphs?
When you check prices in your newspaper, watch quotes on your screen, or
plot an indicator on your chart, what exactly are you looking at? What is the
market that you want to analyze and trade?
Amateurs act as if the market is a giant happening, a ball game in which
they can join the professionals and make money. Traders from a scientific or
engineering background often treat the market as a physical event. They
apply to it the principles of signal processing, noise reduction, and similar
ideas. By contrast, all professional traders know full well what the market
is it is a huge mass of people.
Every trader tries to take money away from other traders by outguessing
them on the probable direction of the market. The members of the market
crowd live on different continents. They are united by modem telecommunications in the pursuit of profit at each other's expense. The market is a huge
crowd of people. Each member of the crowd tries to take money away from

-

48

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

other members by outsmarting them. The market is a uniquely harsh environment because everyone is against you, and you are against everyone.
Not only is the market harsh, you have to pay high prices for entering and
exiting it. You have to jump over two high barriers-commissions and slippage - before you can collect a dime. The moment you place an order you
owe your broker a commission- you are behind the game before you begin.
Then floor traders try to hit you with slippage when your order arrives on the
floor. They try to take another bite out of your account when you exit your
trade. In trading, you compete against some of the brightest minds in the
world while fending off the piranhas of commissions and slippage.
Worldwide Crowds

In the old days, markets were small and many traders knew one another. The
New York Stock Exchange was formed in 1792 as a club of two dozen brokers. On sunny days they used to trade under a cottonwood tree and on rainy
days in Fraunces Tavern. The first thing brokers did after they organized the
New York Stock Exchange was to stick the public with fixed commissions
that lasted for the next 180 years.
Today, only floor traders meet face-to-face. Most of us are linked to the
market electronically. Members of the financial crowd watch the same
quotes on their terminals, read the same articles in the financial media, and
get similar sales pitches from brokers. These links unite us as members of
the market crowd even if we are thousands of miles away from the
exchange.
Thanks to modem telecommunications, the world is becoming smaller
and the markets are growing. The euphoria of London flows to New York,
and the gloom of Tokyo infects Hong Kong.
When you analyze the market, you are analyzing crowd behavior. Crowds
behave alike in different cultures on all continents. Social psychologists have
uncovered several laws that govern crowd behavior. A trader needs to understand how market crowds influence his mind.
Groups, Not Individuals

Most people feel a strong urge to join the crowd and to "act like everybody
else." This primitive urge clouds your judgment when you put on a trade. A

13. WHAT IS THE MARKET?

49

successful trader must think independently. He needs to be strong enough to
analyze the market alone and to carry out his trading decisions.
If eight or ten people place their hands on your head and push you down,
your knees will buckle, no matter how strong you are. The crowd may be
stupid, but it is stronger than you. Crowds have the power to create trends.
Never buck a trend. If a trend is up, you should only buy or stand aside.
Never sell short because "the prices are too high '-never argue with the
crowd. You do not have to run with the crowd-but you should never run
against it.
Respect the strength of the crowd - but do not fear it. Crowds are powerful, but primitive, their behavior simple and repetitive. A trader who thinks
for himself can take money from crowd members.
9

The Source of Money

When you try to make money trading, do you ever stop to wonder where
your expected profits will come from? Is there money in the markets because
of higher company earnings, or lower interest rates, or a good soybean crop?
The only reason there is money in the markets is that other traders put it
there. The money you want to make belongs to other people who have no
intention of giving it to you.
Trading means trying to rob other people while they are trying to rob you.
It is a hard business. Winning is especially difficult because brokers and
floor traders skim money from losers and winners alike.
Tim Slater compared trading to a medieval battle. A man used to go on a
battlefield with his sword and try to kill his opponent, who was trying to kill
him at the same time. The winner took the loser's weapons, his chattels, and
his wife, and sold his children into slavery. Now we trade on the exchanges
instead of doing battle in an open field. When you take money away from a
man, it is not that different from drawing his blood. He may lose his house,
his chattels, and his wife, and his children may suffer.
An optimistic friend of mine once snickered that there are plenty of poorly
prepared people on the battlefield: "Ninety to ninety-five percent of the brokers don't know the first thing about research. They don't know what they're
doing. We have the knowledge, and some poor people who do not have it are
just giving the money away to charity." This theory sounds good, but it is
wrong - there is no easy money in the market.
There are plenty of dumb sheep waiting to be fleeced or slaughtered. The

50

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

sheep are easy -but if you want a piece of their meat, you've got to fight
some very dangerous competitors. There are mean professionals: American
gunslingers, English knights, German landsknechts, Japanese samurai, and
other warriors, all going after the same hapless sheep. Trading means battling crowds of hostile people while paying for the privilege of entering the
battle and leaving it, whether dead, wounded, or alive.

Inside Information
There is at least one group of people who consistently get information before
other traders. Records show that corporate insiders consistently make profits
in the stock market. Those records reflect legitimate trades that have been
reported by insiders to the Securities and Exchange Commission. They represent the tip of the iceberg - but there is a great deal of illegitimate insider
trading in the stock market.
People who trade on inside information are stealing money from the rest
of us. The insider trials of the 1980s have landed some of the more notorious
insiders in jail - Dennis Levine, Ivan Boesky, and others. For a while, hardly
a week went by without an arrest, indictment, conviction or a consent
decree: The Yuppy Five, Michael Milken, even a psychiatrist in Connecticut
who traded after learning about a pending takeover from a patient.
The defendants of the 1980s insider trials were caught because they
became greedy and careless - and ran into a federal prosecutor in New York
with major political ambitions. The tip of the iceberg has been shaved down,
but its bulk continues to float. Do not ask whose ship it will hit-it is your
trading account.
Trying to reduce insider trading is like trying to get rid of rats on a farm:
Pesticides keep them under control but do not root them out. A retired chief
executive of a publicly traded firm explained to me that a smart man does
not trade on inside information but gives it to his golfing buddies at a country club. Later they give him inside information on their companies, and both
profit without being detected. The insider network is safe as long as its members follow the same code of conduct and do not become too greedy.
Insider trading is legal in the futures markets. Technical analysis helps
you detect insider buying and selling. Charts reflect all trades by all market
participants-even by the insiders. They leave their tracks on the charts just
like everyone else- and it is your job as a technical analyst to follow them to
the bank.
