
PIVOT POINTS: DO THEY WORK?
“Big dogs” are a very important part of the market. Usually the settings
used by the greater number of people will work the best because everybody will be reacting to those levels at the same time and place. However,
I would recommend testing different approaches so that you can determine
by yourself which settings work more accurately on your charts.
The key is support/resistance—former levels at which the price has
been rejected many times—as well as channels and trendlines too. Also,
pivots should be considered as zones more than a particular and exact price

CHAPTER 12

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

223

(especially because there are differences among most brokers on prices that
can go as far as 10 to 12 pips).
I want to point out that this is my personal opinion: I check the pivots
but personally prefer the psychological levels to work with short term in 1
minute increments also known as M1, which I consider to be small pivots
in themselves.
Price goes in waves, not linearly. When price action is observed in a
very small time frame, you can see that at every lower level, a “decision”
must be made, a price is approved or rejected. Bulls or bears win the small
battle, then go on to the next level or come back to the previous one, and
later on “decide” to retest again until the level breaks or the opposite party
wins and rejects the “proposed” price, just like a staircase. Then the key
levels (previous bigger staircases on larger time frames) are made by the
support or resistance levels that held through many attempts at being
crossed.

Pivots are, like Fibonacci lines, the result of a calculation made based
on an analysis of historical data, and in a certain way and because of it, they
can become a self-fulfilling prediction because everyone is watching the

224

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

same prices and has the same information. Thus, indeed, the best pivots
will be those that are used by the greater number of traders.
For me, it’s more logical to start the day when the FOREX day “officially” starts in Sydney through the New York close (5 p.m. Eastern Time).
In my opinion, this doesn’t matter much because in the end, you won’t have
more than 24 hours in a daily candle.

The pivot indicator is based on the high-low and close price of the daily
candle (calculated with respect to every different set of settings and based
on 24 sequential hourly candles), which will show differently on each platform according to its own time zone.
The “daily session” consists of the whole day (all the markets
involved), and personally, I don’t think that two hours difference can make
much noise unless there’s a huge move at the end of the day (New York
close), and even then, I don’t think it would matter because it would be
compensated by the hours not taken from the preceding day.
Settings that start at Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) 00:00 (eight hours
before the London session) are perhaps a more normalized time where
more people calculate the pivots (you would have to know how many brokers start the day with GMT 00:00). Mine starts with the Sydney session
two hours earlier because it seems more logical to me, since most markets

CHAPTER 12

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

225

open on Sunday at the Sydney open and close on Friday at the New York
close. Other people may like to base the close/open of the daily candle on
the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) close at 4 p.m. Eastern Time. The
more people who use the same setting, the more probabilities there will be
for a pivot price to become predictable. This works exactly like the
Fibonacci levels.
Since I see pivots more as a range level (or zone) than a particular
exact price (and I prefer to take into account the psychological levels anyway), it doesn’t bother me much if my pivot is 5 pips up or 5 pips down
(because, anyway, prices between brokers differ sometimes by as much as
10 or more pips, and in some, there can be huge spikes that don’t show on
the others; this in respect to high highs and low lows). Therefore, it’s
really relative, and real support/resistances, which can be seen on the
charts at the levels the price went and bounced back, in my opinion are
more accurate.
Exactly the same is true for Fibonacci levels. It is impossible to calculate prices to the pip because of all the preceding. You can easily take a look
at several sites that show the daily pivots, and there will be differences
among them, too.

FIBONACCI

R3
R2
R1
Pivot
S1
S2
S3

STANDARD
H + 2 (Pivot – L)
Pivot + (H – L
(2 × Pivot) – L
(H + L + C) / 3
(2 x Pivot) – H
Pivot – (H – L)
L – 2(H – L)

R3
R2
R1
Pivot
S1
S2
S3

Pivot + 1.000 * (H – L)
Pivot + 0.618 * (H – L)
Pivot + 0.382 * (H – L)
(H + L + C) / 3
Pivot – 0.382 * (H – L)
Pivot – 0.618 * (H – L)
Pivot – 1.000 * (H – L)

R4
R3
R2
R1
Pivot
S1
S2
S3
S4

CAMARILLA
R4 = C + RANGE * 1.1/2
R3 = C + RANGE * 1.1/4
R2 = C + RANGE * 1.1/6
R1 = C + RANGE * 1.1/12
(H + L + C) / 3
R1 = C – RANGE * 1.1/12
R2 = C – RANGE * 1.1/6
R3 = C – RANGE * 1.1/4
R4 = C – RANGE * 1.1/2

R4
R3
R2
R1
Pivot
S1
S2
S3
S4

R3 + RANGE
R1 + RANGE
PP + RANGE
R1 = (2 * PP) – LOW
(H + L + C) / 3
R1 = (2 * PP) – HIGH
PP – RANGE
S1 – RANGE
S3 – RANGE

WOODIE

226

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

DEMARK PIVOT POINTS
Tom DeMark, in calculating pivots projections, differentiates three situations:
1. Close ⬎ open:
PHigh ⫽ [(H ⫹ H ⫹ L ⫹ C)/2] ⫺ L
PLow ⫽ [(H ⫹ H ⫹ L ⫹ C)/2] ⫺ H
2. Close ⬍ open:
PHigh ⫽ [(H ⫹ L ⫹ L ⫹ C)/2] ⫺ L
PLow ⫽ [(H ⫹ L ⫹ L ⫹ C)/2] ⫺ H
3. Close ⫽ open:
PHigh ⫽ [(H ⫹ L ⫹ C ⫹ C)/2] ⫺ L
PLow ⫽ [(H ⫹ L ⫹ C ⫹ C)/2] ⫺ H
In intraday application with open (yesterday open), H (yesterday high), L
(yesterday low), and close (yesterday close).

PSYCHOLOGICAL LEVELS
You might have noticed that you are constantly rounding off numbers in
your daily activities. You tend to see round numbers as more perfect and
whole and are invariably drawn to use them, especially numbers that end in
zero. These round numbers also play an important role in FOREX trading.
If you take a look at previous support and resistance levels, you might
discover a common characteristic that prices have with respect to certain
prices: They can be seen as usually having difficulty moving past a round
price, such as, for example, $100. Other strong levels are prices ending in
5, or quarter prices, such as 25 or 75. There is also a curious behavior that
I have noticed that I can only associate with Fibonacci levels around prices
ending on 66 and 33. All these are said to be psychological levels. Human
beings also tend to be attracted to numbers that are factors of 10, a theory
suggested by the fact that we have 10 fingers and toes for counting.
Hitting a major 00 mark is a quite common goal, and often it will be
tested and tried until it is reached or crossed, only for the price to come
back soon afterwards because the final milestone was reached, and the market continues toward its next new goal.
Supports and resistances are being created at those round-number
levels through the accumulation of pending limit or stop orders. This also
could be a reason why those levels are bounced off sometimes when they

CHAPTER 12

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

227

have been barely touched and, conversely, the price experiences a surge as
soon as it has crossed the level for a few points. Limit orders will be
placed a little below the higher round-number price or above the lower
round-number price, whereas stop orders usually are placed beyond
either level.
Most target prices or stop-loss orders are placed by market participants
at round-number price levels because these are perceived to be a fair value
and a more perfect price than nonround numbers. For example, the $100
mark will be more attractive to a trader than a price of $101.02 or $99.96.
Such large numbers of orders act as a strong price barrier and, when triggered, will cause the price to bounce back. The levels are said to be psychological because there is no other logical, technical, or fundamental
reason to explain the reaction of the market except for this simple attraction
to round numbers.
Banks are known for implementing most orders around these levels, as
can be seen from the relative volumes on the Interbank. Large pools of
orders accumulate, and when the price level is reached, they are triggered,
causing an avalanche in the contrarian direction, which is perceived on
charts as a strong bounce.
This is very important information for traders, who then can base their
strategies on this peculiarity of the markets and increase their profits by
going with the flow.

----·

228

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Round numbers can be better employed on smaller time frames. The
first bounce from a round-number support or resistance is usually the
strongest, and every time a round number is hit, a series of orders is executed. With every successive reach of the same level, the volume of orders
decreases; if at any moment this volume is not strong enough to keep holding the support or resistance, the level will break.
Although successive moves from a support or resistance level also can
yield handsome profits, it is better to try to take advantage of the first time
the price hits the level and comes back because this is the moment when the
volume is at its strongest peak for a rejection.
This penchant for round numbers is common to all trading markets but
is especially dominant in the FOREX market. The principal reason behind
this phenomenon is that, simply, most human beings are attracted to round
numbers, and as long as trading is performed by human beings, the condition will recur.

USING MULTIPLE TIME FRAMES
When you look at multiple time frames, you can get a much better idea
of what is happening with a currency pair. You should use at least two
time frames, one to spot the trend and the other to pinpoint your entries at

CHAPTER 12

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

229

a better price. However, the best option is to use from three to four time
frames, especially when you are swing trading, because the perspective
will be much broader, and you will be able to understand how the market
moves.
For example, in a usual swing trading situation, where the main chart is
located in the daily time frame, you can use the weekly, daily, 1-hour, and
5-minute charts. Here is a short description of what you should look for in
each of those time frames, and if you are trading intraday, you can translate
the method to the series of smaller time frames.
Main Chart or Charting Workspace ⫽ Daily Chart
Buy and sell decisions are made here. You find the setups and signals given
by your system to get to trading opportunities. You can see a general
medium-term trend. However, you need to know what the longer-term
trend is.
Overview of the General Trend ⫽ Weekly Chart
In this chart, you can step back and see what the longer-term trend looks
like. You can find more data than in the daily chart earlier in time. You also
can check the significant patterns to confirm that the decision made based
on the daily trend is probably correct.
Looking Closer ⫽ 1-Hour Chart
You switch to a broader representation in detail of what is really going on
during the day. You can see the smaller swings that occur that can’t be seen
in a single candle on the daily chart. For example, when you are buying
consecutive pullbacks on the daily chart that have a series of consecutive
lower highs, you will be able to see that the prices are showing a downtrend
on the hourly chart. Thus you will be looking for a break of that trendline
in this time frame and enter at the appropriate time.
The Magnifying Glass ⫽ 5-Minute Chart
The 5-minute chart is the smaller time frame, the one you will be using to
time your entries. Your setup is perfect on the daily chart, and you have
already checked the weekly chart to gauge the patterns and to be sure of
the current main trend. You have drawn the trendline on the hourly chart
and are waiting for a break. The decision to enter a long position is
already made, and you will wait until the price pulls back to a support
level on the smaller chart so as to enter at the best possible price.

230

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Every time frame has an effect on every other time frame, from the
smaller ones to the bigger ones. Using smaller time frames for entries
allows you to enter at better prices, thus giving you the opportunity to use
much tighter stop losses than if you just traded off the main chart. Check
every time frame, and spot the support and resistance levels and chart and
candlesticks patterns. Finally, a good point of reference for general support and resistance is the SMA 200, which you should use in all time
frames. I personally also add the SMA 34 because I have found that the
prices always will bounce at least once from this particular moving average before resuming a move.
This type of multiple-chart analysis can improve your success as
a swing trader. Your main goal is to identify the areas of support and resistance and to check if there is an alignment of your preferred setup on most
of the time frames chosen. The more all the time frames are in alignment,

CHAPTER 12

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE

231

the greater the opportunity for success. Try to look at two additional time
frames along with your main chart. The lower time frame will be telling
you what is happening in the present, and the higher time frame will show
you what could happen in the future!

TREND IS YOUR FRIEND
The end of a trend is signaled when it stops making progressively higher (or
lower) highs and higher (or lower) lows. A trend reverses its previous direction when the price begins making progressively lower (or higher) lows and
lower (or higher) highs. However, you need to filter out any consolidation
pattern (e.g., a flag in an uptrend may be making lower lows and lower
highs, but its consequence is a further continuation almost three out of four
times). For this, you can observe the momentum of the move or use moving
averages or another indicator crossing to determine if there is a reversal of
the trend or if it is only a pause before the strength of the trend resumes.
Very often, when the market looks the most bullish or bearish and
everybody is jumping in, this is precisely the moment when professional
FOREX traders will be loading their positions in the contrarian direction.
Be very aware not to be late when entering a trend. At the same time, never
trade against a trend (unless you are swing trading in a range or scalping in
smaller time frames). When the trend is strong, apparent reversal patterns
may have no meaning, and the reversal never happens, unless it is for just a
few pips. In a strong market such as this, you trade breakouts—and that’s it.
Very often there isn’t even a pullback to trade, and by the time a pullback
happens, the move is already over. In a market such as this, the energy has
to slow down before it can reverse.

This page intentionally left blank

C

13

H

A

P

T

E

R

AUTOMATED TRADING
EXPERT ADVISORS AND AUTOMATIC PROGRAMMING
INTERFACES (APIs)
Trading systems are a series of rules that traders use to determine their
entries and exits from a position. A well-designed trading system can help
traders to attain consistent returns while limiting risk through its moneymanagement specifications. In an ideal situation, traders should follow
their system rules like robots, executing trades systematically and without
emotion. However, the human condition makes this last part a little difficult, and this is why automated systems have started gaining in popularity.
I have always said the number one mistake investors make is that they
let their emotions get in the way. To increase your winning percentage, you
must trade emotion-free. A good system will help you to refine your ability to stick to your trading rules. The advent of program trading, which is
nothing new, can maximize your opportunities. Program trading (robots)
has really made headway with individual investors. With all the advances in
personal computing, this is an area where I have spent considerable time
and money on research and development. All my software, as well as new
software yet to be released, incorporates some state-of-the-art programming language that allows all my customers to take advantage of the latest
robots to trade for you.
The importance of an automated system is reflected in its wide array of
uses in the financial markets. The FOREX market is not only the biggest
market worldwide in terms of daily turnover but also because it involves the

233

234

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

largest number of participants. Many of the biggest players in the FOREX
market use a diversity of automated systems to help in their decision making and overall organization of the trading process.
Today, most of the order flow goes through a computerized communications network. This facilitates the use of computer-based automation.
Automated trading systems are created simply by converting the rules of
your trading system into code that can be interpreted by your computer and
the software that is employed to interact on the financial markets. The computer runs those rules through your trading software, and the system itself
will be looking for trades that comply with the coded rules. When the
appropriate conditions are met, the system will place the trades automatically directly with your broker.
Many brokerage firms and platforms support automated trading systems. Such systems can be used in a totally automated manner or as semiautomatic variants, where the trader will be given a signal when conditions
are met, and the trader will take the final decision of opening the trade.
Some brokers require an authorization to be able to implement an automated system on your account.
These kinds of trading systems have many advantages, but they also
have some negative aspects. The positive side is that all the emotion and
stress are taken out of the picture. The hard work already has been done
through the development and testing of the trading strategy, and thereafter,
you only need to focus on its improvement and, of course, applying moneymanagement rules. As long as market conditions do not change and the system has proven to be profitable in its development phase, it will not require
additional work on your part. The negative aspects come from the fact that
if the code is not defined and tested properly before using it in a real-money
account, you could face losing trades. In addition, there are some combinations of rules that can’t be translated to a code, especially when the system
includes a discretionary approach, making it difficult to develop.
The following are the main areas to pay attention to if you decide to
work with a trading robot: backtesting and performance and market phases
(whether it is trending or ranging).
It is of an extreme importance to do a thorough backtesting of your system until you are sure that it performs well with historical data. Then trade it
on a demo account to make sure that there will be no surprises along the way
and that actual performance is equivalent to that which resulted from the
backtesting. Very few strategies perform well in both phases of the markets
because the conditions present in a ranging market are very different from
those in a trending market. Be sure to use and implement the appropriate

CHAPTER 13

AUTOMATED TRADING

235

strategy for each of those situations, either in a single system or by developing and using two alternate automated systems.
Additionally, it is important that you keep things simple and that your
code is well documented so as to be able to find out quickly when a portion
of it is not performing or you need to change some of the conditions.
Changes to code should be done one at a time so that you can more precisely
pinpoint which changes improve the performance of the system and which
ones set it back. Finally, make sure that you know what strategy operates
behind your trading system. Sometimes the coded version can become so
complex that it deviates from the original rules of the trading strategy.

ADVANCED ROBOTS: NEURAL NETWORKS IN THE FOREX
The first research on neural networks began back at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, but only between the 1940s and 1950s, in the twentieth
century, did the study of neural networks acquire its major strength, thanks
to the Connectionist movement. This movement sustained the theory that
the secret of learning processes and knowledge can be found in axioms or
unquestionable truths; members of this movement affirmed that knowledge
is independent of the structure that handles the symbols and that the representation of knowledge is done from the most basic stratum of intelligence—the brain, especially the neurons and the multiple interconnections
between them.
This important interest in neural networks decreased in the 1970s
because researchers such as Minsky and Papert in 1969 indicated that there
were limitations in the learning processes of the architectures of neural networks that had been used until then. In their book, Perceptrons, they made a
detailed analysis of the perceptron and considered that its extension to a
multilayered structure was a totally sterile activity (the original perceptron,
a neural network under research, possessed only one layer). The limitations
of the perceptron were quite important, especially its failure to resolve
many problems simultaneously. This caused a setback in the development
of neural networks that lasted more than 10 years.
Advances in technology and in knowledge about the structure of the
brain gave a new impetus to interest in neural networks that has allowed the
development of a growing number of applications in several different fields
and with diverse purposes. Artificial neural networks now are established as
a technique of massive and parallel processing of information that emulates
the essential characteristics of the neural structure of the biologic brain.

236

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

One of the fields in which these data-analysis methods have been introduced is the automated FOREX world. Neural networks consist of a large
number of processing units that are linked together by weighted probabilities. They are a model that exhibits behavior that is similar to the working
and learning of the human brain. This model “thinks and learns” based on
the results of the previous actions.
Neural networks can be trained to interpret data and draw conclusions
from them. They are able to take in multiple streams of data and give a single result as the outcome of their calculations. New forms of quantification
of those data can be added to the series of factors that the neural network
considers before it makes a decision, and the new forms will be processed
along with the previous ones. This is why neural networks are being used
increasingly in the FOREX to make price predictions.
The network is trained to adjust itself based on specific patterns that
form between the time of the input data and the output it generates. This is
quite time-consuming, but in the end, it will provide the neural network
with the ability to predict a future outcome based on historical data. When
it is presented with examples of pairs of input and output data, the network
can “learn” the dependencies and apply those dependencies when presented with new data. Thereafter, the network can compare the new data
with output it has generated previously and determine how far from or
close to the real data its prediction was, go back and adjust the relationships
among the various factors that determine the calculations, and keep on
adjusting until it reaches the correct answer and the output is equivalent to
the real event.
The training has to be performed with two different sets of data: the
data specifically used for training and the data that will be used in testing.
The neural network can continue to learn by continuously comparing the
predictions it makes with the data that are being given to the system. The
neural network also combines technical and fundamental data in its calculations; in this way, it can find additional patterns that might not have been
included in earlier considerations and apply them to the prediction, coming
up with very accurate results.
However, the output will be as good as the input data it is fed. The neural
network is very good at correlations independent of the amount of data you
are introducing in the process. It will be able to recognize patterns even
among extremely different types of information, even if there is no existing
relationship or particular pattern. Most important, the neural network can
apply its intelligence without clouding it with emotions. However, this can
become a weakness when unknown factors are introduced, such as, for
