
need to learn.
There are always greater levels of satisfaction available in every
experience until we reach the point where we know everything there is to
know. If we did know everything there is to know, we could expect
outcomes from the outside that would correspond exactly with the inside
mental environment. This kind of perfect correspondence between inner
and outer would be the result of our perfect understanding of ourselves—
the inner forces that act on our behavior—in relationship to the outer
environmental forces that act on us. Since none of us is at the level of
perfect knowledge, we can assume that within every experience we have
with the physical environment there are other probable experiences
resulting from other choices that were available but unknown to us at the
time, the point being that what we end up with in any given situation will
correspond exactly with our level of understanding, insight, and ability to
act on what we know.
The more we allow ourselves to learn, the better able we are at making
assessments about the possibilities that exist in some future moment.
However, implied within the foregoing statement is that we are, first,
willing to acknowledge that other possible futures exist, not just the one
future that our expectations and beliefs about what we have already learned
lock us into. Keep in mind that everything we know in relationship to
everything we haven't learned yet would represent the current set of
limitations that we operate out of. Conceptually, these individual
limitations are no different from the choices people in the Middle Ages
were blinded to by believing that the Earth was flat.
If we aren't willing to acknowledge that in any given situation more
information and choices exist than what our beliefs allow us to perceive,
then we will never learn to recognize or anticipate the existence of these
other more satisfying possibilities. By acknowledging the possibility that a
more appropriate set of steps exists, we open ourselves up to perceive and
then learn the steps that can lead to greater levels of satisfaction. Refusing
to acknowledge the existence of these possibilities would be the same as
claiming that electricity didn't exist before it was discovered. When we
continually argue for the status quo by defending what we already believe
we know, the environment will seem to be constantly assaulting us,
resulting in feelings of stress and anxiety. The outer environment becomes
assaulting because it is offering us more to learn about the nature of the
ways in which things exist and we are simply refusing to learn.
In fact, we can easily determine if we need to learn something to operate
in the environment more effectively by just monitoring the way we feel. If
there were never an imbalance or lack of correspondence between the mental
and the physical environments, then theoretically we wouldn't ever have a
reason to feel disappointment, frustration, confusion, stress, or anxiety. It is
only because there is an imbalance, a lack of harmony or correspondence,
between the mental and physical that we ever experience any of these
111

unpleasant, negative emotions. Because when there is a balance between
the inside and outside, we experience the opposite feelings of joy, happiness,
and satisfaction. So it would stand to reason that any time we feel these
negative emotions, it is because we either didn't know the most appropriate
set of steps, resulting in frustration and disappointment, or we don't know
what to do next, resulting in stress, anxiety, and confusion. In any case, our
feelings will always tell us about the state of our relationship with the
environment and point the way to what we need to learn to experience greater
degrees of satisfaction.
For example, if we aren't experiencing satisfaction in our personal
relationships, would it be too simple to assume that the reason is because
we haven't developed the appropriate interpersonal skills? Is it possible that
there are certain communication skills available that—once learned and
used—can result in much more satisfying personal relationships and deeper
levels of intimacy? The problem is that it is just as easy to assume that the
appropriate skills leading to greater levels of satisfaction don't exist or that we
already know what we need to know and if we aren't experiencing satisfaction
now, it must therefore not be possible to experience it at all. When we operate
out of the last assumption, even if the environment presents us with evidence that
deeper levels of satisfaction are possible (observing another couple who are
experiencing satisfaction), we would probably assume that they are acting as if
they were happy for appearance's sake. That way, we won't have to take
responsibility for learning something they might know.
The first assumption would result in investigation, learning, and expansion,
leading to greater levels of effectiveness and satisfaction. The last two assumptions
would obviously lead to more dissatisfaction. The names and places may change,
but we will experience the same kind of painful conditions over and over again.
These cycles of dissatisfaction will continue until we acknowledge there is something we need to learn and go about the task of learning it.
WHAT WE ALREADY KNOW WILL BLOCK
WHAT WE HAVEN'T LEARNED YET
Obviously, acknowledging there is something that we need to learn is not as easy
as it sounds. In fact, acknowledging that we don't know something or that what
we do know isn't very useful or effective presents us with one of the major
paradoxes of life. The dilemma we are confronted with is how can we know
what we don't know when what we have already learned will block our
perception of what we haven't learned yet. For example, once we learn that
trading is easy (the first few quick winning trades will establish that belief), it
will block our perception of information to the contrary, that trading is probably
one of the hardest endeavors one could choose to undertake. Each of these
beliefs—that trading is easy or trading is hard—would result in the perception of
completely different choices as being available from the environment, resulting
in very different outcomes based on the choices perceived and acted on.
112

We don't question the usefulness or effectiveness of something we have already
learned, simply because what each of us has learned we experienced in some way.
That is, we won't question what we have experienced just because we experienced it,
meaning the reality of the experience is based in our five senses: what is inside
of us we either, felt, saw, heard, smelled, or tasted. That's real enough. Once
an experience becomes a component part of our mental environment in the
form of a memory, belief, or association, it becomes a part of what is
commonly believed to be our identity and beyond question.
However, we are open to learn practically anything the environment has
to offer, if we haven't been previously exposed in some way. We will soak
up first-time information like a sponge, regardless of what it is. However,
once it is inside of us, we will either defend it or defend against it (hide from
information in the environment that we don't want to acknowledge as a part
of our mental environment), instead of making ourselves available to learn
more of what the environment has to offer in the way of insight about itself
or ourself as the case may be.
To defend against the intrusion of information requires energy. This
investment in energy is commonly referred to as stress. The simplest
definition that I can think of for stress is that it is what we feel when we are
actively blocking information from the environment. In physical terms
stress is really no different from walking against the wind. Symbolically,
the wind would represent various categories of environmental information
we don't want to confront; our bodies walking against the wind would
represent what we have already learned—what is already inside of us that
blocks what is outside of us. The two forces clash and we feel stress.
One of the biggest ironies of life is that everyone wants to be right. In
other words, everyone assumes what they have experienced and learned
about the nature of the way things exist to be the true and correct version.
The irony is everyone's version is correct by virtue of the fact that what is
inside all of us was experienced by our physical senses—if we saw it, if we
read it, if we heard it, if we felt it, if we tasted it, if we smelled it, or any
combination thereof, we experienced it. However, not everybody's version
(of what the environment has to offer in the way of experiences) is
particularly useful or effective as a resource for interacting with the
environment in a way that would lead to satisfactory outcomes. Just
because something gets input into our mental environment doesn't mean
that it's of any real value in helping us to fulfill ourselves.
A child has no way of conceptualizing how his experiences are forming
beliefs about the nature of reality, concepts that would, in fact, be much
different under different environmental conditions.
He unquestioningly takes an experience as a fact of reality because the
beliefs he is forming are founded in feelings and emotions. He does not
reflect on his experiences to assess the quality of the beliefs he is forming.
He has no way of determining how these beliefs will either act as resources
or obstacles to self-expression in the future.
113

The child doesn't understand that any belief that he forms will define
reality in a way that excludes other possibilities or that he will make
associations with experiences, lumping components of the environment
together in ways that are very limiting and not practical. Many of these
beliefs will just naturally be decharged as his attractions cause him to
interact with the environment in new ways. All of us will just naturally grow
into a new set of limitations as we expand our awarenesses by learning,
which in turn releases us from things we used to believe. However, if the
quality of the energy in many of our beliefs is negatively charged, then our
fear will act as an obstacle to self-expression, limiting what we can perceive
from the environment as possibilities.
For example, someone who grew up constantly being belittled or
criticized by his parents knows exactly how that feels. The beliefs he forms
about himself and his relationship with the environment, as a result, were
formed in a reality of pain. Certainly he wouldn't know, while growing up,
that he was forming a belief about his relative unworthiness as a person.
Unworthiness is a concept that he may not learn about well into his adult
years, and he may never learn how to release himself from the damaging
effects. But in the meantime, his fear of being ridiculed and belittled will
drastically limit the possibilities he perceives in the environment for selfexpression. Many possibilities that seem self-evident to someone without
this fear would be totally out of the realm of possibility for him.
An even bigger irony is that the more we acknowledge the possibility that
our version of the way things exist isn't as effective of a resource as it could
be, the more we make ourselves available to learn from the environment. By
expanding our personal dot to include more of what is outside of us inside
of us, the more it increases our level of correspondence with the outside,
leaving less and less of what is out there that we don't know about, thereby
increasing our ability to be right.
The more we allow ourselves to learn, the better able we are at making
assessments about the probabilities that exist in some future moment. How
could we not be better off by learning something when you consider that
the environment can act as a force on us in an almost infinite variety of
ways, some of which we know about, many others we couldn't begin to
anticipate unless we keep on learning in spite of what we already know?
The more we believe we know, the more we make the environment prove to
us that what we know isn't particularly useful or effective. The problem is
that proof could be right in front of our noses and we wouldn't have the
mental framework to recognize it, unless we willingly allowed ourselves to
confront it and consider it. Otherwise, if we all knew so much, we wouldn't
ever experience emotional pain, because it is a perfect indication that we
don't know how to interact with the environment to our satisfaction—
because if we did, we would.
All this should be somewhat apparent because it is not a typical human
characteristic to actively gather and consider information that conflicts
114

with what we already know and believe to be true. However, consider that
hidden within the environmental information that we haven't learned to
perceive yet, either because we haven't learned to make the appropriate
distinctions or because the information is being blocked by our current set of
beliefs, are a more appropriate set of steps to fulfilling ourselves. What we
haven't learned yet is outside of each one of us waiting to become a part of
our personal dot. What we don't know represents all the information that
could result in choices that have much more satisfying outcomes. However,
since we can't know what we haven't learned yet and what we do know
blocks the perception of other alternatives that exist for satisfaction, we
easily get caught in these terribly unsatisfying life cycles, believing that is all
the world has to offer, when our predicament is merely the result of our
inability to adapt ourselves. When we do allow ourselves to adapt, we learn
that there are always more choices available than our beliefs will allow us to
perceive. What I mean by adapt is to identify and actively change
something that is already inside of us so there is a higher degree of
correspondence between the inside and outside.
Each first-time experience with the physical environment creates a
distinction in the mental environment about its nature. All information or
possibilities that exist in the same category as that first experience will
then be filtered perceptually through what we learned from that
experience. Again I will use the example of a child whose first experience with
a dog is a painful one, meaning that the first dog the child attempted to play with,
out of his natural sense of curiosity, bit him. As a result of this one experience the
child will "naturally associate" all dogs with the one that bit him. What he
learned will then act as a mental barrier to anything else the environment may have
to offer with respect to all other dogs.
I have used the words "naturally associate" to point out that the child will
not have to actively think about the limiting way in which dogs will be
characterized in his mental environment. The associations will occur
automatically, as a natural function of the way our minds are wired. So he will
not have to see "the" dog that bit him; any dog will cause him to remember the
pain of his previous experience. As a result of his first experience with a dog
being painful, he will automatically associate any future encounters with dogs
with his one painful experience. Regardless of how erroneous his association is
or how the environment may try to prove to him that most dogs are friendly and
will not cause him pain, he won't believe it, because what he has already learned
about dogs (not one dog, but all dogs) will cause him to block the acceptance of
this new information into his mental system.
However, if the child's first experience with a dog is positive, he will obviously
have no reservations to play with any dog until he has a painful experience. In this
case, however, if he is bitten, he will not automatically associate all other dogs
with the one that bit him because he has already learned that the environment
has more to offer than this one painful experience. What he will learn, that is
new for him, is that not all dogs are friendly and that he must use some caution
115

when interacting with them until he can determine their disposition.
The child whose first experience was painful doesn't know that he can
experience happiness and joy with dogs. He doesn't know it because he hasn't
experienced it; it isn't something he has learned yet, regardless of the evidence
the environment may be presenting him. Nor will he likely learn it until he is
willing to step through his fear. All other information being offered to him about
the nature of dogs will be blocked or rejected by the energy of what he has already
learned.
You can teach a child anything you please, regardless of how erroneous or
dysfunctional it is relative to the environmental conditions. The child will
believe what you teach him because what he experiences becomes a part of
his identity. Anything we experience will become a functioning part of our
identity. When I say "functioning," I mean that once something is inside of
us, regardless of what it is, it then has the potential to act as a force on
our behavior. All these functioning parts that we call memories of experiences, beliefs, and associations, in turn then act as an internal force to
shape our perception of the environment we experience out of what is
available to experience.
As you already know, what each one of us fears as individuals is
something that we have at some point in our lives learned to fear, as a result
of our experiences. When we feel fear, it is because we have learned to
perceive the environmental conditions as threatening in some way,
whereas someone who hasn't had a painful experience associated with those
same environmental conditions has learned to perceive the environment
conditions in a completely different way, a way that corresponds with his
previous experience. One person can perceive the conditions as a threat,
the other as an opportunity, in the same moment, based on what is already
inside of them. In other words, what they have already taken into their
mental environment as experience will determine how they perceive the
environmental conditions, whether as an opportunity to experience joy or
as a threat to experience pain and all the degrees in between. What is
really interesting is that neither one would be able to convince the other of
the validity of his perception, because what they are experiencing at the
moment is directly related to what they have already learned.
We will usually only question the value of something that is inside of us, if
we are forced to, as an absolute last resort. What would be the ultimate
proof that we need to finally make us acknowledge that there is something
we need to learn? Pain! We will acknowledge the need to learn when we
are experiencing the emotional pain of a great disappointment or stress
and anxiety because we don't know what to do next, and we are finding it
increasingly difficult to shift the responsibility for what we are ending up
with.
If we go back to the "believing that trading is easy" example, why would
we consider that trading is difficult when we already know that it is easy?
What would cause us to question the usefulness of such a belief? The
116

emotional pain of disappointment as a result of not being able to achieve
our goals? Once we question the usefulness, what happens? A whole world
of information opens up to us on how we can learn to interact with the
trading environment more effectively by increasing our level of
correspondence. However, everything we would find in the environment to
increase our understanding already existed, unless we think of something
completely new on our own. The only thing that stopped us from finding
it before was the energy of what we already knew, blocking what we
haven't learned yet. The problem is that if learning something new means
that we have to change what we have already learned, we instinctively seem
to refuse to do it, regardless of how inappropriate what we have learned
may be relative to what we would need to know to experience satisfaction.
Once we have learned something, it will act as a force to block other
information that would result in the perception of other choices. Even
children will resist the acceptance of information that is contrary to what
they have already learned, regardless of how dysfunctional their knowledge
may be.
All learning is synonymous with change, whether we are changing
something we already know or learning something completely new. If we
refuse to change (adapt) the inside—adding to what we know to create
more distinctions and change our perspective—then we are not learning
what we need to know to experience something different in the outer
environment. If there is no change on the inside, there will be no
perceived change in the outside, thereby locking us into recurring cycles of
pain and dissatisfaction. What's more, we will continue to suffer until the
pain becomes so great that we are left with no choice other than to reassess
how we go about managing our lives, that is, reassessing the usefulness of
our beliefs.
WHAT WE DO KNOW BECOMES OBSOLETE
Besides the cycles of dissatisfaction that our current set of limitations locks
us into (what we know blocks what we haven't learned yet), there is an
even more practical reason for learning how to adapt. All of us are forced
to interact with a constantly changing physical environment to fulfill our
needs and achieve our goals. The way we interact with the environment,
what choices we perceive in relationship to what is actually available from
the environment's perspective, and what we do in relationship to what we
perceive are all a function of what we have learned. Now, if you will
recall, everything that constitutes the physical environment is in constant
motion. Anything that is in motion (which includes everything made of
atoms and molecules) is also changing over time. So change is an automatic
function of the physical environment.
However, the mental environment is composed of positively or
negatively charged energy that carries information about our experiences,
117

what we have learned that forms into organizational patterns that we call
beliefs and concepts about the nature of the physical environment. Energy
is not made of atoms and molecules and therefore does not change over
time. In fact, energy exists in a nonphysical dimension outside of time as we
perceive it with our senses. Electrical energy or chemically produced
electrical energy can be stored just the same as in a battery and the
information it carries is stored with it. That is, time has no effect on the
quality of this energy (the degree of the positive or negative charge) and the
ways in which it affects our perception of environmental information and
how it acts as a force on our behavior.
Changing our mental environment to correspond with the constant
external changes going on in the physical environment is not automatic.
The information stored in our mental environment about the nature of the
physical environment can remain unchanged for years or a lifetime, for that
matter, regardless of how outdated, useless, or even harmful it may be. And
furthermore this outdated knowledge will continue to act as a force on our
behavior, causing us to interact with the environment in completely
inappropriate ways relative to the conditions. So even if we are experiencing
satisfaction in certain areas of our lives, we cannot take it for granted that
the conditions that we have learned to interact with will stay as we know
them to exist. The outside conditions are in constant motion, presenting us
with different forces to learn about and adapt to. In the market
environment, for example, the changes in conditions are highly visible and
usually moment to moment, whereas in other types of environments that
we typically operate in, the forces of change work a little slower and are less
visible, but they are changing nevertheless. The problem is that the
conditions will change and we won't necessarily recognize these changes
even if we start to experience some degree of dissatisfaction, unless we are
constantly vigilant that even though we have learned something that works,
it can still become obsolete.
