
Looking for liquidity
Liquidity is the ability to buy or sell an asset in large quantity without affecting the price levels. Day traders look for liquid assets so they can move in and
out of the market quickly without disrupting price levels. Otherwise, they
may not be able to buy at a good price or sell when they want.
At the most basic level, financial markets are driven by supply and demand.
The more of an asset supplied in the market, the lower the price; the more
of an asset that people demand, the higher the price. In a perfect market, the
amount of supply and demand is matched so that prices don’t change. This
situation occurs if a high volume of people are trading such that the supply
and demand are constantly matched or if the frequency of trades is very low,
which keeps the price from changing.
You may be thinking, wait, don’t I want big price changes so that I can make
money quickly? Yes, you want price changes in the market, but you don’t
want to be the one causing them. The less liquid a market is, the more likely
your buying and selling are to affect market prices, and the smaller your
profit will be.

Volume
Volume is the total amount of a security that trades in a given time period.
The greater the volume, the more buyers and sellers are interested in the
security and the more easily you can get in there and buy and sell without
affecting the price.
Day traders also look at the relationship between volume and price. This
important technical indicator is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
Here’s the simple analysis:

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
✓ High volume with no change in price levels means an equal match
between buyers and sellers.
✓ High volume with rising prices means that buyers outnumber sellers, so
the price will continue going up.
✓ High volume with falling prices means that sellers outnumber buyers, so
the price will keep going down.

Frequency
Another measure of liquidity is frequency, or how often a security trades. Some
assets, like stock market futures, trade constantly, from the moment the market
opens until the very last trade of the day, and then continue into overnight
trading. Others, like agricultural commodities, trade only during market hours
or only during certain times of the year. Other securities, like stocks, trade
frequently, but the volume rises and falls at regular intervals related to such
things as options expiration (the date at which options on the stock expire).
Much of the market is dominated by high-frequency traders, which are proprietary computerized systems that enter, execute, or cancel buy and sell
orders in the blink of an eye — or less. These traders have thrown a wrench
into a few trading days, but they are only partially responsible for the type of
frequency being discussed here. That’s because high-frequency traders look
for securities that already trade frequently to make the programs work better.

Finding the standard deviation — the hard way
Here’s the equation you use to calculate standard deviation:

√
√
N
√1 ∑
(
)2
𝜎=√
x − x̄
N i =1 i
In this equation, N is the number of price
quotes, x1 is any one price quote, and the funky
x with the line over it is the average of all the
prices over time.
To calculate standard deviation for yourself,
you calculate the difference between any given
price and the average value. So if the average
price is $5 and the closing price today is $8, the

difference is $3. (More likely, the research service that you use would calculate the difference
for you; you can learn more about research
services in Chapter 13.)
After you have all the differences between the
prices and the average for the time period in
question, you find the square of these differences. If the difference for one day’s price is
$8, then the square is $64. You add up all the
squared differences over the period of time that
you are looking at and then find the average of
them. That number is called the variance, or σ2.
Finally, calculate the square root of the variance, and you have the standard deviation.

47

48

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Homing in on high volatility
The volatility of a security is how much the price of an asset varies over a
period of time. It tells you how much prices fluctuate and thus how likely
you are to be able to take advantage of that. For example, if a security has an
average price of $5 but trades anywhere between $1 and $14, it is more
volatile than one with an average price of $5 that trades between $4 and $6.
One standard measure of volatility and risk is standard deviation, which is
how much any given price quote varies from a security’s average price. If you
are dying to see it, the math is explained in the sidebar “Finding the standard
deviation — the hard way,” but you can calculate it with most spreadsheet
programs and many trading platforms.
The higher the standard deviation, the higher the volatility; the higher the volatility, the more a security’s price is going to fluctuate, and the more profit —
and loss — opportunities there are for a day trader.
Standard deviation is also a measure of risk that can be used to evaluate your
trading performance. That use of the measure is discussed in Chapter 16.

Staying within your budget
You don’t necessarily need a lot of money to begin day trading, but you do
need a lot of money to buy certain securities. Stocks generally trade in round
lots, which are orders of at least 100 shares. If you want to buy a stock worth
$40 per share, you need $4,000 in your account. Your broker will probably let
you borrow half of that money, but you still need to come up with the other
$2,000.
Options and futures trade by contract; one contract represents some unit of
the underlying security. For example, in the options market, one contract is
good for 100 shares of the stock. These contracts also trade in round lots of
100 contracts per order.
No one will stop you from buying a smaller amount than the usual round lot in
any given security, but you’ll probably pay a high commission and get worse
execution for your order. Because the returns on each trade tend to be small
anyway, don’t take up day trading until you have enough money to trade your
target asset effectively. Otherwise, you’ll pay too much to your broker without
getting much for yourself.
Bonds do not trade in fractional amounts; they trade on a per-bond basis,
and each bond has a face value of $1,000. Some trade for more or less than
that, depending on how the bond’s interest rate differs from the market rate

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
of interest, but the $1,000 figure is a good number to keep in mind when
thinking about capital requirements. Many dealers have a minimum order of
ten bonds, though, so a minimum order would be $10,000.

Making sure you can use margin
Most day traders make money through a large volume of small profits. One
way to increase the profit per trade is to use borrowed money to buy more
shares, more contracts, or more bonds. Margin is money in your account
that you borrow against, and almost all brokers will be happy to arrange a
margin loan for you, especially if you’re going to use the money to make more
trades and generate more commissions for the brokerage firm. In Chapter 9, I
discuss how margin is used within an investment strategy. Here, though, you
want to think about how margin affects your choice of assets for day trading.
The following section gives you more information on how margin works and
what you need to consider when selecting assets to trade, but here’s what
you need to know now: Most stocks and bonds are marginable (able to be
purchased on margin), and the Federal Reserve Board allows traders to
borrow up to 50 percent of their value. But not all securities are marginable.
Stocks priced below $3 per share, those traded on the OTC Bulletin Board or
OTC Link (discussed later in this chapter), and those in newly public
companies often cannot be borrowed against or purchased on margin. Your
brokerage firm should have a list of securities that are not eligible for margin.
If leverage is going to be part of your day-trading strategy, be sure that the
assets you plan to trade are marginable.
Generally, your stock or bond account must hold the greater of $2,000 or
50 percent of the purchase price of securities when you borrow the money.
So, for example, if you want to buy $5,000 worth of something on margin,
you need to have $2,500 in your account. The price of those securities can
go down, but if they go down so much that the account now holds only 25
percent of the value of the loan, you’ll get a margin call. That means that you
have to add cash or securities to your account right then and there. If not,
your position will be liquidated.
Excess margin is the amount of money in your account over and above the
minimum. For example, if you have $100,000 in your account and need 30
percent as maintenance margin, then you can borrow against an additional
$70,000, the amount in excess of the 30 percent used for maintenance.
For derivatives, the margin rules are a bit different. Each contract has its own
requirement for the initial margin and maintenance levels that must be kept
on account; in the argot of the derivatives markets, margin is also known as

49

50

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
a performance bond. If you are trading the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s
E-mini MSCI Emerging Markets index contracts, for example, your initial
margin per contract is $10,000, and your maintenance margin is $8,000. You
can find current margin requirements for Chicago Mercantile Exchange and
Chicago Board of Trade products at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s
website, www.cmegroup.com.
Margin requirements aren’t set by the brokerage firms. Instead, the minimum
amount in your account — and thus the maximum amount you can borrow —
is set by the Federal Reserve Board under Regulation T. That’s because of
concerns that if too much borrowing takes place, the borrowers will panic in
a financial downturn and drag the market down even further. (Excessive trading on margin was a contributing factor to the stock market crash of 1929, in
which the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 13 percent in one day, and the
market did not fully recover until 1954. The financial crisis of 2008 wasn’t
caused by leverage in the stock market but by excessive borrowing in the
real estate market.)

Changing margin rules for pattern day traders
FINRA, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority that oversees the activities of member brokerage firms (which pretty much includes every brokerage
firm in the United States), has rules about margin for day trading accounts to
help brokerage firms manage their risks while accommodating the needs of
active customers. Their rules complement those of the Federal Reserve Bank.
The FINRA regulations include a category of brokerage customer known as
the pattern day trader. These are folks who day trade, which FINRA defines
as buying, selling or selling short, and then buying the same security on the
same day four or more times in five business days. Furthermore, pattern
day traders, according to FINRA, make enough day trades that they constitute more than 6 percent of their total trading activity for that same five-day
period. Brokerage firms can classify customers as pattern day traders before
they make a single trade. For example, if the firm offers you special training
or services designed for active traders, it may put you into that category.
Pattern day traders have to meet a different margin requirement. They need
to start the trading day with at least $25,000 in cash and securities and maintain that amount throughout the trading day. The reason for these requirements is that margin requirements for other customers are based on the
value of the account at the end of the day, but most day traders close out
their positions overnight, which means that firms weren’t managing their
intra-day risk. Having the minimums in place helps protect the broker, but it
also limits how much you can borrow if you have less than $25,000 in your
day-trading account.

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
Being a pattern day trader under FINRA offers some advantages, the greatest one being that you can borrow more money during the day. Meet the
standards, and you’re allowed to borrow four times your excess margin as
long as you close your trades out at the close of the market or before.
A regular customer can only borrow one times the excess. If you exceed
your margin limit, you have five days to deposit more cash or securities in
your account.

Obeying your brokerage firm’s margin policies
The Fed limits the amount that can be borrowed, and FINRA monitors how
member brokerage firms comply. All brokerage firms have to meet those
rules, but some set stricter limits for their customers.
The brokerage firms also set the interest rates for margin and the requirements for customers who want to borrow money to trade. The rates can be
high; in 2013, brokerage firm Charles Schwab charged an annual rate of 8
percent on margin loans between $25,000 and $49,999.
Day traders have to pay margin interest, even though their loans are of
short duration. Because it takes three days for a securities trade to settle,
to the accountants, it looks as though you borrowed the money for three
full days, not three hours. Some brokerage firms charge you interest for the
full three days.
You won’t pay the quoted interest rate each day, however; the quoted rate is
almost always annualized. Divide it by 365 to find the daily rate. If the annual
rate is 8.00 percent, then the daily rate will be 8.00 ÷ 365 = 0.02 percent. Check
with your brokerage firm to find out the specifics of the margin interest calculation for day traders so that you understand what you’ll be charged before
you start to trade.

Trading Types of Securities
In the financial markets, people buy and sell securities every day, but just
what are they buying or selling? Securities are financial instruments. In the
olden days, they were pieces of paper, but now they are electronic entries
that represent a legal claim on some type of underlying asset. This asset may
be a business, if the security is a stock, or it may be a loan to a government
or a corporation, if the security is a bond. In this section, I cover different
types of securities that day traders are likely to run across and tell you what
you need to jump into the fray.

51

52

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
In practice, asset and security are synonyms, and derivative is considered to be
a type of asset or security. But to be precise, these three are not the same:
✓ An asset is a physical item. Examples include a company, a house, gold
bullion, or a loan.
✓ A security is a contract that gives someone the right of ownership of the
asset, such as a share of stock, a bond, a promissory note.
✓ A derivative is a contract that draws its value from the price of a
security. Examples include options and futures.

Stocks
A stock, also called an equity, is a security that represents a fractional interest in the ownership of a company. Buy one share of Microsoft, and you are
an owner of the company, just as Bill Gates is. He may own a much larger
share of the total business, but you both have a stake in it. Stockholders
elect a board of directors to represent their interests in how the company
is managed. Each share is a vote, so good luck getting Bill Gates kicked off
Microsoft’s board.
A share of stock has limited liability, which means that you can lose all of your
investment but no more than that. If the company files for bankruptcy, the
creditors cannot come after the shareholders for the money that they are owed.
Some companies pay their shareholders a dividend, which is a small cash
payment made out of firm profits. Because day traders hold stock for really
short periods of time, they don’t normally collect dividends.

How U.S. stocks trade
Stocks are priced based on a single share, and most brokerage firms charge
commissions on a per-share basis. Despite this per-share pricing, stocks are
almost always traded in round lots of 100 shares. The supply and demand for
a given stock is driven by the company’s expected performance.
A stock’s price is quoted with a bid and an ask.
✓ The bid is the price that the broker pays to buy the stock from you if you
are selling.
✓ The ask is the price that the broker charges you if you are the one buying.
You can remember the difference between the bid and the ask this way: The
broker buys on the bid. Let alliteration be your friend!

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
The difference between the bid and the ask is the spread, and that represents
the dealer’s profit.
Here is an example of a price quote:
MSFT $31.60 $31.61
This quote is for Microsoft (ticker symbol: MSFT). The bid, listed first, is
$31.60, and the ask is $31.61. That’s the smallest spread you’ll ever see! The
spread here is so small because Microsoft is a liquid stock, and no big news
events are going on that may change the balance of buyers and sellers.
The brokerage firm makes money from the commission and from the spread.
Many novice day traders focus on the amount of the commission and forget
that some brokerage firms can execute the order better than others, thus
keeping the spread narrower. You need to consider the total cost of trading
when you design a trading strategy and choose a brokerage firm, and brokers
must disclose data on trade execution quality if you request it.
I tend to use the words broker and dealer interchangeably, but there is a difference. A broker simply matches buyers and sellers of securities, whereas a
dealer buys and sells securities out of its own account. Almost all brokerage
firms are both brokers and dealers.

Where U.S. stocks trade
U.S. stocks trade mostly on organized exchanges such as the New York Stock
Exchange and NASDAQ, but they trade more and more on electronic communications networks, some of which are operated by the exchanges themselves.
The old-line exchanges are what you may think about when someone mentions stock exchanges: brick-and-mortar buildings with lots of people running around to execute trades in person. They are still major factors in the
market, but they have competition from electronic communication networks,
which were created with the theory being that more competition would make
markets function even better. It hasn’t quite worked out that way. Spreads
between bid and ask prices have narrowed, but volatility has increased since
they became a factor in the market. On the other hand, volatility creates
opportunity for day traders, so that’s not necessarily a bad thing.
When you place an order with your brokerage firm, the broker’s computer
executes that order wherever it can get the best deal. But is that the best
deal for you or the best deal for the brokerage firm? It’s tough to know the
right answer. In general, firms that do more trading and participate in
several exchanges and electronic communications networks can get you
the best execution. (To find out more about choosing brokerage firms, turn
to Chapter 11.)

53

54

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
The financial markets are in a state of flux, with a lot of mergers and acquisitions among the exchanges. By the time you read the information here, things
may have changed again, which I think is fascinating. It wasn’t so long ago that
these exchanges were staid organizations run like private clubs.

The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
The New York Stock Exchange is the most famous of all stock exchanges. Most
of the largest U.S. corporations trade on it, and they pay a fee for that privilege.
To be listed on the New York Stock Exchange, a company generally needs
to have at least 2,200 shareholders excluding insiders, trade at least 100,000
shares a month for the last six months, carry a market capitalization (number
of shares outstanding multiplied by price per share) of at least $100 million,
and post total pre-tax earnings of $10 million over the previous three years.
The New York Stock Exchange is more than 200 years old, but it has been
going through some big corporate changes in order to stay relevant. It’s
a floor-based exchange. The trading area is a big open space in the building, known as the floor. The floor broker, who works for the member firm,
receives the order electronically and then takes it over to the trading post,
which is the area on the floor where the stock in question trades. At the trading post, the floor broker executes the order at the best available price.
Although it was once an independent, membership-based organization, the
New York Stock Exchange is now thoroughly modern. In 2007, it merged
with Euronext, a holding company for five different European securities
exchanges. Then NYSE Euronext bought the American Stock Exchange, once
a major competitor to the NYSE, and phased it out. The combined company
offers stock, bond, and derivates trading in person at the remaining physical
exchanges and electronically through Arca, its electronic exchange.
Of course, the percentage of trading that has been done by actual people
standing on the floor of an actual building has fallen steadily over the years.
Most trading is done electronically by small day traders and big institutions
alike, with almost 30 percent of trading executed by computer algorithms.
To give you a clue about the importance of computerized trading, the NYSE
allows brokerage firms to place their servers on the floor of the exchange —
for a fee, of course. For some, the millisecond advantage is worth it.

NASDAQ
NASDAQ used to stand for the National Association of Securities Dealers
Automated Quotation System, but now it’s just a name, not an acronym,
pronounced just like it’s spelled. When NASDAQ was founded, it was an
electronic communication network (more on those shortly) that handled
companies that were too small or too speculative to meet New York Stock

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
Exchange listing requirements. What happened was that brokers liked
using the NASDAQ network, and technology companies on the exchange
(Microsoft, Intel, Apple) that were once small and speculative became
huge international behemoths.
When a customer places an order, the brokerage firm’s computer looks to
see whether a matching order is on the network. Sometimes, the order
can be executed electronically; in other cases, the brokerage firm’s trader
needs to call other traders at other firms to see whether the price is still
good. A key feature of NASDAQ is its market makers, who are employees
of member brokerage firms who agree to buy and sell minimum levels
of specific stocks in order to ensure that some basic level of trading is
taking place.
NASDAQ divides its listed companies into three categories:
✓ The NASDAQ Global Select Market includes the 1,000 largest companies on the exchange. Companies that make the list have a minimum
average market capitalization of $550 million and total earnings of at
least $11 million in the prior three fiscal years.
✓ The NASDAQ Global Market includes companies that are too small
for the Global Select Market but that aren’t exactly small. To make the
Global Market, companies generally need to have a market capitalization
of at least $75 million, at least 1.1 million shares outstanding, at least 400
shareholders, and a minimum price per share of $4.
✓ The NASDAQ Capital Market is for companies that do not qualify for
the NASDAQ Global Market. To qualify here, companies need a market
capitalization of at least $50 million, at least 1 million shares outstanding, about 300 shareholders, and a minimum price per share of $4.
As a day trader, you’ll find that NASDAQ Global Select Market companies are
the most liquid. You may also notice changes in trading patterns when a company is close to being moved between categories. An upgrade is a sign of good
news to come and increased market interest. A downgrade means that the
company most likely isn’t doing well and will be of less interest to investors.
