
One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 131

One-bar island —+
t
sty 4

t ] + One-bar island reversal

Figure 7-14 One-bar island reversals.

Chart 7-11 Kellwood 2001 exhaustion bar. (From Pring Research.)

Pinocchio Bars

Exhaustion also shows itself in other forms that are different from the char-
acteristics we have so far been looking at. J call these Pinocchio bars because



132 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 7-12 Warnaco exhaustion bar. (From Pring Research.)

454

eeroty
ba
40-4]

355

4
thers, jhe
}
| pi yun
Pale
Exhaustion bar ——_—_—p»- | h

30-1
264
204
eee is fo BR? 6 To |
f 7 0 lit p4 Bip fa Bs 2 fs
co [August [September a ee 2 Bs Nov

Chart 7-13 NYSE Composite 5-minute 1997 exhaustion bar. (From Pring Research.)

6134
612 qk

6124 +
od
64

vm: fly pie Fey 7

SF tlt

+——_ Exhaustion bar

paytt

[ES |__[30__fas 00 16 [30 [46 F006 [30-46-00 [16
ee 1100 12:00

they temporarily give us a false sense of what is really going on. They are
bars in which the bulk of the trading takes place outside the previous and
subsequent trading ranges and that therefore give a false impression of a

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 133 .

breakout. The character Pinocchio cannot hide that he is lying because his
nose gets bigger. In the case of our Pinocchio bar, it is the isolated part of
the bar above (below in a down trend) the open and close that is the big
nose, which signals a probable false move by the end of the bar. Figures 7-15
and 7-16 offer two examples of false upside Pinocchio breaks. Figure 7-16
offers the idea that when a false break develops above a down trendline, this
is indicative of exhaustion since the price cannot hold above the strong resis-
tance reflected by the trendline.

Fatse impression ———____»
of strength

Figure 7-25 Pinocchio bars.

- | <~———_ False Impression
: j of strength

Figure 7-16 Pinocchio bars and down trendlines.


134 Part |: Trend-Determining Techniques

Marketplace examples of Pinocchio bars are featured in Charts 7-14 and
7-15. The first shows a break above the trading range, which was nullified
by the time the bar closed. The second shows a false break to the downside.

Chart 7-14 S&P Composite 10-minute 1997 Pinocchio bar. (From Pring Research.)

916
814-

9134 h Most of the bar is outside the recent trading range
4

812 ™, |

me aera friar eanmeeal j
= la! |
u

ee 16h E
i i pes gh tt [ith Tizh [ish TY

Chart 7-15 S&P Composite 10-minute 1997 Pinocchio bar. (From Pring Research.)

785 4
784 4

+
i.
teeta
“ee

Whipsaw break

21a pepme 20:40 00 |:20 [:40_ [00:20 [40 [:00_ [:20° [rad f:00_ [34

i

One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns 135

As so often happens following whipsaws, the price moves in the direction
opposite to that indicated by the break.

One important fact about exhaustion is that the extremity of the move
often proves to be an important support or resistance point. In this respect,
it is often a good idea to place a stop loss a little bit beyond the extremity
of the Pinocchio bar, provided, of course, that it still results in a reasonable
risk reward.

Summary

* One- and two-bar reversals reflect exhaustion and signal a change, usu-
ally a reversal in trend.

* To be effective, they must be preceded by a worthwhile move.

© Their trend reversal significance is only of short-term duration. What con-
stitutes as short-term will depend on the time span of the bar or bars in
question. Daily or weekly reversal patterns will be far more significant than
10-minute bars.

* Reversal bars that contain more of the required characteristics normally
provide stronger signals than those that only have a few.



Trendlines

A review of any chart will quickly reveal that prices usually move in trends.
Quite often, a series of ascending bottoms in a rising market can be joined
together by a straight line, and so can the tops of a descending series of rally
peaks. These lines, known as trendlines, are a simple but invaluable addition
to the technical arsenal [see Figs. 8-1(a) and (0)].

How to Draw Trendlines

A proper trendline has to connect two or more peaks or troughs; otherwise,
it will be drawn in space and will have no significance. I often see people
constructing lines that only touch one point, as in Fig. 8-2. See how the line
misses the second trough. This is a fundamentally important point because
whenever you draw or interpret a trendline, never ever forget that a true
trendline is a graphic way of representing the underlying trend. Conse-
quently, if it only touches one point, it is not a true trendline.

Ideally, an up trendline is constructed by connecting the final low with
the first bottom in the rally, as line A-Din Fig. 8-3. In the case of a primary
trend, this would be the bear market low and the first intermediate bottom,

(a) 0)
Figure 8-1 Up and down trendlines.

136

Trendlines 137

Not a legitimate trendline because
it only touches one trough

Figure 8-2 A nontrendline.

Figure 8-3 Commonsense trendlines.

and vice versa. For line A—D in Fig. 8-3, the first low develops fairly close to
the final bottom, which results in a fairly shallow line. However, the price
rallies sharply, which means that the violation of the line will develop well



after the final peak. In such situations, it is better to reconstruct the trend-
line as the price moves up. In Fig. 8-3, this is line B-C, which is obviously a
better reflection of the underlying trend. Down trendlines are constructed
using the same principles, but in reverse.

Bar Versus Line or
Close-Only Charts

You probably already have noticed from previous chapters that some charts
are plotted with bars and others as line charts, The question naturally arises
as to which form of chart should be used for the purposes of trend and
trendline analysis. In most cases, bar charts offer quicker signals, whether
it is a peak-trough progression, price pattern completion, or trendline vio-
lation. The problem in technical analysis is that speed comes with a price,
and the price in this case is more whipsaws. It is important to remember
that with traditional daily or weekly charts, the closing price is very impor-
tant because it separates those who are willing to take home a position
overnight or over a weekend from those who are not. Closing prices have there-
Sore traditionally been considered to be more important chart points than highs or lows.

Also, since there is much excitement during the day as unexpected news
breaks, highs and lows often represent random points on the chart. For this
reason, it is often a better idea to construct trendlines using closing data. I
am not going to say that is always the case because some bar trendlines have
greater significance than close-only ones based on the rules outlined for sig-
nificance and described later in this chapter. Thus, it is always crucial to apply
common. sense as much as strict technical rules.

Trendline Breaks Can Signal
Reversals or Consolidations

Some trends can be sideways, that is, a trading range, so it follows that trend-
lines can also be drawn horizontally. The neckline of a head-and-shoulders
(H&S) pattern or the upper or lower boundary of a rectangle is really a
trendline. The penetration of these lines warns of a change in trend, as does

Trend 139

the penetration of rising or falling trendlines. In effect, these lines repre-
pons of support (rising trendline) and resistance (declining trend-
“i completion of a rectangle pattern can signify either (1) a reversal in
the previous trend, in which case it becomes known as a reversal pattern, or
(2) a resumption of the previous trend, when it is defined asa consolidation
or continuation pattern. Similarly, the penetration of a trendline will result in
either a reversal of that trend or its continuation. Figure 8-4 illustrates this
point from the aspect of a rising price trend. In Fig. 8-4(a), the trendline
joining the series of troughs is eventually penetrated on the downside. The
fourth peak represents the highest point in the bull market, so the down-
ward violation of the trendline signals that a bear market is underway.
The upward price trend and (solid) trendline penetration in Fig. 8-4(0)
are identical to those in Fig. 8-4(a), but the action following this warning
signal is entirely different because the trendline violation merely signals that
the advance will continue, but at a greatly reduced pace. A new (dashed)
trendline is subsequently constructed. via ;
Unfortunately, there is no way of telling at the time of the violation which
possibility will prove to be the outcome. y
Also, valuable clues can be gleaned by applying other techniques
described in subsequent chapters and by evaluating the state of health of
the market's overall technical structure (examined in Parts II through IV).

@ )
Figure 8-4 A reversal and @ continuation break.



140 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Using the techniques discussed in Chapter 5 also help. For example, in a
rising market, a trendline penetration may occur at the time of, or just
before, the successful completion of a reversal pattern. Some possibilities
are shown in Fig. 8-5 and Chart 8-1. In Fig. 8-5(a), the rising trendline joins
a series of bottoms, but the last two troughs represent reactions from a right
shoulder and head that are part of an ascending H&S pattern. Figures 8-5 (4)
and (c) represent a similar situation for a rectangle and a broadening top.

Figure 8-6 illustrates the same phenomenon from the aspect of a bear
market reversal. If the violation occurs simultaneously with or just after the
completion of a reversal pattern, the two breaks have the effect of rein-
forcing each other. Sometimes, however, as in Fig. 8-7, the trendline viola-
tion occurs before the completion of the pattern. In such cases, the break
should be regarded as a sign of an interruption of the prevailing movement
rather than as a sign of reversal, because a trend is assumed to continue until
the weight of the evidence indicates otherwise.

During an advance, a setback below the previous trough should develop.
This would confirm an actual reversal. The opposite will occur in the case
of a declining market [see Fig. 8-7(2)]. Further clues as to the significance
of a specific trendline violation can be gleaned from volume characteristics,
as described in Chapters 5, 6, 7, and 22.

For example, if a series of ascending peaks and troughs is accompanied
by progressively lower volume, it is a sign that the advance is running out
of steam (since volume is no longer going with the trend). In this instance,
a trendline violation is likely to be of greater significance than if volume had
continued to expand with each successive rally. It is not necessary for a down-
side penetration to be accompanied by high volume, but a violation that
occurs as activity expands emphasizes the bearish undertone because of the
obvious switch in the demand/supply balance in favor of sellers.

@) @) ©)

Figure 8-5 Simultaneous trendline and price pattern breaks at tops.

Trendlines 141

Chart 8-1 _ Invesco Energy Fund and simultaneous trendline price pattern violations. This chart
shows two examples of a trendline break and pattern completion developing close together. At
the end of 1990, the Invesco Energy Fund violates a nice up trendline and shortly after com-
pletes a right-angled broadening top. The end of the decline is signaled with another down trend-
line break and the completion of a reverse H&S pattern. (From www.pring.com.)

"Tisea’ " "Tigao TE ay TT Rage RS

(a)

Figure 8-6 Simultaneous trendline and price pattern breaks at bottoms.

Extended Trendlines

Most people observe the violation of a trendline and then assume that the
trend has changed and forget about the line. This is a mistake because an
extended line can become just as important as the previous violated line.



142 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Just as a return move often happens following a breakout from a price
pattern, a similar move, known as a throwback, sometimes develops follow-
ing a trendline penetration. Figure 8-8(a) shows a trendline reversing its pre-
vious role as support, while the throwback move turns it into an area of
resistance. Figure 8-8(4) shows the same situation for a declining market.

Chart 8-2, for instance, shows an up trendline break for the Morgan
Stanley Capital International (MSCI) Eastern European (Stock) Index.
The penetration of this relatively steep line resulted in a consolidation break.
As the price worked its way higher, it found resistance on two occasions.

Chart 8-3 shows the same idea but for a down trendline for the Euro. In
this instance, the line continually reversed its role, starting out as resistance,
then support, and finally resistance again.

Logarithmic (Ratio) Versus
Arithmetic Scales

The importance of plotting charts on a logarithmic as opposed to an arith-
metic scale was discussed in Chapter 5. The choice of scale is even more crit-
ical for a timely and accurate use of trendline analysis, because at the end
of a major movement, prices tend to accelerate in the direction of the pre
vailing trend; that is, they rise faster at the end ofa rising trend and decline
more sharply at the termination of a bear market [see Figs. 8-9(a) and (0)]-

Trendlines 143

Now resistance. Resistonce
we —— support
(a) (o)

Figure 8-8 Extended trendlines at tops and bottoms.

Chart 8-2 MSCI Eastern Europe Index showing the importance of extended lines. (From
www. pring.com.)

Resistance ae /

sb TA Js fo INJo fisss]_TA TM) JA JS JON > ooo] TAM VTA [sjo No oot] TA

In a bull market, prices rise slowly after an initial burst, and then advance
at a steeper and steeper angle as they approach the ultimate peak, looking
rather like the left-hand cross section of a mountain.

Chart 8-4 shows that this exponential movement in late 1999 for the
Athens General SE Index took the price well away from the trendline in the
“Upper, arithmetically based chart. Consequently, the price had to fall that



144 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 8-3 Euro FX showing lines as support/resistance areas. (From www.pring.com.)

1.105

Resistance
1.055

1.005

0.25 4 Support

Dul jaug|Sep [Oct [Nov]Dec [2000 Jwar [Apr May [Jun Jul [Aug [Sep]Oct [Nov [Decfa001

ao |e

Figure 8-9 Arithmetic and ratio scale breaks at tops.

much farther before a penetration of the trendline could take place. As a
result, up trendlines are violated more quickly on a logarithmic than on an
arithmetic scale. This can be seen from the vertical arrow. Conversely, down
trendlines are violated sooner on an arithmetic scale. Note that at the end
of the chart, the up trendline on the arithmetic scale has been violated,
whereas the logarithmically based one has not.

Generally speaking, penetration of a logarithmically based trendline is

more accurate in reflecting trend reversals than the penetration of an arith-
metically based trendline.

Trendlines 145

Athens SE Arithmetic Scale

ANY

Athens SE Logarithmic Scale,

ri

AIM] Vy alslo INib fises [a Mp TA(S[O [ND 2000 TAPAS JON 007 Al

Significance of Trendlines

It has been established that a break in trend caused by the penetration of a
trendline results in either an actual trend reversal or a slowing in the pace of
the trend. Although it may not always be possible to assess which of these alter-
natives will develop, it is still important to understand the significance of a
trendline penetration; the following guidelines should help in evaluation.

Length of the Line

The size or length of a trend is an important factor, as with price patterns.
Ifa Series of ascending bottoms occurs over a $- to 4-.week span, the result-
'ng trendline is only of minor importance. If the trend extends over a period
1 to3 years, however, its violation marks a significant juncture point. Just
remember, big trends result in big signals, small trends in small signals.



146 Part |: Trend-Determining Techniques

Number of Times the Trendline
Has Been Touched or Approached

A trendline derives its authority from the number of times it has been
touched or approached; that is, the larger the number, the greater the sig-
nificance. This is true because a trendline represents a dynamic area of sup-
port or resistance. Each successive “test” of the line contributes to the
importance of this support or resistance role, and thus the authority of the
line is a true reflection of the underlying trend. Just remember that a close
encounter with the line (an approach) is almost as important as an actual
touching of the line because it still reflects the line’s importance as a sup-
port or resistance area.

Also, if a line gains significance from the fact that it has been touched or
approached, the extended line will become equally as important, but from
a reverse point of view since extended lines reverse their support/resistance
functions.

Angle of Ascent or Descent

Avery sharp trend, as in Fig. 8-10, is difficult to maintain and is liable to be
broken rather easily, even by a short sideways movement. All trends are even-
tually violated, but the steeper ones are likely to be ruptured more quickly.
The violation of a particularly steep trend is not as significant as that of a
more gradual one. The penetration of a steep line usually results in a short
corrective movement, following which the trend resumes, but at a greatly
reduced and more sustainable pace. Usually, the penetration of a steep_
trendline represents a continuation rather than a reversal break.

Measuring Implications

‘Trendlines have measuring implications when they are broken, just as price
patterns do. The vertical distance between the peak in the price and the

Figure 8-10 Sharp-angled trendlines.

Trendlines 147

trendline is measured during a rising trend (A, in Fig. 8-11). This distance
is then projected down from the point at which the violation occurs (A,).

The term price objective is perhaps misleading. Objectives are usually
reached when a trendline violation turns out to be a reversal, but because
they are more often exceeded (as with price patterns), the objective
becomes more of a minimum expectation. When prices move significantly
through the objective, as in Fig. 8-12, this area often becomes one of Tesis-
tance to the next major rally or support for a subsequent reaction.
Figure 8-13 shows the same possibilities for an upside breakout.

Figure 8-11 ‘Measuring implications.

Ar pe

Figure 8-12 Downside measuring objectives.

Ay

"Figure 8-13 Upside measuring objectives.



148 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Time and again, these price objective areas prove to be important sup-
port or resistance points. Unfortunately, there is no way to determine where
the actual juncture point will be for any Tally or reaction. This emphasizes
a point made earlier that there is no known way of consistently determin-
ing the duration of a price movement. It is only possible to speculate on the
probability that a specific area will prove to be an important turning point.

Corrective Fan Principle

At the beginning of a new primary bull market, the initial intermediate rally
is often explosive, and so the rate of ascent is unsustainably steep. This hap-
pens because the advance is often a technical reaction to the previous
overextended decline, as speculators who were caught short rush to cover
their positions. As a result, the steep trendline constructed from the first
minor reaction is quickly violated.

This is represented as line AA in Fig. 8-14. A new trendline is then con-
structed, using the bottom of this first intermediate decline (AB). The new
line rises at a less rapid rate than the initial one. Finally, the process is
repeated, resulting in construction ofa third line, AC. These lines are known
as fan lines. There is an established principle that once the third trendline
has been violated, the end of the bull market is confirmed. In some respects
these three rally points and trendlines can be compared to the three stages
of a bull or bear market, as outlined in Chapter 3. The fan principle is just
as valid for downtrends and can also be used for determining intermediate
as well as primary trend movements.

Trend Channels

So far, only the possibilities of drawing trendlines joining bottoms in rising
markets and tops in declining ones have been examined. It is also useful to

Figure 8-14 Corrective fan principle.

ea

Trendlines 149

draw lines that are parallel to those basic trendlines, as shown in Figs. 8-15(a)
and (¢). In a rising market, the parallel line known as a return trendline joins
the tops of rallies [AA in Fig. 8-15(a)], and during declines the return line
joins the series of bottoms [BB in Fig. 8-15(c)]. The area between these
trend extremities is known as a trend channel. Figure 8-15(6) is a rectangle,
which is a horizontal form of a trend channel. :

The return line is useful from two points of view. First) it represents an
area of support or resistance, depending on the direction of the trend.
Second; and perhaps more important, the penetration of the return trend-
line represents a signal that either the trend will accelerate or that a rever-
sal of at least a temporary proportion in the basic trend is about to take place.

In Fig. 8-16(a), the violation of the return line signifies that the price
advance has begun to accelerate. Figure 8-16(b) shows the same idea for a
downside breakout. In effect, the channel in Fig. 8-16(a) represents a ris-
ing rectangle and the trendline violation represents a breakout.

On the other hand, if the angle of the trend channel is much steeper, as
in Fig. 8-17(a), the violation of the return line represents an exhaustion
move. The failure of the price to hold above (below) the return line then
signals an important reversal in trend. This is often the case if the action is
accompanied by high volume.

Consider a situation in which a man is, sawing a thick piece of wood. At
first, his sawing strokes are slow but deliberate;,gradually, he realizes that
his task is going to take some time, begomes frustrated, and slowly increases
the speed of his strokes. Finally, he bursts into a frantic effort and is forced
to give up his task for at least a temporary period because of complete
exhaustion. Figure 8-17(b) shows an exhaustion move in a declining mar-
ket. In this case, the expanding volume at the low represents a selling cli-
max. As a general rule, the steeper the channel, the more likely it is that
the breakout will turn out to be an exhaustion move.
