
OF

OPTIMIZERS

There are many kinds of optimizers, each with its own special strengths and weak
nesses, advantages and disadvantages. Optimizers can be classified along such
dimensions as human versus machine, complex versus simple, special purpose
versus general purpose, and analytic versus stochastic. All optimizers-regardless
of kind, efficiency, or reliability-execute a search for the best of many potential
solutions to a formally specified problem.
lmpllcit Optimizers
A mouse cannot be used to click on a button that says “optimize.” There is no special command to enter. In fact, there is no special software or even machine in
sight. Does this mean there is no optimizer? No. Even when there is no optimizer
apparent, and it seems as though no optimization is going on, there is. It is known
as implicit optimization and works as follows: The trader tests a set of rules based
upon some ideas regarding the market. Performance of the system is poor, and so
the trader reworks the ideas, modifies the system’s rules, and runs another simulation Better performance is observed. The trader repeats this process a few
times, each time making changes based on what has been learned along the way.
Eventually, the trader builds a system worthy of being traded with real money.
Was this system an optimized one? Since no parameters were ever explicitly
adjusted and no rules were ever rearranged by the software, it appears as if the
trader has succeeded in creating an unoptimized system. However, more than one
solution from a set of many possible solutions was tested and the best solution was
selected for use in trading or further study. This means that the system was optimized after all! Any form of problem solving in which more than one solution is
examined and the best is chosen constitutes de facto optimization. The trader has
a powerful brain that employed mental problem-solving algorithms, e.g., heuristically guided trial-and-error ones, which are exceptionally potent optimizers.

32

This means that optimization is always present: optimizers are always at work.
There is no escape!
Brute

Force

Optimizers

A brute force optimizer searches for the best possible solution by systematically
testing all potential solutions, i.e., all definable combinations of rules, parameters,
or both. Because every possible combination must be tested, brute force optimization can be very slow. Lack of speed becomes a serious issue as the number
of combinations to be examined grows. Consequently, brute force optimization is
subject to the law of “combinatorial explosion.” Just how slow is brute force optimization? Consider a case where there are four parameters to optimize and where
each parameter can take on any of 50 values. Brute force optimization would
require that 504 (about 6 million) tests or simulations be conducted before the
optimal parameter set could be determined: if one simulation was executed every
1.62 seconds (typical for TradeStation), the optimization process would take about
4 months to complete. This approach is not very practical, especially when many
systems need to be tested and optimized, when there are many parameters, when
the parameters can take on many values, or when you have a life. Nevertheless,
brute force optimization is useful and effective. If properly done, it will always
find the best possible solution. Brute force is a good choice for small problems
where combinatorial explosion is not an issue and solutions can be found in minutes, rather than days or years.
Only a small amount of programming code is needed to implement brute
force optimization. Simple loop constructs are commonly employed. Parameters
to be optimized are stepped from a start value to a stop value by some increment
using a For loop (C, C+ +, Basic, Pascal/Delphi) or a Do loop (FORTRAN). A
brute force optimizer for two parameters, when coded in a modem dialect of
Basic, might appear as follows:

Because brute force optimizers are conceptually simple and easy to program,
they are often built into the more advanced software packages that arc available
for traders.
As a practical illustration of bmte force optimization, TradeStation was used
to optimize the moving averages in a dual moving-average crossover system.
Optimization was for net profit, the only trading system characteristic that TradeStation can optimize without the aid of add-on products, The Easy Language code
for the dual moving-average trading model appears below:

The system was optimized by stepping the length of the first moving average
(LenA) from 2 to 10 in increments of 2. The length of the second moving average
(LenB) was advanced from 2 to 50 with the same increments. Increments were set
greater than 1 so that fewer than 200 combinations would need to be tested
(TradeStation can only save data on a maximum of 200 optimization runs). Since
not all possible combinations of values for the two parameters were explored, the
optimization was less thorough than it could have been; the best solution may have
been missed in the search. Notwithstanding, the optimization required 125 tests,
which took 3 minutes and 24 seconds to complete on 5 years of historical, end-ofday data, using an Intel 486 machine running at 66 megahertz. The results generated by the optimization were loaded into an Excel spreadsheet and sorted for net
profit. Table 3-l presents various performance measures for the top 25 solutions.
In the table, LENA represents the period of the shorter moving average,
LENB the period of the longer moving average, NetPrft the total net profit,
LtNerPlft the net profit for long positions, S:NefPrji the net profit for short positions, PFact the profit factor, ROA the total (unannualized) return-on-account,
MaxDD the maximum drawdown, #Trds the total number of trades taken, and
%Prji the percentage of profitable trades.
Since optimization is a problem-solving search procedure, it frequently
results in surprising discoveries. The optimization performed on the dual movingaverage crossover system was no exception to the rule. Conventional trading wisdom says that “the trend is your friend.” However, having a second moving average
that is faster than the first, the most profitable solutions in Table 3. I trade against
the trend. These profitable countertrend solutions might not have been discovered
without the search performed by the optimization procedure.

34

T A B L E

Successful user-guided optimization calls for skill, domain knowledge, or
both, on the part of the person guiding the optimization process. Given adequate
skill and experience, not to mention a tractable problem, user-guided optimization
can be extremely efficient and dramatically faster than brute force methods. ‘Ibe
speed and efficiency derive from the addition of intelligence to the search process:
Zones with a high probability of paying off can be recognized and carefully examined, while time-consuming investigations of regions unlikely to yield good
results can be avoided.
User-guided optimization is most appropriate when ballpark results have
already been established by other means, when the problem is familiar or well
understood, or when only a small number of parameters need to be manipulated.
As a means of “polishing” an existing solution, user guided-optimization is an
excellent choice. It is also useful for studying model sensitivity to changes in rules
or parameter values.
Genetic Optimizers

Imagine something powerful enough to solve all the problems inherent in the
creation of a human being. That something surely represents the ultimate in
problem solving and optimization. What is it? It is the familiar process of evolution. Genetic optimizers endeavor to harness some of that incredible problem-solving power through a crude simulation of the evolutionary process. In
terms of overall performance and the variety of problems that may be solved,
there is no general-purpose optimizer more powerful than a properly crafted
genetic one.
Genetic optimizers are Stochustic optimizers in the sense that they take
advantage of random chance in their operation. It may not seem believable that
tossing dice can be a great way to solve problems, but, done correctly, it can be!
In addition to randomness, genetic optimizers employ selection and recombination. The clever integration of random chance, selection, and recombination is
responsible for the genetic optimizer’s great power. A full discussion of genetic
algorithms, which are the basis for genetic optimizers, appears in Part II.
Genetic optimizers have many highly desirable characteristics. One such
characteristic is speed, especially when faced with combinatorial explosion. A
genetic optimizer can easily be many orders of magnitude faster than a brute force
optimizer when there are a multiplicity of rules, or parameters that have many possible values, to manipulate. This is because, like user-guided optimization, genetic
optimization can focus on important regions of solution space while mostly ignoring blind alleys. In contrast to user-guided optimization, the benefit of a selective
search is achieved without the need for human intervention.
Genetic optimizers can swiftly solve complex problems, and they are also
more immune than other kinds of optimizers to the effects of local maxima in the

36

fitness surface or, equivalently, local minima in the cost surface. Analytic methods
are worst in that they almost always walk right to the top of the nearest hill or bottom of the nearest valley, without regard to whether higher hills or lower valleys
exist elsewhere. In contrast, a good genetic optimizer often locates the globally
best solution-quite an impressive feat when accomplished for cantankerous fitness surfaces, such as those associated with matrices of neural connection weights.
Another characteristic of genetic optimization is that it works well with fitness surfaces marked by discontinuities, flat regions, and other troublesome irregularities. Genetic optimization shares this characteristic with brute force,
user-guided, annealing-based, and other nonanalytic optimization methods.
Solutions that maximize such items as net profit, return on investment, the Sharpe
Ratio, and others that define difficult, nonanalytic fitness landscapes can be found
using a genetic optimizer. Genetic optimizers shine with difficult fitness functions
that lie beyond the purview of analytic methods. This does not mean that they cannot be used to solve problems having more tractable fitness surfaces: Perhaps
slower than the analytic methods, they have the virtue of being more resistant to
the traps set by local optima.
Overall, genetic optimizers are the optimizers of choice when there are many
parameters or rules to adapt, when a global solution is desired, or when arbitrarily
complex (and not necessarily differentiable or continuous) fitness or cost functions
must be handled. Although special-purpose optimizers can outperform genetic optimizers on specific kinds of problems, for general-purpose optimization, genetic
optimizers are among the most powerful tools available.
What does a genetic optimizer look like in action? The dual moving-average
crossover system discussed earlier was translated to Cl 1 so that the genetic optimizer in the C-Trader toolkit could be used to solve for the two system parameters, LenA and LenB. LenA, the period of the first moving average, was examined
over the range of 2 through 50, as was LenB, the period of the second moving average. Optimization was for net profit so that the results would be directly comparable with those produced earlier by brute force optimization. Below is the Cl 1
code for the crossover system:

CWR 3

Optimizers and Optimimion

I/ take no trades in lo&back period
if(clt[cbl c 910302) ( eqclsLcb1 = 0.0; continue; )

To solve for the best parameters, brute force optimization would require that 2,041
tests be performed; in TradeStation, that works out to about 56 minutes of computing time, extrapolating from the earlier illustration in which a small subset of
the current solution space was examined. Only 1 minute of running time was
required by the genetic optimizer; in an attempt to put it at a significant disadvantage, it was prematurely stopped after performing only 133 tests.
The output from the genetic optimizer appears in Table 3-2. In this table, PI represents the period of the faster moving average, P2 the period of the slower moving
average, NETthe total net profit, NETLNG the net profit for long positions, NETSiS
the net profit for short positions, PFAC the profit factor, ROA% the annualized rehm
on account, DRAW the maximum drawdown, TRDS the number of trades taken by the
system, WIN% the percentage of winning trades, AVGT the profit or loss resulting
from the average trade, and FZTthe fitness of the solution (which, in this instance, is
merely the total net p&it). As with the brute force data in Table 3-1, the genetic data
have been sorted by net profit (fitness) and only the 25 best solutions were presented.

Top 25 Solutions Found Using Genetic Optimization in C-Trader Toolkit

Comparison of the brute force and genetic optimization results (Tables 3- 1 and 3-2,
respectively) reveals that the genetic optimizer isolated a solution with a greater net
profit ($172,725) than did the brute force optimizer ($145,125). This is no surprise
since a larger solution space, not decimated by increments, was explored. The surprise is that the better solution was found so quickly, despite the handicap of a prematurely stopped evolutionary process. Results like these demonstrate the incredible
effectiveness of genetic optimization.
Optimization by Simulated Annealing

Optimizers based on annealing mimic the thermodynamic process by which liquids freeze and metals anneal. Starting out at a high temperature, the atoms of a
liquid or molten metal bounce rapidly about in a random fashion. Slowly cooled,
they mange themselves into an orderly configuration-a crystal-that represents
a minimal energy state for the system. Simulated in software, this thermodynamic
process readily solves large-scale optimization problems.
As with genetic opimization, optimization by simulared annealing is a very
powerful Stochastic technique, modeled upon a natural phenomenon, that can find
globally optimal solutions and handle ill-behaved fitness functions. Simulated
annealing has effectively solved significant combinatorial problems, including

CHAPTER 3

Optimizers and Optimization

39

the famous “traveling salesman problem,” and the problem of how best to arrange the
millions of circuit elements found on modem integrated circuit chips, such as
those that power computers. Methods based on simulated annealing should not be
construed as limited to combinatorial optimization; they can readily be adapted to
the optimization of real-valued parameters. Consequently, optimizers based on
simulated annealing are applicable to a wide variety of problems, including those
faced by traders.
Since genetic optimizers perform so well, we have experienced little need to
explore optimizers based on simulated annealing. In addition, there have been a
few reports suggesting that, in many cases, annealing algorithms do not perform
as well as genetic algorithms. Because of these reasons, we have not provided
examples of simulated annealing and have little more to say about the method.

Analytic Optimizers
Analysis (as in “real analysis” or “complex analysis”) is an extension of classical
college calculus. Analytic optimizers involve the well-developed machinery of

analysis, specifically differential calculus and the study of analytic functions, in
the solution of practical problems. In some instances, analytic methods can yield
a direct (noniterative) solution to an optimization problem. This happens to be the
case for multiple regression, where solutions can be obtained with a few matrix
calculations. In multiple regression, the goal is to find a set of regression weights
that minimize the sum of the squared prediction errors. In other cases, iterative
techniques must be used. The connection weights in a neural network, for example, cannot be directly determined. They must be estimated using an iterative procedure, such as back-propagation.
Many iterative techniques used to solve multivariate optimization problems (those involving several variables or parameters) employ some variation
on the theme of steepest ascent. In its most basic form, optimization by steepest ascent works as follows: A point in the domain of the fitness function (that
is, a set of parameter values) is chosen by some means. The gradient vector at
that point is evaluated by computing the derivatives of the fitness function with
respect to each of the variables or parameters; this defines the direction in ndimensional parameter space for which a fixed amount of movement will produce the greatest increase in fitness. A small step is taken up the hill in fitness
space, along the direction of the gradient. The gradient is then recomputed at
this new point, and another, perhaps smaller, step is taken. The process is
repeated until convergence occurs.
A real-world implementation of steepest ascent optimization has to specify
how the step size will be determined at each iteration, and how the direction
defined by the gradient will be adjusted for better overall convergence of the optimization process. Naive implementations assume that there is an analytic fitness

surface (one that can be approximated locally by a convergent power series) having hills that must be climbed. More sophisticated implementations go further,
commonly assuming that the fitness function can be well approximated locally by
a quadratic form. If a fitness function satisfies this assumption, then much faster
convergence to a solution can be achieved. However, when the fitness surface has
many irregularly shaped bills and valleys, quadratic forms often fail to provide a
good approximation. In such cases, the more sophisticated methods break down
entirely or their performance seriously degrades.
Worse than degraded performance is the problem of local solutions. Almost
all analytic methods, whether elementary or sophisticated, are easily trapped by
local maxima: they generally fail to locate the globally best solution when there
are’ many hills and valleys in the fitness surface. Least-squares, neural network
predictive modeling gives rise to fitness surfaces that, although clearly analytic,
are full of bumps, troughs, and other irregularities that lead standard analytic techniques (including back-propagation, a variant on steepest ascent) astray. Local
maxima and other hazards that accompany such fitness surfaces can, however, be
sidestepped by cleverly marrying a genetic algorithm with an analytic one. For titness surfaces amenable to analytic optimization, such a combined algorithm can
provide the best of both worlds: fast, accurate solutions that are also likely to be
globally optimal.
Some fitness surfaces are simply not amenable to analytic optimization.
More specifically, analytic methods cannot be used when the fitness surface has
flat areas or discontinuities in the region of parameter space where a solution is to
be sought. Flat areas imply null gradients, hence the absence of a preferred direction in which to take a step. At points of discontinuity, the gradient is not defined;
again, a stepping direction cannot be determined. Even if a method does not
explicitly use gradient information, such information is employed implicitly by
the optimization algorithm. Unfortunately, many fitness functions of interest to
traders-including, for instance, all functions that involve net profit, drawdown,
percentage of winning trades, risk-to-reward ratios, and other like items-have
plateaus and discontinuities. They are, therefore, not tractable using analytic methods.
Although the discussion has centered on the maximization of fitness, everything said applies as well to the minimization of cost. Any maximization technique
can be used for minimization, and vice versa: Multiply a fitness function by - 1 to
obtain an equivalent cost function; multiply a cost function by - 1 and a fitness function is the result. If a minimization algorithm takes your fancy, but a maximization
is required, use this trick to avoid having to recode the optimization algorithm.
Linear

Programming

The techniques of linear programming are designed for optimization problems
involving linear cost or fitness functions, and linear constraints on the parameters

or input variables. Linear programming is typically used to solve resource allocation problems. In the world of trading, one use of linear programming might be
to allocate capital among a set of investments to maximize net profit. If riskadjusted profit is to be optimized, linear programming methods cannot be used:
Risk-adjusted profit is not a linear function of the amount of capital allocated to
each of the investments; in such instances, other techniques (e.g., genetic algorithms) must be employed. Linear programming methods are rarely useful in the
development of trading systems. They are mentioned here only to inform readers
of their existence.
HOW TO FAIL WITH OPTIMIZATION
Most traders do not seek failure, at least not consciously. However, knowledge of
the way failure is achieved can be of great benefit when seeking to avoid it. Failure
with an optimizer is easy to accomplish by following a few key rules. First, be sure
to use a small data sample when running sirindations: The smaller the sample, the
greater the likelihood it will poorly represent the data on which the trading model
will actually be traded. Next, make sure the trading system has a large number of
parameters and rules to optimize: For a given data sample, the greater the number
of variables that must be estimated, the easier it will be to obtain spurious results.
It would also be beneficial to employ only a single sample on which to run tests;
annoying out-of-sample data sets have no place in the rose-colored world of the
ardent loser. Finally, do avoid the headache of inferential statistics. Follow these
rules and failure is guaranteed.
What shape will failure take? Most likely, system performance will look
great in tests, but terrible in real-time trading. Neural network developers call this
phenomenon “poor generalization”; traders are acquainted with it through the
experience of margin calls and a serious loss of trading capital. One consequence
of such a failure-laden outcome is the formation of a popular misconception: that
all optimization is dangerous and to be feared.
In actual fact, optimizers are not dangerous and not all optimization should be
feared. Only bad optimization is dangerous and frightening. Optimization of large
parameter sets on small samples, without out-of-sample tests or inferential statistics, is simply a bad practice that invites unhappy results for a variety of reasons.
Small Samples
Consider the impact of small samples on the optimization process. Small samples
of market data are unlikely to be representative of the universe from which they
are drawn: consequently, they will probably differ significantly from other samples obtained from the same universe. Applied to a small development sample, an
optimizer will faithfully discover the best possible solution. The best solution for
