
62

SOLON'S

WARNING

struck me while reading Richard Dawkins' Selfish Gene3 is that, although
the text does not exhibit a single equation, it seems as if it were translated
from the language of mathematics. Yet it is artistic prose.

reverse turing

test

Randomness can be of considerable help with the matter. For there is
another, far more entertaining way to make the distinction between the
babbler and the thinker. You can sometimes replicate something that can
be mistaken for a literary discourse with a Monte Carlo generator but it
is not possible randomly to construct a scientific one. Rhetoric can be
constructed randomly, but not genuine scientific knowledge. This is the
application of Turing's test of artificial intelligence, except in reverse.
What is the Turing test? The brilliant British mathematician, eccentric,
and computer pioneer Alan Turing came up with the following test: a
computer can be said to be intelligent if it can (on average) fool a human
into mistaking it for another human. The converse should be true. A
human can be said to be unintelligent if we can replicate his speech by a
computer, which we know is unintelligent, and fool a human into
believing that it was written by a human. Can one produce a piece of
work that can be largely mistaken for Derrida entirely randomly?
The answer seems to be yes. Aside from the hoax by Alan Sokal (the
same of the hilarious book a few lines ago) who managed to produce
nonsense and get it published by some prominent journal,4 there are
Monte Carlo generators designed to structure such texts and write entire
papers. Fed with "postmodernist" texts, they can randomize phrases
under a method called recursive grammar, and produce grammatically
sound but entirely meaningless sentences that sound like Jacques
Derrida, Camille Paglia, and such a crowd. Owing to the fuzziness of his
thought, the literary intellectual can be fooled by randomness.
At the Monash University program in Australia featuring the Dada
Engine built by Andrew C. Bulha,5 I toyed with the engine and
generated a few papers containing the following sentences:
However, the main theme of the works of Rushdie is not theory, as
the dialectic paradigm of reality suggests, but pretheory. The premise

RANDOMNESS,

N O N S E N S E , AND T H E

SCIENTIFIC

of the neosemanticist paradigm of discourse
identity, ironically, has significance.

INTELLECTUAL

implies that

63

sexual

Many narratives concerning the role of the writer as observer may be
revealed. It could be said that if cultural narrative holds, we have to
choose between the dialectic paradigm of narrative and neoconceptual Marxism. Sartre's analysis of cultural narrative holds
that society, paradoxically, has objective value.
Thus, the premise of the neodialectic paradigm of expression implies
that consciousness may be used to reinforce hierarchy, but only if
reality is distinct from consciousness; if that is not the case, we can
assume that language has intrinsic meaning.
Some business speeches belong to this category in their own right,
except that they are less elegant and draw on a different type of
vocabulary than the literary ones. We can randomly construct a speech
imitating that of your chief executive officer to insure whether what he
is saying has value, or if it is merely dressed-up nonsense from someone
who was lucky to be put there. How? You select randomly five phrases
below, then connect them by adding the minimum required to construct
a grammatically sound speech.
We look after our customer's interests/the road ahead/our assets are
our people/creation of shareholder value/our vision/our expertise lies
in/we provide interactive solutions/we position ourselves in this
market/how to serve our customers better/short term pain for long
term gain/we will be rewarded in the long run/we play from our
strength and improve our weaknesses/courage and determination will
prevail/we are committed to innovation and technology/a
happy
employee is a productive employee!commitment
to
excellence!
strategic plan/our work ethics.
If this bears too close a resemblance to the speech you just heard from
the boss of your company, then I suggest looking for a new job.

64

SOLON'S

WARNING

the father of all

pseudothinkers

It is hard to resist discussion of artificial history without a comment on
the father of all pseudothinkers, Hegel. Hegel writes a jargon that is
meaningless outside of a chic Left-Bank Parisian cafe or the humanities
department of some university extremely well insulated from the real
world. I suggest this passage from the German "philosopher" (this
passage was detected, translated and reviled by Karl Popper):
Sound is the change in the specific condition of segregation of the
material parts, and in the negation of this condition; merely an
abstract or an ideal ideality, as it were, of that specification. But this
change, accordingly, is itself immediately the negation of the material
specific subsistence; which is, therefore, real ideality of specific
gravity and cohesion, i.e. - heat. The heating up of sounding bodies,
just as of beaten and or rubbed ones, is the appearance of heat,
originating conceptually together with sound.
Even a Monte Carlo engine could not sound as random as the great
philosophical master thinker (it would take plenty of sample runs to get
the mixture of heat and sound). People call that philosophy and
frequently finance it with taxpayer subsidies! Now consider that
Hegelian thinking is generally linked to a "scientific" approach to
history; it has produced such results as Marxist regimes and even a
branch called "neo-Hegelian" thinking. These "thinkers" should be
given an undergraduate-level class on statistical sampling theory prior to
their release in the open world.

Monte Carlo Poetry
There are instances where I like to be fooled by randomness. My allergy
to nonsense and verbiage dissipates when it comes to art and poetry. On
the one hand, I try to define myself and behave officially as a nononsense hyper-realist ferreting out the role of chance; on the other, I

RANDOMNESS,

N O N S E N S E , AND T H E

SCIENTIFIC

INTELLECTUAL

65

have no qualms indulging in all manner of personal superstitions. Where
do I draw the line? The answer is aesthetics. Some aesthetic forms
appeal to something genetic in us, whether or not they originate in
random associations or plain hallucination. Something in our human
genes is deeply moved by the fuzziness and ambiguity of language; then
why fight it?
The poetry and language-lover in me was initially depressed by the
account of the Exquisite Cadavers poetic exercise where interesting and
poetic sentences are randomly constructed. By throwing enough words
together, some unusual and magical-sounding metaphor is bound to
emerge according to the laws of combinatorics. Yet one cannot deny
that some of these poems are of ravishing beauty. Who cares about their
origin if they manage to please our aesthetic senses?
The story of the Exquisite Cadavers is as follows. In the aftermath of
the First World War, a collection of surrealist poets, which included
Andre Breton, their pope, Paul Eluard, and others got together in cafes
and tried the following exercise (modern literary critics attribute the
exercise to the depressed mood after the war and the need to escape
reality). On a folded piece of paper, in turn, each one of them would
write a predetermined part of a sentence, not knowing the other's
choice. The first would pick an adjective, the second a noun, the third a
verb, the fourth an adjective, and the fifth a noun. The first publicized
exercise of such random (and collective) arrangement produced the
following poetic sentence:
The exquisite cadavers shall drink the new wine
(Les cadavres exquis boiront le vin nouveau). Impressive? It sounds even
more poetic in the native French. Quite impressive poetry was produced
in such a manner, sometimes with the aid of a computer. But poetry has
never been truly taken seriously outside of the beauty of its associations,
whether they have been produced by the random ranting of one or more
disorganized brains, or the more elaborate constructions of one
conscious creator.
Now regardless of whether the poetry was obtained by a Monte
Carlo engine or sung by a blind man in Asia Minor, language is potent
in bringing pleasure and solace. Testing its intellectual validity by

66

SOLON'S

WARNING

translating it into simple logical arguments would rob it of a varying
degree of its potency, sometimes excessively; nothing can be more bland
than translated poetry. A convincing argument of the role of language is
the existence of surviving holy languages, uncorrupted by the nononsense tests of daily use. Semitic religions, that is Judaism, Islam, and
original Christianity understood the point; keep a language away from
the rationalization of daily use and avoid the corruption of the
vernacular. Four decades ago, the Catholic church translated the
services and liturgies from Latin to the local vernaculars; it can be
argued that this caused a drop in religious beliefs. Suddenly religion
subjected itself to being judged by intellectual and scientific, without the
aesthetic, standards. The Greek Orthodox church made the lucky
mistake, upon translating some of its prayers from Church-Greek into
the Semitic-based vernacular spoken by the Grecosyrians of the Antioch
region (Southern Turkey and Northern Syria), of choosing classical
Arabic, an entirely dead language. My folks are thus lucky to pray in a
mixture of dead Koine (Church Greek) and no less dead Koranic
Arabic.
What does this point have to do with a book on randomness? Our
genes dictate a need for peche mignon. Even the economists, who
usually find abstruse ways completely to escape reality, are starting to
understand that what makes us tick is not necessarily the calculating
accountant in us. We do not need to be rational and scientific when it
comes to the details of our daily life - only in those that can harm us and
threaten our survival. Modern life seems to invite us to do the exact
opposite; become extremely realistic and intellectual when it comes to
such matters as religion and personal behavior, yet as irrational as
possible when it comes to markets and matters ruled by randomness. I
have encountered colleagues, "rational" no-nonsense people, who do
not understand why I cherish the poetry of Baudelaire or obscure (and
often impenetrable) writers like Elias Canetti, Borges, or Saint-John
Perse. Yet they get sucked into listening to the "analyses" of a television
"guru", or into buying the stock of a company they know absolutely
nothing about, based on tips by neighbors who drive expensive cars.
The Vienna Circle, in their dumping on Hegel-style verbiage-based
philosophy, explained that, from a scientific standpoint, it was plain
garbage, and, from an artistic point of view, it was inferior to music. I

RANDOMNESS,

N O N S E N S E , AND T H E

SCIENTIFIC

INTELLECTUAL

67

have to say that I find Baudelaire far more pleasant to frequent than
CNN newscasters or listening to George Will.
There is a Yiddish saying: If I am going to be forced to eat pork, it
better be of the best kind. If I am going to be fooled by randomness, it
better be of the beautiful (and harmless) kind. This point will be made
again in Part III.

FIVE
4
SURVIVAL OF THE LEAST FIT CAN EVOLUTION BE FOOLED
BY RANDOMNESS?

A case study on two rare events. On rare events and evolution.
How "Darwinism" and evolution are concepts that are misunderstood in the non-biological world. Life is not continuous.
How evolution will be fooled by randomness. A preparation to
the problem of induction.

Carlos the Emerging Markets Wizard
used to meet Carlos at a variety of New York parties, where he would
show up impeccably dressed, though a bit shy with the ladies. I used
to regularly pounce on him and try to pick his brains about what he did
for a living, namely buying or selling emerging market bonds. A nice
gentleman, he complied with my requests, but tensed up; for him
speaking English, in spite of his fluency, seemed to require some
expenditure of physical effort that made him contract his head and neck
muscles (some people are not made to speak foreign languages). What

I

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

FIT

69

are emerging market bonds? "Emerging market" is the politically
correct euphemism to define a country that is not very developed (as a
skeptic, I do not impart to their "emergence" such linguistic certainty).
The bonds are financial instruments issued by these foreign governments, mostly Russia, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and Turkey. These
bonds traded for pennies when these governments were not doing well.
Suddenly investors rushed into these markets in the early 1990s and
pushed the envelope further and further by acquiring increasingly more
exotic securities. All these countries were building hotels where United
States cable news channels were available, with health clubs equipped
with treadmills and large-screen television sets that made them join the
global village. They all had access to the same gurus and financial
entertainers. Bankers would come to invest in their bonds and the
countries would use the proceeds to build nicer hotels so more investors
would visit. At some point these bonds became the vogue and went from
pennies to dollars; those who knew the slightest thing about them
accumulated vast fortunes.
Carlos supposedly comes from a patrician Latin-American family
that was heavily impoverished by the economic troubles of the 1980s,
but, again, I have rarely run into anyone from a ravaged country whose
family did not at some juncture own an entire province or, say, supply
the Russian Czar with sets of dominoes. After brilliant undergraduate
studies, he went to Harvard to pursue a Ph.D. in economics, as it was
the sort of thing Latin-American patricians had gotten into the habit of
doing at the time (with a view to saving their economies from the evils of
non-Ph.D. hands). He was a good student but could not find a decent
thesis topic for his dissertation. Nor did he gain the respect of his thesis
advisor, who found him unimaginative. Carlos settled for a Master's
degree and a Wall Street career.
The nascent emerging market desk of a New York bank hired Carlos
in 1992. He had the right ingredients for success; he knew where on the
map to find the countries that issued "Brady bonds", dollardenominated debt instruments issued by Less Developed Countries.
He knew what Gross Domestic Product meant. He looked serious,
brainy and well spoken, in spite of his heavy Spanish accent. He was the
kind of person banks felt comfortable putting in front of their
customers. What a contrast with the other traders who lacked polish!

70

SOLON'S

WARNING

Carlos got there right in time to see things happening in that market.
When he joined the bank, the market for emerging market debt
instruments was small and traders were located in undesirable parts of
trading floors. But the activity rapidly became a large, and growing, part
of the bank's revenues.
He was generic among this community of emerging market traders;
they are a collection of cosmopolitan patricians from across the
emerging market world that remind me of the international coffee hour
at the Wharton School. I find it odd that rarely does a person specialize
in the market of his or her birthplace. Mexicans based in London trade
Russian securities, Iranians and Greeks specialize in Brazilian bonds,
and Argentines trade Turkish securities. Unlike my experience with real
traders, they are generally urbane, dress well, collect art, but are nonintellectual. They seem too conformist to be true traders. They are
mostly between 30 and 40, owing to the youth of their market. You can
expect many of them to hold season tickets to the Metropolitan Opera.
True traders, I believe, dress sloppily, are often ugly and exhibit the
intellectual curiosity of someone who would be more interested in the
information-revealing contents of the garbage can than the Cezanne
painting on the wall.
Carlos thrived as a trader-economist. He had a large network of
friends in the various Latin-American countries and knew exactly what
took place there. He bought bonds that he found attractive, either
because they paid him a good rate of interest, or because he believed
that they would become more in demand in the future, therefore
appreciating in price. It would be perhaps erroneous to call him a trader.
A trader buys and .sells (he may sell what he does not own and buy it
back later, hopefully making a profit in a decline; this is called
"shorting"). Carlos just bought - and he bought in size. He believed that
he was paid a good risk premium to hold these bonds because there was
economic value in lending to these countries. Shorting, in his opinion,
made no economic sense.
Within the bank Carlos was the emerging markets reference. He
could produce the latest economic figures at the drop of a hat. He had
frequent lunches with the chairman. In his opinion, trading was
economics, little else. It had worked so well for him. He got promotion
after promotion, until he became the head trader of the emerging market

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

FIT

71

desk at the institution. Starting in 1995, Carlos did exponentially well in
his new function, getting an expansion of his capital on a steady basis
(i.e., the bank allocated a larger portion of its funds to his operation) so fast that he was incapable of using up the new risk limits.

the g o o d

years

The reason Carlos had good years was not just because he bought
emerging market bonds and their value went up over the period. It was
mostly because he also bought dips. He accumulated when prices
experienced a momentary panic. The year 1997 would have been a bad
year had he not added to his position after the dip in October that
accompanied the false stock market crash that took place then.
Overcoming these small reversals of fortune made him feel invincible.
He could do no wrong. He believed that the economic intuition he was
endowed with allowed him to make good trading decisions. After a
market dip he would verify the fundamentals, and, if they remained
sound, he would buy more of the security and lighten up as the market
recovered. Looking back at the emerging market bonds between the
time Carlos started his involvement with these markets and his last
bonus check in December 1997, one sees an upward sloping line, with
occasional blips, such as the Mexican devaluation of 1995, followed by
an extended rally. One can also see some occasional dips that turned out
to be "excellent buying opportunities".
It was the summer of 1998 that undid Carlos - that last dip did not
translate into a rally. His track record today includes just one bad
quarter - but bad it was. He had earned close to $80 million
cumulatively in his previous years. He lost $300 million in just one
summer. What happened? When the market started dipping in June, his
friendly sources informed him that the sell-off was merely the result of a
"liquidation" by a New Jersey hedge fund run by a former Wharton
professor. That fund specialized in mortgage securities and had just
received instructions to wind down the overall inventory. The inventory
included some Russian bonds, mostly because yield hogs, as these funds
are known, engage in the activity of building a "diversified" portfolio of
high-yielding securities.

72

SOLON'S

WARNING

averaging

down

When the market started falling, he accumulated more Russian bonds,
at an average of around $52. That was Carlos's trait, average down. The
problems, he deemed, had nothing to do with Russia, and it was not
some New Jersey fund run by some mad scientist that was going to
decide the fate of Russia. "Read my lips: It's a li-qui-da-tion!" he yelled
at those who questioned his buying.
By the end of June, his trading revenues for 1998 had dropped from
up $60 million to up $20 million. That made him angry. But he
calculated that should the market rise back to the pre-New Jersey selloff, then he would be up $100 million. That was unavoidable, he
asserted. These bonds, he said, would never, ever trade below $48. He
was risking so little, to possibly make so much.
Then came July. The market dropped a bit more. The benchmark
Russian bond was now at $43. His positions were under water, but he
increased his stakes. By now he was down $30 million for the year. His
bosses were starting to become nervous, but he kept telling them that, after
all, Russia would not go under. He repeated the cliche that it was too big
to fail. He estimated that bailing them out would cost so little and would
benefit the world economy so much that it did not make sense to liquidate
his inventory now. "This is the time to buy, not to sell", he said repeatedly.
"These bonds are trading very close to their possible default value". In
other words, should Russia go into default, and run out of dollars to pay
the interest on its debt, these bonds would hardly budge. Where did he get
this idea? From discussions with other traders and emerging market
economists (or trader-economist hybrids). Carlos put about half his net
worth, then $5,000,000, in the Russia Principal Bond. "I will retire on
these profits"; he told the stockbroker who executed the trade.

l i n e s in t h e

sand

The market kept going through the lines in the sand. By early August,
they were trading in the 30s. By the middle of August, they were in the
20s. And he was taking no action. He felt that the price on the screen
was quite irrelevant in his business of buying "value".

SURVIVAL

OF

THE

LEAST

FIT

73

Signs of battle fatigue were starting to show in his behavior. Carlos
was getting jumpy and losing some of his composure. He yelled at
someone in a meeting: "stop losses are for schmucks! I am not going to
buy high and sell low!" During his string of successes he had learned to
put down and berate traders of the non-emerging market variety. "Had
we gotten out in October 1997 after our heavy loss we would not have
had those excellent 1997 results", he was also known to repeat. He also
told management: "these bonds trade at very depressed levels. Those
who can invest now in these markets would realize wonderful returns".
Every morning, Carlos spent an hour discussing the situation with
market economists around the globe. They all seemed to present a
similar story: this sell-off is overdone.
Carlos's desk experienced losses in other emerging markets as well.
He also lost money in the domestic Russian Ruble Bond market. His
losses were mounting, but he kept telling his management rumors about
very large losses among other banks - larger than his. He felt justified to
show that "he fared well relative to the industry". This is a symptom of
systemic troubles; it shows that there was an entire community of
traders who were conducting the exact same activity. Such statements,
that other traders had also gotten into trouble, are self-incriminating. A
trader's mental construction should direct him to do precisely what
other people do not do.
Towards the end of August, the bellwether Russia Principal Bonds
were trading below $10. Carlos's net worth was reduced by almost half.
He was dismissed. So was his boss, the head of trading. The president of
the bank was demoted to a "newly created position". Board members
could not understand why the bank had so much exposure to a government that was not paying its own employees - which, disturbingly,
included armed soldiers. This was one of the small points that emerging
market economists around the globe, from talking to each other so
much, forgot to take into account. Veteran trader Marty O'Connell calls
this the firehouse effect. He had observed that firemen with much
downtime who talk to each other for too long come to agree on many
things that an outside, impartial observer, would find ludicrous (they
develop political ideas that are very similar). Psychologists give it a
fancier name, but my friend Marty has no training in clinical
psychology.
