technical indicators can be stored in one spot. It will allow you to outline a
scenario of the expectations for the future. In addition, it provides a place
for the exact entry and exit points to be delineated and necessary money
management principles to be applied.
One of the important features of the trading plan is that it is devised
before the money is risked. Traders are typically far less emotional about
a trade before the money is committed. Typically, traders lose their objectivity when they are on the firing line and money is committed.
The trading plan also helps to educate you. After a trade, you can go
over your trading plans and evaluate what actually happened. This is called
the postmortem. You have an opportunity to examine how accurate the
pretrade analysis was and discover areas of weakness in your own education or insights. Often, investors will realize that certain facets of their
trading technique have been over- or underestimated. They think that a particular technique is doing well when, in fact, it is doing poorly. Traders can
refer back to the trading plan while in the trade to determine whether
things are going as planned and whether there have been significant
changes that will affect the analysis that led to initiating the position.
The trading plan thus becomes a rudder for the average speculator, who
tends to trade like a rudderless ship. When investors are forced to commit thoughts to paper before initiating the trade, their thoughts must be
more logical and coherent. The record of the thoughts before the trade is
initiated provides a useful insight for future growth.
The use of a trading plan is also a viable way of reducing mental fatigue and anxiety. The trading plan is a record of the thoughts of the trader
before the trade is initiated. It represents a calmer, detached state of mind
than will exist when money is on the line. Traders who have committed
money based on a rational trading plan will be able to refer back to that
trading plan and use it as a touchstone of calm.

FILLING OUT THE PLAN
Many people believe a trading plan is a waste of time. Filling out a trading
plan takes time but is probably a major time-saver in the final analysis. Most
average speculators will spend a tremendous amount of time and valuable
energy watching the market on a tick-by-tick basis. This seems to be based
on the psychological concept that if they do not watch the market it will
go against them. This constant staring at a screen is an incredibly timeconsuming activity. There is a major loss of energy when a trader’s mind
is unfocused. The trading plan enforces a certain discipline, requiring that

The Psychology of Successful Trading

151

traders specify the entry and exit points and the method of stop placement
before the trade is initiated. This means that traders can enter entry and
exit points once a day rather than staring at a screen all day long looking
for clues to the future direction of the market. The trading plan will reduce
traders’ impulsive behavior when prices get close to entry or exit points.
There are often nagging second thoughts about a trade when prices begin
to get close to the entry point. This doubt about the trade is really a form
of self-doubt and often occurs when traders are not using a trading plan.
The use of a trading plan releases traders from having to watch the market
on a micro level. The time saved can be spent analyzing the markets and
acquiring more knowledge.
Remember, the main point of a trading plan is to help increase discipline. A written plan is far superior to a mental plan. It is extremely difficult
for the human mind to take into account all possible factors in a rational
manner when they are not written down. A mental trading plan tends to
become a plan composed of wishful thinking rather than hard critical analysis. Furthermore, the written plan provides the opportunity for traders to
conduct a postmortem analysis on the trade (we will discuss this later in
detail). It is probably easier for traders to acquire the discipline to fill out
the trading plan than it is to acquire the psychological discipline necessary
to function without a trading plan.
You should fill out a trading plan whenever you have an idea that you
are thinking of trading. You may see a chart pattern or read an article in
the paper and think that there is something worthwhile to follow upon.
You may become bullish on a particular forex pair because of a particular
analysis you have done. You should then fill out the trading plan before
entering the position because it will enforce your self-discipline.
A trading plan can be in any form. It can be a form that is filled out
or a narrative in your journal or a line on a spreadsheet. Whatever works
for you.
I recommend that you use a form or journal if you are incorporating
fundamentals in your trading. This will be in conjunction with the technical techniques you learned in this book. I suggest that traders analyze each
trade from both perspectives. The elimination of one technique will leave
the trader trading with one eye. The use of both techniques combined provides a synergy. It also allows traders to eliminate absurd trades.
Of course, most traders trade only with technicals. So simply create
a trading plan on a spreadsheet. Just make sure that you include a Notes
section where you put the postmortem that we are going to talk about in
the next section.
To me, it is critical to put down the technique that you are using to enter, add, or exit the position. For example, you can say that you are entering

152

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

on a channel breakout and exiting on a channel breakout. On my sheet, I
simply have CB as a column and I put the current entry and exit price on
the sheet.
I have been trading for many years and I am always amazed at how
much better my original plan is than what I end up doing. I change my plan
midstream far too often. I go back and see what would have happened if I
had simply stuck to my original plan and the original plan is nearly always
better. Why? Because it is devised in an atmosphere of calm and calculated
reason rather than in the heat of battle. It gives me a clearer picture of the
future and the best way to play it. It also creates a better atmosphere for
self-discipline. Here’s the plan, now stick to it.
One of the key reasons why I recommend this approach to nonprofessional investors is that it saves time. You write the plan once and do
not deviate, no matter what happens in the future. This usually means that
you don’t have to call your broker to change orders very often and you
certainly don’t have to reanalyze the market. Okay, perhaps you should reanalyze, but only after several weeks or even months have gone by so that
you don’t spend too much time.
Some investors will say that this is ridiculous and that not taking into
consideration changes in market conditions is foolish and will lead to
losses. It turns out that this is not necessarily true. It sounds good in theory
but doesn’t work in fact.
I undertook a study at a trading firm that I worked at back in the 1980s.
I asked the traders to make a trading plan for every trade. Sometimes, there
would be a significant news item at some point during the trade. Let’s say
that we are sitting on a profit in the trade and the news causes the market to dip. Should we take into account this fresh piece of information or
stick to the original trading plan? At the time, it seemed clear to me that
we should take into account the new information. Why should we trade
using information that is weeks old when we can use the freshest info
possible?
Based on my study, we would have made more money 80 percent of
the time by sticking with the original trading plan rather than ignoring that
plan and trading off the new information. I think this result occurs because
we lose objectivity once we are in a position. Our minds are blown. We
can’t evaluate the new information rationally. We can’t use that information in a rational way. On the other hand, we were calm, cool, and collected when we put together our trading plan. We had no emotional skin in
the game.
What happens is that you second-guess yourself and don’t retain as
much self-discipline. You read another article that makes you second-guess
your deeply thought-out analysis in the trading plan and tend to pull out of
the trade based on just a little bit of new evidence. I wouldn’t have a big

The Psychology of Successful Trading

153

problem if you go back and do the whole analysis from scratch if you read
a new article and think that the conditions have changed enough to exit
the position. But few people have the self-discipline to do this. It is hard
enough to get people to do the initial trading plan.
The basic problem is that investors second-guess their plans in the heat
of battle without the benefit of a calm, reasoned approach. This means that
they will shade all of their analysis toward what their heart or guts want
rather than what their brain wants.
I have trained many traders over the years and few trades work out
better by overriding the original plan. Of course, if you have a position on
for many weeks, you may want to start your analysis all over. There will
be enough new information that needs to be processed. However, you may
want to even consider exiting the position temporarily to make sure that
you have sufficient self-discipline while you do the new analysis. The main
thing to remember is that you will likely need to change the exit rule. That
old trend line might not be valid anymore. Still, be careful not to change
the original plan too much.

THE IMPORTANCE OF A POSTMORTEM
This is one of the truly great techniques for attaining greater self-discipline,
increasing your skills as a trader, and focusing more on educating yourself.
I am a big fan of postmortems and have written about them for more than
25 years.
A postmortem is taking each of your trades and tearing it apart from
the perspective of seeing what you can learn. This is easiest if you are using
a trading plan because the plan is a record of what you were thinking and
you will not have to rely on your faulty memory to figure out what you were
thinking.
The first thing to look at is the trading plan and see how your analysis
held up. When you said that the stochastics were bearish, did the market
go down? Were your milestones the correct milestones to consider? Did
you correctly identify the driving fundamentals?
As far as self-discipline is concerned, the key factor is the action section of the trading plan. Did you follow your plan? Did you enter and exit
the trade when you said that you would and use the techniques that you
said you would? Grade yourself hard because it is here that your lack of
self-discipline will really show up. It is here that most traders fail. They
typically enter the trade correctly but fail to use the exit technique outline
in the plan. They either panic and jump out too soon or get stubborn and
don’t get out until it’s too late.

154

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

Take the trading plan and use a red pen to grade yourself. Mark on
the plan where you succeeded and where you failed. It’s important to see
where you succeeded because you want to promote good habits in your
trading. You want to see where you failed so that you can reduce the
propensity to do it again.
Take the initial trading plan and your postmortem and file them away.
Then, every several months, take them out and read through them. You will
find it fascinating to see a living record of your trading.
Look very closely for patterns of success and failure. For example, I
studied Elliott Wave analysis for months. I initiated many trades largely
based on my Elliott Wave analysis. I gave up on it when I studied my postmortems and realized that I rarely had a winning trade using Elliott Wave.
That doesn’t mean that Elliott Wave is not a valid form of analysis but it
does mean that I couldn’t apply the concepts and make money.
You will start to see areas where your analysis is consistently leading
you to profitable trades or where your behavior is leading you to losing
trades and so on. Look to study the profitability of your techniques and,
more important, where you succeeded or failed from a self-discipline point
of view.
The postmortem is a key to becoming a better trader. You can continually refine your abilities as a trader. Let’s say that you are trading five
different methods. You go out and start to trade a sixth method. After a
year, you sit down and throw out the worst of the techniques and trade the
top five for the coming year. Of course, you will want to now find a new
sixth system to test for the next year. Perhaps the new system is better
than one of the old ones. Perhaps not. You will gain incremental profit if
the new system is better than just one of the old ones. Multiply this concept for the rest of your trading career and you can see that this can add
dramatically to your profits each year.
Now imagine that you have increased your annual profits by replacing
inferior systems with superior systems each year. Now compound those
gains.
Again.
And again.
Do you see how powerful this substitution technique is for building
serious wealth in your life?
Notice how the postmortem forces you to grade yourself and your techniques. It forces you to learn more about trading. It forces you to become
more focused on education and self-discipline. You will feel less pressure
to make money and more pressure to become a better trader. You will either unlock the key to becoming a successful trader or you will find the
reason why you cannot be a profitable trader.

The Psychology of Successful Trading

155

THE BOTTOM LINE
This completes our exploration of how to stop being a losing forex trader.
I covered what is, in my opinion, the most important issue: self-discipline.
I showed you proven techniques that can boost your self-discipline. I
showed you concepts to help you understand your motivations for trading
and how they impact your profitability.
I believe that a combination of the techniques outlined in this chapter
with tight money and risk management can turn any trader from showing
losses to at least breaking even, and that is a remarkable turn of events
when you consider that roughly 90 percent of traders lose money. You
should be able to get into the top decile of all traders with these techniques.

CHAPTER 10

Putting It All
Together

I

have presented a comprehensive program for profits. It includes all
the essential elements for creating massive profits for the rest of
your life:

r Tools and concepts for creating the right psychology for trading
success

r Specific techniques and methods for identifying entry and exit points
r Risk management actions to ensure that you are protecting yourself
from loss and maximizing profit
Each element of the program supports the others, so it will be difficult
to make money and cut out one of the key elements. They all need to be in
place to really make money in the forex market. This is not to say that each
element isn’t a stand-alone idea that can improve your current results, but
the synergy between them is a massive bonus.

DIVERSIFYING TO REDUCE RISK
One of the critical components of the program is the concept of diversifying through time. We all know that diversifying is a way to reduce risk.
But when everyone talks about diversification, they are talking about diversifying the instruments that you trade. A classic example is to not invest
in just five stocks but have at least 30 stocks in your portfolio to diversify
157

158

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

your risk. And, in fact, the more stocks you have in your portfolio, the less
volatility of returns you will have.
However, there are other ways to diversify to lower risk. For example,
you can diversify through time. Having different methods trade at different time periods will reduce the risk in your portfolio even with the same
number of instruments. I have given you methods that will trade on shortterm time frames as well as longer time frames. For example, trend analysis tends to be looking at the market over a several-week time frame while
channel breakout looks at 55 days or almost three months. Then add in the
short-term methods like inside days and you have a lot of different time
frames covered.
You can have one method long and another short. That has the effect of
reducing the volatility of returns in your portfolio because sideways markets can get the various methods going in different directions. This particularly happens with the pattern recognition techniques.
It cannot be stressed enough: It is important to execute flawlessly each
part of the program, particularly the psychological and risk management
rules. A breakdown in discipline will put your equity at risk.
Even though I am telling you that all of these elements fit together,
you should still trade each of the entry and exit methods as if the other
methods didn’t exist. In other words, you should trade trend analysis with
laser precision as if channel breakouts didn’t exist.

USE A MENTAL CHECKLIST
I look at my charts every day and simply go through the mental process of
checking for new trades and changes to existing trades method by method.
“Here’s EUR/USD. In a trade already using channel breakout? If yes, do I
need to change my stop? If no, do I need to change the entry stop? In a
trade using trend analysis? If yes, do I need to change my stop? If no, can
I enter a trade? If yes, then put in entry stop. If no, then go on to the next
pair.” And so on. At no point do I look at another method to see what it is
doing when I’m looking at one method. This constant monitoring can get
us all the advantages of diversifying through time.
Note that you can use the multiunit tactic on all methods. I only talked
about it briefly in the book, but you can use it on every technique.
Some traders will only have small accounts and not be able to execute
every trade of every method even with a mini-account. One suggestion is
to pick just one technique and execute that one flawlessly. Pick the one
that fits your psychology the best to ensure the highest discipline. Add additional methods as your bankroll expands. Another possibility is to shift

Putting It All Together

159

to a micro-account and trade more methods. This is preferred because it
helps to diversify the risk.

HOW TO TRADE ONLY ONE METHOD
Which system should you use if you can only trade one? I guess I would
pick the channel breakout for the position trading and inside days for the
day trading. I think they are the best in terms of keeping risk tight yet having a large profit potential.
A final comment on tying the various techniques together is what I call
the holistic or weight of evidence method. The basic idea is that you trade
according to the weight of the evidence. Let’s say you are using Conqueror,
channel breakout, and trend analysis. You will go long when the majority
of those techniques are bullish and short when the majority are bearish.
You will always use the tightest stop of the three.
Now note that it is possible that you will be flat the market on occasion.
Let’s assume that all systems are flat to start. The trend analysis then gives
a buy signal to go long and we enter a buy order that gets filled. We are
now long with a stop when the trend analysis tells us to get long. We then
get a sell signal from the channel breakout that gets filled before we are
stopped out on the trend analysis. You take that trade as well, which gets
you flat the market. Technically, you are now long and short with protective stops in the market. Basically, you will get long again when the channel breakout trades get stopped out or get short if the trend analysis gets
stopped out.
The market trades along for a while and the Conqueror gets long
on the same day that the channel breakout gets stopped out. You are now
long three contracts with three different stop losses. You continue doing
exactly this method so that your position will vary from three short to
three long and everything in between. You will therefore be the longest
or the shortest when the market is the strongest or the weakest. And that
is exactly what you want to be.
Smaller investors will also find the weight of evidence to be useful. In
this method, you don’t go long until, say, all three methods turn bullish. In
other words, you would wait until two methods are long and then you put
in an order to enter long on the signal for the third method. You then place
a protective stop at the point that the closest method would get stopped
out. In other words, you may be entering on a trend analysis entry stop
but exiting on a Conqueror exit stop. In other words, you will only be trading one contract but you wouldn’t be entering until all three methods are
long and are exiting the position when just one of the methods exits. By

160

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

using these techniques, the smaller trader can gain exposure to the market
without entering very many trades.

THE BOTTOM LINE
All of the techniques, risk management, and psychology integrate into a total package for making money. It is a powerful combination that can create
massive profits for you, and it is best if you use all the techniques because
that will reduce the risk the most.
It will also give you the most chances to create profit.

EPILOGUE

Key Insights for
Maximizing Your
Trading Profits

T

rading forex is close to the ideal business. Unlike many other
businesses, you don’t have to deal with the usual problems, such as:

Employees
Employment taxes
Regulations
Rent
Health insurance

The list goes on and on. Those of you who have run a business know
all about the many issues.
Most businesses have employees. The advantage of employees is that
they can leverage your business. They can do things you can’t or don’t want
to do. That is about all they are good for. On the other hand, you have to
pay them. You have to act as priest, mother, and psychiatrist to them. You
have to pay taxes on them. They can be a pain in the neck. So a big advantage to being a forex trader is that you don’t have to have any employees.
In most areas of the world, trading profits are tax free. That alone
almost makes it worthwhile to be a trader. You don’t need any inventory.
That means that you never have to have sales to dump your inventory that
doesn’t sell. You can open your trading business for 24 hours a day or
15 minutes a day. And you get to pick which 15 minutes! Unlike the
