tion. Markets are too unstable, regulation too rigid. Markets need
to be regulated but regulation cannot be left to itself either: it is in
constant need of revision. The fact that no system is perfect is not
a valid argument against trying to perfect the system. Take Bretton
Woods: the fact that it eventually broke down does not alter the
fact that it provided tlie basis for a quarter of a century of prosperity.
When it comes to a' choice between the two attitudes, mine is
clearly in favor of life and the temporary and imperfect structures
we can create within it. Although I advocate a comprehensive
reform of the financial system, I have no illusions that the new
system will be any more flawless or permanent than the preceding
ones. On the contrary: I regard the search for permanence and
perfection as an illusion. The pitfall in a well-functioning system
is that it lulls us into complacency. That is what happened to
Bretton Woods, and that is what will happen to the next one if we
design it too well.
This brings me to the personal problem I have with systemic
reform. Systems are operated by bureaucrats, and I have an instinctive aversion to the bureaucratic mentality. In advocating a
more regulated international financial system I seem to be wishing for something that I abhor.
The problem is real. The distinctive feature of every bureaucracy is its striving for self-perpetuation. Every system faces the
danger that it becomes ossified in the hands of the bureaucracy
that administers it. This holds true for Christianity as well as
communism. The dead hand of bureaucracy is difficult to escape.
Mao Tse-tung tried it by instigating the Cultural Revolution and
the consequences were disastrous.
But the problem is not insurmountable. When bureaucrats are
in charge of a market, market action serves to keep the bureaucrats
on their toes. Experience shows that central banks are among the
most flexible, innovative, and efficient institutions. The reason is
that the market provides a criterion by which the results of their
actions can be judged. They may come under the influence of false
ideologies, just like anybody else, but when a policy does not
work, they cannot help but notice it. For instance, the Federal
Reserve adopted a monetarist stance in 1979, but abandoned it in
August 1982. Similarly, the IMF operated with a rather rigid set
of prescriptions in dealing with heavily indebted countries, but
gradually it has been forced to abandon a formula that does not

344
1

Prescription

work. Central banks are often criticized for following the wrong
policies; but the very fact that the failures can be demonstrated
provides a potent discipline. Moreover, central banks have been
surprisingly innovative in handling crises. The Bank of England
invented the "lifeboat" in 1974, and the Federal Reserve applied
it on a worldwide scale in the debt crisis of 1982. Volcker, in
particular, proved to be a man who thrives on crises; but the fact
that a man like Volcker could be at the helm of a central bank
cannot be treated as an accident.*
In sum, the creation of an international central bank does not
constitute a permanent solution. Indeed, the very idea that it constitutes a permanent solutiox carries with it the seeds of the next
crisis.

I

* Compared with other bureaucracies, central banks constitute a lesser evil.

THE CRASH OF '87

The stock market crash'of 1987 is an event of historic significance.
One must go back to the crashes of 1929, 1907 or 1893 to find a
comparison. In many ways the most relevant is 1929, and it is
also the most widely h o w n ; but in drawing the comparison we
must be careful not to confuse the crash itself with its aftermath.
In the crash of 1929; the New York stock market fell by about
(36%;this figure is almost identical with the loss that occurred in
W87. Subsequently, stbcks recovered nearly half their losses, and
then declined by another 80% in the long-drawn-out bear market
between 1930 and 1932. It is that bear market, assoekted with the
Great Depression, which preys on the public imagination. Exactly
because it is so well remembered, we can be sure that history will
not repeat itself. The immediate governmental reaction to the
crash already bears out this contention. After 1929, :he monetary
authorities made a momentous mistake by not supplying enough
liquidity; in the present case, they will make a different mistake.
On the basis of their initial reaction, the danger is that they will
destroy the stability of the dollar in their effort to avoid a recession, at least in an election year.
Technically, the crash of 1987 bears an uncanny resemblance
to the crash of 1929. The shape and extent of the decline and even
the day-to-day movements of stock prices track very closely. The
major difference is that in 1929 the first selling climax was followed within a few days by a second one which carried the market to a lower low. In 1987, the second climax was avoided, and
even if the market were to establish new lows in the future, the

346
I

t

Prescription

pattern would be different. The divergence bears witness to the
determination of the authorities not to repeat the mistake of 1929.
In the early stages of the crash President Reagan sounded remarkably like President Hoover, but by the time of his press conference
on Thursday, October 22, he had been carefully coached to avoid
the resemblance.
The crash of 1987 came just as unexpectedly as the crash of
1929. There had been a general awareness that the worldwide
boom was unsound and unsustainable, but few people got their
timing right. I was as badly caught as the next fellow. I was convinced that the crash would start in Japan; that turned out to be
an expensive =istake.
In retrospect, it is easy to reconstruct the sequence of events
that led to the crash. The boom had been fed by liquidity; it was
a reduction in liquidity that established the preconditions for a
crash. In this respect also 1987 resembles 1929: it will be recalled
that the crash of 1929 was preceded by a rise in short-term money
rates.
Exactly how the reduction in liquidity came about in 1987 is a
thornier question, to which one cannot give a definitive answer
without a great deal of research. One thing is clear: the agreement
to defend the dollar played a crucial role. In the first few months
following the Louvre Accord of February 1987, the dollar was
defended by sterilized intervention; that is to say, domestic interest rates were not allowed to be affected. When the central banks
found that they had to acquire more dollars than they had appetite for, they changed their tactics. After Nakasone's visit to Washington of April 29-May 2, 1987, they allowed interest-rate
differentials to widen to levelis a), which the private sector was
willing to hold dollars; in effect, they "privatized" the intervention.
What is not so clear yet is whether it was the sterilized or the
unsterilized intervention that led to the reduction in liquidity.
Sterilized intervention transferred large amounts of dollars to the
coffers of the central banks, and the Federal Reserve may have
failed to inject the equivalent amounts into the domestic money
market. In that case, the effect would have made itself felt with a
lag of several months. Alternatively, it may be that the monetary
authorities in Japan and Germany got cold feet about the inflationary implications of unsterilized intervention and it was their attempt to rein in their domestic money supply that led to the
worldwide rise in interest rates.

The Crash of '87

347

I favor the latter explanation, although I cannot rule out the
possibility that the former was also a contributing factor. The
Germans are well known to harbor a strong anti-inflationary bias.
The Japanese are more pragmatic, and they did, in fact, allow their
interest rates to fall after Nakasone's return to Tokyo. But when
they found that an easy-money policy was merely reinforcing the
already unhealthy speculation in financial assets, including land,
they had second thoughts. They tried to slow down the growfh of
the Japanese domestic money supply and bank lending; but speculation was out of control by then. Even after the Bank of Japan
started to rein in the qoney supply, the bond market continued
to soar, and the yield on the bellwether Coupon #89 issue fell to
only 2.6% in May before the bond market crashed in September,
1987.
The collapse of the Japanese bond market was the first in a
sequence of events that will enter the annals of history as the
Crash of 1987. There were large speculative long positions in
September bond futures which could not be liquidated. Hedging
led to a collapse of the December futures, and the yield on the
Coupon #89 issue rose to more than 6% before the bottom was
reached. I thought that the collapse would carry over into the
stock market, which was even more overvalued than the bond
market, but I was wrong. Speculative money actually moved from
bonds to stocks in a vain attempt to recoup the losses. As a result,
the Japanese stock market reached minor new highsin October.
The consequences for the rest of the world were more grievous.
The government bond market in this country had become dependent on Japanese buying. When the Japanese turned sellers, even
in relatively small quantities, our bond market sufferad a sinking
spell which went beyond any change justified by economic fundamentals. Undoubtedly our economy was somewhat stronger
than had been expected, but the strength was in industrial production rather than in final demand. Commodity prices were rising, encouraging inventory accumulation and raising the specter
of inflation. The fear of inflation was more a rationalization for
the decline in bonds than its root cause; nevertheless, it served to
reinforce the downtrend in the bond market.
The weakness in bonds widened the disparity between bond
and stock prices that had been developing since the end of 1986.
Such a disparity can persist indefinitely, as it did, for instance, in
the 1960s, but as it widens it creates the preconditions for an
eventual reversal. The actual timing of the reversal is determined

348
t

I

Prescription

by a confluence of other events. In this case, political considerations played a major role: President Reagan had lost his luster and
the elections were approaching. The decisive factor was the renewed pressure on the dollar; and the internal instabilities of the
stock market converted a decline into a rout.
The first crack came when a well-known and widely followed
"guru," Robert Prechter, gave a bearish signal before the opening
on October 6 and the market responded with a resounding fall of
some 90 points. This was a sign of underlying weakness, but
similar incidents had occurred in 1986 without catastrophic consequences. The situation deteriorated when the dollar also started
to weaken. On Tuesday, October 13, Alan Greenspan, Chairman
of the Federal Reserve, announced that the trade balance showed
signs of a "profound structural improvement." The figures published on Wednesday, October 14, were all the more disappointing. The dollar came under severe selling pressure. The principle
of unsterilized intervention would have required a rise in interest
rates which would have been all the larger because of the rises
that had occurred in Japan and Germany. The U.S. authorities
were unwilling to undertake such a tightening, and by Thursday,
as the stock market continued to decline, Treasury Secretary
James Baker was reported to be pressing the Germans to lower
their interest rates lest the dollar be allowed to fall. The stock
market decline continued to accelerate amid reports that the
House Ways and Means Committee was planning to limit the tax
deductibility of junk bonds issued in leveraged buy-outs. Although the provision was abandoned by Friday, stocks that had
been bid up in the expectation of a "corporate event" declined
sufficiently to force the liquidation of positions held on margin
by professional arbitrage traders.
Then came the sensational lead article in the Sunday edition of
The New York Times in which Treasury officials were reported to
be openly advocating a lower dollar and blaming the Germans in
advance for the stock market fall which these remarks helped to
precipitate. Some selling pressure on Monday, October 19, was
inevitable because of the built-in instabilities; but the New York
Times article had a dramatic effect, exacerbating the instabilities
which had been allowed to accumulate. The result was the largest
decline ever on a single day: the Dow Jones average lost 508
points, or 22% of its value.
Portfolio insurance, option writing and other trend-following
devices allow, in principle, the individual participant to limit his

The Crash of '87

349

risk at the cost of enhancing the instability of the system. In practice, the breakdown of 'the system did not allow the individual to
escape unscathed. The market became disorganized, panic set in
and the forced liquidation of collateral further compressed market
values.
& had repercussions abroad, and the
The collapse in ~ e York
collapse of other markets affected New York in turn. London
turned out to be more' vulnerable than New York, and the normally staid Swiss market was even worse affected. Worst of all
was Hong Kong, where a group of speculators in the futures market managed to arrange for a suspension of trading on the stock
exchange for the rest of the week in the vain hope that they might
be able to force a settlement of the futures contract at an artificial
price. The ploy failed, the speculators were wiped out and the
futures market had to be rescued by Government intervention.
During the week that the Hong Kong market was suspended, selling from Hong Kong radiated to the other Australasian n p k e t s
and to London. The selling pressure persisted for the better part
of two weeks after Black Monday. While other stock markets continued to reach new lows, the New York market did not exceed
the lows set in the initial selling climax.
The only stock market that escaped collapse was Japan's. There
was a one-day panic following Black Monday, when prices fell
the limit without many transactions taking place. (In Japan, daily
price movements are limited by regulations.) Japanese stocks
traded at large discounts in London the next morning; but by the
time the Japanese market reopened the next day, the Ministry of
Finance had made a few phone calls, the sell orders miraculously
disappeared and large ixstitutions were aggresshe buyers. As a
result, the market recouped a large part of the previous day's
losses. Prices sagged further after the panic, and at the time of the
gigantic Nippon Telephone & Telegraph issue, which involved
raising about $37 billion from the public, it looked as if the market
might unravel. But the authorities intervened again, this time permitting the four large brokers to trade for their own accounts-in
effect, giving them a license to manipulate the market.
The two outstanding features of the Crash of 1987, then, are the
absence of a second selling climax in New York and the relative
stability of Tokyo. These two features deserve further exploration,
because they can provide some insight into consequences of the
crash.

350

'

I

Prescription

The historic significance of the crash of 1929 derived from the
fact that it precipitated the Great Depression. It occurred during a
period when economic and financial power was moving from
Europe to the United States. The shift in power caused a great
deal of instability in exchange rates, and the end result was that
the dollar supplanted sterling as the international reserve currency; but the crash of 1929 itself played no clearly defined role
in the process.
By contrast, the historic significance of the Crash of 1987 lies
in the fact that it marks the transfer of economic and financial
power from the United States to Japan. Japan has been producing
more than it consumes, t;nd the Ucitsd States has been consuming
more than it produces for some time past. Japan has been accumulating assets abroad, while the United States has been amassing debts. The process received a great boost when President
Reagan took office with a program of cutting taxes and increasing
military expenditures (in this context, armaments are also a form
of consumption), and it has been gaining momentum ever since.
Both sides have been loath to acknowledge it: President Reagan
wanted to make Americans feel good about being American and
pursued the illusion of military superiority at the cost of rendering our leading position in the world economy illusory; while
Japan wanted to keep growing in the shadow of the United States
as long as possible.
The Crash of 1987 has revealed the strength of Japan and made
the transfer of economic and financial power clearly visible. It
was the collapse of the Japanese bond market that depressed our
own bond market and set up our stock market for a crash. Yet
Japan has been able to avert 3 collapse of its own stuck markst.
To top it all, our authorities have been able to avert a second
selling climax only by abandoning the dollar. Herein lies the significance of the two features of the crash I have singled out for
special attention. Japan has, in effect, emerged as the banker to
the world-taking deposits from the rest of the world, and making
loans to and investing in the rest of the world. The dollar is no
longer qualified to serve as the international reserve currency.
Whether a new international currency system can be established
without a Great Depression remains an open question.
Events are notoriously more difficult to predict than to explain.
How can one anticipate decisions that have not yet been taken?
Nevertheless, one can evaluate the implications of the decisions
that have already been taken.

The Crash of '87

.

351

The Crash of 1987 confronted our Government with the question: which do we conSider more important, averting a-recession
or preserving the value of the dollar? The response was unequivocal. By the middle of the second week after Black Monday, the
dollar had been cut loose from its moorings, and by the end of
that week Treasury Secretary James Baker made the news official.
The dollar moved obediently lower, and a second selling climax
in the stock market did not take place. The mistake of 1929 has
been avoided, but only at the peril of committing a different kind
of mistake. The decision to cut the dollar loose is painfully reminiscent of the competitive devaluations of the 1930s. Temporary
relief may be bought at ,the cost of greater damage later.
Prospects are good that a severe recession in the United States
can be avoided at least in the near future. Consumer spending was
already declining prior to the crash, and the crash is bound to
make consumers more cautious. But industrial production has
been benefiting from the lower dollar, and industrial employment
has been strong. The reduction in the budget deficit is too small
and too illusory to have much of an effect. If American corporations slash their capital expenditures, foreign corporations expanding in the United States may take up the slack. It is unlikely,
therefore, that the downturn in consumption would develop into
much more than a flat first quarter or first half in 1988. Both
Germany and Japan are likely to stimulate their own economies.
The net result would be a continuation of the s l o s growth that
has prevailed in the world economy since 1983. It may come as a
surprise how little direct effect the stock market is going to have
on the real economy.
The trouble with this scenario is that it leaves the imbalances
that have precipitated the Crash of 1987 unresolved. Neither the
budget deficit nor the trade deficit of the United States is likely to
disappear. The aftermath of the crash may bring some temporary
respite, but eventually the dollar is bound to come under pressure
again-either because our economy is strong and the trade deficit
persists, or because it is weak and lower interest rates are needed
to stimulate it.
The United Kingdom found itself in a similar situation prior to
the discovery of North Sea oil. The result was "stagflation" and a
sequence of "stop-go" policies. The same is in store for us now.
The major difference is that the United States is the largest economy in the world and its currency still serves as the international
medium of exchange. As long as the dollar remains unstable, in-

352

'

I

Prescription

ternational financial markets will remain accident-prone. It
should be recalled that while it was the Louvre Accord that created the preconditions for a crash, it was the actual fall in the
dollar that precipitated it.
If the dollar continues to depreciate, owners of liquid assets
will be driven to take refuge elsewhere. Once the movement gathers momentum, not even a rise in interest rates could arrest it,
because the rate of depreciation in the dollar would outweigh the
interest-rate differential in its favor. Eventually, the rise in interest rates would bring on a more severe recession than the one that
the Administration sought to avoid.
It has happened before. In the last tvro years ~f the Carter Administration, speculative capital continued to move to Germany
and Switzerland even when it had to pay a premium to be accepted there. The specter of a free-fall in the dollar is more real
today than it has been at any time since President Carter was
forced to sell bonds denominated in hard currencies in 1979.
Ever since the crash, stock markets worldwide have weakened
whenever the dollar weakened, and vice versa. The message is
clear: any further decline in the dollar would be counterproductive. The Administration seems to have received the message: all
talk of a lower dollar has ceased, and now that a budget compromise of sorts has been accomplished, preparations are under way
for reestablishing the Louvre Accord. Much depends on how successful the effort will be. Unfortunately, the Administration does
not bring much to the table: the budget cut has been described as
"a miserable pittance" by Senator Packwood. Moreover, the Crash
of 1987 has demonstrated conclusively that the Administration is
more concerned with avoiding a recession than with stabiiizing
the dollar. The burden of supporting the dollar will fall primarily
to our trading partners.
The best way for the Japanese to protect their export markets is
to transfer production to the dollar zone; the process had already
started prior to the crash. Many Japanese companies, led by the
car makers, are establishing manufacturing subsidiaries in the
United States and Mexico. The process will be accelerated by
the crash and the falling dollar, both of which make American
assets cheaper to acquire and the American market less profitable
to supply from abroad. The eventual solution of the trade deficit
will be import substitution-by
Japanese manufacturers. It
echoes the solution to Europe's seemingly incurable "dollar gap"
