
41
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

Mean reversion and stationarity are two equivalent ways of looking at the
same type of price series, but these two ways give rise to two different statistical tests for such series.
The mathematical description of a mean-reverting price series is that the
change of the price series in the next period is proportional to the difference
between the mean price and the current price. This gives rise to the ADF
test, which tests whether we can reject the null hypothesis that the proportionality constant is zero.
However, the mathematical description of a stationary price series is that
the variance of the log of the prices increases slower than that of a geometric random walk. That is, their variance is a sublinear function of time,
rather than a linear function, as in the case of a geometric random walk.
This sublinear function is usually approximated by τ2H, where τ is the time
separating two price measurements, and H is the so-called Hurst exponent,
which is less than 0.5 if the price series is indeed stationary (and equal to
0.5 if the price series is a geometric random walk). The Variance Ratio test
can be used to see whether we can reject the null hypothesis that the Hurst
exponent is actually 0.5.
Note that stationarity is somewhat of a misnomer: It doesn’t mean that
the prices are necessarily range bound, with a variance that is independent
of time and thus a Hurst exponent of zero. It merely means that the variance
increases slower than normal diffusion.
A clear mathematical exposition of the ADF and Variance Ratio tests can
be found in Walter Beckert’s course notes (Beckert, 2011). Here, we are
interested only in their applications to practical trading strategies.

Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test
If a price series is mean reverting, then the current price level will tell us
something about what the price’s next move will be: If the price level is
higher than the mean, the next move will be a downward move; if the price
level is lower than the mean, the next move will be an upward move. The
ADF test is based on just this observation.
We can describe the price changes using a linear model:
Δy(t) = λy(t − 1) + μ + βt + α1Δy(t − 1) + … + αkΔy(t − k) + t
∋

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

42

(2.1)

where Δy(t) ≡ y(t) − y(t − 1), Δy(t − 1) ≡ y(t − 1) − y(t − 2), and so on.The ADF
test will find out if λ = 0. If the hypothesis λ = 0 can be rejected, that means the
next move Δy(t) depends on the current level y(t − 1), and therefore it is not a
random walk. The test statistic is the regression coefficient λ (with y(t − 1) as
the independent variable and Δy(t) as the dependent variable) divided by the
standard error of the regression fit: λ/SE(λ).The statisticians Dickey and Fuller
have kindly found out for us the distribution of this test statistic and tabulated
the critical values for us, so we can look up for any value of λ/SE(λ) whether
the hypothesis can be rejected at, say, the 95 percent probability level.
Notice that since we expect mean regression, λ/SE(λ) has to be negative,
and it has to be more negative than the critical value for the hypothesis to
be rejected. The critical values themselves depend on the sample size and
whether we assume that the price series has a non-zero mean −μ/λ or a
steady drift −βt/λ. In practical trading, the constant drift in price, if any,
tends to be of a much smaller magnitude than the daily fluctuations in price.
So for simplicity we will assume this drift term to be zero (β = 0).
In Example 2.1, we apply the ADF test to a currency rate series
USD.CAD.
Example 2.1: Using ADF Test for Mean Reversion
The ADF test is available as a MATLAB Econometrics function adftest,
or from the open-source MATLAB package spatial-econometrics.com’s
adf function. We will use adf below, and my code is available for
download as stationarityTests.m from http://epchan.com/book2.
(After you have downloaded the spatial-econometrics.com’s jplv7
folder to your computer, remember to add all the subfolders of this
package to your MATLAB path before using it.)

Example 2.1 (Continued)

FIGURE 2.2 USD.CAD Price Series

(Continued )

43
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

The adf function has three inputs. The first is the price series in
ascending order of time (chronological order is important). The
second is a parameter indicating whether we should assume the
offset μ and whether the drift β in Equation 2.1 should be zero. We
should assume the offset is nonzero, since the mean price toward
which the prices revert is seldom zero. We should, however, assume
the drift is zero, because the constant drift in price tends to be of a
much smaller magnitude than the daily fluctuations in price. These
considerations mean that the second parameter should be 0 (by the
package designer’s convention). The third input is the lag k.You can
start by trying k = 0, but often only by setting k = 1 can we reject
the null hypothesis, meaning that the change in prices often does
have serial correlations. We will try the test on the exchange rate
USD.CAD (how many Canadian dollars in exchange for one U.S.
dollar). We assume that the daily prices at 17:00 ET are stored in
a MATLAB array γ. The data file is that of one-minute bars, but we
will just extract the end-of-day prices at 17:00 ET. Sampling the data
at intraday frequency will not increase the statistical significance of
the ADF test. We can see from Figure 2.2 that it does not look very
stationary.

Example 2.1 (Continued)
And indeed, you should find that the ADF test statistic is about
−1.84, but the critical value at the 90 percent level is −2.594, so we
can’t reject the hypothesis that λ is zero. In other words, we can’t
show that USD.CAD is stationary, which perhaps is not surprising,
given that the Canadian dollar is known as a commodity currency,
while the U.S. dollar is not. But note that λ is negative, which
indicates the price series is at least not trending.
results=adf(y, 0, 1);
prt(results);
% Augmented DF test for unit root variable:

variable

%

ADF t-statistic

# of lags

AR(1) estimate

%

-1.840744

1

0.994120

%

1% Crit Value

5% Crit Value

10% Crit Value

%

-3.458

-2.871

-2.594

1

%

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

44

Hurst Exponent and Variance Ratio Test
Intuitively speaking, a “stationary” price series means that the prices diffuse
from its initial value more slowly than a geometric random walk would. Mathematically, we can determine the nature of the price series by measuring this
speed of diffusion. The speed of diffusion can be characterized by the variance
Var(τ) = 〈|z(t + τ) − z(t)|2〉

(2.2)

where z is the log prices (z = log( y)), τ is an arbitrary time lag, and 〈…〉 is
an average over all t’s. For a geometric random walk, we know that
〈|z(t + τ) − z(t)|2〉 ∼ τ

(2.3)

The ∼ means that this relationship turns into an equality with some proportionality constant for large τ, but it may deviate from a straight line for
small τ. But if the (log) price series is mean reverting or trending (i.e., has
positive correlations between sequential price moves), Equation 2.3 won’t
hold. Instead, we can write:
〈|z(t + τ) − z(t)|2〉 ∼ τ2H

(2.4)

where we have defined the Hurst exponent H. For a price series exhibiting
geometric random walk, H = 0.5. But for a mean-reverting series, H < 0.5,
and for a trending series, H > 0.5. As H decreases toward zero, the price
series is more mean reverting, and as H increases toward 1, the price series
is increasingly trending; thus, H serves also as an indicator for the degree of
mean reversion or trendiness.
In Example 2.2, we computed the Hurst exponent for the same currency rate series USD.CAD that we used in the previous section using the
MATLAB code. It generates an H of 0.49, which suggests that the price
series is weakly mean reverting.

Example 2.2: Computing the Hurst Exponent

H=genhurst(log(y), 2);

If we apply this function to USD.CAD, we get H = 0.49, indicating
that it may be weakly mean reverting.

Because of finite sample size, we need to know the statistical significance
and MacKinlay of an estimated value of H to be sure whether we can reject
the null hypothesis that H is really 0.5.This hypothesis test is provided by the
Variance Ratio test (Lo, 2001).
The Variance Ratio Test simply tests whether
Var (z(t) − z(t − τ))
τV ( ( ) − z(t − 1))
is equal to 1. There is another ready-made MATLAB Econometrics Toolbox
function vratiotest for this, whose usage I demonstrate in Example 2.3.

45
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

Using the same USD.CAD price series in the previous example, we
now compute the Hurst exponent using a function called genhurst we
can download from MATLAB Central (www.mathworks.com
/matlabcentral/fileexchange/30076-generalized-hurst-exponent).
This function computes a generalized version of the Hurst exponent
defined by 〈|z(t + τ) − z(t)|2q〉 ∼ τ2H(q), where q is an arbitrary
number. But here we are only interested in q = 2, which we specify as
the second input parameter to genhurst.

Example 2.3: Using the Variance Ratio Test for Stationarity
The vratiotest from MATALB Econometric Toolbox is applied to the
same USD.CAD price series y that have been used in the previous
examples in this chapter. The outputs are h and pValue: h = 1 means
rejection of the random walk hypothesis at the 90 percent confidence
level, h = 0 means it may be a random walk. pValue gives the
probability that the null (random walk) hypothesis is true.
[h,pValue]=vratiotest(log(y));

We find that h = 0 and pValue = 0.367281 for USD.CAD, indicating
that there is a 37 percent chance that it is a random walk, so we
cannot reject this hypothesis.

Half-Life of Mean Reversion

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

46

The statistical tests I described for mean reversion or stationarity are
very demanding, with their requirements of at least 90 percent certainty.
But in practical trading, we can often be profitable with much less certainty. In this section, we shall find another way to interpret the λ coefficient in Equation 2.1 so that we know whether it is negative enough
to make a trading strategy practical, even if we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that its actual value is zero with 90 percent certainty in an
ADF test. We shall find that λ is a measure of how long it takes for a price
to mean revert.
To reveal this new interpretation, it is only necessary to transform the
discrete time series Equation 2.1 to a differential form so that the changes in
prices become infinitesimal quantities. Furthermore, if we ignore the drift
(βt) and the lagged differences (Δy(t − 1), …, Δy(t − k)) in Equation 2.1, then
it becomes recognizable in stochastic calculus as the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
formula for mean-reverting process:
dy(t) = (λy(t − 1) + μ)dt + dε

(2.5)

where dε is some Gaussian noise. In the discrete form of 2.1, linear regression of Δy(t) against y(t − 1) gave us λ, and once determined, this value of λ
carries over to the differential form of 2.5. But the advantage of writing the

equation in the differential form is that it allows for an analytical solution for
the expected value of y(t):
E( y(t)) = y0exp(λt) − μ/λ(1 − exp(λt))

(2.6)

Example 2.4: Computing Half-Life for Mean Reversion
We concluded in the previous example that the price series
USD.CAD is not stationary with at least 90 percent probability. But
that doesn’t necessarily mean we should give up trading this price
series using a mean reversion model because most profitable trading
strategies do not require such a high level of certainty. To determine
whether USD.CAD is a good candidate for mean reversion trading,
we will now determine its half-life of mean reversion.
To determine λ in Equations 2.1 and 2.5, we can run a regression
fit with y(t) − y(t − 1) as the dependent variable and y(t − 1) as
the independent variable. The regression function ols as well as the
function lag are both part of the jplv7 package. (You can also use the
(Continued )

47
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

Remembering that λ is negative for a mean-reverting process, this tells us
that the expected value of the price decays exponentially to the value −μ/λ
with the half-life of decay equals to −log(2)/λ. This connection between a
regression coefficient λ and the half-life of mean reversion is very useful
to traders. First, if we find that λ is positive, this means the price series is
not at all mean reverting, and we shouldn’t even attempt to write a meanreverting strategy to trade it. Second, if λ is very close to zero, this means
the half-life will be very long, and a mean-reverting trading strategy will not
be very profitable because we won’t be able to complete many round-trip
trades in a given time period. Third, this λ also determines a natural time
scale for many parameters in our strategy. For example, if the half life is 20
days, we shouldn’t use a look-back of 5 days to compute a moving average
or standard deviation for a mean-reversion strategy. Often, setting the lookback to equal a small multiple of the half-life is close to optimal, and doing
so will allow us to avoid brute-force optimization of a free parameter based
on the performance of a trading strategy. We will demonstrate how to compute half-life in Example 2.4.

Example 2.4 (Continued)
MATLAB Statistics Toolbox regress function for this as well.) This code
fragment is part of stationaryTests.m.
ylag=lag(y, 1); % lag is a function in the jplv7
% (spatial-econometrics.com) package.
deltaY=y-ylag;
deltaY(1)=[]; % Regression functions cannot handle the NaN
in the first bar of the time series.
ylag(1)=[];
regress_results=ols(deltaY, [ylag ones(size(ylag))]);
halflife=-log(2)/regress_results.beta(1);

The result is about 115 days. Depending on your trading horizon, this
may or may not be too long. But at least we know what look-back to use
and what holding period to expect.

A Linear Mean-Reverting Trading Strategy
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

48

Once we determine that a price series is mean reverting, and that the halflife of mean reversion for a price series short enough for our trading horizon, we can easily trade this price series profitably using a simple linear
strategy: determine the normalized deviation of the price (moving standard
deviation divided by the moving standard deviation of the price) from its
moving average, and maintain the number of units in this asset negatively
proportional to this normalized deviation. The look-back for the moving
average and standard deviation can be set to equal the half-life. We see in
Example 2.5 how this linear mean reversion works for USD.CAD.
You might wonder why it is necessary to use a moving average or standard
deviation for a mean-reverting strategy at all. If a price series is stationary,
shouldn’t its mean and standard deviation be fixed forever? Though we usually
assume the mean of a price series to be fixed, in practice it may change slowly
due to changes in the economy or corporate management. As for the standard
deviation, recall that Equation 2.4 implies even a “stationary” price series with
0 < H < 0.5 has a variance that increases with time, though not as rapidly as a
geometric random walk. So it is appropriate to use moving average and standard
deviation to allow ourselves to adapt to an ever-evolving mean and standard deviation, and also to capture profit more quickly.This point will be explored more
thoroughly in Chapter 3, particularly in the context of “scaling-in.”

Example 2.5: Backtesting a Linear Mean-Reverting
Trading Strategy
In this simple strategy, we seek to own a number of units of
USD.CAD equal to the negative normalized deviation from its
moving average. The market value (in USD) of one unit of a currency
pair USD.X is nothing but the quote USD.X, so in this case the
linear mean reversion is equivalent to setting the market value of
the portfolio to be the negative of the Z-Score of USD.CAD. The
functions movingAvg and movingStd can be downloaded from my
website. (This code fragment is part of stationaryTests.m.)
lookback=round(halflife); % setting lookback to the halflife
% found above
mktVal=-(y-movingAvg(y, lookback))./movingStd(y, lookback);
pnl=lag(mktVal, 1).*(y-lag(y, 1))./lag(y, 1); % daily P&L of
% the strategy

FIGURE 2.3 Equity Curve of Linear Trading Strategy on

AUDCAD.

(Continued )

49
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

The cumulative P&L of this strategy is plotted in Figure 2.3.
Despite the long half-life, the total profit and loss (P&L) manages
to be positive, albeit with a large drawdown. As with most example
strategies in this book, we do not include transaction costs. Also,
there is a look-ahead bias involved in this particular example due to

Example 2.5 (Continued)
the use of in-sample data to find the half-life and therefore the lookback. Furthermore, an unlimited amount of capital may be needed
to generate the P&L because there was no maximum imposed on
the market value of the portfolio. So I certainly don’t recommend
it as a practical trading strategy. (There is a more practical version
of this mean-reverting strategy in Chapter 5.) But it does illustrate
that a nonstationary price series need not discourage us from trading
a mean reversion strategy, and that we don’t need very complicated
strategies or technical indicators to extract profits from a meanreverting series.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

50

Since the goal for traders is ultimately to determine whether the expected return or Sharpe ratio of a mean-reverting trading strategy is good
enough, why do we bother to go through the stationarity tests (ADF or Variance Ratio) and the calculation of half-life at all? Can’t we just run a backtest
on the trading strategy directly and be done with it? The reason why we
went through all these preliminary tests is that their statistical significance is
usually higher than a direct backtest of a trading strategy. These preliminary
tests make use of every day’s (or, more generally, every bar’s) price data for
the test, while a backtest usually generates a significantly smaller number
of round trip trades for us to collect performance statistics. Furthermore,
the outcome of a backtest is dependent on the specifics of a trading strategy,
with a specific set of trading parameters. However, given a price series that
passed the stationarity statistical tests, or at least one with a short enough
half-life, we can be assured that we can eventually find a profitable trading
strategy, maybe just not the one that we have backtested.
■ Cointegration
As we stated in the introduction of this chapter, most financial price series
are not stationary or mean reverting. But, fortunately, we are not confined to
trading those “prefabricated” financial price series: We can proactively create a portfolio of individual price series so that the market value (or price)
series of this portfolio is stationary. This is the notion of cointegration: If we

can find a stationary linear combination of several nonstationary price series, then these price series are called cointegrated. The most common combination is that of two price series: We long one asset and simultaneously
short another asset, with an appropriate allocation of capital to each asset.
This is the familiar “pairs trading” strategy. But the concept of cointegration
easily extends to three or more assets. And in this section, we will look at
two common cointegration tests: the CADF and the Johansen test. The former is suitable only for a pair of price series, while the latter is applicable to
any number of series.

Cointegrated Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test

Example 2.6: Using the CADF Test for Cointegration
ETFs provide a fertile ground for finding cointegrating price
series—and thus good candidates for pair trading. For example, both
Canadian and Australian economies are commodity based, so they
seem likely to cointegrate. The program cointegrationTest.m can be
downloaded from my website. We assume the price series of EWA is
(Continued )

51
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

An inquisitive reader may ask: Why do we need any new tests for the stationarity of the portfolio price series, when we already have the trusty ADF
and Variance Ratio tests for stationarity? The answer is that given a number
of price series, we do not know a priori what hedge ratios we should use to
combine them to form a stationary portfolio. (The hedge ratio of a particular asset is the number of units of that asset we should be long or short in a
portfolio. If the asset is a stock, then the number of units corresponds to the
number of shares. A negative hedge ratio indicates we should be short that
asset.) Just because a set of price series is cointegrating does not mean that
any random linear combination of them will form a stationary portfolio. But
pursuing this line of thought further, what if we first determine the optimal
hedge ratio by running a linear regression fit between two price series, use
this hedge ratio to form a portfolio, and then finally run a stationarity test on
this portfolio price series? This is essentially what Engle and Granger (1987)
did. For our convenience, the spatial-econometrics.com jplv7 package has
provided a cadf function that performs all these steps. Example 2.6 demonstrates how to use this function by applying it to the two exchange-traded
funds (ETFs) EWA and EWC.

Example 2.6 (Continued)

FIGURE 2.4 Share Prices of EWA versus EWC

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

52

contained in the array x, and that of EWC is contained in the array y.
From Figure 2.4, we can see that they do look quite cointegrating.
A scatter plot of EWA versus EWC in Figure 2.5 is even more
convincing, as the price pairs fall on a straight line.
We can use the ols function found in the jplv7 package to find the
optimal hedge ratio.

FIGURE 2.5 Scatter Plot of EWA versus EWC

Example 2.6 (Continued)
regression_result=ols(y, [x ones(size(x))]);
hedgeRatio=regression_result.beta(1);

FIGURE 2.6 Stationarity of Residuals of Linear

Regression between EWA versus EWC

(Continued )

53
THE BASICS OF MEAN REVERSION

As expected, the plot of the residual EWC-hedgeRatio*EWA in
Figure 2.6 does look very stationary.
We use the cadf function of the jplv7 package for our test. Other
than an extra input for the second price series, the inputs are the
same as the adf function. We again assume that there can be a nonzero
offset of the pair portfolio’s price series, but the drift is zero. Note
that in both the regression and the CADF test we have chosen EWA
to be the independent variable x, and EWC to be the dependent
variable y. If we switch the roles of EWA and EWC, will the result
for the CADF test differ? Unfortunately, the answer is “yes.” The
hedge ratio derived from picking EWC as the independent variable
will not be the exact reciprocal of the one derived from picking EWA
as the independent variable. In many cases (though not for EWAEWC, as we shall confirm later with Johansen test), only one of those
hedge ratios is “correct,” in the sense that only one hedge ratio will
lead to a stationary portfolio. If you use the CADF test, you would
have to try each variable as independent and see which order gives
the best (most negative) t-statistic, and use that order to obtain the
