
FIGURE 16.6 Choose Grid Mode to change ProphetCharts into a four-paneled
layout.

454

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.7 The initial result of using grid mode is four identical chart panes.

If you are looking at a single chart and choose Grid Mode, the result
will be somewhat like Figure 16.7: four equally sized panes, each identical
to the others. At that point, you can treat each of these panes independently, using any symbol, duration, frequency, or other settings in each of
the four charts that you like. As you make other alterations to the default
menu, such as adding technical studies, those embellishments will be applied to whichever of the four charts is currently active.
There is very little value in this, however, because all you’ve done
is given yourself one-fourth the amount of workspace you had before.
One useful thing to do, though, is to keep the same symbol in all four
panes but change the amount of time displayed in each. This allows you
to have a short-, medium-, long-, and very long-term perspective (or any
other combination) when examining the contents of a watch list (typing
a symbol into one of the panes doesn’t change the other three panes, but
thumbing through a watch list will populate all four panes with the same
symbol).
In Figure 16.8, for instance, the same symbol, DBB, is shown as a
10-year daily chart, a 5-day/5-minute chart, a 30-day/30-minute chart, and
a 3-month daily chart.

Power Features

455

FIGURE 16.8 Multiple panes can provide you multiple perspectives.

Once you have established a quartet of useful settings, you can preserve them in a grid style, saving you the trouble of doing that work over
again. Choose the item Save Grid Style from the Grid Charts menu, and
the dialog box in Figure 16.9 appears. You have two choices here: you can
choose the first radio button and type in a unique name for this style, or you
can update an existing style with the radio button. You can also choose to
include the accompanying technical studies as part of the style by checking
the pertinent checkbox.
When you are in grid mode, you can examine the contents of a watch
list, one symbol at a time, but displayed in the four panes you have customized. Looking at charts this way is performed the same way as you regularly look at a watch list: just open up the list you want to see, double-click
on the first symbol, and press the down-arrow (or click the down-arrow
button) to thumb through charts, one by one.
We’ve just learned one of the ways to use grid charts—that is, to examine a single financial instrument four different ways. The other use for grid
charts is to look at four different charts at a time (usually with the same
settings for each chart, since you want to be using consistent parameters
when looking at different issues).

456

FIGURE 16.9 Once you have established the desired settings for your four
charts, you can save them as a style.

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.10 You can view four different charts at once by choosing this
item from the pop-up watch list menu.

To accomplish this, right-click on a watch list name and choose the
View in Grid item, as shown in Figure 16.10. What this does is automatically
populate the grid with the first four symbols of the selected watch list.
What is somewhat unusual in this mode is that the four symbols in the
watch list are highlighted all at the same time, and when you click the upor down-arrow (or button) to move up or down the list, you will move four
symbols at a time (in chunks, so to speak). Figure 16.11 gives an example of
this function; you can see on the watch list that four symbols are shown in
inverse text, and the corresponding quartet of charts is displayed in a grid.
As suggested before, there is a price to pay for grid charts, which is
thoroughness. If you are examining one large chart at a time, you are probably going to do a much better job of analyzing the stock, as opposed to
viewing a quarter-size chart accompanied by three different instruments.
However, if you want to do a more cursory examination of a long list of
charts, the grid mode can be a valuable time-saver.

RATIO CHARTS
Charts do not necessarily need to be examined in a vacuum; analyzing
how one chart is doing in relation to another can yield profitable insights.

Power Features

457

FIGURE 16.11 Viewing a watch list in a grid can greatly reduce the amount of
time examining a long list requires.

Assume, for example, that you believed the value of gold and silver moved
in such a way that, over the years, silver oscillated between worth half as
much as gold (relatively speaking) to being worth twice as much as gold.
(This example is overly simple, but it has a point.) That would be a powerful piece of knowledge because, assuming this cycle remained intact on an
ongoing basis, you could go long silver (and short gold) at one extreme of
the ratio and go long gold (and short silver) at the other extreme.
ProphetCharts provides the ability to combine multiple stock symbols
with arithmetic operators to yield new graphs based on synthetic instruments. You can’t actually trade the concocted symbols you create, but you
can draw insights from them. Take Figure 16.12 as a simple example. In
it, the user has typed in (GLD/SLV) in the symbol box, instead of just a
regular symbol. The parentheses indicate that a formula is being used, and
GLD/SLV divides the silver ETF (symbol SLV) into the gold ETF (symbol
GLD). The result is a ratio chart—that is, the ratio of the symbol GLD to the
symbol SLV. Although it doesn’t yield the whimsical sine wave conjured up
in the aforementioned example, it still provides an interesting illustration
of how gold’s value interacts with silver’s (in this instance, gold is generally overpowering silver, although in this chart, its relative strength has
recently been greatly diminished).

458

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.12 The formula GLD/SLV yields a chart of the gold/silver ratio.

There is a lot more power in ratio charts than simple division, however. The more powerful way of entering a formula is with the Ratio Charts
dialog box, which you can access directly from the Chart Settings menu.
Figure 16.13 provides an example of how to use this feature. In it is the
formula (goog+rimm+aapl+amzn)/4; these four stock symbols are known
as the four horsemen of the NASDAQ exchange, and they are surrounded
by parentheses and followed by a division sign and the number 4. This formula, therefore, adds up the price values of all four of these stocks and
finds their average, yielding a chart of the Four Horsemen Average (which
doesn’t exist, but it does for the sake of this example).
You can use all the standard basic math operators when constructing a
formula: addition (+), subtraction (−), multiplication (*), and division (/),
along with parentheses, which take precedence over the other functions.
Figure 16.14 provides a somewhat more complex example that uses nested
parentheses. In this case, we are multiplying the value of SLV by 5 and
dividing that result into the value of GLD. The reason for this is that, as of
this writing, SLV is about one-fifth the price of GLD, and this formula helps
normalize the ratio. Figure 16.14 is similar in appearance to 16.12, but the
y-axis values are different since they are aligned to a more traditional value
of 1.0 as being “normal” for the ratio.

Power Features

459

FIGURE 16.13 Arithmetic operators and symbols can be used to create your own
custom indexes.

FIGURE 16.14 Using nested parentheses when constructing a formula.

460

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.15 You can preserve all your customized charts in the Ratio Charts
module.

As with most features in ProphetCharts, the work you put into constructing something customized can be permanently preserved in your account. In this case, when you are done with constructing a formula, click
the button labeled Save Ratio. The formula you have entered will be preserved in the module called Ratio Charts. From then on, you will have access to any of the custom formulas you have created by double-clicking on
them in the Ratio Charts module, shown in Figure 16.15.
The ratio charts feature calls for imagination and creativity, since you’ll
need to think about markets in a true intermarket sense; that is, you want
to gather insights from what one financial instrument is doing in relation to
another and deduce how you can profit from those dynamics.

HIDING ELEMENTS
When it comes to charting, simpler is usually better. Traders with access
to a lot of different indicators and studies often overdo it, thinking that the
more elaborate and complex the chart, the more powerful and useful it is.
This simply isn’t the case. A clean, spare chart with only the most crucial
elements is going to be far more helpful to you than a fireworks display of
indicators splashed on the screen.
Because of this, ProphetCharts lets you hide a variety of the elements
that are displayed. To briefly see the chart without a particular property,
you can temporarily or permanently hide features. Figure 16.16 shows how
to hide an item: choosing the Hide item from the Chart Settings menu.
This menu also shows that most of these Hide functions have a keyboard equivalent. For example, to hide the volume pane, you could press
the Ctrl and Spacebar keys (and to reveal the pane again, you would press

Power Features

461

FIGURE 16.16 Any elements currently hidden will have a check mark next to
them.

Ctrl-Space again; this is what is known as a toggle, since it turns something
on and off alternately). The various items you can hide are:

r Drawn Items (Ctrl-D)—Hides all the objects you created with the drawing tools menu, such as trend lines, Fibonacci studies, and highlights.

r Events (Ctrl-E)—Hides all the event icons, such as earnings calls and
dividend payments. Unless you consistently use these events as the
basis for trading decisions, you’ll probably want to hide events and
leave them hidden, temporarily turning them on only when you need
to glance at an event for a particular stock.
r Expansion (Ctrl-F)—As you know, you can add as much white space
horizontally (for time) and vertically (for prices) as you like with the
expansion tool. If you want to revert to a regular chart with no expansion, you can use this function (which doesn’t so much hide an object
as it undoes the effect of a particular feature in the program).
r Grid Lines (Ctrl-G)—By default, ProphetCharts displays a Cartesian
grid of lines for the major x-axis and y-axis levels. You might have noticed in this book that there are virtually no gridlines shown; this is
because eliminating them makes the charts simpler and cleaner to interpret for some people. You can toggle whether the grid is visible or
not with this function.
r Price—This might be a surprising one for you, since it seems odd that
a person would want to hide prices on a chart of prices. However, if
you are using overlay studies (such as moving averages) and want to
focus on them and their movement instead of the price, you can make
the price bars disappear.

462

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

r Studies (Ctrl-S)—This is probably one of the most frequently used toggles, since a person generally doesn’t want to see studies on their
charts for every single viewing. Instead, studies are usually brought
up when a person wants to examine a chart more deeply. Toggling the
studies on and off is far more efficient than clearing and then reapplying studies repeatedly.
r Volume—This hide feature is similar to being able to hide price, since
it will still keep the pane open in which volume is displayed, but
the volume bars themselves will disappear. This is useful when you
are performing overlay studies on volume and want to temporarily
hide the bars.
r Volume Pane—Finally, this eliminates the volume pane altogether.
This is also one of the most frequently used toggles, since many
ProphetCharts users would rather use the space on their screen for
their price chart, only turning on the volume pane on the occasions
when they want to examine what volume action is going on with respect to the accompanying price data.
Figure 16.17 shows an example chart in which both prices and volume
bars are hidden. Somewhat like the Cheshire cat’s smile, only the studies
remain.

FIGURE 16.17 The result of hiding both price and volume bars.

Power Features

463

FIGURE 16.18 The volume and price bars are revealed, along with the Cartesian
grid in the background.

Figure 16.18 shows the price and volume bars reinstated, accompanied
by the grid. When you hide or unhide any particular element, the chosen
state will remain intact until you make any other changes. Also note that
the settings for the elements that are hidden or suppressed will be included
in any ProphetCharts styles that you preserve, since these settings are considered critical elements of appearance.

UPSIDE-DOWN CHARTS
ProphetCharts now also has the ability to flip charts upside down. All you
have to do is press Ctrl-U to toggle between upside down and right side up.
Why would this be useful, you ask? It helps give you a new perspective on
a stock’s movement. Some people have a predisposition to bullish charts,
and others are predisposed to bearish charts. But turning the chart on its
head, you can see a graph with a totally new perspective, helping you get
past any biases you might have in your own examination of a graph.
Let’s take the extraordinary example of Dollar Thrifty rental car (symbol DTG), which fell from about $55 to about 60 cents in 2007 and 2008,
only to soar thousands of percent higher in price in 2009. Figure 16.19
shows DTG over a lengthy period, and the horizontal line provides a nice

464

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 16.19 The extraordinary price movement of DTG over eight years.

demarcation as to when the price fell below support and, years later,
pushed up against resistance.
Experienced traders will claim to be neither bulls nor bears, but the
truth is that most people do tilt pretty strongly one way or the other. If
someone has bull on the brain (or bear on the brain, for that matter), it
might be instructive, when looking at a chart that has experienced such extreme movement, to flip it upside down and see if they feel any differently
about it. Figure 16.20, for example, shows the result of pressing Ctrl-U on
the DTG chart. As you can see, the prices and the y-axis are both flipped
(although the logarithmic nature of the graph is retained). To someone very
accomplished at picking out bullish charts, they might say that this chart is
extraordinarily bullish, which, given the fact that it is upside down, means
that this could be a compelling short-sale opportunity.
The upside-down feature is a toggle, but it only holds when you are
actually pressing down the keys. The reason for this, naturally, is that you
don’t want to accidentally leave charts in upside-down mode and be basing
your decisions on inverted charts.

Power Features

465

FIGURE 16.20 When a chart is ﬂipped upside down, it still maintains its logarithmic properties.

MORE TO COME
As stated earlier in this chapter, ProphetCharts is a dynamic, ever-changing
product. You can expect improvements to continue coming, and depending on your method of accessing the product, you will be notified of these
improvements, and how to use them, in release notes and other announcements that are distributed by your platform provider.

CHAPTER 17

For Bears Only

n my trading, I have made a specialty of being a short-seller (that is,
betting that a security will go down), and I’ve learned a few things about
short-selling in my many years of doing so. I’d like to share some of my
personal experiences and knowledge here.

I

THE PHILOSOPHY OF SHORTING
Selling a stock short involves selling a security you do not own, pledging
that you will buy back the same stock at a later date (and hopefully at
a lower price). There are many financial instruments you can short (and
many ways you can short the market by going long, such as purchasing put
options), but I will use stocks as the focus in this chapter, since that is the
simplest and most popular method.
Over the many years I’ve been trading and writing my blog, people have
often asked me why I tend to be a bear in the first place. Let me first state
that I am quite aware of a couple of reasons why a person shouldn’t be a
bear:
1. The whole world is against you. From the investment banks, to CNBC,

to Jim Cramer, to the brokerage houses, everyone on the planet wants
the market to go up forever. There is a huge, huge, huge vested interest
in the markets going skyward for all eternity. So by being a bear, you
are definitely going against the crowd.
466

For Bears Only

467

2. No one gets rich being a bear. Fortunes like Warren Buffett’s are made

by investing in stocks that reap multithousand percent gains or more.
There is virtually no one on the Forbes 400 list that got there by being
a bear, although there are a couple of big hedge fund managers who
have done so.
Having said that, allow me to explain myself and hopefully shed some
light on my position. I have several reasons, some of which are rational,
and others which are not:
Impatience: I’m not the most patient soul in the world. And the fact
is that markets fall much faster than they rise. For instance, on
February 27, 2009, the market plummeted over 500 points in just a
few hours. It takes weeks to go up that much (usually). The financial turmoil in late 2007 and throughout 2008 is a fine example—it
took only 15 months to wipe out gains that had required a decade
to form. So I’m drawn to fast-moving markets.
Worrywart: I’m a worrier by nature. I wouldn’t go so far as saying I’m
a pessimist, but usually I tend to see the things that will go wrong
faster than I see the things that will go right. (I will add this is a
skill that is quite handy when one is raising young children.)
Unconventional: Somehow I’m wired to want to be different. I like to
stand apart from the crowd. Per my introductory paragraph, being
a bear is by its very nature weird and different. If you happened
to be this way during the 1980s and 1990s, it’s also terribly unprofitable!
Long-Term Charts: I’m a chartist. I believe in what charts can predict.
And every long-term chart I see (and when I say long-term, I’m
talking about over a century in some cases) absolutely screams
TOP! to me. And if you study the charts well, it doesn’t predict a
few hundred points off the Dow. It predicts a cataclysm, and I want
to profit from it.
Social Observation: One of the few verbs I remember from four years
of Latin in high school is speculare, from which we derive the term
speculate. This verb doesn’t mean “to gamble” but instead means
“to observe.” I am a speculator, and as such, I am an observer. And
what I am noticing in the present environment, based on my longterm analysis of markets, points to a multiyear downturn followed
by remarkable, long-term growth.
Whatever a person’s reasons for leaning one way or another in the
never-ending bull-bear battle, my belief is that most traders are naturally inclined to be either bullish or bearish, and it’s important to your

468

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

development as a trader to have enough self-awareness to understand your
inclinations and the reasons behind them. I hope some of the reasons I’ve
offered for my own personal bias help shed some light on your own thinking as well.

PRACTICAL GUIDE TO SHORT-SELLING
In simplest terms, short-selling is no different than the normal buying and
selling of a stock, except that you are doing it backwards. Bulls want to
buy low and sell high; bears want to sell high and buy low.
There are obstacles, however, that exist for bears that bulls need not
contend with. You should be aware of these pitfalls:

r Locating the Stock—If you want to buy a stock, your broker will
always be happy to oblige. But if you want to sell a stock, they have to
find it first. Typically, the larger the brokerage firm, the easier it is for
them to locate a stock. Some brokerages can show you lists of stocks
that are easy for them to borrow. Generally speaking, the more widely
traded a stock is, the easier it will be to find. If you find yourself often
frustrated with your broker’s lack of inventory, and you are serious
about short-selling, you might consider changing brokers.
r The Uptick Rule—As of this writing, this rule is no longer being used,
but there is talk of bringing it back in some form. The uptick rule, in
its prior form, deemed that a person could not sell a stock short unless
there was an uptick in its price—that is, unless the stock traded at a
price higher than it did before, indicating there was at least some level
of buying happening. This is, sadly, an example of how the market is
constructed to be against the bears—notice there is no downtick rule
on the books—but the logic was that the markets should not permit a
stock to go down mercilessly, aided by the incessant selling pressure
of the bears.
r Buy-Ins—Once you are in a short position, your brokerage can force
you out of that position, even at a price that you’d prefer not to take.
This is known as a buy-in. Recall that, in order to sell a stock that you
do not own, you need to borrow it from someone else. Well, that someone else might want it back; more particularly, if the broker’s inventory
of that given stock shrinks to the point that they need to recover shares
that are sold short, they may need to take you out of that position.
r Dividends—If you own a dividend-paying stock, you enjoy being paid
a (usually small) dividend periodically from the company. If you are
short a stock, the reverse is true—you actually have to pay the dividend

For Bears Only

469

yourself, on behalf of the company, since the rightful owner of the
stock is still due that dividend. So this creates a true cash cost to being
short a particular security (which means you might want to focus on
stocks that don’t pay a dividend in the first place).
r Squeezes—You have probably heard the term “short squeeze” before,
but perhaps you’re not sure what it meant. When a large number of
individuals have short positions in a given stock, they all are obliged
to buy back that stock at some point. But let’s assume that a stock has
been performing well, and it keeps pushing to new highs (or at least
technical levels that are damaging to bears). Those who are short the
stock will be compelled to close their positions in order to stop the
pain, and that creates more buying pressure on the stock. This buying
pressure, in turn, compels other shorts to cover their positions, and
this cascade of buying feeds on itself. This is what is known as a short
squeeze, because eventually all the bears on that stock are falling all
over themselves to get out, which, ironically, is terrific for the bulls. So
it is best to avoid stocks that are already heavily short (there are entire
web sites devoted to tracking the short interest on stocks, showing,
relatively speaking, how many shares are short for a given company’s
stock float).
r Emergency Rules—There are times when extraordinary circumstances in the market lead to extraordinary measures being taken.
Since those who regulate markets tend to be in favor of upward markets, and opposed to down markets, these measures are almost without exception designed against bears. During the historic week of
September 15, 2008, the SEC put rules in place banning short-selling
on an entire class of widely traded financial stocks. This caused havoc
in the markets, particularly on securities based on bearish financial
positions. So during tumultuous times, be warned that the laws and
regulations might be changed right under your feet.
