
FIGURE 4.11 USDCAD Daily Chart, September 5, 2010, to August 4, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

This is a EURUSD weekly chart, meaning each candlestick shows a week's price movement for the
Euro-USD currency pair. Thus, the 10-period EMA line is a 10-week EMA, the 50-period EMA is a
50-week EMA, and the 200-period EMA is a 200-week EMA.
Notice how:
Shorter-term MAs show price changes faster than longer-term MAs: The shortest duration 10period MA follows price more closely than the others, whereas the longer-duration 50- and 200period MAs are progressively more smoothed, with the 200-period MA almost flat, reflecting
how minimal the net price was over the period shown despite the volatility. That's a potentially
important point that you might have missed by looking at only the candles.
Longer-term MAs provide better s/r: The shorter-duration 10-week MA is breached seven times,
far more often than the 50-week (two times) or 200-week. Shorter-duration MAs are less
reliable s/r than longer ones.
Again, note the tradeoffs: See how the shorter-duration MAs are more responsive, and how the
longer-term MAs are better at showing the overall trend because they don't jump with every
short-term move. The longer-term MAs are breached much less frequently. Indeed, if the 200-day
EMA is breached, we will have to consider whether this longer-term downtrend is reversing.
Because this is a daily chart, these are 200-, 100-, 50-, 20-, and 10-day EMAs.

Additional Points about MAs: Watch and Respect the Most Popular
Ones
Most Popular Durations: Trading has nothing to do with discerning what logically should happen.
Instead, it's all about anticipating what the crowd will do and doing it first in your chosen time frame
before they bid up your entry price or bid down your selling price.
Don't Think: What logically should happen?
Think: What will the crowd think the other investors will do?
This kind of thinking is important for short-term trades meant to be concluded within a few days at

most, or intraday trades and trades based on short-term reactions to news events. For example, during
2010–2011, despite the worsening situation in the Euro-zone (EZ), the EUR would repeatedly rally
on flimsy excuses like:
Rumors of rescue plans.
Rescue plans that were badly flawed and failed to address the real problems in the EZ.
Bank stress tests that were so lenient that banks which passed the tests were nationalized or
dependent on government or European Central Bank (ECB) support within a matter of months
after the tests.
So why did the EUR rally? Enough traders believed that expectations had sunk low enough that
anything resembling good news would spark at least a short-term rally, and they were right.
Applying this lesson to technical indicators, it pays to keep the most widely followed indicators
like the 10, 20, 50, (100?), and 200 MAs on your charts so you know where everyone else is seeing
these widely followed forms of potential s/r.
For example, if you want to buy low, you need to have identified what everyone else believes is the
likely support so you're ready to buy if the crowd buys and proves the support level is valid. In
planning your profit-taking exit, you need to know where the masses are likely to begin selling and be
ready to take profits before price hits real resistance and a wave of selling.
This principle of watching the popular indicators holds true for all kinds of technical indicators.
You don't have to keep them all on your chart at the same time if you find your chart getting
cluttered. You can keep multiple charts of the same currency pair and time frame with different
templates (groups of technical indicators), so that you can watch everything yet still keep uncluttered
charts. That's one reason that traders love to use computers with multiple screens.

For Further Study, Experiment
Though you should watch the most popular MAs, traders can and do experiment with less or more
radical variations on these. Some will use slightly shorter-duration MAs when seeking more
responsive trend lines in order to catch trend changes before the rest of the crowd, but at a cost of
catching more false signals. Others will opt for slightly longer durations in order to filter out all but
the most proven trends. That may reduce the number of losing trades at a cost of missing some moves
or accepting reduced profits on winning trades due to later entries and exits. The MAs that work best
for you will depend greatly on your risk tolerance, skill level, ability to monitor trades in real time,
and thus your chosen time frame and trading style. When we cover MA crossovers in Chapter 5, we'll
see that this kind of tinkering can be useful for developing entry and exit signals.
Before you start tinkering with MA durations or any of the most popular TA tools, get comfortable
with those covered in this book. Only then will you have the background needed to start customizing
your tools.

FIBONACCI RETRACEMENTS (FIBs): THESE FIBs
DON'T LIE
Fibonacci retracements (Fibs) provide a valuable kind of s/r information that the previous s/r

indicators don't.
As in any financial market, forex price trends don't move in a straight line. Instead, trends move in a
zigzagging pattern as they periodically retrace parts of their primary move and continue it, steadily
testing progressive levels of s/r as they move higher or lower.
For example, in the period covered in the EURUSD daily chart shown in Figure 4.12, note not only
the retracements within the overall uptrend (like October to November 2010 on the right side of the
chart, or May to early August 2011 on the left), but also the smaller reversals within these
countermoves.
FIGURE 4.12 EURUSD Daily Chart, September 2, 2010, to August 4, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Fibs help us determine where prices are likely to either:
Make these repeated short-term reversals as they zigzag within their longer-term trend.
Make a longer-term reversal within an even longer-term trend or begin a longer-term reversal.
Fibs are based on certain mathematical relationships, expressed as ratios, between numbers in a
series, that were identified (at least for the Western world) by thirteenth-century mathematician
Leonardo Fibonacci. They have application in fields as diverse as biology, music, and art. You can
search online for the details of how these are derived, but we'll stick to what's relevant to trading.
Traders found that trends tend to retrace prior moves according to these same ratios, which in
percentages come to 23.6 percent, 38.2 percent, 50 percent, 61.8 percent, and 100 percent of a given
trend. By drawing these percent retracements of a trend on their charts, they could better predict
where future price moves might stall or reverse.
That is, they found that when trends retrace they tend to retrace 23.6 percent, 38.2 percent, 50
percent, 61.8 percent, or 100 percent of their prior move.
It's unclear why these ratios work, but they do, so they became widely accepted, thus strengthening
their influence as markets accept them as likely s/r points.
For example, Figure 4.13 is the same chart as we saw in Figure 4.12, with Fib levels (horizontal

lines) drawn for the range of the downtrend of December 2009 to June 2010. Note how well the Fibs
predict s/r as the EURUSD retraces that downtrend.
FIGURE 4.13 EURUSD Daily Chart, November 25, 2009, to August 5, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Applying Fibs to Your Charts
Because the application of technical indicators varies with charting packages, we usually don't cover
how you insert a given indicator. With Fibs, however, it's worth reviewing the general mechanics of
how you get them on your chart.
So, where did these lines come from? How do you draw them?
To create Fib levels, you select a major high and low for the period in question. Your charting
software divides that price range by the key Fibonacci ratios of 23.6 percent, 38.2 percent, 50
percent, 61.8 percent, and 100 percent, and it draws horizontal lines at the prices that correspond to
these percentages of that range. These price levels are where s/r levels are more likely to occur.
Your charting software will describe the mechanics of this, which typically involve nothing more
than the following procedure steps:
Identify the price range to study. For example, in Figure 4.13, we wanted to see the Fib s/r points
as the EURUSD rallied and retraced the downtrend of December 2009 to June 2010, highlighted
by the dotted line on the left side of the chart.
Select the Fibonacci retracements option.
To plot the fib retracements for an uptrend that occurs after a downtrend, you first need to
define the range of the prior downtrend so that the charting software can calculate the percent
retracement points that the new uptrend will hit as it retraces through the range of the prior
downtrend. To do that:
Place your mouse cursor at the high point where the downtrend began, left click and hold the
left mouse button down in order to drag the mouse cursor to the low point where the

downtrend ends, then release the left mouse button.
The fib retracements will appear. These serve as s/r points for the uptrend that follows. As
price rises, each level it approaches is resistance until decisively breached, and then that
level becomes support unless price falls back below it.
To plot the fib retracements for a downtrend that follows an uptrend, you do the same thing.
The only difference is that you first need to define the range of the prior uptrend so that the
charting software can calculate the percent retracement points that the new downtrend will hit as
it retraces through the range of the prior uptrend. To do that:
After selecting the Fibonacci Retracements option from you menu of technical indicators,
place your mouse cursor at the low point where the uptrend began, left click and hold the left
mouse button down in order to drag the mouse cursor to the high point where the uptrend ends,
then release the left mouse button.
The fib retracements will appear. These serve as s/r points for the downtrend that follows. As
price falls, each level it approaches is support until decisively breached, and then that level
becomes resistance unless price falls back below it.
The software fills in the price levels that correspond to 23.6 percent, 38.2 percent, 50 percent,
61.8 percent, and 100 percent of the price range you selected.

Fibs Within Fibs
Traders must choose the period to which they apply Fibs, so there is a degree of human judgment as to
the range to which a given set of Fibs will be applied. At any one time, millions of traders will be
looking at different Fib levels for different periods and time frames. So, it's helpful to draw Fibs for a
time frame above and below the one from which you trade so that you can see both:
The longer-term s/r from longer-term Fibs that cover a wider price range and possibly a different
trend altogether.
The shorter-term s/r from Fibs nested within your time frame that covers a narrower price range
and possibly a different kind of trend.
For example, let's say we wanted more information about likely s/r for the EURUSD downtrend
from April to August 2011, as shown in Figure 4.13. We could draw another set of Fibs for the
uptrend of February to May 2011 that occurred within the broader overall downtrend that began in
late 2009 to early 2010, which would provide possible support points as the EURUSD retraced this
uptrend lower.
The resulting Fibs, in Figure 4.14, served as useful predictors of s/r during this downtrend. Like any
s/r points, see them as center lines for bands or zones of s/r within which the candles cluster, rather
than as precise points of s/r. Some retracement levels are stronger than others. The 23.6, 38.2, and
61.8 percent retracement levels tend to be stronger than the others.
FIGURE 4.14 EURUSD with Fibonacci Retracements from January 11, 2011, to August 4, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

For perspective, examine the chart in Figure 4.15. This uptrend and its Fibs nest are within the
broader overall downtrend and its Fibs.
FIGURE 4.15 EURUSD Daily Chart, November 25, 2009, to August 4, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

You can use different sets of Fibs to gauge possible s/r points for the overall trend and various
moves higher or lower within it. In this case, we plotted Fibs for the longer-term overall downtrend

from November 25, 2009, to June 2, 2010, and also plotted the Fibs for the shorter-term uptrend from
January 12, 2011, to May 4, 2011, within this overall downtrend.

BOLLINGER BANDS (BBs): USE AS S/R IN RANGEBOUND MARKETS
Bollinger Bands (BBs) are a simple yet powerful combination of channels and MAs. BBs consist of
an SMA surrounded by an upper and lower band plotted by a certain number of standard deviations
above and below the SMA. Think of them as flexible channels whose width varies with price
volatility. The wider the price swings over the period of the SMA, the wider the channel; the
narrower the price range over this period, the narrower the channel.
The default settings on most charting software will be a 20-period SMA with the bands at a
distance of two standard deviations (discussed next) from this SMA. Figure 4.16 shows what they
look like using these “20, 2” default settings.
FIGURE 4.16 USDCAD Daily Chart, February 23 to August 8, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

You can change these settings to suit your needs, and later we'll look at one useful variation:
Double Bollinger Bands (DBBs). However, the standard settings are popular and are worth watching
for the sake of knowing what the herd is seeing as potential s/r from the lower and upper bands.

Support/Resistance (S/R) for Flat or Gently Sloping Trends: The
Bollinger Bounce
The two standard deviation width of the channel means that the statistical probability of price hitting
the bands given the price range of the past 20 periods is only about 5 percent. However like any
statistical measure, it assumes that all elements of the sample, in this case the 20 periods, are
the same.

That assumption works for flat, range-bound markets or gently trending markets, which by definition
are times when no change occurs in the markets' perception of a currency pair's value. Under those
conditions, the upper and lower bands provide reliable s/r points. In flat or mild trends, the price
tends to fluctuate between the upper and lower bands, as price bounces off the upper and lower bands
like a ball bouncing off the floor and ceiling. Even if price swings widen or narrow, Bollinger bands
adjust for those conditions and widen or narrow with the price swings, providing s/r points that adjust
with volatility (a uniquely valuable feature of BBs). In Figure 4.16, price usually bounces off these
bands back toward the middle, particularly when price makes a sudden sharp move up or down.
Using the standard default settings of a 20-period SMA middle band with each band two standard
deviations distance from the middle band, there is only a 5 percent chance that the price will ever
touch the outer bands. Again, this calculation assumes (as with any statistical measure) that all sample
elements (the past 20 periods) were the same and all prices equally probable. When there's no strong
trend or no trend at all, that assumption applies. Flat price action suggests that market perceptions
about the value of a currency pair haven't materially changed.
However, that assumption doesn't apply in a strong trend, which by definition indicates market
perceptions about value are changing.

Bollinger Bands Don't Provide Meaningful S/R with Strong Trends
BBs are useful s/r points only when the pair (or any other asset) is in a flat trading range, as in Figure
4.16, where you can see how price tended to bounce off the upper and lower bands. However, if a
currency pair or any other asset is in a clear trend, you won't see that tendency for price to bounce off
these bands. If the trend is strong, as in Figure 4.17, the bands provide no useful s/r at all as price can
climb up or down the BBs for long periods repeatedly. The price continued to climb the upper band
from April to mid-June 2010, September to October 2010, February to April 2011, and July 2011 (all
periods highlighted).
FIGURE 4.17 Gold Weekly Chart, April 17 to August 8, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

You don't need to know why this is true, but just in case you're interested, here's a basic layman's
explanation.
Assuming the two standard settings mentioned previously, then statistically speaking, 95 percent of
the 20 closing prices were supposed to fall within two standard deviations from the middle band.
However, as noted, statistics assume that all data or elements of the sample (in this case, the past 20
closing prices for the each candle) are equally probable. That's not the case for strongly trending
markets, which by their nature indicate that perceptions of value are changing. So, the 20 (or other)
past 20 data points or closing prices were not equally probable. For example, during a rising trend,
higher prices are more likely than lower ones. Changing perceptions of value mean that the latest
prices have a higher probability of hitting the upper band in an uptrend or lower band in a downtrend.
In sum, strongly trending markets reflect a change in how the asset's value is perceived, so the BBs
don't work as meaningful support or resistance in strongly trending markets.
However, BBs have additional uses besides gauging s/r in flat or gently trending markets. We'll
cover that in Chapter 8.

INTRODUCTION TO JAPANESE CANDLE CHART
PATTERNS
Chart patterns are another technical indicator and form of s/r. The two styles most widely followed
are Japanese candle and Western style chart patterns.
A few key differences exist between them:
Scope: Though Western chart patterns can serve as the centerpiece of certain trading strategies,
Japanese candle patterns are not intended to comprise a stand-alone trading system; instead, they
confirm or are confirmed by other technical indicators. Japanese candle patterns typically
forecast what happens over the next few candles, whereas Western patterns can suggest longerterm movements covering a longer period and can suggest specific price targets.
Pattern types: Japanese candle charts mostly indicate reversal or indecision (i.e., possible
reversal), whereas Western charting patterns tend to indicate continuation (trend pausing before
resuming) or reversal.
What both kinds of chart patterns share in common is that both are useful because:
They help us understand market sentiment and are easy to interpret because they make sense. For
example, it's intuitively clear that candles comprised solely of long bodies with no wick,
meaning that price went straight up or down, suggest strong, decisive bullish or bearish sentiment
with buyers or sellers in control. Candles comprised almost solely of upper and lower wicks,
with only a line for a body, show price moved back and forth but ended almost unchanged. They
suggest indecisiveness or a balance of power between buyers and sellers.
Both kinds of chart patterns present graphic images of mass trader psychology, which doesn't
change over time, hence these patterns do tend to repeat and are valid indicators of s/r points and
how price may behave in the future.
Candle patterns are a vast topic. Our goal here is to introduce you to the most important among
them. You can search for more information, a great deal of which is available online free. Some are

so good that I admit I couldn't do a better job, so use these and print the parts you want as hard
copies:
BabyPips.com
investopedia.com
stockcharts.com
Table 4.1 is a brief summary of the candle patterns with which you should become familiar. It will
be easier to remember what price movements these patterns suggest if you see the logic behind them
even if you don't remember their names.
Table 4.1 Summary of Basic Japanese Candle Patterns

Note that the table classifies candles and patterns as bullish, bearish, or neutral. The adjective
“bullish” refers to candles that show price rising or patterns that suggest price will rise, because a
bull gores its adversary in an upward motion. “Bearish” is used to refer to candles that show price
falling or patterns that suggest price will drop, because a bear swipes at its adversary in a downward
motion.
Notes on Single Candle Patterns
Spinning Top
Depends on whether higher or lower close. Significance increases if occurs after an
extended move in the opposite direction of the close. In this example, the most recent candle
showed a black, lower close. If these spinning tops occurred at the top of an extended
uptrend, it would suggest a coming reversal. If they occurred at the bottom of a downtrend,
they'd merely suggest continued downtrend, already the default assumption in an ongoing
downtrend.
Doji
Neutral: The more wick relative to body, the more indecision because buyers and sellers are
more evenly matched. The lack of a body means that dojis suggest indecision and possible
end or reversal of trend. Thus they're more meaningful when found after a long move up or
down, because they suggest the move may end and perhaps reverse.
White Marubozu – Bullish/Black Marubozu – Bearish
Conversely, the more body relative to wick, the more decisive the move and the clearer the
dominance of buyers or sellers. White suggests buyers dominant, so usually suggests more
upside. The black version suggests the opposite.
Hammer – Bullish/ Hanging Man - Bearish
Hammer and Hanging Man have same shape:
Long lower wick, little or no upper wick two to three times the length of the body

Opposite meaning depending on the following:
a. Occurs after extended move lower = Hammer, bullish, suggests market probing and
hitting a bottom.
b. Occurs after extended move higher = Hanging Man, bearish, suggests market hitting a
top.
In either case, higher or lower close unimportant.
Inverted Hammer - Bullish/Shooting Star - Bearish
Inverted Hammer and Shooting Star share same shape and are the inverted forms of the
Hammer and Hanging Man shown above
It has a long upper wick, little or no lower wick two to three times the length of the body. As
usual, needs to occur after a move higher or lower, needs start of reversal to confirm the
pattern.
Opposite meaning depending on the following:
a. Occurs after extended move lower = Inverted Hammer, bullish, suggests markets hitting
bottom, confirmed by a bounce higher
b. Occurs after extended move higher = Shooting Star, bearish, suggests markets hitting a
top, confirmed by bounce lower
In either case, higher or lower close unimportant though if it's in the opposite direction of the
prior candles, it's a bit more suggestive of a halt or reversal of prior candles' trend.
Notes on Double Candle Patterns
Bullish Engulfing
Occurs when a bearish candle (lower close) is followed by a noticeably longer bullish
candle (higher close), which “engulfs” the range of the prior bearish candle. The longer the
bullish candle, the more it “engulfs” or exceeds the range of the prior bearish candle, the
more bullish the pattern. Obviously, as always, context and timing matter. The pattern is
more bullish if this pair appears after an extended downtrend, at strong support, or both,
because these other signs confirm that the odds are higher that the downtrend is exhausted.
Bearish Engulfing
Occurs when a bullish candle (higher close) is followed by a noticeably longer bearish
candle (lower close), which “engulfs” the range of the prior bullish candle The longer the
bearish candle, the more it “engulfs” or exceeds the range of the prior bullish candle, the
more bearish the pattern. Obviously, as always, context and timing matter. The pattern is
more bearish if this pair appears after an extended uptrend, at strong resistance, or both,
because the odds are higher that the uptrend has become exhausted.
Tweezer Tops – Bearish
Looks like a pair of tweezers at the top of an uptrend. Ideally:
First candle closes in the direction of the uptrend, the second closes down.
Upper wicks are longer than the bodies, and should be about the same length and
terminate around the same resistance (confirms resistance to further upward progress),
hence the tweezers shape.
Think of these wicks as knocking against a ceiling of resistance, or the market rejecting a
