disturbed his sense of the universe’s symmetry. But applying such strictly rational rules to his own children
was a chilly way to look at the world. “He won’t give it to us on principle,” said Susie. “All my life, my father
has been teaching us. Well, I feel I’ve learned the lesson. At a certain point, you can stop.”30
Before long, her doctor confined Susie Jr. to bed rest for a tedious six months. She lay in a tiny bedroom
watching a small black-and-white television set. An appalled Kay Graham brought over meals prepared by
her chef and sat at Susie’s bedside, then shamed Buffett into buying his daughter a larger color TV. When Big
Susie caught wind of what was happening, she dropped everything and flew in to care for her daughter,
spending months in Washington. As soon as she saw the condition of the place, she turned it upside down and
renovated it. “It’s just terrible that Warren won’t pay for this,” she complained. But everything she was
spending had been dunned out of him. Their endless money game enhanced Warren’s reputation for
thriftiness, and Susie’s reputation for generosity. Since they had both signed up for this arrangement,
obviously they both wanted it this way.
With the birth of Emily in September 1986, the Buffetts now had eight grandchildren and stepgrandchildren
in three cities: San Francisco, Omaha, and Washington, D.C. As the Emerald Bay house renovation reached
habitability, Susie slowed the pace to a steady tinkering and began to use it as a base to entertain friends and,
especially, her grandchildren. In San Francisco, she hop-scotched into an apartment in Pacific Heights, close
to Peter’s new home on Scott Street. This large condominium on Broadway sat at the top of four dizzying
flights of stairs and had a glorious view over the bay from the Golden Gate Bridge to Alcatraz.
Now she hired her decorator, Kathleen Cole, as a personal assistant to help manage her life. “You can just
work part-time,” she told Cole, “and you’ll have all this time for your two kids.” The next thing Cole knew,
she was working for the Buffett Foundation, planning Susie’s travel arrangements, overseeing entertainment,
and hiring and managing a staff that included housekeepers, errand-runners, and friends employed partly as a
favor. The gift-giving grew every year: Cole ordered catalogs, chose gifts, wrapped them, shipped them, kept
track of what was coming in and going out, and maintained records so that nothing was ever duplicated.31
She found herself managing two houses, including the ongoing renovation of the Laguna house and the
two-year renovation project that Susie had launched on her new place on Broadway. Cole’s husband, Jim, a
fire-fighter, stepped in as a favor to work as Susie’s part-time handyman. Another friend, Ron Parks, a CPA
whom Susie had met while traveling in Europe, managed the disbursements and taxes—out of kindness and
without pay—for what he jokingly called “STB Enterprises,” or, as another friend put it, Susie’s “payroll and
give-away roll.”32 Parks was the partner of Tom Newman, her friend Rackie’s son; Susie had become close
friends with the couple. Newman, a chef, occasionally helped out with her parties, but mostly tried
unsuccessfully to improve her nutritional style. By now, Susie’s paid and unpaid staff had far outgrown that
at Berkshire Hathaway headquarters.
While the renovation of Susie’s new Broadway apartment was under way, Billy Rogers, apparently drug-free,
moved from Los Angeles to San Francisco and started collaborating with Susie on an album. One day when
he was working on music at Peter’s studio, he borrowed twenty dollars from Peter and left around lunchtime.
After a couple of days with no word from Rogers, Susie, Peter, and Mary Buffett decided to go to his
rooming house and check on him. They found his door locked from inside. When he didn’t answer their
knock, they were worried enough to go to the manager to ask her to let them in. As they waited in the
hallway for her to return with the key, they could hear drifts of music from other apartments. “Oh, say that
you’ll be true, and never leave me blue, Suzie Q,” came from one doorway. From another, “Que sera, sera,”
floated through the air. Whatever will be, will be.
Finally the manager arrived and unlocked the door. The three of them stepped in to see Billy sitting crosslegged on the floor with his back to the door. He was tied off and a needle stuck out from his forearm
beneath the tourniquet. Nearby, an LP spun silently on a turntable. The last song on the album had finished
playing two days before. Billy was stone dead. Susie covered her eyes and began to wail as Peter took off
down the hallway to find a pay phone so he could call an ambulance.33 The autopsy revealed that Billy had
died of “acute cocaine and morphine poisoning.”34
“He was such a sweet guy,” says Buffett, “and he killed himself with drugs.” The shock of losing a family

member in a sordid overdose at a rooming house would reverberate for years. When Rogers died, Doris says,
“That was the worst sorrow that Susie ever went through.” She had not only lost the nephew she had loved
like a son. After so many years, all her efforts to try to save him had come to naught. She had never suffered
such a defeat.
***
Warren admired his wife’s desire to rescue people and her skill in helping those in need. Billy Rogers was
only one of many she had befriended through the years. Some of them had done damage to themselves
through terrible choices, others were victims of bad luck—though few came to such a terrible end. As
“Mama Susie,” she made it her mission to help people one at a time. Warren called her a “retailer.” The
emotional opening-up of this one-on-one work was beyond him. Rather, he chose to leverage his brains and
money to affect as many lives as possible; he considered himself a “wholesaler.” His way of connecting to
people was through his role as a teacher. But he was no longer teaching his courses at the University of
Omaha, and his most attentive students, Kay and Don Graham, had become thoroughly Buffettized. His most
important seminar, the Buffett Group meetings, took place only in odd-numbered years. Buffett enjoyed
teaching so much that he actually went looking for an audience.
In 1980, he agreed to testify in a major antitrust lawsuit against IBM, the most famous case of its era.
Another witness, Arjay Miller, a fellow Post director, testified reluctantly; he found being grilled by lawyers,
before a judge who impressed him as hating IBM, a miserable experience. Buffett, however, enjoyed showing
his expertise; he relished putting it to the test before lawyers. He put his all into the testimony. “He’s a great
testifier,” says Miller.35 Buffett was especially pleased that his testimony became part of the record in a
landmark case in American business history.
Buffett’s earliest teachings had been preserved in the letters he had written to his former partners in the
1960s, letters that were photocopied and passed hand to hand around Wall Street until the copies became
blurry and hard to read. Ever since 1977, with the help of Carol Loomis, his unusual chairman’s letters to his
shareholders in the Berkshire annual reports—carefully crafted, enlightening, eye-opening letters—had
grown more personal and entertaining by the year; they amounted to a crash course in business, written in
clear language that ranged from biblical quotations to references to Alice in Wonderland and princesses
kissing toads. Much of their acreage was devoted to discussions of matters other than Berkshire Hathaway’s
financial results—how to think about investing, the harm the dismal economy was doing to business, how
businesses should measure results. These letters brought out both the preacher and the cop in Buffett, giving
people a sense of him as a man. And the man was charming, he was attractive; his investors wanted more of
him. So he gave it to them at the shareholder meetings.
The earliest meetings had taken place in Seabury Stanton’s old loft above the New Bedford mill. Two or
three people with Ben Graham connections came because of Buffett. One was Conrad Taff, who had taken
Graham’s class. Buffett wanted his shareholder meetings to be open and democratic, as unlike the old
Marshall-Wells meeting as possible. Taff peppered Buffett with questions, and Buffett enjoyed it, as if he
were sitting in an armchair at a party with people gathered round listening to his wisdom.
The meetings carried on like this for years, with only a sprinkling of people showing up to ask questions, even
after the meetings moved to Nebraska and took place in the National Indemnity cafeteria. Buffett still
enjoyed them, despite the sparse attendance. As recently as 1981, only twenty-two people attended. Jack
Ringwalt actually had to recruit employees to stand in back of the National Indemnity cafeteria so as not to
embarrass his boss with an empty room. When the meeting was adjourned after fifteen minutes of routine
legalizing and half a dozen perfunctory questions, the stenographer whom Conrad Taff had flown in to take
notes for him had written nothing down. She looked frantically at Verne McKenzie, who just shrugged.36
Then in July 1983, coincident with the Blue Chip merger, a little crowd of people suddenly showed up at the
cafeteria to hear Buffett talk. He answered as many questions as they asked in his plain-spoken,
unpretentious style: He was teaching, and he came across as democratic, Midwestern, and refreshing, just as

he did in his letters to the shareholders.
Buffett spoke in metaphors the audience understood, using the emperor’s new clothes and the bird in the
hand versus the two in the bush. He told plain-spoken truths that other businessmen would not acknowledge,
and routinely burst the bubble of corporate double-speak. He developed a memorable way of fabulizing life
and businesses into instructive tales that rang familiar—Rose Blumkin as the Cinderella of Berkshire
Hathaway, or Ajit Jain as Buffett’s Rumpelstiltskin, who ran his reinsurance division by spinning straw into
gold. His style was so engaging and his meaning so illuminating that word began to spread. The way he
expressed himself made people see old problems in new ways. The meetings took on a quality associated with
almost everything that Buffett touched. They began to snowball.
In 1986, Buffett moved the meeting to the Witherspoon Auditorium of the Joslyn Art Museum. Four hundred
people came, then five hundred the next year. Many of them worshipped Buffett, who had made them rich.
In between questions, some people read poems of praise from the balcony.37
Buffett’s anomalous success, and the fame it had brought him, was putting him on the road to becoming a
brand just as surely as Skippy peanut butter. Inevitably, therefore, he became the target of a group of finance
professors who were at that very moment attempting to prove that someone like Buffett was a mere accident
who should not be paid attention, much less worshipped.
These academics had started by positing the reasonable but not necessarily obvious truth that if a whole lot of
people were trying to be better than average, they would become the average. Paul Samuelson, an MIT
economist, revived and circulated the 1900 work of Louis Bachelier, who observed that the market is made
up of speculators who cohere into a whole that operates according to a “random walk.”38 A professor from
the University of Chicago, Eugene Fama, took Bachelier’s work and tested it empirically in the modern-day
market, which he described as “efficient.” The scrabbling efforts of legions of investors to beat the market
made those very efforts futile, he said. Yet an army of professionals had sprung up who charged everything
from modest fees to the soon-to-be-legendary hedge-fund cut of “two-and-twenty”(two percent of assets and
twenty percent of returns) for the privilege of managing an investor’s money and trying to predict the future
behavior of stocks. Stockbrokers raked their cut from all the individuals who were encouraged by TV shows
and magazines to pick the next hot stock and compete with the pros. Every year, the sum of all these
people’s labors added up to exactly what the market did (less the fees).
Charles Ellis, a consultant to professional money managers, blew the whistle on the market’s pickpockets in
1975 in “Winning the Loser’s Game,” an article that showed that professional money managers failed to beat
the market ninety percent of the time.39 Ellis’s work also had disheartening implications for individual
investors and the readers of books and attendees of seminars like “Invest Your Way to Millions.” He said the
best way to make money in the market was to simply buy an index of the market itself without paying the
high fees that the toll-takers charged. Over the long term, the market tended to outperform bonds, so
investors would receive the payback from the entire economy’s growth. So far, so good.
The professors who had discovered this efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) kept hacking away at their
computers over the years, however, to turn these ideas into an even tighter version, one that had the purity
and rigor of physics and mathematics, one to which there could be no exceptions. They concluded that
nobody could beat the average, that the market was so efficient that the price of a stock at any time must
reflect every piece of public information about a company. Thus, studying balance sheets, listening to
scuttlebutt, digging in libraries, reading newspapers, studying a company’s competitors—all of it was futile.
The price of a stock at any time was “right.” Anybody who beat the average was just lucky—or trading on
inside information.
Most people who actually worked on Wall Street could cite examples of stocks that had traded
inefficiently.40 But it was certainly true that exceptions to the efficient market had grown rarer—and the
people who exploited them generally had a steady pulse and deep knowledge based on long study, and the
willingness to put in full-time concentrated effort. Yet the proponents of EMH denied all exceptions, and to
them Buffett—the most visible exception of all—and his lengthening and increasingly acclaimed record

became an inconvenient fact. They saw him as like a man who could sail blindfolded through a sea of
icebergs: in theory impossible; it was only a matter of time before he would drown. The “random walkers”
—Samuelson at MIT, Fama at the University of Chicago, Michael Jensen at the University of Rochester,
William Sharpe at Stanford—kicked around the Buffett conundrum. Was he a one-off genius or a freak
statistical event? A certain amount of derision was heaped on him, as if such an anomalous stunt were not
worthy of study. Burton Malkiel, a Princeton economist, summed the whole thing up by saying that anyone
who outperformed the stock market consistently was no different from a lucky monkey that had a winning
streak at picking stocks by throwing darts at the Wall Street Journal stock listings.41
Buffett loved the Wall Street Journal; he loved it so much that he had made a special deal with the local
distributor of the paper. When the batches of Journals arrived in Omaha every night, a copy was pulled out
and placed in his driveway before midnight. He sat up waiting to read tomorrow’s news before everybody
else got to see it. It was what he did with the information the Wall Street Journal gave him, however, that
made him a superior investor. If a monkey got the Wall Street Journal in its driveway every night just before
midnight, the monkey still could not match Buffett’s investing record by throwing darts.
Buffett made sport of the controversy by playing with a Wall Street Journal dartboard in his office. The
efficient-market hypothesis invalidated him, however. Furthermore, it invalidated Ben Graham. That would
not do. He and Munger saw these academics as holders of witch doctorates.42 Their theory peddled
bafflemath, teaching a whole generation of students something disprovable. They offended Buffett’s
reverence for rational thinking and for the profession of teaching.
Columbia held a seminar in 1984 to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of Security Analysis. Buffett was by
then so identified as Ben Graham’s intellectual heir that Graham himself had asked him to revise and update
The Intelligent Investor. The two were not able to agree on certain things—principally Buffett’s belief in
concentration versus Graham’s devotion to diversification—and in the end Buffett wrote only the
introduction. Nevertheless, Columbia invited Buffett to represent the Grahamian point of view at the
seminar, which was actually more of a debate over EMH. Convening in the auditorium at Uris Hall, his
opponent on the panel, Michael Jensen, stood up and said he felt like “a turkey must feel at the beginning of
a turkey shoot.”43 His role in the morality play was to cast withering comments at the antediluvian views of
the Grahamian value investors. Some people could do better than the market for long periods, he said. In
effect, if enough people flip coins, a few of them will flip heads over and over. That was how randomness
worked.
Sitting in the first row alongside Buffett, the frail, aged David Dodd leaned over and whispered, “Take his
pants off, Warren.”
Buffett had spent weeks preparing for this event. He’d anticipated the coin-flipping argument. When he got
up for his turn, he said that while this might be so, the row of heads would not be random if all the successful
coin-flippers came from the same town. For example, if all the coin-flippers who kept flipping heads came
from the tiny village of Graham-and-Doddsville, something specific that they were doing must be making
those coins flip heads.
He then pulled out a chart with the track record of nine money managers—Bill Ruane; Charlie Munger;
Walter Schloss; Rick Guerin; Tom Knapp and Ed Anderson at Tweedy, Browne; the FMC pension fund;
himself; and two others.44 Their portfolios were not similar; despite a certain amount of coattailing in the
early years, they had largely invested on their own. All of them, he said, came from the village of Grahamand-Doddsville, had been flipping straight heads for more than twenty years, and for the most part had not
retired and were still doing it. Such a concentration proved statistically that their success could not have
come by random luck.
Since what Buffett said was obviously true on its face, the audience broke into applause and lobbed questions
at him, which he answered gladly and at length. The random-walk theory was based on statistics and Greekletter formulas. The existence of people like Buffett had been waved away using bafflemath. Now, to the
Grahamites’ relief, Buffett had used numbers to disprove the absolutist version of the efficient-market

hypothesis.
That fall, he wrote up “The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville” as an article for Hermes, the
magazine of the Columbia Business School. Firing a flamethrower at the edifice of the EMH, this article did
much to cement his reputation among investors. And over time, the random walkers revised their argument
into “semi-strong” and “weak” forms that allowed for exceptions.45 The one great service EMH would have
performed, if anybody listened, was to discourage the average person from believing they could outwit the
market. Nobody except the toll-takers could object to that. But the tendencies of humankind being what they
are, EMH became de rigueur in business school classrooms, yet the number of individual investors and
professional money managers who assumed that they were smarter than average only grew, the toll-takers
kept taking their cut, and the market went on as before. Thus the main effect of “The Superinvestors of
Graham-and-Doddsville” was to add to the growing legend, even the cult, that was building around Warren
Buffett.
Meanwhile, EMH and its underpinning, the capital asset pricing model, drove extraordinary and deep roots
into the investing world; it launched a view of the stock market as an efficient statistical machine. In a
reliably efficient market, a stock was risky not based on where it was trading versus its intrinsic value, but
based on “volatility”—how likely it was to deviate from the market average. Using that information and
newly unleashed computing power, economists and mathematicians started going to Wall Street to make
more money than they ever could in academia.
Knowing every stock’s volatility allowed investment managers to shape and carve portfolios using stocks of
greater and lesser volatility built around a core list of stocks that made up a near-replica of the market index
and acted as ballast in the middle. Knowing a stock’s volatility allowed portfolio managers to pair up stocks
and arbitrage them while considering their “betas” (the Greek letter assigned to volatility) to refine these
bets.46 Arbitrage was the idea behind a “hedge fund” in its simplest form: Its manager sold a group of stocks
short to help cushion results if the market went down.47 That was less risky than buying a stock or bond
outright.
But to make big money on arbitrage—buying and selling two nearly identical things to profit from their
difference in price—required scaffoldings of debt, in which more and more assets were sold short to buy
more and more assets on the “long” side.48 This expansion of leverage from hedge funds and arbitrage was
related to the rise of junk bonds and takeovers occurring at the same time. The models that supported the
argument for leveraged buyouts using junk bonds were, like the models used by arbitrageurs, variations of the
efficient-market hypothesis. Leverage, however, was like gasoline. In a rising market, a car used more of it to
go faster. In a crash, it was what made the car blow up.
This is why Buffett and Munger considered defining risk as volatility to be “twaddle and bullshit,” as Munger
would later put it. They defined risk as not losing money. To them, risk was “inextricably bound up in your
time horizon for holding an asset.”49 Someone who could hold an asset for years could afford to ignore its
volatility. Someone who was leveraged did not have that luxury—leverage costs; moreover the lender’s (not
the borrower’s) time horizon defines the length of the loan. Thus a risk of leverage is that it takes away
choices. The investor may not be able to wait out a volatile market; she is burdened by the “carry” (that is,
the cost) and she depends on the lender’s goodwill.
But betting on volatility seemed to make sense when the market rose as predicted. When enough time passes
and nothing bad happens, people who are making a lot of money tend to think it is because they are smart,
not because they are taking a lot of risk.50
Throughout these profound changes in Wall Street’s ways, Buffett’s own habits had changed little.51 What
still made his pulse race was buying a company like Fechheimer, which made prison-guard uniforms. People
like Tom Murphy had to worry about whether they would be targeted by corporate raiders wielding junk
bonds, but Berkshire Hathaway was impregnable because Buffett and friends of Buffett owned so much of its
stock; his reputation made Berkshire a fortress where others could shelter. Berkshire had made $120 million
