
- 44 -

John Grisham

The Broker

veteran who'd been selected by Director Maynard himself to handle the
Backman matter. Less than ten minutes after the Ryax incident, Ms. Javier
stared at her monitor, mumbled the word "Dammit," then walked upstairs.
As usual, Teddy Maynard was sitting at the end of a long table, wrapped in a
quilt, reading one of the countless summaries that got piled on his desk
every hour.
Ms. Javier said, "Just heard from Aviano. Our boy is refusing all
medications. Won't take an IV. Wont take a pill."
"Can't they put something in his food?" Teddy said at low volume.
"He's not eating."
"What's he saying?"
"That his stomach is upset."
"Is that possible?"
"He's not spending time on the toilet. Hard to say."
"Is he taking liquids?"
"They took him a glass of water, which he refused. Insisted on bottled water
only. When he got one, he inspected the cap to make sure the seal had not
been broken."
Teddy shoved the current report away and rubbed his eyes with his knuckles.
The first plan had been to sedate Backman in the hospital, with either an IV
or a regular injection, knock him out cold, keep him drugged for two days,
then slowly bring him back with some delightful blends of their most up-todate narcotics. After a few days in a haze, they would start the sodium
pentothal treatment, the truth serum, which, when used with their veteran
interrogators, always produced whatever they were after.
The first plan was easy and foolproof. The second one would take months
and success was far from guaranteed.
"He's got big secrets, doesn't he?" Teddy said.
"No doubt."
"But we knew that, didn't we?"
"Yes, we did."

- 45 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Two of Joel Backman's three children had already abandoned
him when the scandal broke. Neal, the oldest, had written his father at least
twice a month, though in the early days of the sentence the letters had been
quite difficult to write.
Neal had been a twenty-five-year-old rookie associate at the Backman firm
when his father went to prison. Though he knew little about JAM and
Neptune, he was nonetheless harassed by the FBI and eventually indicted by
federal prosecutors.
Joel's abrupt decision to plead guilty was aided mightily by what happened
to Jacy Hubbard, but it was also pushed along by the mistreatment of his son
by the authorities. All charges against Neal were dropped in the deal. When
his father left for twenty years, Neal was immediately terminated by Carl
Pratt and escorted from the firm's offices by armed security. The Backman
name was a curse, and employment was impossible around Washington. A
pal from law school had an uncle who was a retired judge, and after calls
here and there Neal landed in the small town of Culpeper, Virginia, working
in a five-man firm and thankful for the opportunity.
He craved the anonymity. He thought about changing his name. He refused
to discuss his father. He did title work, wrote wills and

- 46 -

John Grisham

The Broker

deeds, and settled nicely into the routine of small-town living. He eventually
met and married a local girl and they quickly produced a daughter, Joel's
second grandchild, and the only one he had a photo of.
Neal read about his fathers release in the Post. He discussed it at length with
his wife, and briefly with the partners of his firm. The story might be
causing earthquakes in D.C., but the tremors had not reached Culpeper. No
one seemed to know or care. He wasn't the broker's son; he was simply Neal
Backman, one of many lawyers in a small Southern town.
A judge pulled him aside after a hearing and said, "Where are they hiding
your old man?"
To which Neal replied respectfully, "Not one of my favorite subjects, Your
Honor." And that was the end of the conversation.
On the surface, nothing changed in Culpeper. Neal went about his business
as if the pardon had been granted to a man he didn't know. He waited on a
phone call; somewhere down the road his father would eventually check in.
After repeated demands, the supervising nurse passed the hat and collected
almost three bucks in change. This was delivered to the patient they still
called Major Herzog, an increasingly cranky sort whose condition was no
doubt worsening because of hunger. Major Herzog took the money and
proceeded directly to the vending machines he'd found on the second floor,
and there he bought three small bags of Fritos corn chips and two Dr
Peppers. All were consumed within minutes, and an hour later he was on the
toilet with raging diarrhea.
But at least he wasn't quite as hungry, nor was he drugged and saying things
he shouldn't say.
Though technically a free man, fully pardoned and all that, he was still
confined to a facility owned by the US. government, and still living in a
room not much larger than his cell at Rudley. The food there had been
dreadful, but at least he could eat it without fear of being sedated. Now he
was living on corn chips and sodas. The nurses were only slightly friendlier
than the guards who tormented him. The doctors just wanted to dope him,
following orders from above, he was certain. Somewhere close by was a
little torture chamber where they

- 47 -

John Grisham

The Broker

were waiting to pounce on him after the drugs had worked their miracles.
He longed for the outside, for fresh air and sunshine, for plenty of food, for a
little human contact with someone not wearing a uniform. And after two
very long days he got it.
A stone-faced young man named Stennett appeared in his room on the third
day and began pleasantly by saying, "Okay, Backman, here's the deal. My
name's Stennett."
He tossed a file on the blankets, on Joel's legs, next to some old magazines
that were being read for the third time. Joel opened the file. "Marco
Lazzeri?"
"That's you, pal, a full-blown Italian now. That's your birth certificate and
national ID card. Memorize all the info as soon as possible."
"Memorize it? I can't even read it."
"Then learn. We're leaving in about three hours. You'll be taken to a nearby
city where you'll meet your new best friend who'll hold your hand for a few
days."
"A few days?"
"Maybe a month, depends on how well you make the transition."
Joel laid down the file and stared at Stennett. "Who do you work for?"
"If I told you, then I'd have to kill you."
"Very funny. The CIA?"
"The USA, that's all I can say, and that's all you need to know."
Joel looked at the metal-framed window, complete with a lock, and said, "I
didn't notice a passport in the file."
"Yes, well, that's because you're not going anywhere, Marco. You're about to
live a very quiet life. Your neighbors will think you were born in Milan but
raised in Canada, thus the bad Italian you're about to learn. If you get the
urge to travel, then things could get very dangerous for you."
"Dangerous?"
"Come on, Marco. Don't play games with me. There are some really nasty
people in this world who'd love to find you. Do what we tell you, and they
won't."
"I don't know a word of Italian."
"Sure you do-pizza, spaghetti, caffe latte, bravo, opera, mamma

- 48 -

John Grisham

The Broker

mia. You'll catch on. The quicker you learn and the better you learn, the
safer you'll be. You'll have a tutor."
"I don't have a dime."
"That's what they say. None that they could find, anyway." He pulled some
bills out of his pocket and laid them on the file. "While you were tucked
away, Italy abandoned the lira and adopted the euro. There's a hundred of
them. One euro is about a dollar. Ill be back in an hour with some clothes. In
the file is a small dictionary, two hundred of your first words in Italian. I
suggest you get busy."
An hour later Stennett was back with a shirt, slacks, jacket, shoes, and socks,
all of the Italian variety. "Buon giorno," he said.
"Hello to you," Backman said.
"What's the word for car?"
"Macchina."
"Good, Marco. It's time to get in the macchina."
Another silent gentleman was behind the wheel of the compact, nondescript
Fiat. Joel folded himself into the backseat with a canvas bag that held his net
worth. Stennett sat in the front. The air was cold and damp and a thin layer
of snow barely covered the ground. When they passed through the gates of
the Aviano Air Base, Joel Backman had the first twinge of freedom, though
the slight wave of excitement was heavily layered with apprehension.
He watched the road signs carefully; not a word from the front seat. They
were on Route 251, a two-lane highway, headed south, he thought. The
traffic soon grew heavy as they approached the city of Pordenone.
"What's the population of Pordenone?" Joel asked, breaking the thick
silence.
"Fifty thousand," Stennett said.
"This is northern Italy, right?"
"Northeast."
"How far away are the Alps?"
Stennett nodded in the general direction of his right and said, 'About forty
miles that way. On a clear day, you can see them."
"Can we stop for a coffee somewhere?" Joel asked.
"No, we, uh, are not authorized to stop."
So far the driver appeared to be completely deaf.
They skirted around the northern edge of Pordenone and were

- 49 -

John Grisham

The Broker

soon on A28, a four-lane where everyone but the truckers appeared to be
very late for work. Small cars whizzed by them while they puttered along at
a mere one hundred kilometers per hour. Stennett unfolded an Italian
newspaper, La Repubblica, and blocked half the windshield with it.
Joel was very content to ride in silence and gaze at the countryside flying by.
The rolling plain appeared to be very fertile, though it was late January and
the fields were empty. Occasionally, above a terraced hillside, an ancient
villa could be seen.
He'd actually rented one once. A dozen or so years earlier, wife number two
had threatened to walk out if he didn't take her somewhere for a long
vacation. Joel was working eighty hours a week with time to spare for even
more work. He preferred to live at the office, and judging by the way things
were going at home, life would've certainly been more peaceful there. A
divorce, however, would've cost too much money, so Joel announced to
everyone that he and his dear wife would spend a month in Tuscany. He
acted as though it had all been his idea-"a monthlong wine and culinary
adventure through the heart of Chianti!"
They found a fourteenth-century monastery near the medieval village of San
Gimignano, complete with housekeepers and cooks, even a chauffeur. But
on the fourth day of the adventure, Joel received the alarming news that the
Senate Appropriations Committee was considering deleting a provision that
would wipe out $2 billion for one of his defense-contractor clients. He flew
home on a chartered jet and went to work whipping the Senate back into
shape. Wife number two stayed behind, where, as he would later learn, she
began sleeping with the young chauffeur. For the next week he called daily
and promised to return to the villa to finish their vacation, but after the
second week she stopped taking his calls.
The appropriations bill was put back together in fine fashion.
A month later she filed for divorce, a raucous contest that would eventually
cost him over three million bucks.
And she was his favorite of the three. They were all gone now, all scattered
forever. The first, the mother of two of his children, had remarried twice
since Joel, and her current husband had gotten rich selling liquid fertilizer in
third world countries. She had actually written

- 50 -

John Grisham

The Broker

him in prison, a cruel little note in which she praised the judicial system for
finally dealing with one of its biggest crooks.
He couldn't blame her. She packed up after catching him with a secretary,
the bimbo that became wife number two.
Wife number three had jumped ship soon after his indictment.
What a sloppy life. Fifty-two years, and what's to show for a career of
bilking clients, chasing secretaries around the office, putting the squeeze on
slimy little politicians, working seven days a week, ignoring three
surprisingly stable children, crafting the public image, building the
boundless ego, pursuing money money money? What are the rewards for the
reckless pursuit of the great American dream?
Six years in prison. And now a fake name because the old one is so
dangerous. And about a hundred dollars in his pocket.
Marco? How could he look himself in the mirror every morning and say,
"Buon giorno, Marco"?
Sure beat the hell out of "Good morning, Mr. Felon."
Stennett didn't as much read the newspaper as he wrestled with it. Under his
perusal, it jerked and popped and wrinkled, and at times the driver glanced
over in frustration.
A sign said Venice was sixty kilometers to the south, and Joel decided to
break the monotony. ''I'd like to live in Venice, if that's all right with the
White House."
The driver flinched and Stennett's newspaper dropped six inches. The air in
the small car was tense for a moment until Stennett managed a grunt and a
shrug. "Sorry," he said.
"I really need to pee," Joel said. "Can you get authorization to stop for a
potty break?"
They stopped north of the town of Conegliano, at a modern roadside
servizio. Stennett bought a round of corporate espressos. Joel took his to the
front window where he watched the traffic speed by while he listened to a
young couple snipe at each other in Italian. He heard none of the two
hundred words he'd tried to memorize. It seemed an impossible task.
Stennett appeared by his side and watched the traffic. "Have you spent much
time in Italy?" he asked.
"A month once, in Tuscany."
"Really? A whole month? Must've been nice."

- 51 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Four days actually, but my wife stayed for a month. She met some friends.
How about you? Is this one of your hangouts?"
"I move around." His face was as vague as his answer. He sipped from the
tiny cup and said, "Conegliano, known for its Prosecco."
"The Italian answer to champagne," Joel said.
"Yes. You're a drinking man?"
"Haven't touched a drop in six years."
"They didn't serve it in prison?"
"Nope."
"And now?"
"I'll ease back into it. It was a bad habit once."
"We'd better go."
"How much longer?"
"Not far."
Stennett headed for the door, but Joel stopped him. "Hey, look, I'm really
hungry. Could I get a sandwich for the road?"
Stennett looked at rack of ready-made panini. "Sure."
"How about two?"
"No problem."
A27 led south to Treviso, and when it became apparent they would not
bypass the city, Joel began to assume the ride was about to end. The driver
slowed, made two exits, and they were soon bouncing through the narrow
streets of the city.
"What's the population of Treviso?" Joel asked.
"Eighty-five thousand," Stennett answered.
"What do you know about the city?"
"It's a prosperous little city that hasn't changed much in five hundred years.
It was once a staunch ally of Venice back when these towns all fought with
each other. We bombed the hell out of it in World War Two. A nice place,
not too many tourists."
A good place to hide, Joel thought. "Is this my stop?"
"Could be."
A tall clock tower beckoned all the traffic into the center of the city where it
inched along around the Piazza dei Signori. Scooters and mopeds zipped
between cars, their drivers seemingly fearless. Joel soaked in the quaint little
shops-the tabaccheria with racks of newspapers blocking the door, the
farmacia with its neon green cross, the butcher with all manner of hams
hanging in the window, and of course

- 52 -

John Grisham

The Broker

the tiny sidewalk cafes where all tables were taken with people who
appeared content to sit and read and gossip and sip espresso for hours. It was
almost 11:00 a.m. What could those people possibly do for a living if they
broke for coffee an hour before lunch?
It would be his challenge to find out, he decided.
The nameless driver wheeled into a temporary parking place. Stennett
pecked numbers on a cell phone, waited, then spoke quickly in Italian. When
he was finished, he pointed through the windshield and said, "You see that
cafe over there, under the red-and-white awning? Caffe Donati?"
Joel strained from the backseat and said, "Yeah, I got it."
"Walk in the front door, past the bar on your right, on to the back where
there are eight tables. Have a seat, order a coffee, and wait."
"Wait for what?"
"A man will approach you after about ten minutes. You will do what he
says."
"And if I don't?"
"Don't play games, Mr. Backman. We'll be watching."
"Who is this man?"
"Your new best friend. Follow him, and you'll probably survive. Try
something stupid, and you won't last a month." Stennett said this with a
certain smugness, as if he might enjoy being the one who rubbed out poor
Marco.
"So its adios for us, huh?" Joel said, gathering his bag.
"Arrivederci, Marco, not adios. You have your paperwork?"
"Yes."
"Then arrivederci."
Joel slowly got out of the car and began walking away. He fought the urge to
glance over his shoulder to make sure Stennett, his protector, was paying
attention and still back there, shielding him from the unknown. But he did
not turn around. Instead, he tried to look as normal as possible as he strolled
down the street carrying a canvas bag, the only canvas bag he saw at that
moment in the center of Treviso.
Stennett was watching, of course. And who else? Certainly his new best
friend was over there somewhere, partially hiding behind a newspaper,
giving signals to Stennett and the rest of the static. Joel stopped for a second
in front of the tabaccheria and scanned the headlines of the Italian
newspapers, though he understood not a single

- 53 -

John Grisham

The Broker

word. He stopped because he could stop, because he was a free man with the
power and the right to stop wherever he wanted, and to start moving
whenever he chose to.
He entered Caffe Donati and was greeted with a soft "Buon giorno" from the
young man wiping off the bar.
"Buon giorno," Joel managed in reply, his first real words to a real Italian.
To prevent further conversation, he kept walking, past the bar, past a circular
stairway where a sign pointed to a cafe upstairs, past a large counter filled
with beautiful pastries. The back room was dark and cramped and choking
under a fog of cigarette smoke. He sat down at one of two empty tables and
ignored the glances of the other patrons. He was terrified of the waiter,
terrified of trying to order, terrified of being unmasked so early in his flight,
and so he just sat with his head down and read his new identity papers.
"Buon giorno," the young lady said at his left shoulder.
"Buon giorno," Joel managed to reply. And before she could rattle off
anything on the menu, he said, "Espresso." She smiled, said something
thoroughly incomprehensible, to which he replied, "No."
It worked, she left, and for Joel it was a major victory. No one stared at him
as if he was some ignorant foreigner. When she brought the espresso he said,
"Grazie," very softly, and she actually smiled at him. He sipped it slowly,
not knowing how long it would have to last, not wanting to finish it so he
might be forced to order something else.
Italian whirled around him, the soft incessant chatter of friends gossiping at
a rapid-fire pace. Did English sound this fast? Probably so. The idea of
learning the language well enough to be able to understand what was being
said around him seemed thoroughly impossible. He looked at his paltry little
list of two hundred words, then for a few minutes tried desperately to hear a
single one of them spoken.
The waitress happened by and asked a question. He gave his standard reply
of "No," and again it worked.
So Joel Backman was having an espresso in a small bar on Via Verde, at the
Piazza dei Signori, in the center of Treviso, in the Veneto, in northeast Italy,
while back at Rudley Federal Correctional Facility his old pals were still
locked down in protective isolation with lousy food and watery coffee and
sadistic guards and silly rules and years to go before they could even dream
of life on the outside.
Contrary to previous plans, Joel Backman would not die behind

- 54 -

John Grisham

The Broker

bars at Rudley. He would not wither away in mind and body and spirit. He
had cheated his tormentors out of fourteen years, and now he sat unshackled
in a quaint cafe an hour from Venice.
Why was he thinking of prison? Because you can't just walk away from six
years of anything without the aftershocks. You carry some of the past with
you, regardless of how unpleasant it was. The horror of prison made his
sudden release so sweet. It would take time, and he promised himself to
focus on the present. Don't even think about the future.
Listen to the sounds, the rapid chatter of friends, the laughter, the guy over
there whispering into a cell phone, the pretty waitress calling into the
kitchen. Take in the smells-the cigarette smoke, the rich coffee, the fresh
pastries, the warmth of an ancient little room where locals had been meeting
for centuries.
And he asked himself for the hundredth time, Why, exactly, was he here?
Why had he been whisked away from prison, then out of the country? A
pardon is one thing, but why a full-blown international getaway? Why not
hand him his walking papers, let him say so long to dear ol' Rudley and live
his life, same as all the other freshly pardoned criminals?
He had a hunch. He could venture a fairly accurate guess.
And it terrified him.
Luigi appeared from nowhere.

- 55 -

John Grisham

The Broker

LuiGI WAS IN HIS EARLY THIRTIES, WITH DARK SAD EYES AND
DARK
hair half covering his ears, and at least four days' worth of stubble on his
face. He was bundled in some type of heavy barn jacket that, along with the
unshaven face, gave him a handsome peasant look. He ordered an espresso
and smiled a lot. Joel immediately noticed that his hands and nails were
clean, his teeth were straight. The barn jacket and whiskers were part of the
act. Luigi had probably gone to Harvard.
His perfect English was accented just enough to convince anyone that he
was really an Italian. He said he was from Milan. His Italian father was a
diplomat who took his American wife and their two children around the
world in sendee to his country. Joel was assuming Luigi knew plenty about
him, so he prodded to learn what he could about his new handler.
He didn't learn much. Marriage-none. College-Bologna. Studies in the
United States-yes, somewhere in the Midwest. Job-government. Which
government-couldn't say. He had an easy smile that he used to deflect
questions he didn't want to answer. Joel was dealing with a professional, and
he knew it.
"I take it you know a thing or two about me," Joel said.

- 56 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The smile, the perfect teeth. The sad eyes almost closed when he smiled.
The ladies were all over this guy. "I've seen the file."
"The file? The file on me wouldn't fit in this room."
"I've seen the file."
"Okay, how long did Jacy Hubbard serve in the US. Senate?"
"Too long, I'd say. Look, Marco, we're not going to relive the past. We have
too much to do now."
"Can I have another name? I'm not crazy about Marco."
"It wasn't my choice."
"Well, who picked Marco?"
"I don't know. It wasn't me. You ask a lot of useless questions."
"I was a lawyer for twenty-five years. It's an old habit."
Luigi drained what was left of his espresso and placed some euros on the
table. "Let's go for a walk," he said, standing. Joel lifted his canvas bag and
followed his handler out of the cafe, onto the sidewalk, and down a side
street with less traffic. They had walked only a few steps when Luigi
stopped in front of the Albergo Campeol. "This is your first stop," he said.
"What is it?" Joel asked. It was a four-story stucco building wedged between
two others. Colorful flags hung above the portico.
"A nice little hotel. Albergo' means hotel. You can also use the word 'hotel'
if you want, but in the smaller cities they like to say albergo."
"So it's an easy language." Joel was looking up and down the cramped
street-evidently his new neighborhood.
"Easier than English."
"We'll see. How many do you speak?"
"Five or six."
They entered and walked through the small foyer. Luigi nodded knowingly
at the clerk behind the front desk. Joel managed a passable "Buon giorno"
but kept walking, hoping to avoid a more involved reply. They climbed three
flights of stairs and walked to the end of a narrow hallway. Luigi had the key
to room 30, a simple but nicely appointed suite with windows on three sides
and a view of a canal below.
"This is the nicest one," Luigi said. "Nothing fancy, but adequate."
"You should've seen my last room." Joel tossed his bag on the bed and began
opening curtains.
