
percent interest in as a cigar butt and helped turn around. By then, the stock market had recovered. Ruane’s
Sequoia Fund had made a huge comeback in 1975, up almost sixty-two percent compared to thirty-seven
percent for the market. Munger had just about made back his partners’ money, with a seventy-three percent
gain in 1975. He took no fees for himself, and was winding his partnership down. Explaining why their
convoluted empire made sense based on the cheap prices paid for stocks at the time grew harder as the
market recovered. The investigation kept growing hairy legs like a tarantula.
Rickershauser had been studying a chart that showed all of Buffett and Munger’s complex financial interests.
Buffett sat at the center, buying Blue Chip, Diversified, and Berkshire, Wattling them into so many pockets
that it made Rickershauser shudder.33 Everyone knew Buffett, the great white shark, was virtually helpless to
stop himself from acquiring these stocks. If he found ten bucks and spied a share of Blue Chip, Berkshire, or
Diversified, he charged, grabbed, and threw the stock in the nearest drawer. After he and Munger had bought
the first twenty-five percent of Wesco, Rickershauser had finally advised Buffett to buy stock only through
formal tender offers to avoid the appearance of impropriety.34 The complex cross-holdings that Buffett had
created made it seem as though he was trying to hide something. Rickershauser looked at the crazy diagram
and fretted, “There’s got to be an indictment in there somewhere.”35 He didn’t think the SEC would have
enough evidence to convict, but it would be awfully easy to accuse.
In the greater sense, Munger was a two-bit player, his financial stake minute compared with Buffett’s. He
had been snared as a petty accomplice. But since Blue Chip was his territory, he was a principal in the Wesco
saga and thus played a central role in the SEC’s questioning.36 He admitted to Seidman, “We do have a very
complicated set of business affairs, and I think we have learned, to our regret, that that may not be too smart.
But we tried to keep all the balls in the air and properly sequenized with the other balls and handle them
honorably.”
Despite the pair’s protestations and the fact that it could find nothing wrong with the San Jose Water Works
or Source Capital deals, the SEC kept going. The tiger of a prosecutor now recommended to Sporkin that the
SEC file charges against Buffett and Munger personally. He was unswayed by Buffett’s and Munger’s
testimony and believed that they had intentionally quashed the Santa Barbara merger by overpaying for
Wesco’s stock. He was unsympathetic to the “who was harmed?” explanation for paying more for the stock
and thought the pair was splitting hairs too fine in its explanations of events.37

Rickershauser wrote Sporkin directly. He pleaded with him not to prosecute Buffett and Munger,
“individuals who value their good names and reputations as their most priceless possessions,” because “many
people, probably most people, assume evil conduct on the part of anyone civilly prosecuted by the
commission.” Even if Buffett and Munger consented to a settlement without admitting or denying the
charges, merely filing them would cause “terrible, irreversible damage” because “the good reputation of the
commission automatically and inexorably destroys the good reputation” of the defendants. “A giant’s
strength should be used with great discretion,” he urged. “The risk from inadvertent oversights in business
should not become so onerous that people who value their reputations are deterred from participation.”38 He
begged to save Buffett’s and Munger’s reputations by offering to consent to an order on minor, technical
disclosure violations on behalf of Blue Chip only, as long as the consent decree did not name any individuals.
The panic inside Buffett’s mind can only be imagined. Within the office, he did his best to maintain an

imperturbable facade so as not to alarm his office staff, any of whom might be interviewed by the SEC.
Rickershauser worked like a stevedore to portray his clients as upstanding citizens from the perfect model
families. He sent in biographies of Munger and Buffett to the SEC, stressing their charitable work, the many
boards on which they served, Howard Buffett’s tenure as a Congressman, and the millions of dollars of taxes
that Buffett had paid to the government since filing his first tax return at age fourteen. Buffett obviously had
been grinding away at this document as if his life depended on it.
Munger was resigned. “If a policeman follows you down the road for five hundred miles,” he said to Buffett,
“you’re going to get a ticket.”
Then Rickershauser made a further proffer to Sporkin, put delicately: “The complex financial interests of Mr.
Buffett and Mr. Munger…have apparently raised the impression that compliance with various legal
requirements is becoming difficult,” he wrote, noting the pair had tried to comply with both the spirit and the
letter of the law. “They now wish to simplify their holdings as rapidly as they can.”39
In their interviews, the SEC lawyers had already explored what simplifying would mean. “Sometime in the
future, it is certainly possible that we would merge Blue Chip with Berkshire,” Buffett had responded to
their question, “but Blue Chip has a lot of legal problems, and until some of those are resolved, it might be
hard to arrive at what we would feel reasonably sure would be a fair exchange ratio. If I had my
preferences, it would be that someday they would be merged. So hopefully we would have more or less the
same businesses we have now, but less complications. I don’t really like these complications. It may look
like I like these complications. I don’t have a great staff to handle it all. It seemed fairly simple while we
were doing it,” he said, “but not simple now.”40
Asked by an SEC investigator if Buffett had “contingency plans” to simplify things, “Oh, does he ever,” said
Munger. “He has about twice as big a contingency plan as before this investigation started.”41
In considering the proffer, says Sporkin today, much depended on Rickershauser. He “was one of those few
lawyers that I’ve met in life that, whatever he told you, you could go to the bank on.” Sporkin viewed
Rickershauser as not only a brilliant lawyer but truthful, straightforward, and upright, incapable of being
disingenuous. Rickershauser told Sporkin that Buffett was “going to be the greatest person that Wall Street
has ever seen” and that “he was the most decent, honorable person you would ever meet.” Coming from
almost anyone else, Sporkin would have dismissed this as rhetoric, but coming from Rickershauser, he took
these statements to be both sincere and probably well-judged.42 Sporkin felt he had as great a duty to absolve
as to convict. He thought that a prosecutor had to differentiate between a fundamentally honest person who
had made a misstep and a crook. When it came to crooks, his job was to put ’em away. His view of Buffett
and Munger was that they had certainly misstepped, but that they were not crooks.43
And so the giant tapped Blue Chip gently on the wrist.44
The company consented to an SEC finding in which it neither admitted nor denied that it failed to notify
investors it was trying to bust the Santa Barbara merger in buying Wesco’s stock and that Blue Chip had
artificially propped up Wesco’s market price over the course of three weeks.45 Blue Chip promised never
again to do what it had not admitted it had done.46 The consent decree named no individuals. The publicity
over the event had been trivial and would fade. Buffett’s and Munger’s records and reputations stayed clean.
Two weeks later, the SEC named Buffett to a blue-ribbon panel to study corporate disclosure practices. It
was forgiveness and, above all, a fresh start.47

40

How Not to Run a Public Library
Washington, D.C. • 1975–1976

One day in early 1975, Susie Buffett’s friend Eunice Denenberg came over to the house and sat on the
dog-hair-covered sofa in the family room. Susie turned her back so she wouldn’t have to face her friend and
turned on the tape deck. Then she sang. Denenberg pronounced approval. They talked about Susie’s dream
of singing professionally, which she was too diffident to do anything about herself. Denenberg went home;
then she called back the next day and said, “This is your agent.” She enlisted Bob Edson, an assistant music
professor at Midland College, to create a backup band and got Susie a gig at the Steam Shed, a nightclub in
Irvington, the tiny town on Omaha’s outskirts where she and Dottie had once formed the choir in her father’s
church. Susie was nervous, but the rest of the family was enthusiastic. Only Doc Thompson, who said, “I
don’t know why you want to sing in bars,” had any doubts.
The night of Susie’s first public performance, before a crowd made up of about thirty-five friends, she was so
anxious that she asked Warren not to come. Talking and greeting people in a long sequined dress, she stalled
until Denenberg pushed her out onto the stage. From Aretha Franklin’s “Call Me,” to Sinatra’s “You Make
Me Feel So Young,” to Blood, Sweat & Tears’s “You’ve Made Me So Very Happy,” to what she said was
one of her favorites, Roberta Flack’s “The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face,” her choice of music was
soulful, passionate, and romantic. Susie found that the audience responded to and returned her warmth.1 The
same pulse and flow she got from connecting with people individually came through in a wave when she sang
to a group in an intimate space. This was her special gift, transmuted and magnified. She wanted to become a
cabaret singer.
A few weeks later, however, Susie was pulled away from rehearsals for her next performance to go to
Carmel, California, to help her sister-in-law Bertie, whose youngest daughter, Sally, was dying of a brain
tumor. Bertie’s marriage to Charlie Snorf was crumbling at the same time.
When Sally died, Bertie discovered that the tragedy had unlocked her frozen emotions. “Sally was a
wonderful person, amazing and intuitive and so strangely insightful about people and feelings for a sevenyear-old,” Bertie says. “Once she told me, Mom, you and Dad are lonely together. I think when someone dies
who’s very close to you, they will you something. When Sally died, what she willed to me was that I couldn’t
deny my feelings to myself anymore. It was like a copper wire went straight into my heart, and I couldn’t
cover up my feelings from then on.”
Bertie had always had a special relationship with Susie, but when her heart opened after Sally died, suddenly
they connected on a different level. “Susie was somebody I loved who was so important to me,” says Bertie.
“She was the only person I could talk to about my feelings when there was nobody else in my family whom I
could do that with.”
Her brother, however, reacted differently to his niece’s death. He called some friends who had visited the
Buffetts in Laguna and told them about Sally. “We were so shocked because we’d all been together a week
or two before,” says Mary Holland. “I asked him what happened, and he said, ‘I can’t talk anymore,’ and got
off the phone.”
Warren at the time had many distractions to assist him in evading his feelings. He was finishing up the SEC
investigation. He was so fascinated with Kay Graham that he literally could not get enough of her. When
Warren got obsessed with something—especially someone new—he could not stop thinking about it or them;
this came across to a new person as a wholehearted, flattering, and even overwhelming attentiveness. When
business arose, however, he snapped back to it in a split second with all the fierce intensity his steely mind
could muster. As Munger put it, Buffett “never let his minor obsessions interfere with his major obsession.”2
Katharine Graham, however, was no minor obsession. Some time earlier, he had decided to see what sparks

would fly when she brushed up against Munger, the greatest smart-ass he knew. “Kay was the kind, if I gave
topics of things for her to do, she was very dutiful. If I told her to read some terribly complicated financial
statements, she was going to follow my instructions, no matter what. I told her, ‘You have to meet Charlie.’ I
was laying it on thick. Finally, she was out in Los Angeles and went to meet Charlie.
“So she sat down in that scrubby office of Charlie’s, and immediately she pulls out a yellow pad so she can
take notes on what he’s saying. Charlie just loved it—the idea that everything he was saying was so
important that the most powerful woman in the world had to be taking it down as fast as he could talk.”
Munger could not resist this encouragement to show off. He had been corresponding with Graham, and wrote
to her, “You are taking me back thirty years or more and making me behave like Tom Sawyer with Becky
Thatcher, and I figure that Warren is silly enough for both of us.”3
But however giddily she might be making Warren behave, he was also taking Kay to business school in a
serious way. “Kay had had me trying to explain accounting to her on the side. I’d bring these annual
reports to Washington. And she’d say, ‘Oh, Warren, lessons.’ There I was, teaching again.” He considered
her son Don “unbelievably smart,” with “as close to a photographic memory as anyone I’ve ever run into.”
As a sign of reassurance to the family, Warren had signed the voting proxy on his shares over to Don. He
now stayed at Kay’s house when he came to Washington for monthly board meetings. She didn’t approve of
the way he dressed, but “I told her, ‘I’ll dress as well as Don dresses,’” Buffett says. “He and I had a sort
of united front.”
Buffett felt that Kay was “very, very smart, and in many ways wise, as long as you didn’t go into those
areas where the wounds were. But she understood people well.” As they grew more intimate, he felt he
could say something to her about the way she presented herself to her board. He knew she was less needy
than she herself realized. One day he took her aside and said, “You can’t plead for help anymore from the
board. It’s just not the position you want to be in.” And so, he says, she quit.
The business and personal ties between the Grahams and Buffett had become close enough that Warren
invited Katharine and Don to join the Graham Group at their 1975 meeting, at Hilton Head. Don made an
immediate impression with his unpretentious manner, while raising its already high average IQ. Many people
quickly saw beneath Kay’s brittle, patrician veneer to the vulnerability and humility that had endeared her to
Warren. Thus she fit easily with most of the group despite her queenly presence, worldliness, and
connections. She made a sincere effort to get along with everyone—although her deep belief that men were
far superior to women wasn’t lost on the women at the meeting. The beautifully dressed, perfectly coiffed
Graham, an icon among them, would slide casually into a chair amid the men with a cocktail in her hand;
somebody would utter a political opinion, and she would respond “Henry thinks thus-and-so”—speaking of
Kissinger. It was impossible not to be impressed.
Susie Buffett sang for the group for the first time at Hilton Head. Bill Ruane brought a chart showing the
price of gold, which for five years had surged past Berkshire Hathaway’s. He asked, the others thought
jokingly, whether he should be buying metal. It would turn out that he had, in fact, been buying gold coins,
and made a nice bit of money on it.4
Henry Brandt pulled Buffett into a separate room and asked him to promise that Berkshire stock wouldn’t
drop below $40. By October 1975, the stock had been cut in half after trading at $93 just two years before.
“Look, I love you,” Buffett recalls saying, “but I can’t promise you that.” “The world is ending,” said
Brandt, or words to that effect. “I’ve got every dollar I own in this stock.”
The world continued to end. Even though the rest of the stock market was recovering, Berkshire was not.
Brandt panicked and called Buffett, who offered him $40 a share. Then Brandt called Walter Schloss and
said, “Warren will pay me forty dollars and I want fifty. What should I do?”
Schloss was the last champion of cigar butts. At the Graham Group meetings, the others razzed him about his
“buggy-whip” portfolio of bankrupt steel companies and destitute auto-parts makers. “So what,” said
Schloss. “I don’t like stress and I sleep well at night.” He filled out the simple checklists, applying Graham’s

philosophy in its purest form. He went home from his desk in the closet at Tweedy, Browne at five o’clock
every evening, and his results were phenomenal.
Now Schloss was dismayed to hear Brandt telling himself he was better off without Berkshire stock in a way
that contravened this whole cigar-butt philosophy. Schloss worked on him for two hours, saying, You’ve got
the smartest guy in the world managing your money, in effect, and Warren doesn’t charge you anything,
you’re making a big mistake to sell. “I thought I convinced him,” says Schloss. But the U.S. economy by then
was in so much trouble that New York City was almost bankrupt; the country was in a mood of such
profound pessimism that it affected people’s judgment. “On Monday he called his broker,” says Schloss, and
began selling—his wife’s shares, not his own—until half their shares were gone.5
Immediately afterward, President Ford refused a bailout of the New York City economy; the New York Daily
News captured the feeling of the times in a huge headline: “Ford to City: Drop Dead.”6
The partners who had been given Berkshire stock in 1970 when it was trading around $40 seemed no better
off five years later. “To anybody who held our stock,” says Munger, “it looked like not much was happening
favorably for a long, long time. And that was not the way our partners, by and large, had previously
experienced things. The paper record looked terrible, yet the future, what you might call the intrinsic record,
the real business momentum, was gaining all the while.”
Buffett’s own net worth, based on where the stock was trading, had likewise been sliced to the level of when
he closed the partnership. Yet despite this apparent destruction of wealth—which would have frightened
almost anyone else—his pulse never seemed to flutter. He just had the companies he controlled keep buying,
and buying, and buying. In 1974, before the SEC investigation began, Berkshire owned twenty-six percent of
Blue Chip. Although he put the brakes on at Berkshire during the 1975 Omni aviation affair, through
Diversified, he bought Berkshire stock. By 1976, he was buying both Berkshire and Blue Chip through
Diversified. When all was said and done, Berkshire would own more than forty-one percent of Blue
Chip—so much that he and Susie owned, personally and through Berkshire Hathaway, thirty-seven percent
of the stock all by themselves.
And as long as Berkshire was cheap in 1976, he thought of another way to capitalize on the situation, getting
his mother, “who cared nothing about money,” to sell her 5,272 shares of Berkshire to Doris and Bertie. For
$5,440 plus a $100,000 note, they each got 2,636 shares of Berkshire—paying the equivalent of $2 a share in
cash.7 Buffett, who viewed debt as almost sinful, thought Berkshire was so cheap at $40 a share that he was
willing to have his sisters borrow an extraordinary ninety-five percent of the purchase price to buy it. At the
rate he obviously thought he could compound the stock’s value, buying on these terms would make his sisters
rich.8 And it would also avoid an enormous estate tax bill.
“It’s what my mother wanted to do, but it was the perfect time. That was probably the greatest move of all
time. It will never happen again. That was a once-in-a-lifetime situation.”
Valuable properties were being sold everywhere for a pittance. Around the same time, Tom Murphy came to
Warren with the chance to buy a television station. Buffett realized it would be a terrific deal but that he
couldn’t buy it because it would conflict with the Washington Post Company, which also owned television
stations. Since he sat on the Post board, it would put the Post over the limit the FCC allowed.9 “What am I
involved with that I don’t own?” he asked himself. He actually had to think about it to find something. Then
he remembered that he didn’t own Grinnell College. The first station they looked at had already sold, but at
Buffett’s recommendation, Grinnell bought a Dayton, Ohio, station for $13 million, putting down only $2
million. Sandy Gottesman arranged debt financing for the rest. The broker who sold it to Grinnell called it the
best deal he had seen in the past twenty years.10
There were some good reasons, however, why stocks were cheap and cities like New York were close to
bankruptcy. Along with rampant inflation, out-of-control labor costs and unstable labor relations were
strangling the economy. Newspapers were among the most severely affected businesses. Right after the
Hilton Head meeting, on October 1, 1975, at four a.m., the Washington Post’s union contracts expired. Some

of the Post’s pressmen disabled the fire extinguishers, drained the oil, stripped the gears, and ripped electrical
wiring and operating machinery out of the presses. They slashed the rolls of newsprint, set fires, and left one
pressroom foreman bleeding from a gaping head wound.11 Graham arrived within an hour to a building
glaring under the lights of television cameras and engulfed with fire engines, police, and hundreds of
picketers.
The Post’s relations with some of its unions “were almost literally on a drunk,” recalls Don Graham.12 The
militant workers viewed management as “incompetent,” Kay was to later write, “yet able enough to
deviously make them scapegoats for all of the problems that could more clearly be laid at management’s own
door.”13 After years of surrendering to sabotage and work slowdowns, with nine union contracts set to expire
at once, management negotiators armwrestled with labor in an atmosphere of tension and frustration.
Most of the unions other than the pressmen had stayed at work, especially the all-important Newspaper Guild
of journalists. Using borrowed printing plants and helicopters to move key people past picket lines, the Post
started getting out an attenuated paper after only one day’s disruption. But as the strike ground on, Graham
became paralyzed with fears that her paper was committing suicide. The managers and scab workers could
produce only half the number of papers at a quarter of their normal size, and advertisers marched steadily
over to the Post’s archrival, the Evening Star. Within days, the Star was “so thick with advertising that we
could hardly lift it.”14
“They called me back because they were actually afraid Kay would fall apart. We crossed the picket line
together. Kay was gutsy about that. But I saw her burst into tears when she picked up the Star. The Star was
trying to out-Post the Post, copying their format, hiring their people. She’d wake up and call me in the
middle of the night.”
When she felt threatened, the woman that her editor Howard Simons called the “Bad Katharine” flew down
the chimney.
“It wasn’t really the Bad Kay. It was the Insecure Kay. If she got feeling insecure, she could get pretty
shrill. Occasionally some incident would set her off, and then she would react like an animal. It was as if
she felt nobody was on her side. She felt cornered. And nobody would quite know what to do. That’s when
they would call for me. Phil hadn’t been on her side, and her mother hadn’t been on her side. The
executives at the company hadn’t always been on her side. And so she always had this sense in the back of
her mind that she was in an unfriendly environment and it could be triggered by some incident.
“But she always knew that I was on her side. That didn’t mean I agreed with her on everything or ate
everything she wanted me to eat. But I was on her side. And I always would be.”
The Bad Katharine bore some similarities to Leila Buffett. And Warren took an obvious pride in being the
one person who could win Kay’s trust and keep the Bad Katharine at bay.
Buffett had developed so much discernment about people’s motivations by now that he understood what was
driving everyone around Graham and helped her gain perspective. It was a measure of what Susie had done
for him that he could transmit some of her discernment to others. His antennae for people’s reactions were
sharp. He could help a person who felt threatened tell the difference between somebody who was actually
dangerous and someone who was simply acting from fear.
“She thought Warren walked on water—and he did,” says board member Arjay Miller. “Warren was open,
and she had confidence in him.” For the right person, Buffett could instill an ability to see all sides
nonjudgmentally, an ability that Susie had instilled in him, and this marvelous gift of self-confidence and
security could be internalized, so that it was not dependent on his presence. But Kay was so insecure, “I
don’t think he ever really got her to do that,” says Miller, “although if anybody could have, it would have
been him.” She needed his actual presence.
For the next six months, the Post would continue to publish while navigating fruitless negotiations, threats,
