
further candles to unfold.
The next point which leads on from this is the interaction between volume and the news. Whenever we have an
economic release, a statement, a rate decision, or any other item of fundamental news, then the associated
volume reaction will instantly tell us whether the market is validating the news or ignoring it. In other words, here
too volume validates the news release, and tells us immediately whether the market insiders are joining in any
subsequent price action or waiting on the sidelines and staying out.
If the insiders are joining in, then we can too, and if not, then we stay out, just like them.
For example, when a 'big number' is released, say NFP, which is seen as positive for risk assets such as
equities, commodities and risk currencies, and perhaps we are trading a currency. Then we should see these
assets rise strongly on the news, supported by strong and rising volume. If this is the case, then we know the
markets have validated the news and the insiders and big money are joining in. We might see a wide spread up
candle, with high volume. The news has been validated and confirmed by the price action and associated
volume.
I would urge you to study volume whenever news is released, as it is one of the quickest ways to learn the
basics of VPA. Here you will see it at work. Surges in volume accompanying large price moves, large price
moves on low volume, and trap moves, such as low volume on a long legged doji. It will all be there for you.
However, the key point is this. When news is released, it is often the first place where we see volume surges in
the market, and they are excellent places to start our analysis. If the volume surge has validated the price move,
then we can be sure that the insiders are joining in the move higher or lower. If the price action has moved on
the news, but has NOT been validated by supportive volumes, then it is an anomaly and other forces are at
work. This is telling us to be cautious.
Volume and the news should go hand in hand. After all, the markets generally react to the major news releases
which occur throughout the trading day, and this is the easiest, quickest and simplest way, to begin to read the
market, and also gain a perspective on what is low, medium, high or ultra high volume, for all the various
instruments and markets you may be trading.
A long legged doji candle, should always be validated by a minimum of average volume, and preferably high or
ultra high. If it is low, then it is an anomaly and therefore a trap set by the insiders.
Those then are our trio of 'premier candles' that we watch for in all time frames. They are our cue to pay
attention and start our VPA analysis. If we are not in a position, we are looking for confirmation of an entry, and
if we are already in the market, we are looking for signals either to stay in, or exit.
Now let's move on to some of the other key individual candles, and then on to consider some candle patterns.

Wide Spread Candles

Fig 6.14 Wide Spread Candle
Price action – strong market sentiment
The price action of the wide spread candle is sending a clear signal with only ONE message. Sentiment for the
session is strong. It is either strongly bullish or strongly bearish, but the word is STRONG. The price action has
risen sharply higher or lower in the session and closed at or near the high of an up candle, or at or near the low
of a down candle. The associated volume should therefore reflect this strong sentiment with 'strong' volume.
As we can see in the example in Fig 6.14, if the volume is above average, then this is what we should expect to
see as it validates the price. The insiders are joining the move higher and everything is as it should be.
If the volume is below average or low, this is a warning signal. The price is being marked higher, but with little
effort. The warning bells are now ringing. Many retail traders will be rushing to join the move higher or lower
thinking this is a valid move by the market. But the volume reveals a very different story. If we are in a position,
we look to exit. If we are not in a position we stay out, and wait for the next signal to see when and where the
insiders are now taking this market.

Narrow Spread Candles
Price action – weak market sentiment
You may be wondering why we should be interested in a narrow spread candle, which tells us when market
sentiment is weak. After all, shouldn’t we simply be interested when the insiders are in the market, to which the
answer is, yes, of course. Narrow spread candles can be found everywhere and in quantity. But the reason we
need to consider them is that, in general markets move higher slowly. Markets pause, consolidate and reverse,
often on narrow spread candles. Therefore, the interesting ones are NOT those validated by volume, but the
anomalies.

Fig 6.15 Narrow Spread Candles
A narrow spread candle should have low volume – again effort vs result. These are of little interest to us.
However, the ones that are of great interest are the anomalies, where we see above average, or high volume,
on a narrow spread candle. This should instantly alert us, and we should ask ourselves why.
The reason is very simple and can be seen in Fig 6.15. If we have an up candle with a narrow spread and
relatively high volume, then the market is showing some signs of weakness. As we know high volume should
result in a wide spread candle, not a narrow spread. Effort vs result again. The insiders are starting to struggle
at this price level. The market is resistant to higher prices, and although it has moved a little way higher, is now
proving resistant to any further progress, and the next candle could be a shooting star, which would then
confirm this weakness further.
Equally, if we see high volume on a down candle then the reverse applies. Here the insiders are starting to see
signs of bullish sentiment enter the market. The price is narrow, with buyers ( insiders) coming in, and
supporting the market at this level. Again, this is the first sign of a potential reversal from bearish to bullish.
Subsequent candles may confirm this and we would now be waiting for a hammer, or possibly a long legged
doji to add further weight to the analysis.

The Hanging Man Candle
Price action – potential weakness after bullish trend
When I first started using VPA and candles, I always used to assume that a hanging man appearing in a bullish
trend was a sign of strength, and continuation of the trend, since to me this was the same action as the hammer
candle. It isn't. It is in fact the opposite, and is a sign of weakness, provided it is associated with above average
volume as shown in Fig 6.16.

Fig 6.16 Hanging Man
And the question is, why is it a sign of weakness? The answer is very simple. The market has been rising
steadily on rising volume, when at some point in the bullish trend, the market sells off sharply, with the price
moving lower in the session, only to recover and close at, or near the high of the session, creating the familiar
'hammer candle price action'. Except here we now refer to this candle as the hanging man candle, as it is now
at the top of a bullish trend.
The reason this candle is considered to be bearish is that this is the first sign of selling pressure in the market.
The insiders have been tested, and the buyers have supported the market, but this candle is sending a signal
that the market is moving towards an over sold area. The body of the candle can be either red or blue, but the
price needs to close at, or near the open.
The price action is confirming the appearance of sustained selling pressure, which on this occasion has been
supported by the buyers, but it is an early warning of a possible change. It is an early warning signal, and now
we need to watch our charts for confirming signals.
The insiders will have seen this weakness appearing too, and be starting to plan their next move.
The hanging man is validated if it is followed by the appearance of a shooting star in the next few candles,
particularly if associated with above average or high volume. The key here is validation. On its own it is not a
strong signal, but merely gives us early warning of a possible change.
For this candle to be validated and confirmed we need to see further signs of weakness at this level, or close to
this level, which would then increase the significance of the candle. For example, a hanging man, immediately
followed by a shooting star is an excellent combination and adds considerably to the strength of the initial
signal. Even if the shooting star appears later in the candle sequence, this is still a strong confirming signal,
provided it is associated with high volume.

Stopping Volume
Price action - strength
This is what the price action looks like as the brakes are applied by the insiders, and is generally referred to as
stopping volume. As I have said many times before, the market is like an oil tanker. It never reverses on a dime
for many reasons, not least because just like a supertanker it has momentum, and therefore takes time to
respond, once the brakes are applied.

Fig 6.17 Stopping Volume
In Fig 6.17 we are in a strong down trend, the price waterfall has been in action and the market has been
moving lower fast. However, the insiders now want to start slowing the rate of descent, so start to move in and
begin the buying process. This buying is then seen in subsequent candles with deep lower wicks, but generally
with relatively deep bodies. However, for additional strength in the signal, the close of the candle should be in
the upper half of the open and close price. This is not a hard and fast rule, but generally describes the candles
as shown in Fig 6.17.
What is happening, is that the weight of the selling pressure has become so great at this point, that even the
insiders moving into the market have insufficient muscle to stop the market falling in one session. It takes two or
three sessions for the brakes to be applied and is like our tanker. Switch off the engines and the ship will
continue for several miles. It's the same with the markets, particularly when you remember that markets fall
faster than they rise. In a market that is being driven by panic selling, the pressure is enormous.
The insiders move in and manage to absorb some of this pressure with prices recovering in the session, to
close well off the lows of session thereby creating the deep lower wick. The selling then continues into the next

session, and the insiders come in again with higher volumes, driving the price back higher off the lows, and
perhaps with a narrower body on the candle, signalling that the buying is now starting to absorb the selling to a
greater extent. Next, we see another candle with a narrower body and a deep wick. Finally, we see our first
hammer candle.
The sequence of candles in Fig 6.17 is an almost perfect example, and if we do see this combination following
a sharp move lower, then we would be on full alert for the forthcoming move higher.
Stopping volume is exactly that. It is the volume of the insiders and professional money coming into the market
and stopping it falling further. It is a great signal of impending strength, and a potential reversal in the bearish
trend to a bullish trend. It is the precursor to the buying climax which should follow as the last remnants of
selling pressure are mopped up, the warehouses are filled to over flowing, and the insiders are ready to go. You
should be to!!

Topping Out Volume
Price action - weakness
The clue is in the name! Just as stopping volume was stopping the market from falling further, so topping out
volume is the market topping out after a bullish run higher.
Once again, the market does not simply stop and reverse, it has momentum, both in up trends and in down
trends. The down trend pressure is certainly more intense as the market is generally moving faster.
Nevertheless, in an up trend we still have momentum generated by the insiders driving demand. Traders and
investors are jumping into the market, driven by greed and fear of missing out on easy profits. The volumes are
high and rising, and the insiders are now selling into this demand, driving the market higher into this selling
pressure, which is building. This is the price action we are seeing reflected in the deep upper wicks to each
subsequent candle.
At this point it is becoming increasingly difficult for the insiders to keep the market momentum going, as they
continue to sell at this level, with the candles creating the ‘arcing pattern’ as the spreads narrow and the price
rise slows. Volumes are well above average and probably high or ultra high.

Fig 6.18 Topping Out Volume
In Fig 6.18 the last candle in this 'perfect' schematic is our old friend, the shooting star. We are now looking at
the distribution phase which then culminates in the selling climax, before moving off to the next phase of the
market cycle.
These then are the candles, candle patterns and associated volume, you will be looking for in all markets, in all
instruments and all time frames. They are the MAJOR signals which are the wake up call to you as a VPA
trader. They may be on a tick chart, they may be on a time chart. It makes no difference. The analysis of volume
and price makes no distinction. Once you have practised using the basic principles that we have covered in the
last few chapters, and further techniques you will learn in the following chapters, you will be ready to apply your
new found knowledge and skills to any market. VPA is simple, powerful and it works, and once learnt is never
forgotten.
There are many other candles and candle patterns in candlestick analysis, but as I said earlier, this is not a
book about Japanese candlesticks. The ones I have illustrated here, are those that I look for all the time. They
are the 'king pins' around which VPA revolves. Understand and recognise these instantly, and you will be
amazed how quickly you will become confident and assured in your trading decisions. More importantly, if you
have a position in the market you will have the confidence to stay in that position, and exit when your VPA
analysis signals tell you to close out.
In the next few chapters we are going to build on our knowledge, and add further techniques, before finally
putting it all together with annotated examples from live charts.

Chapter Seven
Support And Resistance Explained
Money and markets may never forget, but surely people do. And that will not be different this time, next time, or
any time in your life.
Kenneth L Fisher (1950-)
So far in this book on Volume Price Analysis we have focused on the 'pure' relationship between volume and
price.
In this chapter I am going to introduce the first of our analytical techniques, which helps to give us our
'perspective' on where we are in terms of the price behaviour on the chart. More importantly, when combined
with VPA, this technique also reveals when trends are about to start or end, and equally when markets are
moving into congestion phases.
To use a building analogy for a moment. If volume and price can be considered the foundations, then the
analytical techniques I explain in the next few chapters are the walls, floors, ceilings and the roof. In other
words, they provide the framework for volume and price. VPA on it's own is extremely powerful. However, what
these additional techniques will add are the markers, the signposts if you like, as to where the market is in its
longer term journey on the chart.
Perhaps one of the most difficult aspects of trading is managing and exiting any position. As I said earlier,
getting in is the easy part, getting out is hard, and this is where these techniques will help in 'mapping' the price
action. They are milestones if you like, and understanding these milestones and the messages they convey will
then help you to understand not only when a market is about to trend, but also, and perhaps more importantly,
when it is coming to an end.
Let me begin with the first of these techniques which is known as support and resistance. Once again, this is a
powerful concept which can be applied to any market, any instrument and in any time frame, so whether you are
using VPA as a scalping intra day trader, or as a longer term investor, support and resistance is one of the key
principles of price behaviour on a chart.
However, the irony of support and resistance is that it is in sharp contrast to VPA itself. Volume Price Analysis
focuses on the 'leading' aspects of price behaviour and tries to analyse where the market is heading next.
Support and resistance does this in a different way entirely, by focusing on what has gone before. The history of
price behaviour, the 'lagging' aspects of price behaviour.
Despite this irony, it is the combination of the two which gives us a perspective on where the market is in terms
of its overall journey. It tells us where the market might pause, breakout, or reverse, both now and in the future,
all important markers for the entry, management and exit of trading positions.
Therefore, let me recap the basics of price behaviour. In broad terms a market can only move in one of three
ways, up, down or sideways. In other words, a market can only trend higher, trend lower or move sideways in a
consolidating phase of price action. Of these three states, markets spend considerably more time moving
sideways, than they do trending either higher or lower. As a rough rule of thumb this is generally considered to
be around 70% of the time, whilst only trending for 30% of the time. Markets move sideways for all sorts of
reasons, but primarily there are three.
First, is the pending release of an item of fundamental news. To see this in action simply watch the price action
ahead of the monthly Non Farm Payroll for example. Prices are likely to trade in a narrow range for several
hours ahead of this key release.
Second, markets move sideways in both the selling climax and the buying climax phases, when warehouses
are either being filled or emptied by the insiders.
Third and finally, markets move sideways when they run into old areas of price, where traders have been
locked into weak positions in previous moves. As the market approaches these areas, speculators and
investors grab the chance to exit the market, usually grateful to be able to close out with a small loss.

Whatever the reason, areas of support and resistance will look something like Fig 7.10. This price behaviour
appears on all charts, with clearly defined areas where the market has moved sideways for an extended period.

Support And Resistance

Fig 7.10 Support & Resistance
The analogy that I always use to explain this type of price action is that of a house, with floors and ceilings,
which I hope will help to fix this more vividly in your mind's eye. What is happening in the schematic in Fig
7.10?
To begin with the price has fallen, before reversing higher, only to fall back again, before reversing higher
again. This zig zag price action is repeated over and over again, and as a result, has created the 'channel' of
price action with peaks and troughs as shown on the schematic. This oscillating price action creates what we
call the floor of support and the ceiling of resistance. Each time the price action comes down to the floor, it is
supported by what appears to be an invisible cushion. Not only does this help to prevent the market from falling
further, but also helps the price to bounce higher.
Once the price has bounced off the floor of support, it heads back towards the ceiling of resistance, where an
invisible barrier appears again, this time preventing the price moving higher and pushing it back lower again.
For any of you who remember the very first computer games such as ping pong with the two paddles, it is very
similar, with the ball, or the market in this case, bouncing endlessly back and forth between the two price levels.
At some point the price will break out from this region.
However, before moving on there are several points I would like to examine and the first, and perhaps most
obvious is, why is this price action so important. Therefore let me try to address this issue here.

Suppose for a moment that the price action in Fig 7.10 is taking place following a long bullish trend higher, but
that this is NOT a selling climax. What is actually happening in this scenario?
First the market has moved higher, buyers are still buying into the trend, but then the price reverses, and moves
lower. The buyers are trapped at this higher level, and are now regretting their decision. They are trapped in a
weak position. The market moves lower, but then starts to move higher again, as buyers come in at this lower
level, fearful they may miss out on another leg higher in the trend. As the market approaches the first reversal
point, those buyers in a weak position, sell, glad to exit with a small loss or at break-even. This selling pressure
sends the market lower, away from the ceiling level, but with a second wave of buyers now trapped in weak
positions at this higher level.
The market then approaches the floor again, where buyers enter, seeing an opportunity to join the bullish trend,
and take the market back to the ceiling again, where the second wave of weak traders sell out, and exit with
either a small loss or marginal profits. This oscillating price action is then repeated.
At the top of each wave, buyers are left in weak positions, and then sell out on the next wave, to be replaced by
more buyers at the top of the wave, who then sell out at the top of the subsequent wave. It is this constant
buying and then selling at similar price levels, which creates the 'invisible' bands, which are made visible by
joining the highs and lows on the price chart.
The buyers who bought at the floor of the price action, are happy to hold on, expecting higher prices. They have
bought at the lower level as the market has pulled back, seen the market rise, and then reverse back to the
original entry level. Unlike those buyers who bought at the ceiling level, their positions have never been in loss.
So far, all that has happened, is that a potential profit has been reduced back to zero, or close to zero, so these
buyers are still hopeful of making a profit from their position. Fear is not yet driving their decision making.
In fact, there is nothing magical about these price levels of the floor and the ceiling. They simply represent the
'extreme' psychological levels of fear and greed in that particular price region and time. We must always
remember, price action is fuelled by these two basic emotions, and it is in the price congestion phase of market
behaviour, that we see these emotions in their most basic form. At the top of the first wave, greed is the over
riding emotion. By the time the market returns on the second wave, fear and relief are the over riding emotion for
these traders.
