
had been violated. Such things were just not done. "From that point on,"
says Stone, "I was never treated well at the firm. Whenever I lost
money on a trade, they'd say, 'We should have let him go.' "
The firm decided quickly enough that it was a mistake to have met
Stone's demands. A single large paycheck had thrown into doubt not only
the compensation system but also the long-standing pecking order within
Salomon Brothers. Money was the absolute measure of one's value to the
firm. Paying a mortgage trader much more than a treasury trader made
the treasury trader feel unwanted. It wasn't going to happen again. To
stanch the flow of his young mortgage trading talent out the door, Mike
Mortara was forced to resort to diplomacy, which never worked as well
as cash, especially with traders. He arranged two dinners at the end of
1985 between his traders and John Gutfreund.
The first was held at Gutfreund's favorite Manhattan restaurant, Le
Perigord, where, according to one gourmand, "the man in the kitchen has
a way with birds." Among those present were Mortara, Kronthal, Stone,
and trader Nathan Cornfeld. "Gutfreund was impressive, totally
dominant," says one of the men present. "I left thinking how pleased I
was that he ran the firm." Otherwise the meal was a disaster. It is
doubtful anyone tasted the food. Gutfreund took control, in the way only
Gutfreund can. He embarrassed Mortara, who was by that time a
managing director, by referring to how much money Mortara had made on
his Salomon stock when the firm went public. No doubt Gutfreund had
dug those data out of a file especially for the dinner. "Mike turned
bright red," says one of the traders present. Then Gutfreund raised the
issue of compensation.
Stone, as usual, spoke his mind. He told Gutfreund that since mortgages
were the most profitable area of the firm, the traders should be paid
more than the rest of the firm. "That's when Gutfreund blew up," recalls
one of the traders. "He went on about how it was an honor to work at
Salomon Brothers and how the firm, not the people, created the wealth."
Anyway, Gutfreund said, the mortgage department overrated
its importance; it wasn't even as profitable as the government
department.
The traders knew this was a bold-faced lie, but no one contradicted him.
"No one wanted to see John any angrier," says Stone. The evening ended
on a strained note. The second dinner between Gutfreund and the

traders was canceled. It was clear to everyone that it would only
aggravate the festering wound. Young traders continued to depart
Salomon Brothers. And at the end of 1986 Andy Stone joined PrudentialBache as head of mortgage trading.
Chapter Seven
The Salomon
Diet
I
1986-1988
HE BOND MARKET and the,people market sought their respective
equilibriums, and in the two years following the dinner at Le Perigord the
mortgage department of Salomon Brothers disintegrated. A departing
trader could indeed be replaced by other bright young men from the
nation's leading business schools. With the million dollars Salomon saved
by not meeting Howie Rubin's demands, it bought a dozen new Rubins.
The replacements looked pretty much like the original. However, they
didn't make nearly as much money for Salomon Brothers. For, unlike
their predecessor, they had to compete with the best. Shearson Lehman,
Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Drexel Burnham, First Boston, and
Merrill Lynch employed former Salomon traders. There was a growing
club of men on Wall Street who said with a smile that Salomon Brothers
was a great place to be from. By allowing dozens of able mortgage
traders to fertilize the mortgage departments of other firms, Salomon
Brothers let slip through its fingers the rarest and most valuable asset a
Wall Street firm can possess: a monopoly.
Ranieri & Co. had been a more airtight monopoly than even the people at
Salomon Brothers knew. Between 1981 and 1985 the only noticeable
competition had been First Boston, and even it, early on, wasn't a serious
threat. Marvin Williamson, a Salomon Brothers mortgage salesman who
moved to First Boston in late 1982, recalls that "at the time at Salomon
we thought First Boston was behind every rock. Not only were they not
behind every rock, [but] they didn't even know where the rocks were."
Yet by the middle of 1986 First Boston could
boast about the same market share in mortgage securities as Salomon
Brothers. Ranieri didn't like what he saw, and he let Gutfreund know. He
says, "I kept telling him, 'John, you're selling the technology for a hill of
magic beans.' "

There is no chance that the rest of Wall Street would have permitted
Salomon Brothers to maintain its hammerlock on the mortgage market.
Eventually other firms would have caught on to our tricks because
mortgages were too profitable to ignore, but the process was
accelerated by our policies. The traders who left Salomon Brothers
provided Wall Street not only with trading skills and market
understanding but also with a complete list of Salomon Brothers'
customers. Now the traders had a short-term incentive to educate the
fool; show the fool how much he was paying to Salomon Brothers, and
perhaps he'd give his business to you.
The transfer of skills and information probably cost Salomon Brothers
hundreds of millions of dollars. In the early days of trading, mortgage
bonds were profitable because the traders could buy them at one price
and sell them almost instantly at a much higher price. A trader would pay
a thrift in Kansas 94 for a bond, then sell it to a thrift in Texas at 95.
By early 1986 margins had narrowed. A trader paid 94.5 for a bond which
he might just possibly, on a good day, sell at 94.55. Michael Mortara
says, "We'd see them [former Salomon traders] at work on the screens.
Or the customers would tell us that they had dealt with them. We
started to miss trades, and we finally had to cut our spreads."
Toward the end of 1985 the mortgage trading departments of other
firms began to advertise in the Wall Street Journal. Drexel Burnham ran
one showing two men on a tandem bicycle. The one in front was hugely fat
and slumped in exhaustion. The one in back looked over the shoulder of
the one in front and pedaled furiously. Could it be? "Yes," says Steve
Joseph, who keeps a copy of the ad on his office wall at Drexel, "the fat
guy was supposed to be Lewie." Merrill Lynch's ad showed two rowing
crews, one obese, the other fit and muscular. The fit crew was just
inches behind the fat crew and looked about to pass. The fit crew was
meant to be Merrill Lynch. The fat crew, as everyone on Wall Street
knew, was the Salomon Brothers mortgage trading department. Looking
back on his tenure at Salomon from his office at Goldman Sachs,
Mortara says, "The peak in profitability was 1985."
The deterioration of Ranieri & Co. was so rapid and complete that
one is reluctant to attribute it to a single factor, such as the defection
of traders. And it is clear that several forces at once eroded its
supremacy. One of these forces was the market itself; the market began

to right the imbalance between Ranieri & Co. and the rest of the bond
trading world. The beautiful inefficiency of mortgage bonds was spoiled
for Salomon by one of its own creations, called the collateralized
mortgage obligation (CMO). It was invented in June 1983, but not until
1986 did it dominate the mortgage market. The irony is that it achieved
precisely what Ranieri had hoped: It made home mortgages look more
like other bonds. But making mortgage bonds conform in appearance had
the effect, in the end, of making them only as profitable as other kinds
of bonds.
Larry Fink, the head of mortgage trading at First Boston who helped
create the first CMO, lists it along with junk bonds as the most
important financial innovation of the 1980s. That is only a slight
overstatement. The CMO burst the dam between several trillion
investable dollars looking for a home and nearly two trillion dollars of
home mortgages looking for an investor. The CMO addressed the chief
objection to buying mortgage securities, still voiced by everyone but
thrifts and a handful of adventurous money managers. Who wants to lend
money not knowing when he'll get it back?
To create a CMO, one gathered hundreds of millions of dollars of
ordinary mortgage bonds—Ginnie Macs, Fannie Macs, and Freddie Macs.
These bonds were placed in a trust. The trust paid a rate of interest to
its owners. The owners had certificates to prove their ownership. These
certificates were CMOs. The certificates, however, were not all the
same. Take a typical three-hundred-million-dollar CMO. It would be
divided into three tranches, or slices of a hundred million dollars each.
Investors in each tranche received interest payments. But the owners of
the first tranche received all principal repayments from all three
hundred million dollars of mortgage bonds held in trust. Not until first
tranche holders were entirely paid off did second tranche investors
receive any prepayments. Not until both first and second tranche
investors had been entirely paid off did the holder of a third tranche
certificate receive prepayments.
The effect was to reduce the life of the first tranche and lengthen the
life of the third tranche in relation to the old-style mortgage bonds. One
i
could say with some degree of certainty that the maturity of the first
tranche would be no more than five years, that the maturity of the

second tranche would fall somewhere between seven and fifteen years,
and that the maturity of the third tranche would be between fifteen and
thirty years.
^Now, at last, investors had a degree of certainty about the length of
their loans. As a result of CMOs, there was a dramatic increase in the
number of investors and volume of trading in the market. For though
there was no chance of persuading a pension fund manager looking to
make a longer-term loan to buy a Freddie Mac bond that could evaporate
tomorrow, one could easily sell him the third tranche of a CMO. He slept
more easily at night knowing that before he received a single principal
repayment from the trust, two hundred million dollars of home mortgage
loans had to be prepaid to first and second tranche investors. The effect
was astonishing. American pension funds controlled about six hundred
billion dollars' worth of assets in June 1983, when the first CMO was
issued by Freddie Mac. None of the money was invested in home
mortgages. By the middle of 1986 they held about thirty billion dollars'
worth of CMOs, and that number was growing fast.
CMOs also opened the way for international investors who thought
American homeowners were a good bet. In 1987 the London office of
Salomon Brothers sold two billion dollars of the first tranche of CMOs
to international banks looking for higher-yielding short-term
investments. The money that flowed into CMOs came from investors new
to mortgage bonds, who would normally have purchased corporate or
treasury bonds instead. Sixty billion dollars of CMOs were sold by Wall
Street investment banks between June 1983 and January 1988. That
means that sixty billion dollars of new money were channeled into
American home finance between June 1983 and January 1988.
As with any innovation, the CMO generated massive profits for its
creators, Salomon Brothers and First Boston. But at the same time
CMOs redressed the imbalance of supply and demand in mortgages that
had created so much opportunity for the bond traders. A trader could no
longer bank on mortgages' being cheap because of a dearth of buyers. By
1986, thanks to CMOs, there were plenty of buyers. The new buyers
drove down the returns paid to the investor by mortgage bonds.
Mortgages, for the first time, became expensive.
The market settled on a fair value for CMOs by comparing them
with corporate and treasury bonds. Though this wasn't precisely rational,

as there was still no theoretical basis for pricing the homeowner's option
to repay his mortgage, the market was growing large enough to impose
its own sense of fairness. No longer were the prices of ordinary
mortgage bonds allowed to roam inefficiently, for they were now linked
to the CMO market, in much the same way that flour is linked to the
market for bread. Fair value for CMOs (the finished product) implied a
fair value for conventional mortgage bonds (the raw materials). Investors
now had a new, firm idea of what the price of a mortgage bond should be.
This reduced the amount of money to be made exploiting their ignorance.
The world had changed. No longer did Salomon Brothers traders buy
bonds at twelve and then make the market believe they were worth
twenty. The market dictated the price, and Salomon Brothers' traders
learned to cope.
After the first CMO the Young Turks of mortgage research and trading
found a seemingly limitless number of ways to slice and dice home
mortgages. They created CMOs with five tranches and CMOs with ten
tranches. They split a pool of home mortgages into a pool of interest
payments and a pool of principal payments, then sold the rights to the
cash flows from each pool (known as IDs and POs, after interest only and
principal only) as separate investments. Thehomeowner didn't know it,
but his interest payments might be destined for a French speculator, and
his principal repayments to an insurance company in Milwaukee. In
perhaps the strangest alchemy, Wall Street shuffled the IOs and POs
around and glued them back together to create home mortgages that
could never exist in the real world. Thus the 11 percent interest payment
from condominium dwellers in California could be glued to the principal
repayments from homeowners in a Louisiana ghetto, and voila, a new kind
of bond, a New Age Creole, was born.
The mortgage trading desk evolved from corner shop to supermarket. By
increasing the number of products, they increased the number of
shoppers. The biggest shoppers, the thrifts, often had a very particular
need. They wanted to grow beyond the limits imposed by the Federal
Home Loan Bank Board in Washington. It was a constant struggle to stay
one step ahead of thrift regulators in Washington. Many "new products"
invented by Salomon Brothers were outside the rules of the regulatory
game; they were not required to be listed on thrift balance sheets and
therefore offered a way for thrifts to grow. In some cases,

the sole virtue of a new product was its classification as "off-balance
sheet."
To attract new investors and to dodge new regulations, the market
became ever more arcane and complex. There was always something new
to know, and inevitably Ranieri fell out of touch. The rest of the ozone
layer of management at Salomon Brothers had never really been in touch.
Therefore, the trading risks were managed by mere tykes, a few months
out of a training program, who happened to know more about Ginnie Mae
8 percent IOs than anyone else in the firm. That a newcomer to Wall
Street should all of a sudden be an expert wasn't particularly surprising,
since the bonds in question might have been invented only a month
before. In a period of constant financial innovation, the youngest people
assumed power (and part of the reason young people got rich was that
the 1980s was a period of constant change). A young brain leaped at the
chance to know something his superiors did not. The older people were
too busy clearing their desktops to stay at the frontiers of innovation.
By 1986 Ranieri wasn't even sitting on the trading desk. He was busy
ministering to the affairs of the firm. Moreover, his absence made the
traders happy. It wasn't that they disliked Lewie. But when the
managers—Lewie and Michael Mortara—turned up, they would invariably
dabble in the traders' affairs. They'd tell the traders what they should
or should not do; they'd want to know exactly why the traders had
bought this or that bond. As one of the traders now says, "You didn't
necessarily have a good reason for every position. Sometimes you bought
bonds just to find out what was going on in the street. You didn't want
someone hanging around asking you why you did such and such."
Not surprisingly the traders found ways to discourage their managers
from managing. One week in April 1986, when Ranieri decided he was
going to spend some time on the trading desk, the traders' first plot
unfolded. Ranieri arrived early each morning, but the traders beat him to
his desk. The first day they piled as much paper as they could find on his
desk. Ranieri arrived at 7:00 A . M ., saw the mess, and hit the roof.
"Who did this?" he asked no one in particular. The traders shrugged and
giggled.
The second day the traders removed the support pins from the swivel
chair at Ranieri's desk. When he sat down first thing in the morning, he
crashed to the floor and nearly cracked his spine. It took minutes to

hoist him to his feet while he cursed and shouted. This time he asked
D'An-tona who was responsible for the prank. D'Antona swore ignorance.
The third day the traders raised Ranien's swivel chair, so that though he
sat down safely, when he pulled himself toward his desk, he banged his
kneecaps on the center drawer. He was furious, "Fuck it, Johnny, I want
to know who did this," he said. "Well, Lewie," says D'Antona, "I guess
Mike [Mortara] just doesn't like you out here on the desk" (a lie Ranieri
should have spotted, since Mortara never arrived before 8:00 A.M. and
so couldn't have been the culprit).
"Who the fuck does he think he is?" said Ranieri. He then took all the
garbage cans in the department and dumped them on Mortara's desk—
computer printouts, bagel chips, onion cheeseburger scraps, and other
trader refuse.
The traders joined him, in a show of support, gathering the garbage cans
from across the trading floor. When they had finished, Mortara's
trading desk was buried in a garbage dump. "It couldn't have been more
perfectly timed in the theater," says one of the traders. "Just as Lewie
was storming off one side of the trading floor, Michael was walking in
from the other."
When Mortara saw his desk, he responded just as Ranieri had. His first
and only thought was revenge. He, too, turned to D'Antona, and asked,
"Leroy [D'Antona's nickname], I'm serious, who did this to my desk?"
"Michael, as God is my witness," said D'Antona, "it was Lewie."
Mortara was stuck. Ranieri was the one guy he couldn't squash. He blew
up in frustration, marched to his office on the forty-second floor, and
didn't emerge for the rest of the day.
"Finally we have some peace around here," said one of the traders. And
though Mortara eventually returned (after mortgage trader Mason
Haupt had cleaned up the mess), Ranieri did not. As far as the traders
were concerned, that was fine. That month, April 1986, the mortgage
trading desk lost more money than ever before, estimated by several
traders to have been between thirty-five and sixty-five million dollars.
The mortgage traders offset the losses with profits they had squirreled
away for a rainy day. They had done this by artificially understating the
value of bonds on their books. The senior management of Salomon
Brothers never knew.
The bad times befalling the mortgage department were characteristic of

business throughout the firm. The year 1986 was a poor one for Salomon
Brothers, and 1987 was worse, as revenues ceased to grow and costs
spun out of control. In an effort to install management control,
Gutfreund created a wealth of new titles. A board of directors of
Salomon Brothers was born, consisting mainly of former traders. On top
of the board of directors sat another new level of management, called
the office of the chairman. To the office Gutfreund appointed two
former traders and a former salesman: Lewie Ranieri, Bill Voute, and Tom
Strauss. Each was asked to detach himself from the little local turf
battles he had previously engaged in and to concern himself with the
overall welfare of the firm. It was a nice idea.
"I have this theory," says Andy Stone, seated in his office at Prudential-Bache Securities. "Wall Street makes its best producers into
managers. The reward for being a good producer is to be made a
manager. The best producers are cutthroat, competitive, and often
neurotic and paranoid. You turn those people into managers, and they go
after each other. They no longer have the outlet for their instincts that
producing gave them. They usually aren't well suited to be managers.
Half of them get thrown out because they are bad. Another quarter get
muscled out because of politics. The guys left behind are just the most
ruthless of the bunch. That's why there are cycles on Wall Street—why
Salomon Brothers is getting crunched now—because the ruthless people
are bad for the business but can only be washed out by proven failure."
It was no secret throughout Salomon Brothers that the office of the
chairman was divisive. It was simply a carryover from the battle between
the three pillars of debt, with Strauss representing the government
department, Voute representing the corporate department, and Ranieri
representing the mortgage department. As a member of the government
department put it, "Around here you are in the Strauss family, the
Ranieri family, or the Voute family. Few have been in more than one."
The problem wasn't as mild as conflicting team spirit. The office of the
chairman was noted for its catty animosities. Ranieri called Tom Strauss
"a boob, all artifice. The man never had an original thought in his life." He
called Bill Voute "the most political man I've ever met. He never said
anything without having a political agenda. He's Machiavellian." But his
complaints about his two new peers were apparently mild in comparison
with their complaints about him. He was willing to work with them; they

eventually had him fired. On the other hand, as all three
lived by the law of the jungle, perhaps it was a matter of their getting
him before he got them. Whatever the case, the office of the chairman
came to symbolize the force within Salomon Brothers working to
dismantle the mortgage department.
The government trading desk was a counterpoint to the visible gluttony
and ethnicity of the mortgage department. By Salomon standards, it was
almost refined, which is to say that it took its meat rare rather than
raw. Government traders could have been mistaken for socially conscious
East Coast WASPs, had they only been a bit more repressed. Tom
Strauss, their leader, was tall, thin, and perpetually tanned. He played
tennis.
The mortgage traders resented this. They disliked what they
interpreted as Strauss's overhead smash of Salomon's Jewish culture.
When they talk of Strauss, they rarely fail to mention his game of
tennis; they imagine him dressed in whites on the courts of the exclusive
club. The two vices of which the mortgage department was free,
hypocrisy and pretension, were the vices they least tolerated in others.
"The difference between Strauss and Ranieri?" says one trader still at
Salomon. "That's easy. Strauss wouldn't stoop to use the men's room on
the trading floor. He'd go upstairs. Lewie would piss on your desk."
"Tom Strauss," says Ranieri, "wishes more than anything he wasn't
Jewish. Ever since he joined the firm there's been a joke that some
terrible Jewish couple had stolen Tommy from his crib." (And thus it
perversely fell to a Roman Catholic—Ranieri—to guard the Jewish
heritage of Salomon Brothers.)
"What Strauss hated about Lewie was that he was fat, uneducated, and
lacking finesse," says one of Lewie's senior traders. "Strauss didn't care
about Lewie's business. He didn't care about Lewie's profits. He didn't
even care about Lewie's vision. He didn't like Lewie's lack of couth. Now
that may seem like the sort of objection you have to the guy sitting next
to you, but Lewie was the guy sitting next to Strauss. Strauss got to the
top and looked to his right and said, 'Wait a minute, I thought I had
moved up in the world.' "
The Strauss family (of which I was to become a member) had strong
professional objections to the mortgage department. They disapproved
of what they thought were the excesses of the mortgage group. The

