
Principles 

 CHAPTER 6 
 RETURNING THE BOON: 
 2011–2015 
 I t seems to me that life consists of three phases. In the first, we are dependent on others and we learn. In the second, others depend on us and we work. And in the third and last, when others no longer depend on us and we no longer have to work, we are free to savor life. 
 I was beginning my transition from my second to my third phase. Both intellectually and emotionally, I was no longer as excited about being successful as I was excited about having the people I cared about be successful without me. 
 I had two jobs at Bridgewater to transition out of: overseeing the management of the company as chief executive officer, and overseeing the management of our investments as a chief investment officer. I wasn’t going to stop playing the markets, because that’s a game I’ve loved playing since I was twelve and I will keep playing until I die. But I didn’t want to be needed in either role, because of the key-man risk that would create for the company. 
 My partners and I understood that transitioning from the first generation of leadership to the next in a founder-led organization with a unique culture is difficult, especially if the leader has been in place for a long time. Bill Gates’s transition out of the CEO role at Microsoft in 2008 was the most recent example of that but there have been many others. 
 The biggest question I wrestled with was whether I should leave management completely or stay involved as a mentor. On the one hand, I liked the idea of stepping out completely because it would give the new leadership the freedom to find their own ways of succeeding without me looking over their shoulder. My friends urged me to do that—to “declare victory,” collect my chips, and move on. But I wasn’t confident that the transition would go well, as I hadn’t done such a thing before. I do things through trial and error—making mistakes, figuring out what I did wrong, coming up with new principles, and finally succeeding—and I didn’t see why my transition should be any different. I also didn’t believe that it would be fair for me to dump the heavy workload I was carrying on those I was passing my CEO responsibilities to. I knew that Lee Kuan Yew, the wise founder and leader of Singapore for forty-one years, had transitioned out of his leadership responsibilities to be a mentor, and I had seen how well that went. For all those reasons, I decided I would stay on as a mentor. That meant I would either not speak at all or speak last, but always be available to provide advice. My partners liked the idea. 
 We agreed we should begin as soon as possible, so those replacing me could gain experience and we could make adjustments as needed. Since what we didn’t know about transitioning was greater than what we did know about it, we knew we would need to be careful. We expected that transitioning well would take a number of years—perhaps two or three, perhaps as many as ten. Since we had worked together for many years, we were optimistic that it would be on the shorter end of that range. 
 On the first day of 2011 I announced to the company that I would be stepping down as CEO, with Greg Jensen and David McCormick replacing me. On July 1, I handed over my management responsibilities to Greg, David, and the rest of the Management Committee. Simultaneously, we explained our “up-to-ten-year transition plan” to our clients. 
 LEARNING WHAT SHAPERS ARE LIKE 
 Naturally the new management team struggled over the next eighteen months or so. We diagnosed why in the same way an engineer would diagnose why a machine is operating suboptimally so it could be reengineered to perform better. Since different people produce different outcomes based on differences in what they are like, whenever we create a team we seek to “engineer” the right mix of attributes and people to achieve our goals. So we looked at my attributes relative to others to see what was missing, which we called the “Ray gap.” To be clear, we were looking at the “Ray gap” because I was the one leaving—had Bob, David, or Greg been the ones stepping back, we would have been studying the gaps they left. 
 Greg and David created a log of my various responsibilities and the differences between the qualities they and I brought to handling them. Everyone agreed the gap was in what we called “shaping.” 
 To visualize what I mean by “shaping” and “shapers,” think of Steve Jobs, who was probably the greatest and most iconic shaper of our time, as measured by the size and success of his shaping. A shaper is someone who comes up with unique and valuable visions and builds them out beautifully, typically over the doubts and opposition of others. Jobs built the world’s largest and most successful company by revolutionizing computing, music, communications, animation, and photography with beautifully designed products. Elon Musk (of Tesla, SpaceX, and SolarCity), Jeff Bezos (of Amazon), and Reed Hastings (of Netflix) are other great shapers from the business world. In philanthropy, Muhammad Yunus (of Grameen), Geoffrey Canada (of Harlem Children’s Zone), and Wendy Kopp (of Teach for America) come to mind; and in government, Winston Churchill, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Lee Kuan Yew, and Deng Xiaoping. Bill Gates has been a shaper in both business and philanthropy, as was Andrew Carnegie. Mike Bloomberg has been a shaper in business, philanthropy, and government. Einstein, Freud, Darwin, and Newton were giant shapers in the sciences. Christ, Muhammad, and the Buddha were religious shapers. They all had original visions and successfully built them out. 
 While these are the biggest shapers, I saw that shapers come in varying sizes. You probably know a few personally. They might be your local business, nonprofit, or community leaders—the people who drive change and build lasting organizations. My objective was to identify who the future shapers of Bridgewater would be—either by helping the people who were replacing me in the CEO job become them or by finding shapers on the outside and bringing them in. 
 On October 5, 2011, a few months after I began to think about what makes a shaper, Steve Jobs died. I wrote about him in our Daily Observations , one of the very few times I used the space to address noninvestment-related content, because I admired him as a man who could visualize and execute in breathtakingly wonderful ways. Soon after, Walter Isaacson published his biography of Jobs. I noticed a number of similarities between us, especially when he quoted Jobs’s own words. Soon after that, an article titled “Is Ray Dalio the Steve Jobs of Investing?” came out in aiCIO , a prominent investment-industry publication. It also pointed out a number of similarities between us—that I, like Jobs, started my businesses from scratch (his from a garage, mine from the second bedroom of my apartment), that we both came up with innovative products that reshaped how our industries did things, and that we had unique management styles. Bridgewater has often been called the Apple of the investment world—but to be clear, I didn’t think that Bridgewater or I held a candle to Apple and Jobs. 
 Isaacson’s book and the article pointed to other parallels in our backgrounds, goals, and approaches to shaping—for example, we were both rebellious, independent thinkers who worked relentlessly for innovation and excellence; we were both meditators who wanted to “put a dent in the universe”; and we were both notoriously tough on people. Of course, there were important differences too. I wished Jobs had shared the principles he had used to achieve his goals. 
 I wasn’t just interested in Jobs and his principles; I wanted to know about the qualities and principles of all shapers, so I could better understand the likenesses and differences between them and form an archetype of the typical shaper. I had followed that approach for understanding everything; for example, I had made an exhaustive study of recessions so that I could form a timeless picture of an archetypal recession and then understand the differences among them. I did that for all economic and market movements and was inclined to do it for just about everything, because this approach helps me understand how things work. So it made sense I’d do that to understand shapers too. 
 I started by exploring the qualities of Jobs and other shapers with Isaacson, at first in a private conversation in his office, and later at a public forum at Bridgewater. Since Isaacson had also written biographies of Albert Einstein and Ben Franklin—two other great shapers—I read them and probed him about them to try to glean what characteristics they had in common. 
 Then I spoke with proven shapers I knew—Bill Gates, Elon Musk, Reed Hastings, Muhammad Yunus, Geoffrey Canada, Jack Dorsey (of Twitter), David Kelley (of IDEO), and more. They had all visualized remarkable concepts and built organizations to actualize them, and done that repeatedly and over long periods of time. I asked them to take an hour’s worth of personality assessments to discover their values, abilities, and approaches. While not perfect, these assessments have been invaluable. (In fact, I have been adapting and refining them to help us in our recruiting and management.) The answers these shapers provided to the standardized questions gave me objective and statistically measurable evidence about their similarities and differences. 
 It turns out they have a lot in common. They are all independent thinkers who do not let anything or anyone stand in the way of achieving their audacious goals. They have very strong mental maps of how things should be done, and at the same time a willingness to test those mental maps in the world of reality and change the ways they do things to make them work better. They are extremely resilient, because their need to achieve what they envision is stronger than the pain they experience as they struggle to achieve it. Perhaps most interesting, they have a wider range of vision than most people, either because they have that vision themselves or because they know how to get it from others who can see what they can’t. All are able to see both big pictures and granular details (and levels in between) and synthesize the perspectives they gain at those different levels, whereas most people see just one or the other. They are simultaneously creative, systematic, and practical. They are assertive and open-minded at the same time. Above all, they are passionate about what they are doing, intolerant of people who work for them who aren’t excellent at what they do, and want to have a big, beneficial impact on the world. 
 Take Elon Musk. When he had just come out with the Tesla and showed me his own car for the first time, he had as much to say about the key fob that opened the doors as he did about his overarching vision for how Tesla fits into the broader future of transportation and how impor-tant that is to our planet. Later on, when I asked him how he came to start his company SpaceX, the audacity of his answer startled me. 
 “For a long time,” he answered, “I’ve thought that it’s inevitable that something bad is going to happen on a planetary scale—a plague, a meteor—that will require humanity to start over somewhere else, like Mars. One day I went to the NASA website to see what progress they were making on their Mars program, and I realized that they weren’t even thinking about going there anytime soon. 
 “I had gotten $180 million when my partners and I sold PayPal,” he continued, “and it occurred to me that if I spent $90 million and used it to acquire some ICBMs from the former USSR and sent one to Mars, I could inspire the exploration of Mars.” 
 When I asked him about his background in rocketry, he told me he didn’t have one. “I just started reading books,” he said. That’s how shapers think and act. 
 At times, their extreme determination to achieve their goals can make them appear abrasive or inconsiderate, which was reflected in their test results. Nothing is ever good enough, and they experience the gap between what is and what could be as both a tragedy and a source of unending motivation. No one can stand in the way of their achieving what they’re going after. On one of the personality assessments there is a category they all ranked low on called “Concern for Others.” But that doesn’t mean quite what it sounds like. 
 Consider Muhammad Yunus, for example. A great philanthropist, he has devoted his life to helping others. He received the Nobel Peace Prize for pioneering the ideas of microcredit and microfinance and has won the Congressional Gold Medal, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the Gandhi Peace Prize, and more. Yet he tested low on “Concern for Others.” Geoffrey Canada, who has devoted most of his adult life to taking care of all the disadvantaged children in a hundred-square-block area of New York’s Harlem, also tested low on “Concern for Others.” Bill Gates, who is devoting most of his wealth and energy to saving and improving lives, tested low as well. Obviously Yunus, Canada, and Gates care deeply about other people, yet the personality tests they took rated them low. Why was that? In speaking with them and reviewing the questions that led to these ratings, it became clear: When faced with a choice between achieving their goal or pleasing (or not disappointing) others, they would choose achieving their goal every time. 
 Through this investigative process, I learned that there are distinctly different types of shapers. The most important difference lies in whether their shaping comes in the form of inventing, managing, or both. For example, while Einstein shaped by inventing, he didn’t have to manage, and while Jack Welch (who ran GE) and Lou Gerstner (who ran IBM) were great managers/leaders of people, they didn’t have to be as inventive. The rarest cases were people like Jobs, Musk, Gates, and Bezos, who were inventive visionaries and managed big organizations to build those visions out. 
 There are a lot of people who look like shapers, in that they came up with a great idea and got it to the point where they could sell it for a lot of money, but did not shape consistently. Silicon Valley has many of these types; perhaps they should be called “inventors.” I also saw that there were wonderful leaders of organizations who weren’t classic shapers, in that they didn’t come up with the original visions and build them out; rather, they entered existing organizations and led them well. Only true shapers consistently move from one success to another and sustain success over decades, and those are the people I want to bring to Bridgewater. 
 My examination of shapers and my reflections on my own qualities made clear to me that nobody sees the full range of what they need to see in order to be exceptionally successful, though some see a wider range than others. Those that do best both see a wide range themselves while triangulating well with other brilliant people who see things in different, complementary ways. 
 This realization has been important in making my transition out of management go well. While in the past I would encounter problems, figure out their causes, and design my own ways to get around them, others who think differently than I do will make different diagnoses and designs. My job as mentor was to help them be successful at that. 
 This exercise reminded me that there are far fewer types of people in the world than there are people and far fewer different types of situations than there are situations, so matching the right types of people to the right types of situations is key. 
 Because Gates and Jobs had recently left Microsoft and Apple, I watched their former organizations closely to help me better understand how I could help prepare Bridgewater to thrive without me. Certainly the most notable difference between them and Bridgewater was in our cultures—how we use the idea meritocracy of radical truth and radical transparency to bring problems and weaknesses to the surface to prompt forthright dealing with them. 
 SYSTEMIZING OUR IDEA MERITOCRACY 
 The more I did the research on people, the clearer it became that there are different types of people and that, by and large, the same types of people in the same types of circumstances are going to produce the same types of results. Said differently, by knowing what someone is like we can have a pretty good idea of what we can expect from them. So I was more motivated than ever to continue gathering lots of data on what people are like to build pointillist pictures of them to help us match people to responsibilities well. Doing this in an evidence-based way would enhance the idea-meritocratic process of aligning people’s responsibilities with their merits. 
 While this all seemed so clear and commonsensical to me, it was much harder to achieve in practice. About a year into my transition, I saw that many new managers (and some older ones) still couldn’t see the patterns of people’s behaviors through time (in other words, they couldn’t connect the dots between what people are like and the outcomes they produce). Their reluctance to probe hard to get at what people are like was making things more difficult. 
 But then I had a breakthrough, which grew out of an observation that the challenges we were having with making management decisions didn’t exist in our investment decision making. I realized that, by using big data analytics and other algorithms, our computers could connect those dots more efficiently than any of us could, just as they had helped us make connections in the markets. These systems also didn’t have personal biases and emotional barriers to overcome, so those being analyzed couldn’t be offended by the data-driven conclusions the computers were coming up with. In fact, they could look at the data and algorithms, assess them for themselves, and suggest changes if they wanted. We were like scientists trying to develop tests and algorithms for analyzing ourselves objectively. 
 On November 10, 2012, I shared my thoughts with the Management Committee in an email. Its subject line was “The Path Out: Systemizing Good Management”: 
 It is now clear to me that the main difference behind why the investment management part of Bridgewater is likely to continue to do well and most of the other parts of Bridgewater are unlikely to do as well (if we don’t change how we are operating) is that the decision-making processes for investment management have been so systemized that it’s hard for people to screw them up (because they are largely following the systems’ instructions) while the other areas of Bridgewater are much more dependent on the quality of the people and their decision making. 
 Think about that. Imagine how Bridgewater’s investment decision making would work if it operated the same as Bridgewater’s management decision making (i.e., dependent on the people we hired and how they collectively made decisions in their own ways). It would be a mess. 
 The way the investment decision-making process works is that a small group of investment managers who created these systems see the systems’ conclusions and the reasoning of the systems while we make our own conclusions and explore our reasoning on our own. . . . The machine does most of the work and we interact with it in a quality way. . . . [And] we are not dependent on much more faulty people. 
 Think about how different management is. While we have principles, we don’t have decision-making systems. 
 In other words, I believe that the investment decision-making process is effective because the investment principles have been put into decision rules that make decisions that people then follow while the management decision-making process is less effective because the management principles have not been put into decision rules that people can follow to make management decisions. 
 It doesn’t have to be that way. Having built the investment systems (with the help of others) and knowing about both investment decision making and management decision making, I am confident that it can be the same. The only questions are whether it can happen fast enough and what will happen in the meantime. 
 I am working with Greg (and others) to develop these management systems in the same way I worked with Greg and others (Bob, etc.) on the investment systems. You are seeing this happen via the development of the Baseball Cards, Dot Collector, Pain Button, testing, job specing, etc. Because I have a limited time to do this, we need to move fast. At the same time we will have to fight the battles in the trenches, with hand-to-hand combat, to clean out those who are incapable and bring in or promote those who are excellent. 
 One of the great things about algorithmic decision making is that it focuses people on cause-effect relationships and, in that way, helps foster a real idea meritocracy. When everyone can see the criteria the algorithms use and have a hand in developing them, they can all agree that the system is fair and trust the computer to look at the evidence, make the right assessments about people, and assign them the right authorities. The algorithms are essentially principles in action on a continuous basis. 
 While our management system has a long way to go before it is as well automated as our investment system, the tools it has made possible, especially the “Dot Collector” (an app that gathers information about people in real time described in detail in the Work Principles) , have already made an incredible difference in the way we work. 
 All these tools reinforce good habits and good thinking. The good habits come from thinking repeatedly in a principled way, like learning to speak a language. The good thinking comes from exploring the reasoning behind the principles. 
 The ultimate goal of all this was to help the people I cared about be more successful without me, which was becoming increasingly pressing as life’s milestones continued to remind me of my stage in life. For example, I became a grandfather with the birth of Christopher Dalio on May 31, 2013. And in the summer of 2013, I had a serious health scare that turned out to be nothing but reminded me of my mortality. At the same time, I still loved playing the markets, which I plan to do until I die, making me even more eager to speed the transition from the second to the third phase of my life. 
 ANTICIPATING THE EUROPEAN DEBT CRISIS 
