
INVEST? TRADE? GAMBLE?

11

perate to extract their fingers from a mousetrap. Prices reflect intelligent behavior of rational investors and traders, but they also reflect
screaming mass hysteria. The more active the market, the more traders
are emotional. Rational individuals can become a minority, surrounded
by those with sweaty palms, pounding hearts, and clouded minds.
Markets are more efficient during flat trading ranges, when people
are apt to use their heads. They grow less efficient during trends, when
people become more emotional. It is hard to make money in flat markets because your opponents are relatively calm. Rational people make
dangerous enemies. It is easier to take money from traders who are
excited by a fast-moving trend because emotional behavior is more
primitive and easier to predict. To be a successful trader you must keep
your cool at all times and take money from aroused amateurs.
People are more likely to be rational when alone, and grow more
impulsive when they join crowds. A trader’s intense focus on the price
of a stock, a currency, or a future pulls him into the crowd of all who
trade that vehicle. As the price ticks up and down, the eyes, the heads,
and the bodies of traders across the continents start moving up and
down in unison. The market hypnotizes traders like a magician hypnotizes a snake, by moving his flute rhythmically up and down. The
faster the price moves, the stronger the emotions. The more emotional
a market, the less efficient it is, and inefficiency creates profit opportunities for calm, disciplined traders.
A rational trader can make money by remaining calm and following
his rules. Around him, the crowd chases rallies, hard with greed. It sells
into falling markets, squealing from pain and fear. All the while, the
intelligent trader follows his rules. He may use a mechanical system or
act as a discretionary trader, reading his markets and putting on trades.
Either way, he follows his rules rather than his gut—that is his great
advantage. A mature trader pulls money through the big hole in the
efficient market theory, its presumption that investors and traders are
rational human beings. Most people aren’t; only winners are.

What Is Price?
Each trade represents a transaction between a buyer and a seller
who meet face to face, by phone or on the Internet, with or without
brokers. A buyer wants to buy as cheaply as possible. A seller wants
to sell as expensively as possible. Both feel pressure from the crowd of

12

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

undecided traders that surrounds them, ready to jump in and snatch
away their bargain.
A trade takes place when the greediest buyer, afraid that prices will run
away from him, steps up and bids a penny more. Or the most fearful
seller, afraid of getting stuck with his merchandise, agrees to accept a
penny less. Sometimes a fearful seller dumps his merchandise on a calm
and disciplined buyer waiting for a trade to come to him. All trades reflect
the behavior of the market crowd. Each price flashing on your screen represents a momentary consensus of value among market participants.
Fundamental values of companies and commodities change slowly,
but prices swing all over the lot because the consensus can change
quickly. One of my clients used to say that prices are connected to values with a mile-long rubber band, allowing markets to swing between
overvalued and undervalued levels.
The normal behavior of the crowd is to mill around, make noise, and
go nowhere. Once in a while a crowd becomes excited and explodes
in a rally or a panic, but usually it just wastes time. Bits of news and
rumors send ripples through the crowd, whose shifts leave footprints on
our screens. Prices and indicators reflect changes in crowd psychology.
When the market gives no clear signals to buy or sell short, many
beginners start squinting at their screens, trying to recognize trading
signals. A good signal jumps at you from the chart and grabs you by
the face—you can’t miss it! It pays to wait for such signals instead of
forcing trades when the market offers you none. Amateurs look for
challenges; professionals look for easy trades. Losers get high from the
action; the pros look for the best odds.
Fast-moving markets give the best trading signals. When crowds are
gripped by emotions, cool traders find their best opportunities to make
money. When markets go flat, many successful traders withdraw, leaving the field to gamblers and brokers. Jesse Livermore, a great speculator of the twentieth century, used to say that there is time to go long,
time to go short, and time to go fishing.

AN INTELLIGENT GAMBLER?
Most people gamble at some point in their lives. For most it provides
entertainment, for some it becomes an addiction, while a few become
pros and make a living at it. Gambling provides a living for a very
small minority and entertainment for the masses, but a casual gambler

INVEST? TRADE? GAMBLE?

13

reaching for a quick buck has the same chance of success as an ice
cube on a hot stove.
Some famous investors like betting on horses. They include Peter
Lynch, of Magellan Fund fame, and Warren Buffett, who used to publish a newsletter on handicapping. My friend Lou, to whom my first
book was dedicated, spent several years on the handicapping circuit
and bet on horses for a living before buying an exchange seat and approaching financial markets like a cool handicapper. Some card games,
such as baccarat, are based on chance alone, whereas others, such as
blackjack, involve a degree of skill that attracts intelligent people.
Professionals treat gambling as a job. They keep calculating odds
and act only when mathematics point in their favor. Losers, on the
other hand, itch for the action and enter one game after another,
switching between half-baked systems.
When you gamble for entertainment, follow a set of money management rules. The first rule is to limit how much you’ll risk in any
given session. On a rare occasion when a friend pulls me into a casino,
I put what I am willing to lose that night into my right pocket, and stuff
my winnings, if any, into the left one. I stop playing as soon as my
right pocket is empty, without ever reaching into the left. Once in a
while I find more money in the left pocket than I had in my right, but
I certainly do not count on it.
A friend who is a successful businessman enjoys the glitter of Las
Vegas. Several times a year he takes $5,000 in cash and flies there for a
weekend. When his bankroll runs out, he goes for a swim in the pool,
enjoys a good dinner, and flies back home. He can afford to spend
$5,000 on entertainment and never blows more than his initial stake.
Lounging at a pool after his cash is gone, he differs from legions of
compulsive gamblers who keep charging more chips on their credit
cards, waiting for their “luck” to turn. A gambler with no money management is guaranteed to bust out.

C H A P T E R
T W O

WHAT MARKETS
TO TRADE?

M

any people give little thought to life’s important decisions. They
stumble into them by accidents of geography, time, or chance.
Where to live, where to work, what markets to trade—many of us
decide on a whim, without much serious thought. No wonder so many
are dissatisfied with their lives. You can choose your markets on a
whim or pause to think whether to trade stocks, futures, or options.
Each of those has pluses as well as minuses.
Successful traders are rational people. Winners trade solely for the
money, while losers get their kicks out of the excitement of the game.
Where those kicks land is another question.
In choosing a market to trade, keep in mind that every trading
vehicle, be it a stock, a future, or an option, has to meet two criteria:
liquidity and volatility. Liquidity refers to the average daily volume,
compared with that of other vehicles in its group. The higher the
volume, the easier it is to get in and out. You can build a profitable
position in a thin stock, only to get caught in the door at the exit and
suffer slippage trying to take profits. Volatility is the extent of movement in your vehicle. The more it moves, the greater the trading opportunities. For example, stocks of many utility companies are very
liquid but hard to trade because of low volatility—they tend to stay in
narrow price ranges. Some low-volume, low-volatility stocks may be
good investments for your long-term portfolio, but not for trading.
Remember that not all markets are good for trading simply because
you have a strong opinion on their future direction. They also must
have good volume and move well.

15

16

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

STOCKS
A stock is a certificate of company ownership. If you buy 100 shares
of a company that issued 100 million shares, you own one-millionth
of that firm. You become a part owner of that business, and if other
people want to own it, they will have to bid for your shares, lifting
their value.
When people like the prospects of a business, they bid for its shares,
pushing up prices. If they don’t like the outlook, they sell their stock,
depressing prices. Public companies try to push up share prices
because it makes it easier for them to float more equity or sell debt.
The bonuses of top executives are often tied to stock prices.
Fundamental values, especially earnings, drive prices in the long
run, but John Maynard Keynes, the famous economist and a canny
stock picker, retorted “In the long run we’re all dead.” Markets are full
of cats and dogs, stocks of unprofitable companies that at some point
fly through the roof, defying gravity. Stocks of sexy new industries,
such as biotechnology or the Internet, can fly on the expectations of
future earnings rather than on any real operating records. Each dog has
its day in the sun before reality sets in. Stocks of profitable, well-run
companies may drift sideways to down. The market reflects the sum
total of what every participant knows, thinks, or feels about a stock, and
a declining price means large holders are selling. The essential rule in
any market is “It’s OK to buy cheap, but not OK to buy down.” Don’t buy
a stock that’s trending lower, even if it looks like a bargain. If you like
its fundamentals, use technical analysis to confirm that the trend is up.
Warren Buffett, one of the most successful investors in America, is
fond of saying that when you buy a stock, you become a partner of a
manic-depressive fellow he calls Mr. Market. Each day Mr. Market runs
up and offers either to buy you out of business or to sell you his share.
Most of the time you should ignore him because the man is psychotic,
but occasionally Mr. Market becomes so terribly depressed that he
offers you his share for a song—and that’s when you should buy. At
other times he becomes so manic that he offers an insane price for
your share—and that’s when you should sell.
This idea is brilliant in its simplicity, but hard to implement. Mr.
Market sweeps most of us off our feet because his mood is so contagious. Most people want to sell when Mr. Market is depressed and buy

WHAT MARKETS TO TRADE?

17

when he is manic. We need to keep our sanity. We need objective criteria to decide how high is too high and how low is too low. Buffett
makes his decisions on the basis of fundamental analysis and a fantastic gut feel. Traders can use technical analysis.
Speaking of gut feel, this is something that an investor or a trader
may develop after years of successful experience. What beginners call
gut feel is usually an urge to gamble, and I tell them they have no right
to a gut feel.
What stocks should we trade? There are more than 10,000 of them
in the United States, with even more abroad. Peter Lynch, a highly successful money manager, writes that he only buys stocks in companies
that are so simple that an idiot could run them—because eventually
one will. But Lynch is an investor, not a trader. Stocks of many companies with little fundamental value can embark on fantastic runs, making heaps of money for bullish traders before collapsing and making
just as much money for the bears.
The stock market offers a wealth of choices, even after we cut out
illiquid or flat stocks. You open a business newspaper, and stories of
fantastic rallies and breathtaking declines leap at you from the pages.
Should you jump on the bandwagon and trade stocks in the news?
Have they moved too far from the gate? How do you find future leaders? Having to make so many choices stresses beginners. They spread
themselves thin, jumping between stocks instead of focusing on a few
and learning to trade them well. Newbies who cannot confidently
trade a single stock go looking for scanning software that will let them
track thousands.
In addition to stocks, you can choose from their kissing cousins,
mutual funds, called unit trusts in Europe. Long-term investors tend
to put money into diversified funds which hold hundreds of stocks.
Traders tend to focus on sector funds that let them trade specific sectors of the economy or entire countries. You pick a favorite sector or
country and leave individual stock selection to the supposedly hot-shot
analysts laboring at those funds.
Choosing a winning stock or fund is a lot harder than listening to
tips at a party or scanning headlines in a newspaper. A trader must develop a set of fundamental or technical search parameters, have the
discipline to follow his system, and spread a safety net of money management under his account. We will delve into all three areas in Part 2.

18

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

WHERE DO I GO FROM HERE? How to Buy Stocks by Louis Engel is the best
introductory book for stock investors and traders. The author died years
ago, but the publisher updates the book every few years—be sure to
get the latest edition.

FUTURES
Futures look dangerous at first—nine out of ten traders go bust in their
first year. As you look closer, it becomes clear that the danger is not in
futures but in the people who trade them. Futures offer traders some
of the best profit opportunities, but the dangers are commensurate with
rewards. Futures make it easy for gamblers to shoot themselves in the
foot, or higher. A trader with good money management skills needn’t
fear futures.
Futures used to be called commodities, the irreducible building blocks
of the economy. Old-timers used to say that a commodity was something that hurt when you dropped it on your foot—gold, sugar, wheat,
crude oil. In recent decades many financial instruments began to
trade like commodities—currencies, bonds, stock indexes. The term
futures includes traditional commodities along with new financial
instruments.
A future is a contract to deliver or accept delivery of a specific quantity of a commodity by a certain date. A futures contract is binding on
both buyer and seller. In options the buyer has the right but not an
obligation to take delivery. If you buy a call or a put, you can walk
away if you like. In futures, you have no such luxury. If the market
goes against you, you have to add money to your margin or get out of
your trade at a loss. Futures are stricter than options but are priced better for traders.
Buying a stock makes you a part owner of a company. When you
buy a futures contract you don’t own anything, but enter into a binding contract for a future purchase of merchandise, be it a carload of
wheat or a sheaf of Treasury bonds. The person who sells you that
contract assumes the obligation to deliver. The money you pay for a
stock goes to the seller, but in futures your margin money stays with
the broker as a security, ensuring you’ll accept delivery when your
contract comes due. They used to call margin money honest money.
While in stocks you pay interest for margin borrowing, in futures you
can collect interest on your margin.

WHAT MARKETS TO TRADE?

19

Each futures contract has a settlement date, with different dates selling for different prices. Some professionals analyze their differences to
predict reversals. Most futures traders do not wait and close out their
contracts early, settling profits and losses in cash. Still, the existence of
a delivery date forces people to act, providing a useful reality check. A
person may sit on a losing stock for ten years, deluding himself it is
only a paper loss. In futures, reality, in the form of the settlement date,
always intrudes on a daydreamer.
To understand how futures work, let’s compare a futures trade with
a cash trade—buying or selling a quantity of a commodity outright.
Let’s say it’s February and gold is trading at $400 an ounce. Your analysis indicates it is likely to rise to $420 within weeks. With $40,000 you
can buy a 100-ounce gold bar from a dealer. If your analysis is correct,
in a few weeks your gold will be worth $42,000. You can sell it and
make a $2,000 profit, or 5 percent before commissions—nice. Now let’s
see what happens if you trade futures based on the same analysis.
Since it is February, April is the next delivery month for gold. One
futures contract covers 100 oz. of gold, with a value of $40,000. The
margin on this contract is only $1,000. In other words, you can control
$40,000 worth of gold with a $1,000 deposit. If your analysis is correct
and gold rallies $20 per oz., you’ll make roughly the same profit as you
would have made had you bought 100 oz. of gold for cash—$2,000.
Only now your profit is not 5% but 200%, since your margin was
$1,000. Futures can really boost your gains!
Most people, once they understand how futures work, are flooded
with greed. An amateur with $40,000 calls his broker and tells him to
buy 40 contracts! If his analysis is correct and gold rallies to $420, he’ll
make $2,000 per contract, or $80,000. He’ll triple his money in a few
weeks! If he repeats this just a few times, he’ll be a millionaire before
the end of the year! Such dreams of easy money ruin gamblers. What,
if anything, do they overlook?
The trouble with markets is that they don’t move in straight lines.
Charts are full of false breakouts, false reversals, and flat trading ranges.
Gold may well rise from $400/oz. to $420/oz., but it is perfectly capable of dipping to $390 along the way. That $10 dip would have created a $1,000 paper loss for someone who bought 100 oz. of gold for
cash. For a futures trader who holds a 100 oz. contract on a $1,000 margin that $10 decline represents a total wipeout. Long before he reaches
that sad point, his broker will call and ask for more margin money. If

20

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

you have committed most of your equity to a trade, you’ll have no
reserves and your broker will sell you out.
Gamblers dream of fat profits, margin themselves to the hilt, and get
kicked out of the game by the first wiggle that goes against them. Their
long-term analysis may be right and gold may rise to its target price,
but the beginner is doomed because he commits too much of his
equity and has very thin reserves. Futures do not kill traders—poor
money management kills traders.
Futures can be very attractive for those who have strong money
management skills. They promise high rates of return but demand icecold discipline. When you first approach trading, you are better off
with slower-moving stocks. Once you have matured as a trader, take a
look at futures. They may be right for you if you’re very disciplined.
We return to the futures markets in Part 2 and look at the best ones for
getting started.
WHERE DO I GO FROM HERE?

Winning in the Futures Markets by George
Angell is the best introductory book for futures traders. (It is highly superior to all his other books.) The Futures Game by Teweles and Jones is
a mini-encyclopedia that has educated generations of futures traders (be
sure to get the latest edition). Economics of Futures Trading by Thomas
A. Hieronymus is probably the most profound book on futures, but it’s
long been out of print—try finding a used copy.

OPTIONS
An option is a bet that a specific stock, index, or future will reach or
exceed a specific price within a specific time. Please stop and reread
that sentence. Notice that the word specific occurs in it three times. You
must choose the right stock, predict the extent of its move, and forecast how fast it’ll get there. You must make three choices—if you’re
wrong on just one, you’ll lose money.
When you buy an option, you have to jump through three hoops in
a single leap. You have to be right on the stock or the future, right on
its move, and right on its timing. Ever tried tossing a ball through three
rings at an amusement park? This triple complexity makes buying options a deadly game.
Options offer leverage—an ability to control large positions with a
small outlay of cash. The entire risk of an option is limited to the price

WHAT MARKETS TO TRADE?

21

you pay for it. Options allow traders to make money fast when they’re
right, but if the market reverses, you can walk away and owe nothing!
This is the standard flow of brokerage house propaganda. It attracts
hordes of small traders who cannot afford to buy stocks but want a
bigger bang for their buck. What usually gets banged is the option
buyer’s head.
My company, Financial Trading, Inc., has been selling books to
traders for years. Whenever a person comes back to buy another book,
it is a sign that he is active in the markets. Many clients buy books
on stocks or futures every few months or years. But when a first-time
buyer orders a book on options, he never returns. Why? Does he make
so much money so fast that he doesn’t need another book? Or does he
wash out?
Many beginners buy calls because they can’t afford stocks. Futures
traders who get beat up sometimes turn to options on futures. Losers
switch to options instead of dealing with their own inability to trade.
Using a shortcut to weasel out of trouble instead of facing a problem
never works.
Successful stock and futures traders sometimes use options to
reduce risks or protect profits. Serious traders buy options rarely and
only in special situations, as we will see later in this book. Options are
hopeless for poor people who use them as substitutes for stocks
because they can’t afford the real thing.
Professionals take full advantage of starry-eyed beginners crowding
into options. Their bid-ask spreads are terrible. If an option is bid 75
cents, offered at a dollar, you are 25% behind the game as soon as you
buy. The expression “your loss is limited to what you paid for an option”
means you can lose 100%! What’s so great about losing everything?
A client of mine was a market-maker on the floor of the American
Stock Exchange. She came to my classes on technical analysis because
she was pregnant and wanted to get off the floor and trade from home.
“Options,” she said, “are a hope business. You can buy hope or sell hope.
I am a professional—I sell hope. I come to the floor in the morning and
find what the public wants. Then I price that hope and sell it to them.”
Professionals are more likely to write options than buy them. Writing
is a capital-intensive business. You need hundreds of thousands of
dollars to do it right, and most successful options writers operate with
millions. And even theirs is not a risk-free game. Several years ago a
friend who used to be one of the nation’s top money managers landed
