
FIGURE 7.2 Combining the COT Index with a −40 Point Plunge in the Movement Index

c07

JWBK143-Briese

February 19, 2008

11:18

Char Count=

78

COT THEORY

FIGURE 7.3 COT Climaxes and +40 Surges Mark Buying Opportunities

prototypical bull market pattern with continuous bearish readings, reflecting commercial
selling on a scale up. While this pattern may not be helpful in locating selling points, it
is a reassuring confirmation of which side of the market you should be trading. During
the main portion of a bull trend, buying opportunities are the specialty of the Movement
Index (arrows).
The COT Index pattern during flat, sideways trending markets was illustrated in Figure 6.7 of the last chapter. The attribute that sets trading ranges apart is that both COT
selling (0–5 percent) and buying (+90 percent) climaxes are effective signals, often marking alternate boundary contact with precision. When you find signs in narrow ranges that
price volatility is not high enough to trigger extreme COT readings, often the price range
is sufficient to trigger Movement Index (±40 point) signals.
There are some flat trends in Figure 7.4, where both surges and climaxes came into
play. In these cases you may find the outcome counterintuitive. Let me explain. A yearlong trading range developed in OJ futures in 2005, and several 0 percent COT selling
climaxes marked key downturns at the upper boundary (down arrows). But the bottoms
drew almost no commercial buying interest, and the COT Index remained below 50 percent during the entire period. It looked like commercials were bound and determined
to keep a lid on orange juice, and it then would be logical to expect that the eventual
breakout would be to the downside (in line with the commercial view).
But the excessive commercial selling pressure here was really a sign of pent-up speculative demand. Commercials needed to sell aggressively just to contain prices. This was
successful for a year. Eventually prices started to go the commercials’ way, slumping to

c07

JWBK143-Briese

February 19, 2008

11:18

Char Count=

COT Movement Index

79

FIGURE 7.4 A Trading Range Breakout in OJ

the middle of the range. But just when it looked like commercial bears had bullish speculators on the run, commercials began to cover shorts and accumulate long contracts.
There was not enough commercial buying interest to move the COT Index to a +90 percent reading, because prices rebounded after barely tripping a 40+ point surge signal
(circled). The change in commercial sentiment shown by this buying surge within the
trading range was the tip-off to an impending break of the upper boundary. And the huge
commercial selling effort required just to contain prices over the past year presaged an
explosive speculative-driven bull move. If you missed the initial breakout, the COT Index
afforded one more buying opportunity by flashing a 90 percent buying climax signal on
the retest of the upper boundary (up arrow) three months following the breakout. This
signal erased any remaining doubt about the bullish commercial sentiment.
Anyone who watches the COT Index for extreme readings, but does not monitor its
rate of change—the Movement Index—gives up a potentially valuable trading edge.

FUND MOVEMENT INDEX
It is pretty safe to assume that any mention of the COT Index or Movement Index probably refers to commercial traders. But you can just as easily perform the calculations
on any of the trader groups. The COT Index and Movement Index for large speculators
and small traders can sometimes highlight a key bit of information that you might not

c07

JWBK143-Briese

February 19, 2008

11:18

Char Count=

80

COT THEORY

see on a net position chart, so I do not want to leave them out of this book. However, I
find that COT Index and Movement Index patterns can be confusing at first. This is only
compounded by including indicators for other trader groups. To avoid confusion, you
need to think of Figure 7.5 as Ginger Rogers—she did everything Fred Astaire did on the
dance floor, only backwards (and in high heels).

FIGURE 7.5 The Movement Index Forecasts a Top in Silver

c07

JWBK143-Briese

February 19, 2008

COT Movement Index

11:18

Char Count=

81

In Figure 7.5 the 2004 silver market peaked in April. But by November, it was heading for a retest of the high. Traders were ebullient, and silver coin sales were booming.
The net position chart showed funds buying and approaching, but still short of, their
record net long level set (naturally) at the April peak. There was nothing obvious in
the COT data for bears to hang their hats on—certainly not enough to try top-picking
in the face of a strong bull move. Yet on November 29, 2004 (three days ahead of the
top), I issued an alert to my subscribers, which read in part: “Should silver prices approach their April high of 8.31, a low-risk shorting opportunity could be available.”
How did I make this call? The large speculator Movement Index. Keep in mind that this
is a measure of rate-of-change in the fund COT Index. In this case, the rate-of-change of
fund buying nose-dived in the final weeks of the rally (arrow). It was this buying momentum nonconfirmation—not unlike momentum indicators technicians apply to price—that
shouted “rally failure” loud and clear.

c07

JWBK143-Briese

February 19, 2008

11:18

Char Count=

c08

JWBK143-Briese

February 27, 2008

19:50

Char Count=

CHAPTER 8

View from
the Gallery

An economist is a man who states the obvious in terms of the incomprehensible.
—Attributed to Alfred A. Knopf

I

suspect that most readers of this book have more than an academic interest in the
subject of trading. To the point, you want to know if COT data might provide a trading edge. I am also aware that a common complaint of trading book reviewers is that
there often is scant empirical evidence offered to demonstrate the efficacy of the theories or methods offered, just a few apparently-well-chosen examples. The Commitments
report has been the basis of a number of academic and economic studies dating back 50
years. It behooves us to review the evidence available, if only to keep from reinventing
the wheel.
I studied economics in college. I nearly passed, too. I like to think that my shortcomings were more semantics than technical. I just never had the tongue for foreign
languages, nor the discipline to pull up short of a conclusion, or leave a question for another day. I hope that explaining my lack of formal education will excuse any mistakes
I may make in interpreting the economic studies in the field, or oversimplifying same, or
(godhelpus) drawing unwarranted conclusions. (The full text of most of these studies is
available to readers of this book at www.CommitmentsOfTraders.ORG.)
The role of speculation in the economic system is a matter of controversy, an old
controversy. Economists who regarded speculation as an unnecessary source of market
instability provided endless fodder for the modernists who saw speculators as a necessary evil. The contemporary view that speculation is a vital source of market liquidity and
risk-spreading has gained traction both in academic and regulatory circles. (If history is
a judge, the speculative element may lose its newfound respect under less benevolent
market conditions.)

83

c08

JWBK143-Briese

February 27, 2008

19:50

Char Count=

84

COT THEORY

Economists of all stripes seem to have a fascination with one particular aspect of
speculation: Are they earning risk premia; and if so, is the return greater than one could
get in stocks or bonds? One rather famous economist even had practical experience in
this, as a noted speculator, which undoubtedly contributed to Keynes Theory of Normal
Backwardation. Just a little background is needed to understand the rationales for the
studies reviewed in this chapter.

KEYNES’S THEORY OF NORMAL BACKWARDATION
It is essential for any commodity market participant, with longer than a day trader’s
horizon, to understand the concepts of contango and backwardation. Fortunately the
concepts are not as difficult to master as their names. All other factors being equal (and
they frequently are), it costs more to buy 5,000 bushels of corn for delivery one year from
now, than for immediate delivery. Why? Whoever owns the corn for the intervening year
must pay loan interest and storage fees and other costs. These are lumped together as
“cost to carry” or “carrying costs.” If in June for example, the cash price for corn is $2.00
per bushel and the cost to carry is $0.05 per month, then normal (or, in the vernacular,
contango) pricing would imply the following forward prices: July $2.05, August $2.10,
September $2.15, and so on.
Keynes put forward a theory, beginning in the 1920s, that contango was abnormal,
and that the normal relationship is “backwardation,” which is, as it sounds, just the opposite of contango. (These nineteenth-century words are sufficiently archaic to assure
their continued use in economic circles, so get used to them.) Keynes’s reasoning (not
surprising, given his speculative moonlighting) was that if a farmer wished to lock in a
price for corn before it was even planted he could not ask more than the current price,
but must expect less. In Keynes’s view, the ownership of the corn passed to the speculative buyer at the time of the futures transaction, and because the speculator is also
risk adverse, he would insist on receiving a risk premium commensurate with the risk
of a price decline prior to delivery. This premium was paid in the form of a discount
off the current spot (cash) price, and would be proportionate to the time until delivery.
Keynes’s “normal backwardation” would value corn currently priced at $2.00 in June, as
worth $1.95 for July delivery, $1.90 for August, $1.85 for September, and so on (again
assuming an arbitrary $0.05 per month cost to carry).
From a trading standpoint, backwardation provides a rollover profit for longs, because they pay a relatively lower price each time they roll the position to a further distant
(cheaper) delivery. As time passes, assuming a flat price trend, the long’s investment still
rises to equalize with the higher spot price. This can be an important part of commodity
returns, particularly for a trader with a very long-term horizon. Prices in contango, on
the other hand, drop during the holding period, guaranteeing a rollover loss (which can
only be offset through successful market forecasting).

c08

JWBK143-Briese

February 27, 2008

19:50

Char Count=

View from the Gallery

85

Whether Keynes’s view was normal or backward has been argued ever since, without
resolution. You would think the markets would be the final arbiter, but markets are fickle.
Often the difference in prices between different deliveries will reflect the cost to carry.
Often not. The difference may be called “risk premia” or “convenience yield,” depending
on the presenter’s predisposition. If risk premia is used, suspect you are dealing with a
Keynesian; if “convenience yield,” he may be predisposed to search for other factors. In
any case, the Commitments of Traders report has become a bountiful source of data
for inquiry. (Earlier studies into trader profitability relied on small samples of brokerage
house customer statements.)
One other definition might come in handy: “hedging pressure.” This is typically a
Keynesian concept because it implies that hedgers pay a premium for price insurance;
thus, excess hedging demand moves prices. In the original Keynes premise, this would
be downward price pressure, because he assumed that producers would far outnumber
users hedging in futures. This is not always so, making the hedging pressure angle one of
the more interesting.
Though sufficient for our purposes, this is hardly a comprehensive discussion of an
essential element in a trader’s fundamental knowledge base. For example, seasonal crops
are typically found in contango, but can move into backwardation (sometimes called premium) when nearby supply is restricted. Thus the two terms “demand” and “premium”
bull market both denote backwardation. (Current demand causes nearby prices to move
to a premium over later deliveries.)
Seasonality in production and consumption can add several more steps in the calculation of convenience yields for seasonal commodities, like heating oil, and perishable
commodities, like livestock. These price series may show a combination of positive and
negative convenience yields.
Then there are the markets where backwardation is the normal state, but not for the
reasons advanced by Keynes. Bonds pay interest, creating a negative cost to carry that
short-sellers need to consider. In the same vein, difference in currency yields affect cost
to carry, moving higher yielding currencies to premium.

CAN SPECULATORS FORECAST PRICES?
In one of the earliest studies attempting to appraise the relative ability of different trader
types in forecasting prices (Can Speculators Forecast Prices? 1957), H. S. Houthakker
assumed that the more accurately price changes were forecasted, the less they would
fluctuate, and the easier it would be for affected parties to adjust.
In 1957, Houthakker conducted a study to understand the role of speculators by
measuring their ability to forecast prices in the commodity futures markets. Using end-ofmonth positions from the Commitments of Traders annual reports, and average monthly
prices for three agricultural commodities between 1937 and 1952, Houthakker estimates

c08

JWBK143-Briese

February 27, 2008

19:50

Char Count=

86

COT THEORY

the profitability of large hedgers, large speculators, and small traders. To estimate profits
and losses, he assumes that the market positions existing at the end of each month were
opened at the average price during that month, and subsequently closed at the average
price for the month following. Commission and slippage costs are ignored.
In all three commodities, Houthakker calculates that large hedgers were net losers,
while large speculators enjoyed net gains for the period. (Note that I will be using
the term “large speculators,” for these older studies, since this category was, until
the 1980s, composed primarily of individual traders and not commodity funds or
pools.) Houthakker finds that small traders were profitable in cotton, but they were
net losers in both corn and wheat. In addition to being profitable overall, large speculators were consistently profitable. They made a net profit in cotton for every year
observed. Although in corn and wheat there were a few losing years, none showed a
large loss.
Results were analyzed at a more granular level in order to isolate profits attributable to forecasting skill, from any resulting from backwardation (Keynes’s Theory).
Houthakker finds that large speculators show definite evidence of forecasting skill, both
in the long and the short run. The experience of the small trader category indicates that
they do quite well when they stick to the long side, where sustained periods of backwardation assure them profits. He concludes that small traders show no evidence of ability
in forecasting short-run price movements, though.

RETURNS TO SPECULATORS AND THE THEORY
OF NORMAL BACKWARDATION
In Returns to Speculators and the Theory of Normal Backwardation (1985), Chang disputes Houthakker’s finding (1957) that Keynes’s theory was inconsistent with the positive trading results of large speculators. His criticism is twofold: First, Keynes’s theory
does not rest on whether speculators ever made money, but rather on whether they show
consistent profitability. In this pursuit, Houthakker’s study lacks statistical significance
testing. Chang also disagrees with assumptions Houthakker makes in calculating profits
and losses.
Chang’s approach is a bit simplistic, too. It assumes a typical speculator holds a single long contract when the large speculator net position is long, or, alternately, holds
one short contract when large speculators are net short. He uses average monthly or
bimonthly data as available. His results show an “average large speculator” was consistently profitable in wheat, corn, and soybeans futures from July 15, 1951, through
December 31, 1980. This profit explains how speculators are retained so that the market can continue to operate. Nevertheless, by using the inverse of the large hedger results as a proxy for a “naı̈ve” speculator, Chang concludes that speculative profits were
consistent with Keynes’s backwardation, and not attributable to the large speculators’
forecasting skill.

c08

JWBK143-Briese

February 27, 2008

19:50

Char Count=

View from the Gallery

87

RETURNS TO INDIVIDUAL TRADERS OF FUTURES:
AGGREGATE RESULTS
In an attempt to disprove Keynes’s theory of normal backwardation, Michael Hartzmark (Returns to Individual Traders of Futures: Aggregate Results 1987) measures the
profitability of large traders in nine futures markets—oats, wheat, Minneapolis wheat,
KCBT wheat, pork bellies, live cattle, feeder cattle, T-bonds, and T-bills—from July 1977
through December 1981.
Hartzmark obtained confidential files on the daily positions of large reporting traders
from the CFTC. The actual trading histories of 4,567 individual traders are constructed
using end-of-day market prices. The study considers only the profitability of positions
held overnight. He finds that large commercial hedgers earned significant profits when
returns were aggregated across all nine markets and that large speculators did not
earn profits significantly different than zero. The $728 million that commercial traders
earned over the period was about 85 percent of the total net profits earned by all
large traders.

LUCK VERSUS FORECAST ABILITY: DETERMINANTS OF
TRADER PERFORMANCE IN FUTURES MARKETS
In Luck Versus Forecast Ability: Determinants of Trader Performance in Futures Markets (1991) utilizing the same data set and statistical procedures he used in 1987 (above),
Michael Hartzmark builds on the former study by testing for two types of trader forecasting abilities: (1) consistent forecasting of price direction, and (2) “big hit” ability, where
the trader is able to predict direction plus magnitude, holding the largest positions when
the largest returns are anticipated.
For this study, Hartzmark removes the less active large speculators from the data,
which amount to about half the sample. Unlike the earlier study, the remaining largest
of the large speculators show positive returns. Even though a large number of traders
appear to exhibit significantly superior forecasting ability, Hartzmark concludes that the
statistics are highly supportive of the premise that profits were due to luck, not forecasting ability.
He focuses on two questions that emerge from his inquiry. First, it is not clear why
there is a massive bunching of traders with no ability—although it suggests that many
individuals use very similar trading strategies or information sources. Second, it is not
clear why a subset of large speculative traders should earn significantly positive returns.
If the performance of all traders, whether large or small, is due to luck, one would not
expect the large traders to consistently perform any better than the small traders. Yet
both in this study and in a number of earlier studies cited by Hartzmark, small traders
are the big losers and large traders are the big winners.

c08

JWBK143-Briese

February 27, 2008

19:50

Char Count=

88

COT THEORY

THE RETURNS AND FORECASTING ABILITY OF LARGE
TRADERS IN THE FROZEN PORK BELLIES
FUTURES MARKET
In The Returns and Forecasting Ability of Large Traders in the Frozen Pork Bellies
Futures Market (1994), Leuthold, Garcia, and Lu examine the forecasting ability of large
traders (both commercials and speculators) in the frozen pork bellies futures market.
Daily positions of the 58 largest traders in the frozen pork bellies market from 1982 to
1990 were obtained from the CFTC and used to examine forecasting ability. The study
focuses on trader gains or losses and on the group’s ability to hold its largest position
when the largest price movements in the correct direction occur. (This is similar to the
“big hitter” in Hartzmark 1991.)
Leuthold, Garcia, and Lu concluded that large traders generate significant profits
(over $150 million during the study period) and that the distribution of trader returns
over time is not random. A further breakdown between hedgers and speculators finds
that speculators possess a significant forecasting advantage, consistently anticipating
the direction of price changes, and that they were also on the right side of the market
when large price changes occurred. This is similar to Hartzmark’s findings, in a broader
selection of markets, which also included bellies.

HEDGING PRESSURE EFFECTS IN FUTURES MARKETS
De Roon, Nijman, and Veld (Hedging Pressure Effects in Futures Markets 2000) examine
the effect of large commercial hedgers in 20 futures markets, divided into four groups
(Table 8.1). The data set consists of semimonthly Commitments data for the period from
January 1986 to December 1994 excluding observations from October 1987.
Rather than looking at profitability, this study performs a correlation analysis between the commercial net position (expressed as a ratio) and price movement, and finds
that even when allowing for outside price pressures, hedge pressure accounted for a
significant amount of price movement.
An unusual feature of the study is an attempt to analyze cross-market hedging pressure. In other words, if two markets are positively correlated in price movement, this
TABLE 8.1 Twenty Futures Markets Included in De Roon et al.
Financial

Agricultural

Mineral

Currency

S&P 500
Value Line
T-bonds
T-bills
Eurodollar

Wheat
Corn
Soybeans
Live cattle
Sugar #11

Gold
Silver
Platinum
Crude oil
Heating oil

Deutschmark
British pound
Japanese yen
Canadian dollar
Swiss franc

c08

JWBK143-Briese

February 27, 2008

19:50

Char Count=

View from the Gallery

89

correlation coefficient is used to assign a percentage of hedging in market A to market
B. (The cross-market hedging pressure angle seems to me to be a bit of a stretch, but it
was unique to this study.)

HEDGING DEMAND AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE
RISK PREMIA
In Hedging Demand and Foreign Exchange Risk Premia (2001), David Tien sought to
determine whether speculators are a “stabilizing influence in currency exchange rates as
posited by [Milton] Friedman or the scourge of financial markets as described by Prime
Minister Mahathir of Malaysia.” Tien uses monthly COT data from 1986–2000 for five currency futures: Canadian dollar, Swiss franc, German mark, British pound, and Japanese
yen. He comes down on the side of Friedman.
Tien’s study concludes that hedging pressure accounted for about 45 percent of the
variation in price, and that hedgers tend to lose money to large speculators. He views this
as a risk-sharing arrangement beneficial to the economy. He also finds that hedgers are
the initiators, and that speculative volume responds to hedger demand. This contradicts
assertions made in the CFTC study (Haigh, Hranaiova, and Oversahl, 2005) discussed in
Chapter 1, page 10.
