efficacious than the entreaties of a saint. But, as Stowe informs us, "scarcely was one
year past, when all that thought themselves courtiers fell into the former vice, and
contended with women in their long haires." Henry, the King, appears to have been quite
uninfluenced by the dreams of others, for even his own would not induce him a second
time to undergo a cropping from priestly shears. It is said, that he was much troubled at
this time by disagreeable visions. Having offended the church in this and other respects,
he could get no sound refreshing sleep, and used to imagine that he saw all the bishops,
abbots, and monks of every degree, standing around his bed-side, and threatening to
belabour him with their pastoral staves; which sight, we are told, so frightened him, that
he often started naked out of his bed, and attacked the phantoms sword in hand.
Grimbalde, his physician, who, like most of his fraternity at that day, was an ecclesiastic,
never hinted that his dreams were the result of a bad digestion, but told him to shave his
head, be reconciled to the Church, and reform himself with alms and prayer. But he
would not take this good advice, and it was not until he had been nearly drowned a year
afterwards, in a violent storm at sea, that he repented of his evil ways, cut his hair short,
and paid proper deference to the wishes of the clergy.
In France, the thunders of the Vatican with regard to long curly hair were hardly more
respected than in England. Louis VII. however, was more obedient than his brother-king,
and cropped himself as closely as a monk, to the great sorrow of all the gallants of his
court. His Queen, the gay, haughty, and pleasure-seeking Eleanor of Guienne, never
admired him in this trim, and continually reproached him with imitating, not only the
headdress, but the asceticism of the monks. From this cause, a coldness arose between
them. The lady proving at last unfaithful to her shaven and indifferent lord, they were
divorced, and the Kings of France lost the rich provinces of Guienne and Poitou, which
were her dowry. She soon after bestowed her hand and her possessions upon Henry Duke
of Normandy, afterwards Henry II of England, and thus gave the English sovereigns that
strong footing in France which was for so many centuries the cause of such long and
bloody wars between the nations.
When the Crusades had drawn all the smart young fellows into Palestine, the clergy did
not find it so difficult to convince the staid burghers who remained in Europe, of the
enormity of long hair. During the absence of Richard Coeur de Lion, his English subjects
not only cut their hair close, but shaved their faces. William Fitzosbert, or Long-beard,
the great demagogue of that day, reintroduced among the people who claimed to be of
Saxon origin the fashion of long hair. He did this with the view of making them as unlike
as possible to the citizens and the Normans. He wore his own beard hanging down to his
waist, from whence the name by which he is best known to posterity.
The Church never showed itself so great an enemy to the beard as to long hair on the
head. It generally allowed fashion to take its own course, both with regard to the chin and
the upper lip. This fashion varied continually; for we find that, in little more than a
century after the time of Richard I, when beards were short, that they had again become
so long as to be mentioned in the famous epigram made by the Scots who visited London
in 1327, when David, son of Robert Bruce, was married to Joan, the sister of King

Edward. This epigram, which was stuck on the church-door of St. Peter Stangate, ran as
follows-"Long beards heartlesse, Painted hoods witlesse, Gray coats gracelesse, Make England
thriftlesse."
When the Emperor Charles V. ascended the throne of Spain, he had no beard. It was not
to be expected that the obsequious parasites who always surround a monarch, could
presume to look more virile than their master. Immediately all the courtiers appeared
beardless, with the exception of such few grave old men as had outgrown the influence of
fashion, and who had determined to die bearded as they had lived. Sober people in
general saw this revolution with sorrow and alarm, and thought that every manly virtue
would be banished with the beard. It became at the time a common saying,-"Desde que no hay barba, no hay mas alma." We have no longer souls since we have lost
our beards.
In France, also, the beard fell into disrepute after the death of Henry IV, from the mere
reason that his successor was too young to have one. Some of the more immediate friends
of the great Bearnais, and his minister Sully among the rest, refused to part with their
beards, notwithstanding the jeers of the new generation.
Who does not remember the division of England into the two great parties of Roundheads
and Cavaliers? In those days, every species of vice and iniquity was thought by the
Puritans to lurk in the long curly tresses of the Monarchists, while the latter imagined that
their opponents were as destitute of wit, of wisdom, and of virtue, as they were of hair. A
man's locks were the symbol of his creed, both in politics and religion. The more
abundant the hair, the more scant the faith; and the balder the head, the more sincere the
piety.
But among all the instances of the interference of governments with men's hair, the most
extraordinary, not only for its daring, but for its success is that of Peter the Great, in
1705. By this time, fashion had condemned the beard in every other country in Europe,
and with a voice more potent than Popes or Emperors, had banished it from civilized
society. But this only made the Russians cling more fondly to their ancient ornament, as a
mark to distinguish them from foreigners, whom they hated. Peter, however resolved that
they should be shaven. If he had been a man deeply read in history, he might have
hesitated before he attempted so despotic an attack upon the time-hallowed customs and
prejudices of his countrymen; but he was not. He did not know or consider the danger of
the innovation; he only listened to the promptings of his own indomitable will, and his
fiat went forth, that not only the army, but all ranks of citizens, from the nobles to the
serfs, should shave their beards. A certain time was given, that people might get over the
first throes of their repugnance, after which every man who chose to retain his beard was
to pay a tax of one hundred roubles. The priests and the serfs were put on a lower footing,
and allowed to retain theirs upon payment of a copeck every time they passed the gate of
a city. Great discontent existed in consequence, but the dreadful fate of the Strelitzes was

too recent to be forgotten, and thousands who had the will had not the courage to revolt.
As is well remarked by a writer in the "Encyclopedia Britannica," they thought it wiser to
cut off their beards than to run the risk of incensing a man who would make no scruple in
cutting off their heads. Wiser, too, than the popes and bishops of a former age, he did not
threaten them with eternal damnation, but made them pay in hard cash the penalty of their
disobedience. For many years, a very considerable revenue was collected from this
source. The collectors gave in receipt for its payment a small copper coin, struck
expressly for the purpose, and called the "borodovaia," or "the bearded." On one side it
bore the figure of a nose, mouth, and moustachios, with a long bushy beard, surmounted
by the words," Deuyee Vyeatee," "money received;" the whole encircled by a wreath, and
stamped with the black eagle of Russia. On the reverse, it bore the date of the year. Every
man who chose to wear a beard was obliged to produce this receipt on his entry into a
town. Those who were refractory, and refused to pay the tax, were thrown into prison.
Since that day, the rulers of modern Europe have endeavoured to persuade, rather than to
force, in all matters pertaining to fashion. The Vatican troubles itself no more about
beards or ringlets, and men may become hairy as bears, if such is their fancy, without fear
of excommunication or deprivation of their political rights. Folly has taken a new start,
and cultivates the moustachio.
Even upon this point governments will not let men alone. Religion as yet has not meddled
with it; but perhaps it will; and politics already influence it considerably. Before the
revolution of 1830, neither the French nor Belgian citizens were remarkable for their
moustachios; but, after that event, there was hardly a shopkeeper either in Paris or
Brussels whose upper lip did not suddenly become hairy with real or mock moustachios.
During a temporary triumph gained by the Dutch soldiers over the citizens of Louvain, in
October 1830, it became a standing joke against the patriots, that they shaved their faces
clean immediately; and the wits of the Dutch army asserted, that they had gathered
moustachios enough from the denuded lips of the Belgians to stuff mattresses for all the
sick and wounded in their hospital.
The last folly of this kind is still more recent. In the German newspapers, of August 1838,
appeared an ordonnance, signed by the King of Bavaria, forbidding civilians, on any
pretence whatever, to wear moustachios, and commanding the police and other
authorities to arrest, and cause to be shaved, the offending parties. "Strange to say," adds
"Le Droit," the journal from which this account is taken, "moustachios disappeared
immediately, like leaves from the trees in autumn; everybody made haste to obey the
royal order, and not one person was arrested.
The King of Bavaria, a rhymester of some celebrity, has taken a good many poetical
licences in his time. His licence in this matter appears neither poetical nor reasonable. It
is to be hoped that he will not take it into his royal head to make his subjects shave theirs;
nothing but that is wanting to complete their degradation.

DUELS AND ORDEALS
There was an ancient sage philosopher,
Who swore the world, as he could prove,
Was mad of fighting.
-- Hudibras
Most writers, in accounting for the origin of duelling, derive it from the warlike habits of
those barbarous nations who overran Europe in the early centuries of the Christian era,
and who knew no mode so effectual for settling their differences as the point of the
sword. In fact, duelling, taken in its primitive and broadest sense, means nothing more
than combatting, and is the universal resort of all wild animals, including man, to gain or
defend their possessions, or avenge their insults. Two dogs who tear each other for a
bone, or two bantams fighting on a dunghill for the love of some beautiful hen, or two
fools on Wimbledon Common, shooting at each other to satisfy the laws of offended
honour, stand on the same footing in this respect, and are, each and all, mere duellists. As
civilization advanced, the best informed men naturally grew ashamed of such a mode of
adjusting disputes, and the promulgation of some sort of laws for obtaining redress for
injuries was the consequence. Still there were many cases in which the allegations of an
accuser could not be rebutted by any positive proof on the part of the accused; and in all
these, which must have been exceedingly numerous in the early stages of European
society, the combat was resorted to. From its decision there was no appeal. God was
supposed to nerve the arm of the combatant whose cause was just, and to grant him the
victory over his opponent. As Montesquieu well remarks, ["Esprit des Loix," liv. xxviii.
chap. xvii.] this belief was not unnatural among a people just emerging from barbarism.
Their manners being wholly warlike, the man deficient in courage, the prime virtue of his
fellows, was not unreasonably suspected of other vices besides cowardice, which is
generally found to be co-existent with treachery. He, therefore, who showed himself most
valiant in the encounter, was absolved by public opinion from any crime with which he
might be charged. As a necessary consequence, society would have been reduced to its
original elements, if the men of thought, as distinguished from the men of action, had not
devised some means for taming the unruly passions of their fellows. With this view,
governments commenced by restricting within the narrowest possible limits the cases in
which it was lawful to prove or deny guilt by the single combat. By the law of
Gondebaldus, King of the Burgundians, passed in the year 501, the proof by combat was
allowed in all legal proceedings, in lieu of swearing. In the time of Charlemagne, the
Burgundian practice had spread over the empire of the Francs, and not only the suitors for
justice, but the witnesses, and even the judges, were obliged to defend their cause, their
evidence, or their decision, at the point of the sword. Louis the Debonnaire, his successor,
endeavoured to remedy the growing evil, by permitting the duel only in appeals of felony,
in civil cases, or issue joined in a writ of right, and in cases of the court of chivalry, or
attacks upon a man's knighthood. None were exempt from these trials, but women, the
sick and the maimed, and persons under fifteen or above sixty years of age. Ecclesiastics
were allowed to produce champions in their stead. This practice, in the course of time,
extended to all trials of civil and criminal cases, which had to be decided by battle.

The clergy, whose dominion was an intellectual one, never approved of a system of
jurisprudence which tended so much to bring all things under the rule of the strongest
arm. From the first they set their faces against duelling, and endeavoured, as far as the
prejudices of their age would allow them, to curb the warlike spirit, so alien from the
principles of religion. In the Council of Valentia, and afterwards in the Council of Trent,
they excommunicated all persons engaged in duelling, and not only them, but even the
assistants and spectators, declaring the custom to be hellish and detestable, and
introduced by the Devil for the destruction both of body and soul. They added, also, that
princes who connived at duels, should be deprived of all temporal power, jurisdiction,
and dominion over the places where they had permitted them to be fought. It will be seen
hereafter that this clause only encouraged the practice which it was intended to prevent.
But it was the blasphemous error of these early ages to expect that the Almighty,
whenever he was called upon, would work a miracle in favour of a person unjustly
accused. The priesthood, in condemning the duel, did not condemn the principle on
which it was founded. They still encouraged the popular belief of Divine interference in
all the disputes or differences that might arise among nations or individuals. It was the
very same principle that regulated the ordeals, which, with all their influence, they
supported against the duel. By the former, the power of deciding the guilt or innocence
was vested wholly in their hands, while, by the latter, they enjoyed no power or privilege
at all. It is not to be wondered at, that for this reason, if for no other, they should have
endeavoured to settle all differences by the peaceful mode. While that prevailed, they
were as they wished to be, the first party in the state; but while the strong arm of
individual prowess was allowed to be the judge in all doubtful cases, their power and
influence became secondary to those of nobility.
Thus, it was not the mere hatred of bloodshed which induced them to launch the
thunderbolts excommunication against the combatants; it a desire to retain the power,
which, to do them justice, they were, in those times, the persons best qualified to wield.
The germs of knowledge and civilization lay within the bounds of their order; for they
were the representatives of the intellectual, as the nobility were of the physical power of
man. To centralize this power in the Church, and make it the judge of the last resort in all
appeals, both in civil and criminal cases, they instituted five modes of trial, the
management of which lay wholly in their hands. These were the oath upon the
Evangelists; the ordeal of the cross, and the fire ordeal, for persons in the higher ranks;
the water ordeal, for the humbler classes; and, lastly, the Corsned, or bread and cheese
ordeal, for members of their own body.
The oath upon the Evangelists was taken in the following manner: the accused who was
received to this proof, says Paul Hay, Count du Chastelet, in his Memoirs of Bertrand du
Guesclin, swore upon a copy of the New Testament, and on the relics of the holy martyrs,
or on their tombs, that he was innocent of the crime imputed to him. He was also obliged
to find twelve persons, of acknowledged probity, who should take oath at the same time,
that they believed him innocent. This mode of trial led to very great abuses, especially in
cases of disputed inheritance, where the hardest swearer was certain of the victory. This
abuse was one of the principal causes which led to the preference given to the trial by

battle. It is not all surprising that a feudal baron, or captain of the early ages, should have
preferred the chances of a fair fight with his opponent, to a mode by which firm perjury
would always be successful.
The trial by, or judgment of, the cross, which Charlemagne begged his sons to have
recourse to, in case of disputes arising between them, was performed thus:-- When a
person accused of any crime had declared his innocence upon oath, and appealed to the
cross for its judgment in his favour, he was brought into the church, before the altar. The
priests previously prepared two sticks exactly like one another, upon one of which was
carved a figure of the cross. They were both wrapped up with great care and many
ceremonies, in a quantity of fine wool, and laid upon the altar, or on the relics of the
saints. A solemn prayer was then offered up to God, that he would be pleased to discover,
by the judgment of his holy cross, whether the accused person were innocent or guilty. A
priest then approached the altar, and took up one of the sticks, and the assistants
unswathed it reverently. If it was marked with the cross, the accused person was
innocent; if unmarked, he was guilty. It would be unjust to assert, that the judgments thus
delivered were, in all cases, erroneous; and it would be absurd to believe that they were
left altogether to chance. Many true judgments were doubtless given, and, in all
probability, most conscientiously; for we cannot but believe that the priests endeavoured
beforehand to convince themselves by secret inquiry and a strict examination of the
circumstances, whether the appellant were innocent or guilty, and that they took up the
crossed or uncrossed stick accordingly. Although, to all other observers, the sticks, as
enfolded in the wool, might appear exactly similar, those who enwrapped them could,
without any difficulty, distinguish the one from the other.
By the fire-ordeal the power of deciding was just as unequivocally left in their hands. It
was generally believed that fire would not burn the innocent, and the clergy, of course,
took care that the innocent, or such as it was their pleasure or interest to declare so,
should be so warned before undergoing the ordeal, as to preserve themselves without any
difficulty from the fire. One mode of ordeal was to place red-hot ploughshares on the
ground at certain distances, and then, blindfolding the accused person, make him walk
barefooted over them. If he stepped regularly in the vacant spaces, avoiding the fire, he
was adjudged innocent; if he burned himself, he was declared guilty. As none but the
clergy interfered with the arrangement of the ploughshares, they could always calculate
beforehand the result of the ordeal. To find a person guilty, they had only to place them at
irregular distances, and the accused was sure to tread upon one of them. When Emma, the
wife of King Ethelred, and mother of Edward the Confessor, was accused of a guilty
familiarity with Alwyn, Bishop of Winchester, she cleared her character in this manner.
The reputation, not only of their order, but of a queen, being at stake, a verdict of guilty
was not to be apprehended from any ploughshares which priests had the heating of. This
ordeal was called the Judicium Dei, and sometimes the Vulgaris Purgatio, and might also
be tried by several other methods. One was to hold in the hand, unhurt, a piece of red-hot
iron, of the weight of one, two, or three pounds. When we read not only that men with
hard hands, but women of softer and more delicate skin, could do this with impunity, we
must be convinced that the hands were previously rubbed with some preservative, or that
the apparently hot iron was merely cold iron painted red. Another mode was to plunge the

naked arm into a caldron of boiling water. The priests then enveloped it in several folds
of linen and flannel, and kept the patient confined within the church, and under their
exclusive care, for three days. If, at the end of that time, the arm appeared without a scar,
the innocence of the accused person was firmly established. [Very similar to this is the
fire-ordeal of the modern Hindoos,. which is thus described in Forbes's "Oriental
Memoirs," vol. i. c. xi.--" When a man, accused of a capital crime, chooses to undergo the
ordeal trial, he is closely confined for several days; his right hand and arm are covered
with thick wax-cloth, tied up and sealed, in the presence of proper officers, to prevent
deceit. In the English districts the covering was always sealed with the Company's arms,
and the prisoner placed under an European guard. At the time fixed for the ordeal, a
caldron of oil is placed over a fire; when it boils, a piece of money is dropped into the
vessel; the prisoner's arm is unsealed, and washed in the presence of his judges and
accusers. During this part of the ceremony, the attendant Brahmins supplicate the Deity.
On receiving their benediction, the accused plunges his hand into the boiling fluid, and
takes out the coin. The arm is afterwards again Sealed up until the time appointed for a
re-examination. The seal is then broken: if no blemish appears, the prisoner is declared
innocent; if the contrary, he suffers the punishment due to his crime." * * * On this trial
the accused thus addresses the element before plunging his hand into the boiling oil:-"Thou, O fire! pervadest all things. O cause of purity! who givest evidence of virtue and
of sin, declare the truth in this my hand!" If no juggling were practised, the decisions by
this ordeal would be all the same way; but, as some are by this means declared guilty, and
others innocent, it is clear that the Brahmins, like the Christian priests of the middle ages,
practise some deception in saving those whom they wish to be thought guiltless.]
As regards the water-ordeal, the same trouble was not taken. It was a trial only for the
poor and humble, and, whether they sank or swam, was thought of very little
consequence. Like the witches of more modern times, the accused were thrown into a
pond or river; if they sank, and were drowned, their surviving friends had the consolation
of knowing that they were innocent; if they swam, they were guilty. In either case society
was rid of them.
But of all the ordeals, that which the clergy reserved for themselves was the one least
likely to cause any member of their corps to be declared guilty. The most culpable
monster in existence came off clear when tried by this method. It was called the Corsned,
and was thus performed. A piece of barley bread and a piece of cheese were laid upon the
altar, and the accused priest, in his full canonicals, and surrounded by all the pompous
adjuncts of Roman ceremony, pronounced certain conjurations, and prayed with great
fervency for several minutes. The burden of his prayer was, that if he were guilty of the
crime laid to his charge, God would send his angel Gabriel to stop his throat, that he
might not be able to swallow the bread and cheese. There is no instance upon record of a
priest having been choked in this manner. [An ordeal very like this is still practised in
India. Consecrated rice is the article chosen, instead of bread and cheese. Instances are
not rare in which, through the force of imagination, guilty persons are not able to swallow
a single grain. Conscious of their crime, and fearful of the punishment of Heaven, they
feel a suffocating sensation in their throat when they attempt it, and they fall on their
knees, and confess all that is laid to their charge. The same thing, no doubt, would have
