
Ball-Tossing Momentum
One of the easiest examples to use when comparing real-world physics and momentum principles to
the stock market is to discuss the physics that occur when you throw a ball into the air.
Imagine you are holding a tennis ball in your right hand. The ball will remain stationary (at rest—
Law 1) until some other force (your hand) acts on it to start the ball moving. Now, imagine yourself
throwing the ball high into the air. The ball will continue rising until some other force (gravity) acts
upon it. Your hand and the strength with which you throw it serve as the beginning force that sets the
ball in motion, and the ball will travel higher if you exert more force in your initial swing than if you
exerted less force as you move your hand higher to release the ball (Law 2). The air (resistance) and
gravity (force) will counteract the force you used to throw the ball into the air, eventually becoming
stronger as the momentum you used to throw the ball into the air decreases. The ball will slow down
before reaching the highest point at apogee, pause for a split second, and then begin falling back down
to earth, returning hopefully to your outstretched hand to catch it.
In that simple example, we just demonstrated the First and Second Laws of Motion! The concepts of
physics do not have to be difficult. Again, the ball would have remained in your hand until you threw
it into the air (first law). How hard you throw the ball determines how high the ball travels in the air
(second law). The ball would have stayed in perpetual motion had you thrown it up while floating in
outer space (no gravity or wind resistance), but you were on Earth when you threw the ball, so the
forces of gravity and air molecule resistance acted against the ball to slow down the trajectory to the
upside and eventually return the ball back to earth.
That's great, but how does throwing a ball relate to buying and selling stocks? That's what this
chapter will reveal. To get us started, imagine that the price of a stock is relatively flat or rangebound for a period of time. Now, imagine that the company suddenly releases better-than-expected
earnings or in some way due to positive news becomes the focus of an intense buying campaign,
driving the price higher. This is called a Momentum Burst, or impulse, which sets the stock moving
higher in a trend or upward trajectory. The stock will continue moving higher as a result of the

supply/demand (sellers/buyers) imbalance until some other force serves to weaken, then reverse the
trend, which often reveals itself on the price chart in the form of a rounded reversal price pattern or
negative momentum divergence. Usually, the trend will end just like the ball you threw, which means
that price moves often end through a weakening of buyers or loss of momentum at the highs (which
show up as negative divergences) before the stock pauses, then returns to lower levels as a new
downtrend develops.

MOMENTUM IN THE STOCK MARKET
Now that we have a quick review of the scientific concept of momentum, let's apply this directly to
the stock market. We define momentum in simpler terms when describing price on the charts, with the
simplest definition being “momentum represents a change in price over time.” Large changes
represent large spikes in momentum—also known as acceleration—and hint that price will continue
traveling in the direction the momentum burst occurs. You want to see momentum spikes or sharp
acceleration occur at the start of a new trend, either before or shortly after a trend reversal has
occurred using the definitions and tactics in Chapter 1, or breaking out of a sideways trading range as
we will see in Chapter 3. Initial bursts of momentum after lengthy divergences represent a kickoff in
price that often leads to a pure trend reversal and tradable opportunity for low-risk profits.
In an article for the Journal of Technical Analysis entitled “Momentum Leads Price,” Timothy
Hayes explained that momentum leads price through detecting acceleration and deceleration. Using an
example of two cars, Hayes showed that if two cars leave the same destination with the same
acceleration and stop accelerating at the exact same time, then both cars would continue coasting
forward and slow at the same rate, all things being equal. However, what would happen if one driver
accelerated for a longer period before taking his foot off the accelerator? That car would
subsequently coast forward for a longer period of time and travel farther than the other car whose
driver released the accelerator earlier.
Such a comparison of cars and acceleration is similar to stocks and their momentum qualities, such
that stocks with higher momentum often travel higher in price relative to stocks with lower momentum
readings, using the momentum to coast to higher prices than stocks with lower momentum. It is thus
very important to assess the momentum environment when assessing opportunities in specific stocks
to trade.

GAPS REVEAL MOMENTUM
Observe momentum by itself without indicators by looking at sudden changes in price. A gap or
sudden large price move is by definition a momentum impulse, highlighting the force (of supply or
demand) acting on the price of the stock or market. Let's see a simple example of a positive earnings
announcement in Amazon.com's stock (AMZN) serving as a momentum burst (Figure 2.1).
FIGURE 2.1 A Gap as a Momentum Impulse in Amazon on October 23, 2009

Prior to the gap in mid-October 2009, Amazon was range-bound (trendless with a slight upward
bias). However, the positive earnings announcement sent traders rushing to buy the stock (and shortsellers rushing to cover their short positions), which appeared on the chart as a momentum impulse.
This is similar to Newton's First Law of Motion which states that “objects tend to stay at rest until a
force acts upon them,” which in this case was a rush of buyers creating the force, driving price higher.
Taking into account Law 2, “an object will accelerate proportional to the force that acts upon it.” To
the extent that this positive earnings surprise caused a rush of buyers to purchase shares of Amazon,
the stock will be expected to continue higher in price as the initial force of momentum—like throwing
a tennis ball into the air—leads to a higher trajectory and uptrend in price. Stronger initial impulses
can be expected to drive price higher than weaker initial impulses—all things being equal.
In plain English, this means that the spike in price and the corresponding volume spike, which often
accompanies any sort of momentum burst or impulse, sent prices higher and led us to expect a
continuation of upward prices into the future. Stated differently, after observing a momentum impulse
in price, we expect continued higher prices in the future, translating into low-risk trading
opportunities such as buying shares on pullbacks to support levels in the context of a rising trend. Like
the ball rising immediately from the initial momentum burst the moment it leaves your hand and then
continuing to rise, we would expect stock prices to continue rising higher in the aftermath of a major
impulsive event that sends price higher either in a breakout or continuation trend motion. Positive
momentum bursts in price reveal that a prevailing uptrend is healthy and should continue higher into
the future, rather than reverse.
Let's see another example of a momentum burst (impulse), both to the upside and downside in
Electronic Arts (ERTS) during the transition from 2004 to 2005 (Figure 2.2).
As revealed in Amazon, a gap was the initial impulse burst that led to higher prices yet to come in
the future. Electronic Arts shows the same concept in December 2004 when price began to accelerate
in a momentum burst confirmed by an accompanying rise in volume. From December 10–14, 2004,
we see three days in a row of one-sided action, showing a sharp acceleration of price to the upside,

revealing our momentum burst (or force acting on the object—price). Such momentum bursts hint to us
that odds favor even higher prices yet to come. We'll learn in later chapters that it is best to put on a
position immediately following the first retracement after we see a spike in momentum (I call this the
Impulse Buy trade), but we first must understand why these make good trade setups by learning the
foundation concept of momentum.
We can see an example of the concept in a breakaway gap to the downside in March 2005 with a
downside impulse leading to lower prices yet to come. On March 22, 2004, price opened down $9.25
or almost 14 percent lower, showing us a clear momentum impulse, or burst, to the downside, serving
as a force that kept prices traveling lower. Notice the large spike in volume: almost 40,000,000
shares traded that day, when the average for the prior days was near 5,000,000 shares per day. Price
reached an absolute bottom of the move in May 2005 at $47.45.
FIGURE 2.2 Two Gaps showing two Momentum Impulses in Electronic Arts, 2004/2005 Daily
Chart

Of course, not all gaps result automatically in a continuation of the trend. Breakaway Gaps and
Common Gaps do so, but Exhaustion Gaps (those that form at the end of a lengthy trend) do not.
Breakaway Gaps occur at the start of a new trend near the time of a confirmed trend reversal, while
Common Gaps (also known as Measured Gaps) occur usually near the middle state of a trend.
Exhaustion gaps are a different story, as they occur at the end of a lengthy trend and fill immediately.
Breakaway Gaps rarely fill, while Exhaustion Gaps fill almost immediately; in fact, that is the
distinguishing characteristic between them. It also shows the importance of taking into account the
maturity of a trend when assessing momentum readings.
Amazon and Electronic Arts showed an example of a Common (Measured) Gap when the price
broke in impulse fashion to the upside, while the second gap on March 23, as seen in Figure 2.2, in
Electronic Arts showed us an example of a Breakaway Gap to the downside after price had formed
volume (and momentum) divergences, as price rallied to new highs. We will discuss divergences as

forecasting trend reversals later in the chapter.

THE MOMENTUM INDICATOR
Before we describe indicators, it is important to understand that momentum is a concept of physics
that is applied to the price chart of stocks. There are a variety of methods, or indicators, that help you
assess the current momentum condition of a stock price in motion, but the goal is to assess the
momentum environment, specifically if momentum is increasing or decreasing within the context of a
new or mature trend.
Though it may sound confusing, there is a specific indicator named Momentum, but this indicator is
not the same thing as identifying the physics concept of “momentum” that we are trying to assess.
There is only one concept of “Momentum” though there are many chart indicators you can use to
assess momentum, one of which is labeled the “Momentum Indicator.” It's not as confusing as it
initially seems.
Most charting platforms include a simple indicator appropriately named momentum. The momentum
indicator compares the price today with the price X days in the past to show not just whether price is
higher or lower than in the past, but to what extent. In fact, the Momentum Indicator is perhaps the
simplest but ironically not most effective indicator when studying the physics concept of momentum
as applied to the stock charts. The indicator compares the price today with the price a certain number
of days in the past and tallies the result each day as a line to assess whether momentum is rising or
falling. The momentum indicator formula compares the current price with the price a specified
number of days past, usually 14 as the default, and then plots the value each day as an oscillating line
around zero. A reading of zero indicates that the price today and the price 14 days ago are equal.

MOMENTUM INDICATOR
An indicator that shows price today minus price X days ago

For simplicity, let us say that X days ago is 14 days, so we want to know how much higher or lower
price is today than it was 14 days ago. That is what the indicator shows for the current reading. For
example, if price today is $50.00 and price 14 days ago was $47.00, then the formula would show
$50.00 minus $47.00 equals $3.00. Thus, the current reading would show $3.00. If price was $53.00
14 days ago and price is $50.00 today, then the indicator would show −$3.00, showing that price has
declined $3.00 from the value 14 days ago.
For the purpose of momentum as a physics concept (and not an indicator), the current value of the
indicator is of little to no significance to us. What is most important is the highs and lows of the
oscillator itself when compared to respective price highs and lows. Other textbooks will tell you to
buy when the indicator crosses above the zero-line (indicating positive momentum) and to sell when
the indicator crosses under the zero-line (indicating negative momentum) but that is not what we are
discussing here. We are not using the indicator to give us buy or sell signals; rather, we are most
interested in comparing the highs and lows of the indicator as they relate to swing highs and lows in
price in order to reveal the current condition of the physics of momentum on the price charts. You
discover insights into momentum—the concept—through comparing oscillator highs and lows with
corresponding price highs or lows.
Let us see an example using the S&P 500 as the market turned from bull to bear in early 2008

(Figure 2.3).
FIGURE 2.3 Using the Indicator Momentum to Compare Oscillator and Price Swings—NML = New
Momentum Low

Comparing the Oscillator and Price for Confirmation
Compare oscillator swing highs directly with corresponding price swing highs, and oscillator swing
lows to corresponding price swing lows. You may find it beneficial to draw vertical lines on your
chart to see exactly where the price and oscillator highs and lows align. The oscillator should behave
similarly to price, and serve to highlight swings in price. In other words, if price makes a new swing
low, then we expect the momentum oscillator also to make a corresponding swing low as a
confirmation of the price low. If you are seeing new price lows correspond with new oscillator lows,
then you observe a confirmation of indicator and price that suggests that you can expect lower prices
yet to come. Using the same logic, if you see new price highs and these new highs are confirmed with
new oscillator highs (look directly down at your oscillator when price is making a new high), then
see this as a confirmation and thus expect higher prices to continue in the uptrend.
We see this occurring as expected in the chart in November 2007 and January 2008 in Figure 2.3 as
price forms a new swing low with the oscillator forming a corresponding oscillator swing low with
price. I drew vertical arrows in the chart to focus your attention on comparing the price low with the
momentum oscillator low. We can establish a logical rule based on this concept, which will later
form the basis for trade setups (classic retracement trades, bull or bear flags, and impulse buy or sell
trades):

PRICE VERSUS MOMENTUM EXTREMES
New Momentum Oscillator Highs plus New Price Highs

When the Momentum Oscillator forms a new swing high (relative to the recent past) at the same time that price forms a
new swing high, then this serves as a confirmation of the recent price high and suggests that a higher price high is yet to
come. We can buy the first pullback into support for a potential trade setup.
New Momentum Oscillator Lows plus New Price Lows
When the Momentum Oscillator forms a new swing low (relative to the recent past) at the same time that price forms a
new swing low, then this serves as a confirmation of the recent price low and suggests that a lower price low is yet to
come. We can short sell the first pullback into resistance for a potential trade setup.

In Figure 2.3, we saw our first new price low and new oscillator low at 1,400.00 in the S&P 500
during November 2007. Price then retraced higher to form a lower swing high (this is called the first
reaction or first retracement) and then fell to a new price low that was forecast—or hinted—via the
confirmation signal given by momentum. Price and momentum both made new lows, so we would
anticipate a future new price low yet to come. Price swung to a new low in January 2008 at the
1,300.00 index level with the momentum oscillator also forming a corresponding new low. What do
we assume next?
Again, we see a new price low (new swing low—refer to Chapter 1 for a discussion on price
swings) which was confirmed again with another new oscillator low in the momentum oscillator. For
reference, the price swing low in January 2008 is roughly 100 points lower than the December 2007
price swing low, and the January 2008 momentum oscillator low is roughly 55 points lower than it
was in December 2007 (it hit a low of –105.00 in December and a new low of –160.00 in January).
We would thus expect new price lows yet to come, as hinted by the confirming signal in the
oscillator, along with price. The trade setup is to sell short the first reaction or retracement into
resistance after price and the momentum oscillator form a new low together (in unison). This
retracement takes us back up to the 1,400.00 index level in February, giving us a chance to short sell.
We do see a drop to a new index low as expected, breaking to 1,250.00 in March 2008, but something
strange happens to the oscillator.
Price just made a new swing low, but the oscillator did not—look carefully at the swing low under
1,300.00 in March 2008. This is our first positive momentum divergence on the chart, meaning price
made a new low but the oscillator diverged, or did not confirm the price low under 1,300.00 by
forming a new low in the oscillator. The divergence opens up a new world of analyzing the
momentum oscillator, which warns us of a potential reversal in trend instead of continuation.
Remember, momentum reveals the health or weakness of a trend, and while momentum highs in an
uptrend highlight trend strength, negative momentum divergences that form in the context of a mature
trend are often warning signs of trend deterioration and potential future reversal ahead of the official
signal given from the Pure Price or Moving Average Methods.

Divergences as Non-Confirmations
A divergence occurs when price and the oscillator disagree, or more specifically, when price has
formed a discernable new swing low but the oscillator has formed a noticeably higher swing low,
both relative to the recent past. Be sure you are comparing the exact same swing in price to the
oscillator; draw a horizontal line if you are not sure. First, let's officially define a divergence.

NEGATIVE VERSUS POSITIVE DIVERGENCE
While momentum extremes help forecast future prices in the continuation of a trend in place, momentum divergences
highlight a weakening in the trend and potential for a future reversal in price.

Negative Divergence: New Price High but Lower High in the Oscillator
In the context of an established uptrend, price forms a new swing high as expected, but the momentum oscillator actually
forms a lower swing high, which serves as a non-confirmation of the recent price high. This serves as a warning signal, but
not yet a downside trend reversal signal unless confirmed by price in the form of a break in a rising trendline or moving
average.
Positive Divergence: New Price Low but Higher Low in the Oscillator
In the context of an established downtrend, price forms a new swing low as expected, but the momentum oscillator actually
forms a higher swing low, which serves as a non-confirmation of the recent price low. This serves as a warning signal, but
not yet a positive trend reversal signal unless confirmed by price in the form of a break in a falling trendline or moving
average.

Divergences can be tricky to spot at first, but once you understand how to identify them, you'll start
seeing price and indicator divergences more clearly. Let's look at some examples of Price and
Momentum Oscillator divergences for a reference.
In Figure 2.4, we see the daily chart of Johnson and Johnson (JNJ) as price swings to three higher
highs above $65.00 per share in late March and April 2010. If you are just looking at the price by
itself, all looks well in an established uptrend. However, if we add the indicator Momentum and
verify whether or not the oscillator confirms or disconfirms the recent price highs, we see that indeed
the oscillator is forming lower highs as price pushes to higher highs. We have a negative momentum
divergence developing: caution!
FIGURE 2.4 Highlighting an Example of a Negative Momentum Divergence in Johnson and Johnson
Daily Chart

As we will see in detail through Chapter 7, trends have life cycles and do not persist indefinitely.
Negative divergences between price and an unbound momentum oscillator often develop prior to a
trend reversal from up to down and serve as potential early warning signs that the trend is in its latter
stages and likely to reverse soon. Traders should adopt a cautious stance when observing negative
divergences after a lengthy trend has persisted for a relatively long period of time, depending on the

timeframe of the chart. A long time may be defined as a few days on the 15-minute intraday chart,
while a long time might mean three years or more on a weekly chart. Negative divergences may
resolve with a small downside action lasting hours on an intraday chart, but the resolution of a
negative divergence on a weekly frame might take months or even years.
We will discuss trading tactics using divergences in Chapter 8 when we discuss trade execution
tactics and Chapters 9 and 10 for specific trade setups. For now, focus on learning what a momentum
divergence is, where it is likely to occur, and what it means for traders on any timeframe looking to
establish a new position or take off a profitable old position in a particular stock.
Recall that the momentum oscillator confirms a price high when the oscillator forms a new swing
high at the same time a new price high forms. This suggests that the trend remains strong and that
higher prices are likely yet to come in the future. Divergences send the opposite message, and act as
warning signals to reveal that a trend may be losing steam. If price swings to a new high but the
momentum oscillator fails to register a new oscillator high, then you might choose to tighten any
trailing stop loss orders or be prepared to exit your position on any break of a prior swing low,
moving average, or rising price trendline.
It is very important that you discern a negative divergence as a warning signal and not a sell-short
or reverse position by itself. A caution light is not a red light; in fact, caution only means to slow
down. To initiate an actual sell-short position from a price divergence, you need additional chart
information such as price breaking under a rising trendline, short-term moving average, or some other
technical signal such as a reversal candle or a price pattern entry signal such as the break under a
neckline in a head and shoulders pattern (see Chapter 4 on price patterns). Divergences form the
initial condition that gives you the confidence to execute a safe reversal trade when other
confirmation factors develop on the chart; after all, divergences help us discern the weight of the
evidence in terms of analyzing potential trend reversals.
Figure 2.5 reveals an example of a positive divergence that marked the March low in 2009 in the
S&P 500 broad market index.
FIGURE 2.5 Positive Divergence then New Momentum High Marks Bottom of Market in March
2009
