First Hour Range Breaks
The opening bell brings fresh conflict, with buyers and sellers brawling
for control of daily price direction. This battle of wills often generates a
first hour range that sets boundaries for larger-scale rallies or selloffs later
in the session. Trading the breakout or breakdown from this sideways
pattern is an effective technique to capture short-term profits.
There are four key elements in a first hour range breakout and
breakdown strategy:
1.	Instrument. The strategy works best in highly liquid markets,
so stick with stocks that trade over 5 million shares per day on
average. Even better, use exchange-traded funds that correlate
with a major index or sector because they’re less vulnerable to
news shocks. Build a watch list of possible candidates that you
can keep from day to day. Populate your list with groups that
don’t all move in the same direction at the same time.
2.	Entry price. Buy when price rallies above the high of the first hour
range, or sell short when it falls under the range low. Add a few
cents to the upper and lower end of the range when establishing
your entry price in order to avoid whipsaws. Realistically, the entry
signal might come right after the first hour or not until much later
in the session. This is a short-term play, so full position size should
be taken immediately rather than scaling in with smaller shares.
After execution, look for the trade to move into a profit quickly.
When it doesn’t, the odds for a whipsaw increase geometrically.
3.	Stop loss. Calculate the height of the first hour range, placing a
stop loss 15% to 20% under the high for a breakout, or above the
low for a breakdown. For example, a stock trades from a low of
22 to a high of 24 in the first hour. For a breakout, place the stop
between 23.60 and 23.70. For a breakdown, place the stop between
22.30 and 22.40. Mental stops aren’t recommended because you’re
working in close quarters where a reversal can come quickly and
you might not have enough time to react.
4.	Profit target. Identify your profit target by looking at the last two
days of 15-minute price bars and finding the last major swing

PART THREE

148

Rediscovering Profitability

in that direction. If there’s no swing to work with, use a tight
trailing stop and get out at the close if the stop doesn’t get hit first.
Make sure there’s enough profit potential to make the position
worthwhile. If there isn’t, do not take the trade. A simple rule of
thumb: look for trades in which the realized profit will be at least
three times the risk of price rolling over and triggering the stop.
For example, you enter a trade at 30, with a profit target at 30.70
and a stop loss at 29.80. The potential 70-cent gain is 3½ times the
potential 20-cent loss.
Wait on the sidelines through the first 30 minutes of the session,
and draw horizontal trendlines on a 5-minute chart that correspond with
the high and low over that period. Then, adjust those lines in the next
30 minutes to establish the first hour range. Continue to use the 5-minute
chart for trade management after picking out your intended profit target.
Before entry, confirm that the pattern will actually support your intended
strategy. The first hour range is established by swings in both directions.
Swing levels aren’t measured until there is a counterswing that generates
a 5-minute high or low. You’ll find that many stocks are already trending
at the end of the first hour and not swinging back and forth. These issues
should not be traded using this strategy.

Bilateral Entry
You can double your opportunities with bilateral trade setups. Start by overcoming your directional bias when you look at a price pattern. Although
you might see it in your head as a long or a short opportunity, there’s a good
chance it will work in either direction. The trick with this strategy is to let the
price action tell you which way to go. It works like this. Many consolidation
patterns hit balance points in their evolution in which they generate equal
odds of a breakout or a breakdown. When support and resistance levels
are narrow and well defined, traders can establish bilateral strategies that
take advantage of the developing trend, whichever way it finally breaks.
It’s a relatively simple process that triggers a long entry if price rallies above
resistance and a short entry if price sells off through support.
Each side of a bilateral setup candidate carries a different reward:risk,
with one side usually showing more profit potential than the other side.
This can be frustrating because the calculation is independent of the odds
that either outcome will actually take place. So, for example, you might

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

F I G U R E

149

6.11

The first hour breakout strategy works especially well when opening volatility is higher than normal. Yum!
Brands gaps up to 35.98 and then drops to 35.47. The 51-cent range holds until late morning, when a vertical
breakout lifts the stock nearly a point over early resistance. A 20% stop placed at 35.87 manages the trade well,
while a trailing stop protects profits during the strong uptrend.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

have a high-odds long-side setup with absolutely no reward potential, or
a low-odds short-side setup that would yield windfall profits if it ever
happened. The trick with bilateral strategies is to locate patterns that are
equally weighted in both odds and reward potential. Price triggers complicate bilateral entry even further. Entry signals come in all varieties, with
the most profitable ones ringing loud bells at narrow price levels. Just
like disparities in reward potential and trade odds, one side will usually
bark louder than the other when price hits the associated trigger. Traders

PART THREE

150

F I G U R E

Rediscovering Profitability

6.12

XTO Energy bilateral setup.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

need to overcome this limitation by finding patterns with well-organized
inflection points on both sides.
To sum up, an effective bilateral strategy requires three elements:
well-defined support-resistance, favorable reward:risk on both sides of the
equation, and clean price triggers on both sides of the equation. It sounds
simple enough, and it really is. The difficulty lies in our ability to control
bias and let the market tell us which way to go. Not surprisingly, the best
trade is usually in the direction that’s opposite to our bias. In other words,
the majority is ready to pile in one way, but the biggest profit comes from

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

151

an unexpected signal in the opposite direction. Realistically, it can take
practice for the biased trader to keep an open mind and let the price action
dictate position entry, long or short. But the discipline pays off because,
once again, it helps us to follow the classic wisdom “to trade what we see
and not what we believe.”
In Figure 6.12, XTO Energy rallies from 31 to 41 and starts to pull back
(1). It drops into support at the 50-day EMA and gaps through that level
in mid-December (2). The stock then eases into a trading range (3), with
support above 35 and resistance above 37. This price action establishes a
bilateral setup because a rally out of the rectangle pattern will trigger a
failure of a failure buy signal, while a selloff will confirm the breakdown,
issue a sell signal, and set up a test of the swing low at 31. Limit orders can
be placed just outside the trading range, triggering a buy near 37.40 or a
short sale near 34.80. Alternatively, the trader can just stalk the pattern in
real time and enter as soon as one side gives way. In this case, the stock
surges out of the rectangle (4) in mid-January and climbs back above the
50-day EMA, triggering a buy signal ahead of a strong recovery.
Compute the stop loss using the same technique as the first hour
breakout-breakdown strategy. Calculate 15% to 20% of the pattern width
and place the stop loss that far behind the breakout or breakdown level. In
this example, the rectangle is about two points wide, with 15% to 20% of
the width equaling 30 to 40 cents. Using this calculation, the trader places
a stop loss near 36.80 (5) for a long position or near 35.50 (6) for a short
position.

The Real World: Paranoia and Prosperity
It pays to wait until all your ducks line up in a neat little row when you
have no skin in the game.
A barrage of selling pressure hit the fertilizer stocks on July 22 in response
to falling potash prices. The entire sector had been underperforming the
broad market for weeks, so the minipanic at the opening bell wasn’t
too surprising. Component issues gapped down hard that morning, with
many dropping more than 5% right out of the gate. The air pocket tossed
overnight shareholders into a deep dark hole, forcing them to deal with
shock losses at the expense of other forces moving the market that

PART THREE

152

Rediscovering Profitability

day. For those on the sidelines, however, the surge in volatility set off a
positive spiral that generated an excellent profit opportunity.
Consider the psychological divide between unfortunate longs stuck in
their plunging stocks and folks sitting on the sidelines, looking for a good
trade. Both groups are staring at the same patterns and indicators, but
the shareholders can’t see straight because the losses overwhelm their
objectivity and induce a paranoid state that envisions the worst possible
outcome. Of course, this isn’t quite true because every swing, higher or
lower, yields a corresponding set of odds that defines the likelihood of
further upside or downside.
It’s a different story for sidelined market players, who can examine
the shock event objectively and look for inflection points that support a
variety of plans and strategies, as seen in Figure 6.13. Getting started,

F I G U R E

6.13

The fertilizer selloff yields unexpected opportunities.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

153

you pull up 60- and 15-minute charts on Mosaic, a sector blue chip,
and notice how the price swing that preceded the selloff carved out
a well-organized Elliott five-wave rally set, with a big continuation gap
between 45 and 48. The morning decline has dropped price through the
38% retracement of that uptrend and into the continuation gap’s broad
range. However, there’s no automatic long-side signal here, as in prior
examples, because the setup doesn’t work when price gaps through a
gap to get to the entry trigger. However, despite the downward pressure,
there are several technical aspects that make this pattern interesting on
the long side. Not pictured here, the 50-day EMA cuts right through the
continuation gap, while the morning selloff has dropped price into that
intermediate support level. This yields a potential turning point in which
downward momentum is running straight into a solid price floor. Over
the years, I’ve dubbed this two-sided scenario as a “rock and a hard
place” pattern, in which the eventual breakout or breakdown will be very
strong because it traps one side of an emotionally charged market.
Now look how the 50-bar EMAs are coming into play. These levels
mark support on the 60-minute chart and resistance on the 15-minute
chart. So we now have three incarnations of this moving average sitting
at key prices, yielding a technical convergence, even though the levels
mark out both support and resistance, depending on time frame. More
importantly, the moving averages themselves show a bullish divergence
because price is above the moving average on the two longer time
frames but under the moving average on the shortest time frame. This
follows my observation that trend direction flows downhill, with longer
time frames taking priority over shorter time frames. This divergence
won’t resolve itself until all three moving averages provide either support
or resistance.
You now mark out the first hour range, which holds through the
entire session. By day’s end, the conflicting elements resolve into the
outline of a bilateral setup that will trigger on a breakout or breakdown
of that early range. This is another convergence because signals on
the 15-minute chart are lining up perfectly with signals in longer time
frames. Specifically, the stock is at 50-day EMA support while price is
caught between the 38% and 50% selloff retracements. A first hour
range breakout will mount the 38% retracement, triggering a failure of
a failure buy signal, while a breakdown will violate the 50-day EMA and
50% retracement, triggering a sell signal.
This alignment increases the odds that a breakout will yield an uptick
that reaches the profit target at Swing 1, at a minimum. Meanwhile, there’s

154

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

nothing but thin air below the first hour range, indicating a breakdown
could drop all the way to 45 and fill the 60-minute continuation gap.
With this in mind, orders are placed at both ends of the pattern, ready to
trigger on a break in either direction. The placement of the 50-bar EMA
on the 15-minute chart is extremely favorable for the long-side trigger
because it supports an entry before price actually rallies above pattern
resistance at 48.50. It also solves the thorny issue of gap and Fibonacci
resistance near 49. In other words, you expect momentum out of a first
hour range breakout to lift price above resistance, but getting it wrong
could be costly. Trade entry just above the 50-bar EMA reduces that risk
substantially because it lets you get positioned, with a 25- to 30-cent
profit, before the breakout unfolds.
The trick now is to exercise patience and to wait for the price action
to “speak for itself.” This is easier said than done because the entire
session has passed without a breakout or breakdown. In truth, the
markets tell many tales one lonely chapter at a time. In other words, a
financial instrument does someone good or bad at the opening bell and
spends the rest of the session forcing traders to guess what it actually
means. They expect resolution by the close, which is an obvious fulfillment cycle, but the diabolical market forces them to wait overnight or
even a week before the ticker tape finally addresses their curiosity with
a follow-through rally or selloff.
In Figure 6.14, Mosaic gaps down nearly a point the next morning,
staying within the prior day’s first hour range, and then shoots higher,
breaking above the 50-bar EMA in the first 15 minutes of the new
session. This signals the long-side entry, with a stop placed on the other
side of the moving average. The new support level never gets tested
because the stock shoots higher immediately and rallies through the
Swing 1 pivot, which marks the first profit target. You now have two
equally pleasant choices: take the profits right there, or defer to the
positive price action. From a tape-reading standpoint, the power of the
uptrend to cut through the initial swing pivot like butter is a bullish convergence that predicts even higher prices. This observation supports a
more aggressive approach, with an eye on the Swing 2 pivot, near 51.
The stock reaches that level in the next 15 minutes, offering a more
advantageous exit.
Momentum now eases up, indicating that remaining shares need
to be sold because the odds favor a pullback. Back on the sidelines,
you notice that price is holding up extremely well, hovering near the

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

F I G U R E

155

6.14

Real-time management makes or breaks the Mosaic trade.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

intraday high for over an hour. This price action generates a small-scale
cup and handle breakout pattern that signals another long-side entry
in the late morning. The stock then surges higher in a series of waves
that carry through to the end of the session. As the day progresses,
however, reward:risk starts to deteriorate and turn against the trader.
Price is approaching the Swing 3 pivot slowly, and pullbacks are getting
deeper and more volatile. In addition, the trend is running out of time
because anything can happen overnight, especially with a commoditybased instrument that’s subject to worldwide news shocks.
Wisely, you decide to close out the trade, add up the excellent profits,
and call it a very good day.

This page intentionally left blank

FOUR
P A

R

T

Managing
Opportunity

This page intentionally left blank

7

C

H

A

P

TE

R

market entry

R

isking money in the financial markets changes everything. Your body
chemistry changes, as do your attention span, willpower, emotional
composition, and interpersonal relationships. Just ask the millions of
traders who have lied to their spouses after a particularly bad day, too
afraid to admit their failure or unexpected damage to the family accounts.
This Jekyll and Hyde transformation illustrates why paper trading is a
nearly pointless exercise for new market aspirants. Trading exposes most
folks to things about themselves they really don’t want to know. It’s a
force-fed truth serum that makes long-term success in the markets especially difficult for life’s overachievers, who have reached alpha status in
their primary careers, social encounters, and intellectual pursuits. That’s
why I tell doctors, engineers, and architects they’re less likely to succeed
in the trading game than a high school dropout with an intuitive feel for
the ticker tape and a healthy detachment toward risk.
To minimize the psychic impact of risk taking, traders need to
match their positions, exposures, and markets to their personalities and
159

160

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

lifestyles. This isn’t an easy task because there is often a massive disconnect between who we think we are and who we really are. We’re also
lazy as hell, believing we can skip a few steps on the road to trading profitability and go straight for the cheese, never noticing the spring-loaded
mousetrap that’s standing in our way. As a result, newbie traders create all
sorts of extraneous problems that make long-term success doubly difficult,
robbing them of the time and energy they’ll need to focus on strategy and
position management.
Decide right now whether you’re a speculator or just a spectator.
Simply stated, someone on the sidelines will see things much differently
from a trader who’s risking real money in real-life situations. To make
matters worse, many traders continue to think and act like spectators long
after they’ve assumed position risk. Playing the short side in a secular
downtrend offers a perfect example. There are good reasons to hate the
market when a financial system blows up or a tech bubble bursts, but you
can make money on the short side only when your positions go down,
not up, which they’ll do through long stretches of every bear market. It’s
especially tough because we live in an Internet-driven society filled with
keyboard jockeys spouting a thousand worthless opinions just to see their
words in print.
Spectators sit on the sidelines and wear opinions like hats, while
speculators take those opinions and assume financial, physical, and
emotional risk. Opinions require little more than a loud voice or a cynical
writing style, while real-life speculation demands courage, capital, and
commitment. Spectators rationalize their failures and assign responsibility
to the likes of Madoff or overleveraged exchange-traded funds. Speculators realize there are no demons outside of themselves and their
shortcomings in personal discipline. They see all news, good or bad, as an
opportunity to profit and understand that capitalism has its own selfcorrecting mechanisms. Spectators may feel good and wise, but they’re
just engaging in blatant self-abuse. After all, why bother with the financial
markets if the purpose isn’t to make money? Clearly, there are far better
ways to spend our time than worrying about something we have no
stake in.
Market chitchat during volatile periods generates secondary rewards, like improved self-esteem, a sense of power, and brownie points
with your peers, but are you talking your book during those opportune
times—or just talking? In other words, are you buying, selling, or too paralyzed by fear when the markets are really moving to do anything at all?
If you’re sitting on the sidelines twiddling your thumbs, understand that

CHAPTER 7

Market Entry

161

smarter folks are counting on that crazy volatility to pay the bills, and you
could be doing exactly the same thing if you weren’t caught in the spectator’s game.
I’ve been really upset about the financial markets only one time in
the last two decades. It happened after the American government closed
down Wall Street, following the September 11 tragedy. That historic event
did the one thing I couldn’t handle emotionally at the time, i.e., take away
the source of my livelihood. Contrast those shut doors with the scandals,
blowups, and SEC rule changes that come along periodically to shake up
the market tree. No matter how awful or disturbing they might be, at least
the exchanges are now open for business each day and willing to execute
your trades.
In the final analysis, the transition from market opinion maker into
profitable trader requires a major shift in consciousness that begins when
you shut down pointless belief systems and exchange them for a razorlike
focus on price action as it emanates from the charts or ticker tape. If you
can do that one thing properly and with no bias, you can earn a great
living as a trader.

Margin and Capitalization
We define risk in a new opportunity, enter the market, and carry the position
to an eventual profit or loss. Of course, there are infinite variables for each
element of this deceptively simple workflow. Our first task is to choose
whether to trade stocks, futures, or currencies, accepting the risk profile
that each instrument will bring to the table. Our next decision must deal
with the thorny issue of time management. Will we become day traders
and close positions at the end of the session, or position traders and expose
ourselves to the risk of overnight reversals? Finally, our workflow needs
to perform a sober reality check. Do our lifestyles and emotional makeup
favor one approach over another, and will we match those tendencies to
our market activities or fight them every step of the way?
The amount of free flow capital we have to place at risk dictates many
of our pre-entry trade decisions. This limitation forces us into the thorny
subject of retirement accounts, which often make up the bulk of liquidity
for seniors and middle-aged adults. This is no big deal for responsible
market players who will protect their nest eggs at all costs, but it’s absolutely destructive for yo-yo traders, with histories of big blowups and
