
At first glance Point 2 may appear to be a mere repetition of Point 1.
This is not the case. Point 1 is a matter of fact, appraising the degree of
potential sales growth that now exists for a company’s product. Point 2 is


54 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

a matter of management attitude. Does the company now recognize that
in time it will almost certainly have grown up to the potential of its pres-
ent market and that to continue to grow it may have to develop further
new markets at some future time? It is the company that has both a good
rating on the first point and an ‘affirmative attitude on the second that is
likely to be of the greatest investment interest.

POINT 3. How effective are the company’s research
and development efforts in relation to its size?

For a large number of publicly-owned. companies it is not too difficult
to get a figure showing the number of dollars being spent each year on
research and development. Since virtually all such companies report
their annual sales total, it is only a matter of the simplest mathematics to
divide the research figure by total sales and so learn the per cent of each
sales dollar that a company is devoting to this type of activity. Many pro-
fessional investment analysts like to compare this research figure for one
company with that of others in the same general field. Sometimes they
compare it with the average of the industry, by averaging the figures of
many somewhat similar companies. Prom this, conclusions are drawn
both as to the importance of a company’s research effort in relation to
competition and the amount of research per share of stock that the
investor is getting in a particular company.

Figures of this sort can prove a crude yardstick that may give a
worthwhile hint that one company is doing an abnormal amount of
research or another not nearly enough. But unless a great deal of further
knowledge is obtained, such figures can be misleading. One reason for
this is that companies vary enormously in what they include or exclude
as research and development expense. One company will include a type
of engineering expense that most authorities would not consider gen-
uine research at all, since it is really tailoring an existing product to a par-
ticular order—in other words, sales engineering. Conversely, another
company will charge the expense of operating a pilot plant on a com-
pletely new product to production rather than research. Most experts
would call this a pure research function, since it is directly related to
obtaining the know-how to make a new product. If all companies were
to report research on a comparable accounting basis, the relative figures
on the amount of research done by various well-known companies
might look quite different from those frequently used in financial circles.



What to Buy 55

In no other major subdivision of business activity are to be found
such great variations from one company to another between what goes
in as expense and what comes out in benefits as occurs in research. Even
among the best-managed companies this variation seems to run in a
ratio of as much as two to one. By this is meant some well-run compa-
nies will get as much as twice the ultimate gain for each research dollar
spent as will others. If averagely-run companies are included, this vari-
ation between the best and the mediocre is still greater. This is largely
because the big strides in the way of new products and processes are no
longer the work of a single genius. They come from teams of highly
trained men, cach with a different specialty. One may be a chemist,
another a solid state physicist, a third a metallurgist and a fourth a math-
ematician. The degree of skill of each of these experts is only part of
what is needed to produce outstanding results. It is also necessary to
have leaders who can coordinate the work of people of such diverse
backgrounds and keep them driving toward a common goal. Conse-
quently, the number or prestige of research workers in one company
may be overshadowed by the effectiveness with which they are being
helped to work as a team in another.

Nor is a management’s ability to coordinate diverse technical skills
into a closely-knit team and to stimulate each expert on that team to his
greatest productivity the only kind of complex coordination upon
which optimum research results depend. Close and detailed coordina-
tion between research workers on each developmental project and those
thoroughly familiar with both production and sales problems is almost
as important. It is no simple task for management to bring about this
close relationship between research, production, and sales. Yet unless this
is done, new products as finally conceived frequently are either not
designed to be manufactured as cheaply as possible, or, when designed,
fail to have maximum sales appeal. Such research usually results in products
vulnerable to more efficient competition.

Finally there is one other type of coordination necessary if research
expenditures are to attain maximum efficiency. This is coordination
with top management. It might perhaps better be called top manage-
ment’s understanding of the fundamental nature of commercial
research. Development projects cannot be expanded in good years and
sharply curtailed in poor ones without tremendously increasing the
total cost of reaching the desired objective. The “crash” programs so
loved by a few top managements may occasionally be necessary but are


56 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

often just expensive. A crash program is what occurs when important
elements of the research personnel are suddenly pulled from the proj-
ects on which they have been working and concentrated on some new
task which may have great importance at the moment but which, fre-
quently, is not worth all the disruption it causes. The essence of success-
ful commercial research is that only tasks be selected which promise to
give dollar rewards of many times the cost of the research. However,
once a project is started, to allow budget considerations and other extra-
neous factors outside the project itself to curtail or accelerate it invari-
ably expands the total cost in relation to the benefits obtained.

Some top managements do not seem to understand this. I have
heard executives of small but successful electronic companies express
surprisingly little fear of the competition of one of the giants of the
industry. This lack of worry concerning the ability of the much larger
compaty Lo produce competitive products is not due to lack of respect
for the capabilities of the larger company’s individual researchers or
unawareness of what might otherwise be accomplished with the large
sums the big company regularly spends on research. Rather it is the his-
toric tendency of this larger company to interrupt regular research proj-
ects with crash programs to attain the immediate goals of top manage-
ment that has produced this feeling. Similarly, some years ago I heard
that while they desired no publicity on the matter for obvious reasons,
an outstanding technical college quietly advised its graduating class to
avoid employment with a certain oil company. This was because top
management of that company had a tendency to hire highly skilled peo-
ple for what would normally be about five-year projects. Then in about
three years the company would lose interest in the particular project and
abandon it, thereby not only wasting their own money but preventing
those employed from gaining the technical reputation for accomplish-
ment that otherwise might have come to them.

Another factor making proper investment evaluation of research
even more complex is how to evaluate the large amount of research
related to defense contracts. A great deal of such rescarch is frequently
done not at the expense of the company doing it, but for the account of
the federal government. Some of the subcontractors in the defense field
also do significant research for the account of the contractors whom they
are supplying. Should such totals be appraised by the investor as being as
significant as research done at a company’s own expense? If not, how
should it be valued in relation to company-sponsored research? Like so



What to Buy 57

many other phases in the investment field, these matters cannot be
answered by mathematical formulae. Each case is different.

The profit margin on defense contracts is smaller than that of non-
government business, and the nature of the work is often such that the
contract for a new weapon is subject to competitive bidding from gov-
ernment blueprints. This means that it is sometimes impossible to build
up steady repeat business for a product developed by government-
sponsored research in a way that can be done with privately sponsored
research, where both patents and customer goodwill can frequently be
brought into play. For reasons like these, from the standpoint of the
investor there are enormous variations in the economic worth of dif-
ferent government-sponsored research projects, even though such proj-
ects might be roughly equal in their importance so far as the benefits to
the defense effort are concerned. The following theoretical example
might serve to show how three such projects might have vastly different
values to the investor:

One project might produce a magnificent new weapon having no
non-military applications. The rights to this weapon would all be owned
by the government and, once invented, it would be sufficiently simple
to manufacture that the company which had done the research would
have no advantage over others in bidding for a production contract.
Such a research effort would have almost no value to the investor.

Another project might produce the same weapon, but the technique
of manufacturing might be sufficiently complex that a company not
participating in the original development work would have great diffi-
culty trying to make it. Such a research project would have moderate
value to the investor since it would tend to assure continuous, though
probably not highly profitable, business from the government.

Still another company might engineer such a weapon and in so
doing might learn principles and new techniques directly applicable to
its regular commercial lines, which presumably show a higher profit
margin. Such a research project might have great value to the investor.
Some of the most spectacularly successful companies of the recent past
have been those that show a high order of talent for finding complex
and technical defense work, the doing of which provides them at gov-
ernment expense with know-how that can legitimately be transferred
into profitable non-defense fields related to their existing commercial
activities. Such companics are providing the government the research
results the defense authorities vitally need. However, at the same time


58 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

they are obtaining, at little or no cost, related non-defense research ben-
efits which otherwise they would probably be paying for themselves.
This factor may well have been one of the reasons for the spectacular
investment success of Texas Instruments, Inc., which in four years rose
nearly 500 per cent from the price of 5% at which it traded when first
listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1953; it may also have con-
tributed, in the same period, to the even greater 700 per cent rise expe-
rienced by Ampex shareholders from the time this company’s shares
were first offered to the public in the same year.

Finally, in judging the relative investment value of company research
organizations, another type of activity must be evaluated. This is some-
thing which ordinarily is not considered as developmental research at
all—the seemingly unrelated field of market research. Market research
may be regarded as the bridge between developmental research and
sales. Top management must be alert against the temptation to spend sig-
nificant sums on the research and development of a colorful product or
process which, when perfected, has a genuine market but one too small
to be profitable. By too small to be profitable I mean one that never will
enjoy a large enough sales volume to get back the cost of the research,
much less a worthwhile profit for the investor. A market research organ-
ization that can steer a major research effort of its company from one
project which if technically successful would have barely paid for itself,
to another which might cater to so much broader a market that it would
pay out three times as well, would have vastly increased the value to its
stockholders of that company’s scientific manpower.

If quantitative measurements—such as the annual expenditures on
research or the number of employees holding scientific degrees—are
only a rough guide and not the final answer to whether a company has
an outstanding research organization, how does the careful investor
obtain this information? Once again it is surprising what the “scuttle-
butt” method will produce. Until the average investor tries it, he prob-
ably will not believe how complete a picture will emerge if he asks
intelligent questions about a company’s research activities of a diversi-
fied group of research people, some from within the company and oth-
ers engaged in related lines in competitive industries, in universities, and
in government. A simpler and often worthwhile method is to make a
close study of how much in dollar sales or net profits has been con-
tributed to a company by the results of its research organization during
a particular span, such as the prior ten years. An organization which in



What to Buy 59

relation to the size of its activities has produced a good flow of prof-
itable new products during such a period will probably be equally pro-
ductive in the future as long as it continues to operate under the same
general methods.

POINT 4. Does the company have an above-average
sales organization?

In this competitive age, the products or services of few companies are
so outstanding that they will sell to their maximum potentialities if they
are not expertly merchandised. It is the making of a sale that is the most
basic single activity of any business. Without sales, survival is impossible.
It is the making of repeat sales to satisfied customers that is the first
benchmark of success. Yet, strange as it seems, the relative efficiency of a
company’s sales, advertising, and distributive organizations receives far
less attention from most investors, even the careful ones, than do pro-
duction, research, finance, or other major subdivisions of corporate
activity.

There is probably a reason for this. It is relatively casy to construct
simple mathematical ratios that will provide some sort of guide to the
attractiveness of a company’s production costs, research activity, or finan-
cial structure in comparison with its competitors. It is a great deal harder
to make ratios that have even a semblance of meaning in regard to sales
and distribution efficiency. In regard to research we have already seen
that such simple ratios are far too crude to provide anything but the first
clues as to what to look for. Their value in relation to production and
the financial structure will be discussed shortly. However, whether or
not such ratios have anything like the value frequently placed upon
them in financial circles, the fact remains that investors like to lean upon
them. Because sales effort does not readily lend itself to this type of for-
mulae, many investors fail to appraise it at all in spite of its basic impor-
tance in determining real investment worth.

Again, the way out of this dilemma lies in the use of the “scuttle-
butt” technique. Of all the phases of a company’s activity, none is easier
to learn about from sources outside the company than the relative effi-
ciency of a sales organization. Both competitors and customers know
the answers. Equally important, they are seldom hesitant to express their
views. The time spent by the careful investor in inquiring into this subject
is usually richly rewarded.


v6
©4 WOR G3SNGOMLNI ~

A
v6. NI OZDNCOMLN <|

Ose: NF O2>NCOmLNT {

r

166i NI Q39NdOULNI 4

=

ese

¥Ssi eser eset isét

Zeer m croncoue {

S60 NE aR9NGOULN |
>

¥SEé1 Ni O32NGOULNI +

SG6I NI Q39NGOwLNI

eee o3oncouin {|

#2nposd meu yore uaym

aeed 04 buipsoose payissejo Syuswnaysuy

padojanap Apmau yo sayes Sue9A 9 UO aouaniju}

*411W9 ‘OLTW O1Vd “OD GUVHOVd 1137M3H

HOUV3SIY LNIOIZINOVW 40 NOLLVOIGN! NV

SUVINOD NOTIN

a

vt

ee


What to Buy 61

Tam devoting less space to this matter of relative sales ability than I
did to the matter of relative research ability. This does not mean that I
consider it less important. In today’s competitive world, many things are
important to corporate success. However, outstanding production, sales,
and research may be considered thé three main columns upon which
such success is based. Saying that one is more important than another is
like saying that the heart, the lungs, or the digestive tract is the most
important single organ for the proper functioning of the body. All are
needed for survival, and all must function well for vigorous health. Look
around you at the companies that have proven outstanding investments.
Try to find some that do not have both aggressive distribution and a
constantly improving sales organization.

1 have already referred to the Dow Chemical Company and may do
so several times again, as I believe this company, which over the years
has proven so rewarding to its stockholders, is an outstanding example
of the ideal conservative long-range investment. Here is a company
which in the public mind is almost synonymous with outstandingly suc-
cessful research. However, what is not as well known is that this com-
pany selects and trains its sales personnel with the same care as it han-
dles its research chemists. Before a young college graduate becomes a
Dow salesman, he may be invited to make several trips to Midland so
that both he and the company can become as sure as possible that he
has the background and temperament that will fit him into their sales
organization. Then, before he so much as sees his first potential cus-
tomer, he must undergo specialized training that occasionally lasts only
a few weeks but at times continues for well over a year to prepare him
for the more complex selling jobs. This is but the beginning of the train-
ing he will receive; some of the company’s greatest mental effort is
devoted to seeking and frequently finding more efficient ways to solicit
from, service, and deliver to the customer.

Are Dow and the other outstanding companies in the chemical
industry unique in this great attention paid to sales and distribution?
Definitely not. In another and quite different industry, International
Business Machines is a company which has (speaking conservatively)
handsomely rewarded its owners. An IBM executive recently told me
that the average salesman spends a third of his entire time training in
company-sponsored schools! To a considerable degree this amazing ratio
results from an attcmpt to keep the sales force abreast of a rapidly chang-
ing technology. Nevertheless I believe it one more indication of the


62 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

weight that most successful companies give to steadily improving their
sales arm. A one-time profit can be made in the company which
because of manufacturing or research skill obtains some worthwhile
business without a strong distribution organization. However, such
companies can be quite vulnetable. For steady long-term growth a
strong sales arm is vital.

POINT 5. Does the company have a worthwhile
profit margin?

Here at last is a subject of importance which properly lends itself to
the type of mathematical analysis which so many financial people feel
is the backbone of sound investment decisions. From the standpoint of
the investor, sales are only of value when and if they lead to increased
profits. All the sales growth in the world won’t produce the right type
of investment vehicle if, over the years, profits do not grow correspond-
ingly. The first step in examining profits is to study a company’s profit
margin, that is, to determine the number of cents of each dollar of sales
that is brought down to operating profit. The wide variation between
different companies, even those in the same industry, will immediately
become apparent. Such a study should be made, not for a single year, but
for a series of years. It then becomes evident that nearly all companies
have broader profit margins—as well as greater total dollar profits—in
years when an industry is unusually prosperous. However, it also
becomes clear that the marginal companies—that is, those with the
smaller profit margins—nearly always increase their profit margins by a
considerably greater percentage in the good years than do the lower-
cost companies, whose profit margins also get better but not to so great
a degree. This usually causes the weaker companies to show a greater
percentage increase in earnings in a year of abnormally good business
than do the stronger companies in the same field. However, it should
also be remembered that these earnings will decline correspondingly
more rapidly when the business tide turns.

For this reason I believe that the greatest long-range investment
profits are never obtained by investing in marginal companies. The only
reason for considering a long-range investment in a company with an
abnormally low profit margin is that there might be strong indications
that a fundamental change is taking place within the company. This
would be such that the improvement in profit margins would be



What to Buy 63

occurring for reasons other than a temporarily expanded volume of
business. In other words, the company would not be marginal in the
true sense of the word, since the real reason for buying is that efficiency
or new products developed within the company have taken it out of
the marginal category. When such internal changes are taking place
in a corporation which in other respects pretty well qualifies as the
right type of long-range investment, it may be an unusually attractive
purchase.

So far as older and larger companies are concerned, most of the
really big investment gains have come from companies having relative-
ly broad profit margins. Usually they have among the best such mar-
gins in their industry. In regard to young companies, and occasionally
older ones, there is one important deviation from this rule—a deviation,
however, that is generally more apparent than real. Such companies will
at times deliberately elect to speed up growth by spending all or a very
large part of the profits they would otherwise have earned on even
more research or on even more sales promotion than they would oth-
erwise be doing. What is important in such instances is to make
absolutely certain that it is actually still further research, still further
sales promotion, or still more of any other activity which is being
financed today so as to build for the future, that is the real cause of the
narrow or non-existent profit margin.
