
Fig 8.15 Dynamic Trend Lines – Bearish Trend
In summary, and to put all of this into context. There is nothing wrong with drawing what I call 'static' trend lines
on a price chart, and in many ways this is what we have done here. The difference however, is that the trend
lines in this chapter have been created by the dynamic price action of the market. Obviously this is hard to
present in a book, and is best seen live in action as the market unfolds. Nevertheless, what I have tried to
describe here is the process of analysis and price action which describes where we are in our trading journey,
or perhaps more importantly where the market is in its trading journey.
The pivots are formed dynamically, and as they are created, so the trend is built which we can then define using
these points as our 'way points' on the journey. Nothing is ever perfect, but at least using VPA, and your

understanding of the importance of price congestion, should put you into a strong position, allowing you to
identify a trend BEFORE it starts, and not after. This is what I have tried to explain in the last two chapters, and I
hope that in reading them you will at least have a better understanding of how markets behave and the
importance of price congestion.
As I have said before, many traders become frustrated when markets move into a congestion phase, which I
find hard to understand. This is where the market is preparing the next trend. These areas are the breeding
grounds for trends, and in many ways far more important than any existing trend, since this is a new trend, from
which we can take advantage, early. It really is that simple. It may be a selling climax or a buying climax, it may
be a pause in a longer term trend. Whatever the reason, and whatever the timeframe, you can be sure of one
thing. The market is preparing for a move away from this region, it is just building up strength and preparing to
breakout, one way or the other. All we have to do is be patient, wait, and then apply VPA to the consequent
price action, coupled with our pivots which highlight the journey.

Chapter Nine
Volume At Price (VAP)
In a bull market it is better to always work on the bull side; in a bear market, on the bear side.
Charles Dow (1851-1902)
At the start of this book I made the statement that there is nothing new in trading, and that volume has been
around for over a century. It was the iconic traders of the past with their tape reading skills who laid the
foundations for today's VPA traders.
Well that statement is not entirely true, as in this chapter I want to introduce you to one of the latest
developments in volume studies, which takes volume and Volume Price Analysis to the next level. This is
called volume at price, or VAP for short. Now we have VPA and VAP – very neat really!
So what is volume at price and how does this differ from our studies so far using Volume Price Analysis or VPA.
But first, let me introduce a simple concept which I hope will help to explainVAP, and once again we return to
our wholesaler of goods, who has a warehouse with one product to sell. As a wholesaler, (and indeed anyone
selling anything) he or she is always looking to maximise profits from each sale, and one of the easiest ways to
do this is to 'test the market'.
This is something companies do all the time. A product will be marketed at one price, and the volume of sales
recorded. The price will then be raised or lowered and the resulting sales recorded and monitored. Obviously, if
the wholesaler can sell at a higher price and still maintain the same sales volume, then this will increase profits
automatically, with no fall in volume.
At some point, the price will reach a point at which volumes do fall, as buyers now perceive the product as over
priced, and simply stop buying. The wholesaler then simply drops the price lower, and sales volumes should
pick up again.
On a simple bar chart, this price action and volume would be reported on a chart which would look similar to
that in Fig 9.10 below.

Fig 9.10 Sales Volume vs Price
Here we have a chart of volume and price, with price on the X axis and volume on the Y axis. As you would
expect, as the price increases, then the volume of products sold falls. This is not always the case, but generally
so in most markets. The point here is that we now have a 'map' of volume against price. In other words, we can
now see visually how the volume has changed as the price changes, and this is what Volume at Price is all
about. In a normal volume bar, all we see is one bar, but within the price action there are many different levels of
price. All we are seeing in our single volume bar, is the total volume associated with the price spread of the bar.
What this volume bar does NOT reveal, is the levels of buying associated with the different price points, exactly
as in our simple example above. If we swing this chart through 90 degrees, then we have a perfect
representation of VAP as it would appear on our chart, as we can see in Fig 9.11

Fig 9.11 Sales Volume vs Price – Rotated
Now perhaps you can begin to see how the principle of volume at price really works, and in many ways the term
itself describes the methodology. What we are looking at here, is the volume at the price. In other words, we can
see the volumes associated with each price level as the market moves higher and lower. What we have is a
volume histogram of the buying and selling volumes associated with each price point. We can imagine this as a
dissection of the single volume bar that we use in Volume Price Analysis (VPA). Here the volume bar records
all the volume of activity associated within the period of the bar and the spread of the price action.
With VAP, what we are doing is taking that volume bar, and cutting it open to reveal where the concentration of
volumes actually occurred. After all, if the concentration of volume was at the bottom, then this is more likely to
be buying volume rather than selling volume. Conversely, if the concentration of volume took place at the top of
the bar rather than at the bottom of the bar, then this is more likely to be selling volume. Volume at price gives
us a different perspective on the more traditional volume bar, revealing as it does, the concentration of buying
and selling, at the various price levels, which in turn gives us an alternative perspective, not only in terms of
momentum, but also in terms of support and resistance.
And, as far as I am concerned, this is the KEY point.
The way to use this methodology is as an enhancement to the classic VPA approach, and NOT to replace it in
any way. As you will discover shortly, volume at price gives us a very different perspective, as it provides an
insight into the concentrations of buying and selling areas, which to me means support and resistance. As we
have already discovered how to identify these areas using price, and price action, VAP then gives us an
additional tool to use, which gives us a visual representation of these areas on the chart. If you remember back
to the previous chapter, I referred to support and resistance as invisible barriers, natural barriers if you like –
well now, with volume at price, these barriers are actually revealed on our charts.
However, we must remember, VAP is a supporting technique to VPA, NOT the other way round. Whilst VAP is

powerful and gives us a three dimensional view of the volume and price action, it does NOT replace traditional
VPA, and never will in my view. So please use VAP as a tool with which to identify price congestion along with
support and resistance zones, which you can then confirm with traditional analysis using VPA.
Let's look at some examples and the good news is that this indicator, is generally available free on most good
charting packages. All the examples in the remainder of this chapter are taken from my NinjaTrader trading
platform.

Fig 9.12 Microsoft (MSFT) – 15 Minute Chart
The chart in Fig 9.12 is a 15 minute chart for Microsoft, and as you can see, traditional volume bars are
presented at the bottom of the screen, whilst the volume at price indicator presents the volume distribution on
the Y axis vertically, as I explained in my first example.
Now throughout this book I have tried to explain and reinforce the concept of support and resistance. It is the
breeding ground for trends, it is where they are created and fostered and from which they ultimately break free,
and the beauty of volume at price, is that these areas of price congestion are now painted on the chart visually
for us. Therefore, let me explain this chart in broad terms, and highlight what is perhaps obvious, and more
importantly, what is not so obvious, at first glance.
And before moving to this example, let me just explain the significance of the colours in the VAP bar. Just as
with a conventional volume bar, we have red and blue on the chart which reflect whether the associated candle
was up or down. In a VAP bar we have the same, and what each bar represents, with the two colours, is the
number of up or down candles associated with that phase of price action. If there had been more up candles
than down then the fulcrum of the bar would be more blue than red. Conversely, if there had been more down
candles than up, then the fulcrum would be weighted more red than blue. This in itself gives us a perspective on
the balance of ‘buying’ or ‘selling’ at this price range.
Moving to our example, in simple terms, there are four phases of price congestion here, one at the bottom of the
chart which continued for an extended period, two in the middle, which were both relatively short and one at the
top in the current trading range. The chart covers a 5 day period approximately. What does VAP reveal? First, it
defines these regions for us on the chart. Each area of price congestion is marked by the volume histogram

