
If you were following price alone, you probably were certain that we would see lower and lower
prices far into the future for the index, and from a pure price trend continuity standpoint, you would
certainly assume that lower prices were yet to come. An official trend reversal from down to up
requires an initial higher high, then higher low, and finally a break above the most recent higher high.
In March 2009, there was absolutely no evidence present from price that the stock market downtrend
was in jeopardy of reversing to a new uptrend. However, the momentum oscillator revealed that
short-sellers should be cautious, as the oscillator formed a clear positive momentum divergence with
the final price low.
Look closely at price to see that the index formed a new low in October 2008 with the momentum
oscillator confirming the new price low under 800. That signaled that odds favored a lower price low
yet to come as the downtrend had greater odds of continuing into the future, being confirmed not just
by the price trend structure, but by the momentum principle. Early 2009 resulted in the new expected
index low forming in March as the index took out the 800, then the 750 level last seen in November
2009. Using the momentum principle, we should have expected this new price low due to the
confirmation of price and the momentum oscillator both forming new lows simultaneously.
However, when price pushed to its new low, we see that the momentum oscillator formed a clean
higher low. For reference, the indicator low in November 2008 was –482.00 while the indicator low
in March 2009 was –196.00. The respective index lows were 741.00 in November 2008 and 666.00
in March 2009. The positive momentum divergence warned short sellers to take a defensive position,
tighten up any trailing stops, and keep a close eye on the trendline connecting the swing highs from
late 2008 and early 2009.
Price broke the trendline at the 850.00 level in April 2009, which I have labeled as point A on the
chart. This was an objective place to take profits if you were holding a short position, and then stand
aside for a potential trend change that could be in development. Shortly after price broke the

trendline, a new price high formed above 900 in June 2009 that was confirmed with a new momentum
oscillator high, which I labeled point B. Now we see a distinctly bullish development, in that the
index formed a positive momentum divergence at the March 2009 low, broke the descending trendline
shortly after, then price swung to a new swing high, which was confirmed with a new high in the
momentum oscillator. Notice the new swing high in the oscillator—this is labeled a kickoff in price,
and is often an early signal of a very likely trend reversal yet to come.
Refer to Chapter 1 on trends in Figure 1.8 to see the official trend reversal, marked by a higher
price high, higher price low, then price taking out the prior high—all of which occurred after the 20and 50-day exponential moving averages crossed bullishly. Now with your new knowledge of
momentum, you can add that a positive momentum divergence preceded the trend reversal months in
advance. Also, a negative momentum oscillator divergence preceded the stock market top in 2007.
Momentum often has a distinct leading edge over official trend reversals in terms of clear
divergences at major turning points in a market.

THE RATE OF CHANGE INDICATOR
To highlight that we are describing a concept of momentum and not necessarily a single oscillator, I
want to highlight other indicators you can use when discerning changes in the physics of momentum
via the price charts. Remember, we are discussing a principle of physics and applying it to stock
prices as changes in supply and demand act as forces that move the object of price along. Just as you
can use different tools to measure momentum in the real world, you can use different indicators to
measure momentum in the stock market.
Recall that the indicator named momentum takes a simple comparison of price today in relation to
price a set number of days in the past. The line you see as your momentum oscillator is a running total
of changes in price. You want to know how strong past swings in price are to the current swing. If the
current swing is larger in intensity or duration than the immediate swing that preceded it, then you are
likely observing a new momentum high and therefore you will expect to see further price highs yet to
come because momentum is increasing, driving prices higher and revealing a healthy trend in motion.
On the other hand, if you see the current swing is shorter in price difference or length than the prior
swing, even though price formed a new swing high, then you could be observing a deterioration in
momentum (or supply/demand imbalance) which suggests that the trend could be ready to reverse as
the buyers are losing the upper hand to the sellers; the uptrend is losing steam.
You do not need momentum oscillators to show you the momentum conditions of a price trend once
you gain experience, but oscillators serve as excellent reference tools even for trained technicians;
oscillators highlight divergences that we may miss if we only studied price charts themselves.
If your charting software does not contain the indicator named Momentum, then you can use the
more popular indicator labeled Rate of Change, which is almost identical to Momentum. The
mathematical formula for the Rate of Change oscillator is almost identical to that of the momentum
oscillator, with one small change: while the Momentum oscillator plots price comparisons as actual
price differences, the Rate of Change oscillator plots price changes as a percentage.

RATE OF CHANGE (ROC)
The formula for ROC is:

Stated differently, the Rate of Change Oscillator takes the same formula for momentum—stated in
the numerator of the fraction—and divides by the close a fixed number of periods ago and then
multiplies that fraction by 100 to arrive at a percentage value. The default value for periods is 14.
Let's look at two mathematical examples. Today, price is $50.00. Fourteen days ago, price was
$40.00. Using the indicator momentum (price today minus price 14 days ago), then we arrive at a
value of $10.00, which would appear on our chart for the oscillator value.
If we use the Rate of Change formula, we take the close today ($50.00) then subtract the close 14
days ago ($40.00) as our numerator which is $10.00 (where the first example stopped) and then
divide that number by the close 14 days ago, which is $40. Thus, $10.00 divided by $40.00 is 0.25.
Now, we take that ratio and multiply by 100 to convert the number into a percentage, which gives us
25 percent. In other words, the price today is 25 percent higher than it was 14 days ago.
Using the formula for Momentum, we can say that price is $10.00 greater than it was 14 days ago,
or using the Rate of Change indicator, we can say that price is 25 percent greater today than it was 14
days ago. What we see on our charts as the oscillator will be the rolling difference as each day
passes. Rather than the absolute numbers or percentages, we are most interested in the shape of the
oscillations as they relate to the price oscillations; namely, we want to see new oscillator highs
confirm new price highs, or note whether price forms a new high and the oscillator registers a lower
high in a negative divergence.
If we see price form a new high but our oscillator form a lower high, then this is a negative
divergence, which is a sign of a loss of momentum and potential evidence for a future trend reversal
yet to occur. The Momentum Oscillator and Rate of Change Oscillator will form similar, though not
identical, oscillations with price. It will be up to you to examine these particular indicators and adjust
the look-back period settings to see what parameters are most to your liking.
Let's take another look at the charts used in Figures 2.4 and 2.5, only this time we will use the
indicator named Rate of Change instead of the one labeled Momentum (see Figures 2.6 and 2.7 for a
comparison to Figures 2.4 and 2.5).
Refer to Figure 2.4 to see the daily chart of Johnson and Johnson with the Momentum Indicator as a
guide. Note that the Rate of Change and Momentum Oscillators are almost identical in following price
and forming divergences with price. We see the same three-swing negative oscillator divergence with
the subsequent new price highs for Johnson and Johnson in early 2010, along with the new price and
momentum high that occurred in mid-March which hinted that higher prices were yet to come in the
stock.
To refresh, when price and the oscillator form new highs simultaneously, it often is an all-clear
signal that the trend is likely to continue and we will see higher prices yet to come. However, if we
start to see negative divergences between the price and the oscillator, we should then be cautious and
prepare to take profits or even decide to short sell if we see further deterioration in price and the
breaking of trendlines or moving averages. The main idea is that we are using unbound momentum
oscillators to give us clues to the state of the concept in physics about the momentum of a trend—or
stated in market terms, a window into the supply/demand imbalance—increasing or decreasing—
between buyers and sellers.
FIGURE 2.6 Negative Divergences with the Rate of Change Oscillator in Johnson and Johnson Daily

Chart in early 2010

FIGURE 2.7 Positive Divergence then New Momentum High as seen with the Rate of Change
Oscillator

Now let us compare the market bottom in March 2009 on the weekly chart between the Momentum
Oscillator in Figure 2.5 and the Rate of Change Oscillator as seen in Figure 2.7.
The indicators are almost identical and highlight the new momentum low in November 2008
(hinting that a lower price low was yet to come in the future) and the positive momentum divergence
that formed at the actual price low of 666 in March 2009, which was a caution signal to bears and
early warning signal that the trend might be in the early phases of a positive reversal. Notice also that
the new oscillator high formed the Kick-off in June 2009 as price moved to a new high, serving as a
confirmation and hinting that higher prices were likely yet to come in the future.

THE 3/10 MACD OSCILLATOR
The Momentum Indicator highlights price changes as unaltered price differences over time, while the
Rate of Change Indicator highlights changes as a percentage change over time. In both oscillators, we
are comparing price now to price in the past to create an oscillator, and we aim to find confirmation
or non-confirmation in price and the oscillator to reveal insights about the physics of momentum and
likelihood of a trend continuing or reversing.
Another way to discern momentum characteristics in the stock market is to use the Moving Average
Convergence Divergence (MACD) indicator. The MACD indicator plots the difference between two
moving averages as an oscillator which can be used to assess momentum spikes as confirmation and
divergences with price as non-confirmations.
The default setting for the MACD indicator, as explained by its creator Gerald Appel, is 12, 26, 9.
The first two numbers in the parameters refer to the two Exponential Moving Averages—which use a
shorter-term and an intermediate-term average of price. The difference, or subtraction, between these
two averages creates the actual MACD Line that is plotted as an indicator on a price chart. The final
number refers to the smoothing constant of the MACD line that is called the signal line.
In the context of this discussion, we will not be discussing how to use the MACD Indicator in
standard form, but with reference specifically to its ability to highlight momentum characteristics in
the market. Also, we will be placing emphasis on the MACD line itself instead of the signal line. You
can find more information on the MACD in Gerald Appel's book Technical Analysis, Power Tools
for Active Investors, or through a variety of sources for this popular indicator.

MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE DIVERGENCE
(MACD)
The formula for MACD is:

Moving averages calculate the average price over time and are useful in discerning trends. When
the faster (or shorter) moving average (in this case, the 12-period EMA) is greater in value than the
slower (or longer) moving average (the 26-period EMA), then we can assume that price is moving in
an upswing, perhaps in the context of a rising uptrend.
The distance between these moving averages reveals the momentum characteristics of the market
environment we are studying. A large impulse in price, such as a gap or sustained upward move, will
cause the shorter-term average to react much more quickly than the longer-term average, and therefore

the distance between the short and long moving average will rise. This is how the MACD indicator
becomes a momentum oscillator; we assess the physics concept of momentum via the differential
between a short-term and intermediate-term moving average.
When price swings narrow or price consolidates and the distance between the shorter-term and the
longer-term moving average contracts, then this can highlight a state of momentum divergence to us
through the MACD oscillator. What we are interested in knowing via the oscillator is how great the
distance is between the two averages, which will reveal to us changes in momentum over time. Recall
that the MACD line, or the solid oscillator line we see, is the price difference between the fast- and
slow-moving averages. The signal line, often shown as a dotted or hash-line, is the smoothed average
—usually nine periods—of the MACD line. The signal line is less important in highlighting
momentum confirmations and divergences.
Let's use the same chart of Johnson and Johnson as we did in Figures 2.4 and 2.6 and reveal what
the default MACD value of 12, 26, and 9 highlight on our chart (see Figures 2.8 and 2.9). Figure 2.9
shows a faster MACD that we will come to describe as the 3/10 MACD Oscillator for future
reference.
We see the same three new swing highs in early 2010, but this time we are using a new oscillator
on our chart. This is the default MACD value with the MACD line solid and the signal line (less
important) as hash marks. Notice that the MACD Indicator spikes to a new chart high in late March
when JNJ makes a new swing high at $65.50, serving as a confirmation of the price high and creating
the expectation that all is well with the trend and we should see a new price high yet to come.
We do see that new price high in early April as price nears $66.00, but this time the MACD solid
line (difference between the 12- and 26-day exponential moving averages) does not rise to a new
oscillator high, but instead forms a lower high, forming your negative divergence. As price swings
one more time to a new high above $66.00, the MACD indicator has formed a lower swing high, just
like the Momentum Oscillator and Rate of Change Oscillator did, but perhaps not as clearly. Price
then fell to the downside after the negative divergence formed.
Figure 2.8 reveals how to use the default MACD indicator that is standard on most charting
programs. However, as is the case with almost all indicators, if you shorten the parameters for input,
you can enhance the indicators and make them more reactive or sensitive to price, which can call your
attention to changes earlier. As an example, a 20-day moving average is more reactive (changes more
quickly) to price than a 50-day moving average.
FIGURE 2.8 Negative Divergence in Johnson and Johnson using the default 12, 26, 9 MACD
Indicator

FIGURE 2.9 Negative Divergence in JNJ using the custom “faster” 3, 10, 16 MACD Indicator

The same logic holds true if you decrease the periods for the moving averages you use for your
MACD indicator. There is a MACD setting that makes the indicator more suited to detecting subtle

changes in the momentum environment of a trend, which can clue you in to signals earlier than the
default indicator. Linda Bradford Raschke of LBR Group (www.lbrgroup.com) popularized the
setting of 3, 10, and 16, respectively, which emphasizes the momentum function of the standard
MACD Indicator and creates a new indicator named the “3/10 Oscillator.”
Instead of comparing the difference between a 12- and 26-period exponential moving average, you
can greatly shorten the periods of the indicator to compare the difference between a three-period and
10-period exponential moving average. Most charting software programs allow you to edit the
parameters for your indicators to create the 3/10 Oscillator. To do so, change the default 12, 26, 9 to
the new values of 3, 10, 16. Alternately, to remove the signal line completely, you can change your
MACD settings to 3, 10, 1, which will only show the MACD line (difference between the 3 and 10
moving averages) as your sole momentum indicator, making it more similar to both the Momentum
Oscillator and the Rate of Change oscillator. We are concerned only with oscillator highs and lows
as they compare to price highs and lows.
The official 3/10 Oscillator used by Linda Raschke uses simple moving averages in its calculation
instead of the standard exponential moving averages that the classic MACD uses, but not all software
programs will allow you to change the type of moving averages your MACD indicator uses. Unless
otherwise stated, I will be using the custom 3, 10 MACD setting that uses simple moving averages
rather than exponential moving averages. You will see this labeled on the chart as the MACD SMA
Indicator, created in TradeStation. To replicate this indicator, change the EMA setting to SMAs and
input MACD settings 3, 10, 1. Other charting packages, such as StockCharts.com, require you to input
3, 10, 0 for your MACD settings to eliminate the signal line from the oscillator, leaving only the
distance between the 3 and 10 period moving averages for the creation of the oscillator. While small,
there are subtle differences in using exponential or simple moving averages in the calculation.
Experiment with the settings over a variety of charts to find the combination that suits your
preferences best. Figure 2.9 shows the same Johnson and Johnson chart using the 3/10 MACD
Oscillator (exponential moving averages).
While the 3/10 MACD Oscillator version shows the same three-swing negative divergence price as
all other oscillators, the main difference now is that the 3/10 version spiked to a new indicator high in
February 2010 instead of forming the final indicator high in mid-March as the other three indicators
highlighted. That is because the 3/10 Oscillator, highlighting the difference between a three-day and
10-day exponential moving average, was much more reactive to the four-day rally in mid-February
than the other three momentum-locating indicators we have seen so far. Notice that the default MACD
indicator registered its final high in March. However, being more reactive to price, the 3/10
Oscillator revealed the negative divergences more clearly than the default MACD indicator.
We see the benefit of the faster reflexes of the 3/10 Oscillator in comparing the differences at the
March 2009 bottom, as seen in Figure 2.10.
FIGURE 2.10 Triple Swing Positive Divergence Revealed through 3/10 MACD Oscillator

Because the 3/10 Oscillator is more reactive with price than the other oscillators, the indicator
highlighted a positive divergence on each of the swing lows from October to November 2008 then
March 2009 while the other three indicators treated the November 2008 low as a singular event not
distinct from the October low. Remember that our goal is to compare price swings with immediate
oscillator swings, and sometimes it can be helpful to have a more responsive or reactive momentum
indicator like the 3/10 Oscillator.
For another reference, Figure 2.11 shows the same chart of the 2009 trend reversal process as seen
on the default MACD Indicator with values 12 and 26 for the moving average differences.
FIGURE 2.11 Single Swing Positive Momentum Divergence Revealed through the Standard 12, 26, 9
MACD Oscillator

Using the default MACD Indicator, we see the same reading the Momentum and Rate of Change
indicators revealed to us, highlighting only a single swing divergence between the November 2008
low and the March 2009 bottom.
Why is this distinction important? As you may have guessed, multiple swing positive or negative
momentum divergences, as revealed through an oscillator, are more important and carry more weight
than a single swing divergence. Remember, we're trying to put together the likely probabilities of the
next swing unfolding in price, and then assessing the odds of the trend continuing or reversing via
insights from momentum. We will use information to trade within the price swings when we find a
specific low-risk, high probability entry given the trend and momentum characteristics on the chart.
While a single swing momentum divergence is a warning signal, a triple (or multiple) swing
momentum divergence is a stronger signal that the trend is likely to reverse as momentum declines
near an eventual price peak. Single swing divergences are often take-profits signals for traders, while
multiple swing divergences can serve as a reversal-style trade entry signal, usually when combined
with a reversal candle, price pattern, or some other chart signal from classic technical analysis. As
such, we want our momentum oscillator of choice to highlight momentum confirmations and
divergences as soon as possible in order to assess the trend health (or deterioration) quickly.
The purpose of the indicator is to highlight the momentum characteristics of the trend using the
principles of physics as they relate to objects in motion. We are not using indicators to find
overbought or oversold conditions in the market, nor are we using the indicators themselves to
generate isloated buy or sell signals (such as a cross above or beneath the zero line). In using
momentum oscillators to discern momentum, the zero line becomes irrelevant and we focus only on
oscillator extremes (highs and lows) as they relate to respective price extremes (highs and lows).
First we assess the trend, then we assess the health of the trend, and from that assessment we make
decisions about where to buy and sell based on the price itself, though we will discuss specifics of

entry and exit in later chapters.

WHERE MOMENTUM IS STRONGEST

As we have reached the end of Chapter 2, you now have the knowledge of the importance of
identifying trend structure and confirming your assessment by identifying the momentum conditions
that support a current trend in place. Understand that the momentum principle builds upon your
analysis of a prevailing trend in two ways: we look for momentum to be strongest at the start of a new
trend, particularly with a ‘Kick-off’ in the oscillator to form confirmations with price, and then as a
trend matures over time we look for non-confirmations of recent prices through momentum
divergences, which hint that odds now favor a reversal in trend as momentum weakens ahead of
actual reversals.
As a trader, you must develop a narrative of price as revealed through the price chart that tells the
story of the underlying supply/demand relationship between buyers and sellers. Specifically, you
want to know the current price trend as well as the strength of a price trend in motion. Momentum is
strongest at the earliest stage of a trend and weakest at the latter stages just prior to a trend reversal,
in the same way that a ball accelerates fastest when leaving your hand and slows down its rate of
ascent prior to its final peak and return to earth. We can say that the ball formed a negative momentum
divergence at the high (apogee) prior to returning to earth, which is similar to a classic move in a
stock price trend. Momentum tends to fall ahead of the actual price fall, or in the case of the tennis
ball, momentum declines while the ball still rises to its peak.
By identifying the trend structure and assessing the underlying momentum principles that exist under
the surface of price (namely in your momentum oscillator), you can find specific trade setups that
correspond well with key points in the trend structure and enhance your trading results and confidence
of a successful trade outcome.
While the Trend Continuity and Momentum principles are essential to your education as a trader,
there is one more foundation price principle you must understand, and we turn now to the Price
Alternation Principle in Chapter 3. After all, price on a chart can travel up, down, or sideways, and
we have not effectively addressed sideways motion yet.
