
There are certain weaknesses in momentum oscillators. Momentum shows the current state
of the market relative to its past. Although the oscillator is a derivative of price actions, its
directional movement does not represent price trends and does not necessarily move in the
same direction as price actions. Momentum oscillators represent momentum trends. They are
not stand-alone indicators and, therefore, do not offer any advantage when used in isolation.
But when momentum of different time frames is used to gauge the market, it becomes an

invaluable tool. Time frame is one of the significant decisions we make in our trading. As stated
earlier, the trading method in this book is not for day trading. Data used are end-of-day data
and traders would only be looking at the market in the evening. Thus, the time frame for
trading will be longer than daily, and one should, therefore, be looking at the next higher time
frame, that is, weekly momentum. The MetaStock program can easily convert between daily
and weekly data. It is much easier to see the broader state of the market using weekly data. On
the daily chart, it might appear that the momentum is making an oversold reversal (bullish
reversal), but if you look at the weekly chart, you might see that the weekly momentum is in an
overbought condition or bearish. In such a condition, it would not be prudent to make any
trade because the condition is not favorable and might pose a risk. A trade should only be
considered when there is a bullish reversal in the daily time frame and when the weekly
momentum is bullish and not in an overbought condition. In short, it means that the two time
frames should agree with each other whether in an upward or a downward trend.

PRICE AND MOVING AVERAGES
The object of technical analysis is to get on the favorable side of the trend. An uptrend is when
prices are making “higher highs and higher lows,” and a downtrend is when prices are making
“lower lows and lower highs.” In an uptrend, the sum of the rallies will exceed the sum of the
declines, and in a downtrend, the sum of the declines will exceed the sum of the rallies. To be
able to spot trend reversal and to stay with the trend is the hardest part of trading because
prices do not move in a straight line. Of the various methods applied in technical analysis to
detect trend, moving average is one of the easiest methods to understand and provides good
visual means of spotting a trend. Trading signals are generated when price crosses above or
below the moving average. When price crosses below the moving average, it suggests sellers
are taking control of the market, and when the price crosses above the moving average, buyers
are gaining control. A trade may also be signaled when the shorter-term average crosses above
or below the longer-term moving average. Two or more moving averages will allow a trader to
see a longer-term trend compared to a short-term moving average.
In this book, we describe the use of three sets of moving averages to determine entry and
exit signals and a prospective view of the longer trend. The first set consists of the short-term
moving averages. The second set is made up of the mid-term moving averages, consisting of
two moving averages: the 9-day and the 13-day. The third set is made up of the long-term
moving averages, consisting of three moving averages: the 50-day, the 90-day, and the 200-day.
The first set of short-term averages plots the interactions of two 5-day moving averages and
a 13-day moving average. The signals generated by the interactions of the three averages will
color the price bars. The blue bars in
Figure 2.4
represent bullish signals, the red bars represent bearish signals, and black and red bars
represent a probable change in trend (see
Figure 2.4
).
FIGURE 2.4
Chart showing the interaction of short-term moving averages represented by color bars.

The second set of mid-term averages, when used conjunctively with the first set of shortterm averages, acts as the signals for entry and exit of trades. The second set of mid-term

averages consists of the 9-day and 13-day moving averages. When the 9-day crosses above the
13-day average, and/or the close crosses above the two mid-term averages, it generates an
entry signal. An exit signal is triggered when the 9-day average crosses below the 13-day
average, and/or the close crosses below the two mid-term averages. A strong entry signal is
triggered when the price crosses above the mid-term averages, shown in
Figure 2.5
by either a blue bar or a beige or brown bar. A strong exit signal occurs when the price
crosses below the mid-term averages, shown by either beige, brown, or red bars.
FIGURE 2.5
Chart showing the addition of second set of moving averages and markings of probable trade
signals.

The third set consists of the 50-day, 90-day, and 200-day moving lines. The interactions of
these three longer-term periods of moving averages play a very important role in deciphering
the conditions of the market trend. They show the likely support and resistance levels of prices,
and indicate whether entry/exit trades made in the shorter time period will sustain a longer
time frame, and they will show the longer term outlook of the market. (See
Figure 2.6
.)
FIGURE 2.6
Chart showing the addition of the longer-term moving averages to identify longer-term
outlook of the market. The three longer-term moving averages are converging, with the 50-day
average moving downward to the 90-day average, and the 200-day average line moving flat.
Though the short- and mid-term appear to be positive, the various averages are not in positive
alignment, which likely points a non-trending pattern. If there is a rally, it will be short-lived.

In accordance with the Queuing Theory of Moving Average Crossovers, whether the outlook
of the market is bullish or bearish, price and its various multiple averages should fall in an
orderly alignment. In a bullish trend, price, being the leading indicator, is always above its
moving averages, and it is followed in order by the moving averages of the shortest time period
to the longest. As in the case of the third set of moving averages, when the outlook of the
market is bullish, the alignment of price and the three averages should be in a positive
alignment (from top down): firstly price, then the 50-day, 90-day, and 200-day averages. If it is
bearish, the negative alignment (from top down) would be the 200-day, 90-day, and 50-day
averages, and lastly, price. The market will cycle continuously from a negative alignment to a
positive alignment and back again. There are no limits or fixed data for the time period and
types of moving averages to be used. Expanding the Queuing Theory further, averages for
periods of less than 50 days could also be included in the set for a total reading of market
conditions.
Where there is a negative alignment of the longer-term moving averages during a market
decline, and where the corrective pattern is not completed, any rally will likely be short-lived.
The longer-term moving averages will generally indicate the resistance points. In a bullish
trend, where there is a positive alignment of the longer-term moving averages during an
uptrend, and where the impulse wave pattern is not completed, any correction will likely be
supported at the levels of the longer-term moving averages, and price will continue its uptrend.
In summary, the rules of the first and second sets of moving averages dictate trade entries
and exits relative to longer-term market conditions as indicated by the longer-term moving
averages. The longer-term moving averages will be a guide to the probable support and
resistance zones, which traders can use in calculating risk/reward ratios against entries.

COMBINING THE FOUR DIMENSIONS
We have described the usefulness of each of the four price-related dimensions: patterns,
volume, price momentum, and price and moving averages. While an entry or an exit may be
considered in terms of each dimension individually, a trader who is biased toward only one of
these dimensions will probably experience a higher number of losses. But a trader who is
patient enough to look for a proper balance among the four dimensions will definitely find
better results.
We have included a simple scorecard in this chapter (see “Keeping Count”) for use in
combining the four dimensions as a total approach. The first step prior to making any decision
is to see if there is a possible trade. We want to trade in the direction of the higher time-frame
trend. The easiest way is to look at the weekly price chart. There is no need to go through every
detail in the weekly chart. It will be sufficient to look at three factors: the weekly price
momentum, weekly price and relative moving averages, and the position of the current weekly
price relative to its recent historical prices. If we are considering a trade entry, we would want
to see that the weekly price momentum is not overbought, and is not bearish, and that the
weekly moving average is gaining strength at a level of support. Comparing the current weekly
price relative to its historical prices will give traders a sense of the probable move, and where
the significant support and resistance levels are in a longer time frame. Based on a healthy
bullish setup, we would then look for the prospective timing on the daily chart to determine the
price factor.

BEYOND TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
For those traders who are keen to advance their skills in technical analysis and wish to do a
better job in calling the turns of the market, the next step is to go into astro-harmonics or
financial astrology. Financial astrology is as useful as technical analysis in analyzing markets.
Over the past millennium, astrologers have observed how the interactions of various planets in
their orbits affect the markets. Just as the Moon is known to influence tides, emotions, and to
cause swings in the mass psychology of investors, the other planetary bodies also have certain
effects, though each in widely different ways. It can take years to learn and master this subject,
but there is no doubt that while technical analysis works well under normal circumstances,
added astro-economic indicators can improve technical analysis to an even more pinpoint
accuracy and can forewarn traders of a change in trend. A brief section on financial astrology is
included herein as a preliminary introduction to this methodology.

FINANCIAL ASTROLOGY
Chapter 9 covers some basic aspects of financial astrology, including cycles, selecting stocks,
finding the best timing, and market forecast. Financial astrology is made much easier today
with computing software. The development of financial astrology in combined use with
technical analysis to assist in reading market timing and market directional movements,
particularly in the plotting of planetary movements on price charts, is gaining popularity. It is
likely that the fusion of these two independent systems will radically change the approach to
technical charting in the future.
Financial astrology is an analysis of financial matters based on the observation of planetary
movements. After trading the markets for some time, it will become apparent that major
change in trend (CIT) points often coincide with certain astro-harmonic cycles. In fact, there is
much evidence to show that astronomical cycles correlate with moves in the financial markets,
as explained in Chapter 9. Planetary positions, which are available through astronomical
almanacs on computer programs, may be plotted either as a horoscope chart or against a price
chart. However, the interpretation of planetary movements and the events they imply is best
explained by examples.
For traders who are new to the subject, it may be easier to start using a chart analysis
program like TradeStation with an astro add-on module. The following charts are examples of
plots of the lunar cycles, the eclipse cycles, the planets’ positions, the planetary aspects, and
planetary pairs, produced with add-on modules from
www.soulytion.de
.
Figure 2.7
shows the plots of the lunar cycles together with an indicator of solar and lunar eclipses in
the lower window. The blue histogram bars represent lunar eclipses and the green histogram
bars show the solar eclipses. As described further on, eclipses may increase the effect of either
the new moon or the full moon.
FIGURE 2.7
Chart showing how the full moon and new moon, called lunations, often coincide with highs
and lows in the market. While the new moon (marked by blue lines) is a time to buy and the full
moon (marked by red lines) is a time to sell, the phase may not always hold true in the short
term.
Source: Omega Research—TradeStation Prosuite 2000i at
http://fc-cd.com/omega.htm
; Steffen Peter at
www.soulytion.de
.

Chapter 9, in the section called “Using Lunar Cycles in Trading,” details how a lunar-phased
buy-sell strategy will produce returns which substantially exceed those of a buy-hold strategy
only over several years. That said, for those who are actively trading the markets, it should be
emphasized that the intention is not to trade on the basis of moon-phased buy-sell signals only,
but if, for instance, the new moon correlates with a buy signal from a momentum system like
stochastics and moving average crossovers, then it lends strength to that signal. Conversely, if
the full moon correlates with a technical sell signal, it would add strength to that signal. Unless
the signals are in harmony, it may be better to limit trading or stay on the sideline.
Another combination is to plot the solar and lunar eclipse points, as they quite often coincide
with CITs. The eclipses have a much more intense focus than the regular lunar phases. When
the Moon comes between the Earth and the Sun, the sunlight is blocked either partially or fully.
It is called a solar eclipse and happens at the new moon. The full moon eclipse is called a lunar
eclipse. This happens when the Earth gets between the Sun and the Moon, and the Earth’s
shadow falls on the Moon. The effect of a solar eclipse is usually stronger than a lunar eclipse.
However, the duration of the lunar eclipse on June 15, 2011, was 100 minutes, which is
unusually long; only three other eclipses lasted longer in the last 100 years. The long duration is
likely to strengthen the effect so instead of weeks it may last for months and when a transiting
planet aspects the lunation point, it can trigger sudden wide price swings.
In
Figure 2.8
, the black lines reflect solar eclipses and the blue lines show lunar eclipses. They are plotted
here on a weekly chart of the Hang Seng Index but may apply to any market. The correlation
with CITs is quite high, so one would always want to remain on alert well ahead of time for the
next eclipses, such as the ones that took place on November 25 and December 10, 2011.
FIGURE 2.8
Lunar eclipses and solar eclipses, plotted here on a weekly chart of the Hang Seng Index.

Furthermore, a little-known but valuable technique is to show projections 90 days before
and 90 days after an eclipse, marked with dotted lines. These projections often coincide with
important turning points in some markets. Certainly, in the case of the Hang Seng Index, they
correlate very well with CITs. With these projections, as shown by the dotted lines in
September 2011 (see
Figure 2.8
), one can always be prepared for a possible major change in trend.
The next chart shows how a market often moves in alignment or within the boundaries of
planetary positions, whether geocentric (as seen from the Earth) or heliocentric (as seen from
the Sun). The effect of the planets is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 9 under “Choosing
the Best Periods for Trading.” Usually, the various markets are affected by different planets.
The planets involved may also depend on whether one is looking at shorter-term cycles or
longer-term cycles. The former may be influenced by faster-moving planets and the latter by
slower-moving ones.
Figure 2.10
shows how the aspects of planets may help indicate the possible direction of a market. The
bars at the bottom reflect the most common aspects, such as 0 degrees (conjunction), 60
degrees (sextile), 90 degrees (square), 120 degrees (trine), and 180 degrees (opposition). The 0,
60, and 120 degree aspects are generally considered favorable, whereas the 90 and 180 degree
aspects are considered unfavorable or stressful.
FIGURE 2.10
Planetary aspects have been applied to a chart of the Hang Seng Index. They are viewed on a
heliocentric basis, which fits the Hang Seng Index and Hong Kong shares better than the usual
geocentric basis. Overlaid on the aspects is the VZO (volume zone oscillator) indicator,
described in Chapter 5, Volume. VZO is a simple money-flow indicator that can help reveal
changing conditions of a market. In conjunction with the strength of the aspect bars, it may
alert traders to possible changes in trend. Note: In this chart and other charts herein, the gaps
appearing in the histogram bars represent non-trading days.

Traders may also wish to take note of the tendency of stock markets to react prior to the
moment when two transiting planets are in an exact aspect or in conjunction with each other.
So when the planets move within a certain angle or distance of each other, a company’s stock
horoscope (its price on the first day of listing) tends to react—upward or downward as the case
may be—some time before the actual culmination of the transit takes place. Usually, it is a day
before, but sometimes it is earlier. Therefore, on the day of the exact transit, the effect may
already be over. This gives traders a great advantage as they can see the approaching aspects in
advance and be ready for the possible effect.
Why the Hang Seng Index relates best to a geocentric view of planetary movements (
Figure 2.9
), whereas heliocentric planetary aspects correlate better with CITs in the same market (
Figure 2.10
) is one of the imponderables of astro-harmonics. The main thing, however, is that the
application works and may provide useful clues for trading.
FIGURE 2.9
The chart shows geocentric ephemeris planet lines applied to the Hang Seng Index. (The
ephemeris is a set of tables listing the rapidly changing positions of the planets as seen from
either the Earth or the Sun.) As indicated by the arrows, the lower band of a planet’s trajectory
may act as a buffer to any further correction. Should the market fail to hold at the indicated
level, it may fall to the next trajectory of the faster-moving planets or the cyan line of Jupiter.

Figures 2.11
and
2.12
offer two examples of planet pairing as they applied to markets such as the Dow Jones
Industrial Average and the Hang Seng Index.
FIGURE 2.11
Chart showing the effect of the pairing of Mercury with Venus as applied to the Dow Jones
Industrial Average. The two planets moved to 0 degree conjunction in early May and then
moved to separate just before June. The technique is admittedly preliminary and rather
simplistic. Further research may reveal pairings of planets that correlate even better than this
example. Nevertheless, it shows another method by which one can identify possible future
CITs. Naturally, the index is also influenced by other planets, but these two fast-moving planets
correspond quite well to shorter-term moves. Note also the spike at the end of August, which
may indicate the peak of an uptrend similar to the one in May.

FIGURE 2.12
Chart showing how Venus and Jupiter often correlate with moves in the Hang Seng Index on a

heliocentric basis. The spike in the bars at bottom indicate when transiting Venus and Jupiter
were in conjunction (0 degrees), square (90 degrees), and opposition (180 degrees) to each
other. These aspects are usually the strongest and prices did indeed top at those angles.

Figure 2.13
again shows the pairing of Venus and Jupiter but this time on a weekly basis and in 180
degree increments. That is, whenever the two planets are in 0 or, 180 degree aspect to each
other, it is indicated by the blue and red spikes, respectively, at the bottom of the chart.
FIGURE 2.13
The 0 and 180 degree aspects of Venus and Jupiter on a heliocentric basis often coincide quite
well with turning points in the Hang Seng Index, but not always. Note the spike appearing on
October 1, 2011 and compare it with potential CITs from the other indicators shown earlier. All
the dates may be listed in the Financial Astrology Checklist at the end of this chapter. When
two or more indicators of a CIT converge, it gives that potential change in trend a higher
probability.

A final example of applying technical indicators with astro aspects is shown in
Figure 2.14
for HSBC Holdings (0005.HK). Similar to

Figure 2.10
, the VZO money-flow indicator has been superimposed on the planetary aspects, but this
time, the moving average convergence/divergence (MACD) indicator has been included at the
bottom as well.
FIGURE 2.14
Planetary aspects and VZO–MACD indicators applied to HSBC Holdings (0005.HK). It should be
noted that the planetary aspect bars do not indicate any convergence/divergence with the
share price. They only indicate the strength of the various aspects of the planets that may alert
traders to potential changes in trend.

The tall bars indicate when one of the aspects has reached culmination, where the effect is
usually the strongest. These events often coincide with CITs or acceleration of the trend, as
shown by the arrows. However, as mentioned earlier, the share or index may react one or two
days in advance of the culmination of the aspect, and it is therefore advisable to watch the
action in the VZO and MACD indicators very closely in conjunction with the planetary aspect
bars.
Normally, one should pay attention only to the tallest bars; that is, those exceeding the gray
line at 80. In some instances, however, those slightly below the line also coincide with a change
in trend. After using this method for a while, traders will find that technical and astrological
indicators integrate in an effective way, often acting in confirmation of each other and serving
as a useful early warning system.

KEEPING COUNT
The Technical Analysis Scorecard and the Financial Astrology Checklist include various points
covered in the chapter. The purpose of these lists is to give traders an easy reference to these
points while interpreting the market. A probable bullish trend will have a more positive reading
while a bearish trend will have a more negative reading.
Technical Analysis Score-Card

Financial Astrology Checklist
