
14. THE TRADING SCENE

51

14. THE TRADING SCENE
Humans have traded since the dawn of history -it was safer to trade with
your neighbors than to raid them. As society developed, money became the
medium of exchange. Stock and commodity markets are among the hallmarks of an advanced society. One of the first economic developments in
Eastern Europe following the collapse of communism was the establishment
of stock and commodity exchanges.
It took Marco Polo, a medieval Italian traveler, 15 years to get from Italy
to China. Now when a European trader wants to buy gold in Hong Kong, he
can get his order filled in a minute.
Today, stock, futures, and options markets span the globe. In India alone,
there are 14 stock exchanges. There are over 65 futures and options
exchanges in the world. As Barbara Diamond and Mark Kollar write in their
book, 24-Hour Trading, they make markets in nearly 400 contracts-from
gold to greasy wool, from Australian All-Ordinaries Index to dried silk
cocoons. All exchanges must meet three criteria, first developed in the agoras of ancient Greece and the medieval fairs of Western Europe: an established location, rules for grading merchandise, and defined contract terms.

Individual Traders

Private traders usually come to the market after a successful career in business or in the professions. An average private futures trader in the United
States is a 50-year-old, married, college-educated man. Many futures traders
own their own businesses, and many have postgraduate degrees. The two
largest occupational groups among futures traders are farmers and engineers.
Most people trade for partly rational, partly irrational reasons. Rational
reasons include the desire to earn a large return on capital. Irrational reasons
include gambling and a search for excitement. Most traders are not aware of
their irrational motives.
Learning to trade takes hard work, time, energy, and money. Few individuals rise to the level of professionals who can support themselves by trading.
Professionals are extremely serious about what they do. They satisfy their
irrational goals outside the markets, while amateurs act them out in the marketplace.
The major economic role of a trader is to support his broker - to help him
pay his mortgage and keep his children in private schools. In addition, the

52

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

role of a speculator is to help companies raise capital in the stock market and
to assume a price risk in the commodities markets, allowing producers to
focus on production. These lofty economic goals are far from a speculator's
mind when he gives an order to his broker.

Institutional Traders

Institutions are responsible for a huge volume of trading. Their deep pockets
give them several advantages. They pay low institutional commissions. They
can afford to hire the best researchers, brokers, and traders. Some even strike
back at floor traders who steal too much in slippage. The spate of arrests and
trials of Chicago floor traders in 1990 and 1991 began when Archer Daniels
Midland, a food processing firm, brought in the FBI.
A friend of mine who heads a trading desk at a bank bases some of his
decisions on a service provided by a group of former CIA officers. They
scan the media to detect early trends in society and send their reports to him.
My trader friend culls some of his best ideas from these reports. The substantial annual fee for those experts is small potatoes for his firm compared
with the millions of dollars it trades. Most private traders do not have such
opportunities. It is easier for institutions to buy the best research.
An acquaintance who used to trade successfully for a Wall Street investment bank found himself in trouble when he quit to trade for himself. He discovered that a real-time quote system in his Park Avenue apartment in
Manhattan did not give him news as fast as the squawk box on the trading
floor of his old firm. Brokers from around the country used to call him with
the latest ideas because they wanted his orders. "When you trade from your
house, you are never the first to hear the news," he says.
Some large firms have intelligence networks that enable them to act
before the public. One day, when oil futures rallied in response to a fire on a
platform in the North Sea, I called a friend at an oil firm. The market was
frantic, but he was relaxed-he had bought oil futures half an hour before
they exploded. He had gotten a telex from an agent in the area of the fire
well before the reports appeared on the newswire. Timely information is
priceless, but only a large company can afford an intelligence network.
The firms that deal in both futures and cash markets have two advantages.
They have true inside information, and they are exempt from speculative
position limits (see Section 40). Recently, I visited an acquaintance at a
multinational oil company. After passing through security that was tighter

14. THE TRADING SCENE

53

than at Kennedy International Airport, I walked through glass-enclosed corridors. Clusters of men huddled around monitors trading oil products. When
I asked my host whether his traders were hedging or speculating, he looked
me straight in the eye and said, "Yes." 1 asked again and received the same
answer. Companies crisscross the thin line between hedging and speculating
based on inside information.
Employees of trading firms have a psychological advantage - they can be
more relaxed because their own money is not at risk. Most individuals do not
have the discipline to stop trading when they get on a losing streak, but institutions impose discipline on traders. A trader is given two limits - how much
he may risk on a single trade and the maximum amount he may lose in a
month. These limits work as stop-loss orders on a trader.
With all these advantages, how can an individual trader compete against
institutions and win? First, many institutional trading departments are poorly
run. Second, the Achilles heel of most institutions is that they often have to
trade, while an individual trader is free to trade or stay out of the market.
Banks have to be active in the bond market and food processing companies
have to be active in the grain market at almost any price. An individual
trader is free to wait for the best trading opportunities.
Most private traders fritter away this advantage by overtrading. An individual who wants to succeed against the giants must develop patience and
eliminate greed. Remember, your goal is to trade well, not to trade open.
Successful institutional traders receive raises and bonuses. Even a high
bonus can feel puny to someone who earns many millions of dollars for his
firm. Successful institutional traders often talk of quitting and going to trade
for themselves.
Only a handful of them manage to make the transition. Most traders who
leave institutions get caught up in the emotions of fear, greed, elation, and
panic when they start risking their own money. They seldom do well trading
for their own account - another sign that psychology is at the root of trading
success or failure.

The Swordmakers
Medieval knights shopped for the sharpest swords, and modern traders
shop for the best trading tools. The growing access to data, computers, and
software creates a more level playing field for traders. Prices of hardware
fall almost monthly and software keeps getting better. It is easy for even a

54

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

computer-illiterate trader to hire a consultant and set up a system (see
Section 24).
A computer allows you to speed up your research and follow up on more
leads. It is not a substitute for making trading decisions. A computer helps
you analyze more markets in greater depth, but the ultimate responsibility
for every trade rests with you.
There are three types of trading software: toolboxes, black boxes, and
gray boxes. A toolbox allows you to display data, draw charts, plot indicators, and even test your trading system. Toolboxes for options traders include
option valuation models. It is as easy to adapt a good toolbox to your needs
as it is to adjust your car seat.
What goes inside a black box is secret. You feed it data, and it tells you
when to buy and sell. It is like magic-a way to make money without thinking. Black boxes usually come with excellent historical track records. This is
only natural because they were created to fit old data! Markets keep changing, and black boxes keep blowing up, but new generations of losers keep
buying new black boxes.
Gray boxes straddle the fence between toolboxes and black boxes. These
packages are usually put out by prominent market personalities. They disclose the general logic of their system and allow you to adjust some of their
parameters.

Advisors

Advisory newsletters are colorful splashes on the trading scene. Freedom of
the press allows anyone to put a typewriter on his kitchen table, buy a few
stamps, and start sending out a financial advisory letter. Their "track
records" are largely an exercise in futility because hardly anybody ever takes
every bit of advice in any newsletter.
Some newsletters provide useful ideas and point readers in the direction
of trading opportunities. A few offer educational value. Mostly, they sell outsiders an illusion of being an insider, of knowing what happens or is about to
happen in the markets.
Newsletters are good entertainment. Your subscription rents you a penpal
who sends amusing and interesting letters and never asks you to write back,
except for a check at renewal time.
Services that rate newsletters are for-profit affairs run by small businessmen whose well-being depends on the well-being of the advisory industry.

14. THE TRADING SCENE

55

Rating services may occasionally tut-tut an advisor, but they dedicate most
of their energy to loud cheerleading.
I used to write an advisory newsletter: worked hard, did not fudge results,
and received good ratings. I saw from the inside a tremendous potential for
fudging results. This is a well-kept secret of the advisory industry.
When I was getting into letter writing, one of the most prominent advisors
told me that I should spend less time on research and more on marketing.
The first principle of letter writing is: "If you have to make forecasts, make a
lot of them." Whenever a forecast turns out right, double the volume of promotional mail.

Trading Contests
Trading contests are run by small firms or individuals. Contestants pay organizers to monitor their results and publicize the names of winners. Trading
contests have two flaws -one mild, and another possibly criminal. This is a
scandal waiting to be explored by investigative journalists.
All contests hide information about losers and tell you only about winners. Each dog has its day in the sun, and most losers have at least one good
quarter. If you keep entering contests and taking wild chances, eventually
you will have a winning quarter, reap the publicity, and attract money management clients.
Many advisors enter trading contests with a small stake, which they chalk
off to marketing expense. If they get lucky they receive valuable publicity,
while their losses are hidden. Nobody hears about a contestant who destroys
his account. I know several traders who are so bad they could not trade
candy with a child. They are chronic losers but all of them appeared on the
list of winners of a major contest, with great percentage gains. That publicity
allowed them to raise money from the public-which they proceeded to lose.
If trading contests disclosed the names and results of all participants, that
would promptly kill the enterprise.
A more malignant flaw of trading contests is the financial collusion
between some organizers and contestants. Many organizers have a direct
financial incentive to rig the results and help their co-conspirators obtain
publicity as winners. They use it to raise money from the public.
The proprietor of one of the contests told me that he was raising money
for his star winner. How objective can a judge be if he has a business relationship with one of his contestants? It appeared that the amount he could

-

56

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

raise depended on how well his "star" performed in his contest. That highly
touted star promptly lost money put under his management.
The worst abuses can occur in contests run by brokerage firms. A firm
can set up contest rules, attract participants, have them trade through the
firm, judge them, publicize their results, and then go for the jugular- raising
money from the public for winners to manage, thereby generating fees and
commissions. It would be easy for such a firm to create a star. All it would
have to do is open several accounts for the designated "winner." At the end
of each day it could put the best trades into a contest account and the rest of
the trades into other accounts, creating a great "track record." Trading contests can be an attractive tool for fleecing the public.

15. THE MARKET CROWD AND YOU
The market is a loosely organized crowd whose members bet that prices will
rise or fall. Since each price represents the consensus of the crowd at the
moment of transaction, all traders are in effect betting on the future mood of
the crowd. That crowd keeps swinging from indifference to optimism or pessimism and from hope to fear. Most people do not follow their own trading
plans because they let the crowd influence their feelings, thoughts, and
actions.
Bulls and bears battle in the market, and the value of your investment sinks
or soars, depending on the actions of total strangers. You cannot control the
markets. You can only decide whether and when to enter or exit trades.
Most traders feel jittery when we enter a trade. Their judgment becomes
clouded by emotions after they join the market crowd. These crowd-induced
emotions make traders deviate from their trading plans and lose money.

Experts on Crowds

Charles Mackay, a Scottish barrister, wrote his classic book, Extraordinary
Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds,in 1841. He described several mass manias, including the Tulip Mania in Holland in 1634 and the
South Seas investment bubble in England in 1720.
The tulip craze began as a bull market in tulip bulbs. The long bull market
convinced the prosperous Dutch that tulips would continue to appreciate.
Many of them abandoned their businesses to grow tulips, trade them, or

15. THE MARKET CROWD AND YOU

57

become tulip brokers. Banks accepted tulips as collateral and speculators
profited. Finally, that mania collapsed in waves of panic selling, leaving
many people destitute and the nation shocked. Mackay sighed, "Men go mad
in crowds, and they come back to their senses slowly and one by one."
In 1897, Gustave LeBon, a French philosopher and politician, wrote The
Crowd, one of the best books on mass psychology. A trader who reads it
today can see his reflection in a century-old mirror.
LeBon wrote that when people gather in a crowd, "Whoever be the individuals that compose it, however like or unlike be their mode of life, their
occupations, their character, or their intelligence, the fact that they have been
transformed into a crowd puts them in possession of a sort of collective mind
which makes them feel, think, and act in a manner quite different from that
in which each individual of them would feel, think, and act were he in a state
of isolation."
People change when they join crowds. They become more credulous and
impulsive, anxiously search for a leader, and react to emotions instead of
using their intellect. An individual who becomes involved in a group
becomes less capable of thinking for himself.
The experiments of American social psychologists in the 1950s have
proven that people think differently in groups than they do alone. For example, an individual can easily tell which of the two lines on a piece of paper is
longer. He loses that ability when he is put into a group whose other members deliberately give wrong answers. Intelligent, college-educated people
believe a group of strangers more than they believe their own eyes!
Group members believe others, and particularly group leaders, more than
they believe themselves. Theodore Adorno and other sociologists showed in
their two-volume study, The American Soldier, that the single best predictor
of an individual's effectiveness in combat was his relationship with his
sergeant. A soldier who trusts his leader will literally follow him to his death.
A trader who believes he is following a trend may hold a losing position
until his equity is wiped out.
Sigmund Freud explained that groups are held together by the loyalty of
members to the leader. Our feelings toward group leaders stem from our
childhood feelings toward our fathers- a mixture of trust, awe, fear, the
desire for approval, and potential rebellion. When we join groups, our thinking on issues involving that group regresses to the level of a child. A leaderless group cannot hold itself together and falls apart. This explains buying
and selling panics. When traders suddenly feel that the trend they have been
following has abandoned them, they dump their positions in a panic.

58

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

Group members may catch a few trends, but they get killed when trends
reverse. When you join a group, you act like a child following a parent.
Markets do not care about your well-being. Successful traders are independent thinkers.
Why Join?

People have been joining crowds for safety since the beginning of time. If a
group of hunters took on a saber-toothed tiger, most of them were likely to
survive. A lone hunter had a slim chance of coming out alive from such an
encounter. Loners got killed more often and left fewer offspring. Group
members were more likely to survive, and the tendency to join groups
appears to have been bred into humans.
Our society glorifies freedom and free will, but we carry many primitive
impulses beneath the thin veneer of civilization. We want to join groups for
safety and be led by strong leaders. The greater the uncertainty, the stronger
our wish to join and to follow.
No saber-toothed tigers roam the canyons of Wall Street, but you probably
fear for your financial survival. Your fear swells up because you cannot control changes in prices. The value of your position rises and falls because of
buying and selling by total strangers. This uncertainty makes most traders
look for a leader who will tell them what to do.
You may have rationally decided to go long or short, but the moment you
put on a trade, the crowd starts sucking you in. You need to pay attention to
several signs that indicate when you start turning into a sweaty crowd member instead of an intelligent trader.
You start losing your independence when you watch prices like a hawk
and feel elated if they go your way or depressed if they go against you. You
are in trouble when you start trusting gurus more than yourself and impulsively add to losing positions or reverse them. You lose your independence
when you do not follow your own trading plan. When you notice what is
happening, try to come back to your senses; if you cannot regain your composure, exit your trade.
Crowd Mentality

People become primitive and action-oriented when they join crowds.
Crowds feel simple but strong emotions such as terror, elation, alarm, and
joy. Crowds swing from fear to glee, from panic to mirth. A scientist can be

15. THE MARKET CROWD AND YOU

59

cool and rational in his lab but make harebrained trades after being swept
up in the mass hysteria of the market. A group can suck you in, whether you
trade from a crowded brokerage office or from a remote mountaintop.
When you let others influence your trading decisions, you lose your chance
of success.
Group loyalty is essential for the survival of a military unit. Joining a
union can help you keep a job even if your performance is not very good.
But no group can protect you in the market.
The crowd is bigger and stronger than you. No matter how smart you are,
you cannot argue with the crowd. You have only one choice- to join the
crowd or to act independently.
Many traders are puzzled why markets always seem to reverse immediately after they dump their losing position. This happens because crowd
members are gripped by the same fear-and everybody dumps at the same
time. Once the fit of selling has ended, the market has nowhere to go but up.
Optimism returns to the marketplace, and the crowd feels greedy and goes
on a new buying binge.
Crowds are primitive, and your trading strategies should be simple. You
do not have to be a rocket scientist to design a winning trading method. If the
trade goes against you-cut your losses and run. It never pays to argue with
the crowd-simply use your judgment to decide when to join and when to
leave.
Your human nature prepares you to give up your independence under
stress. When you put on a trade, you feel the desire to imitate others and
overlook objective trading signals. This is why you need to develop and follow trading systems and money management rules. They represent your
rational individual decisions, made before you enter a trade and become a
crowd member.
Who Leads?
You may feel intense joy when prices move in your favor. You may feel
angry, depressed, and fearful when prices go against you, and you may anxiously wait to see what the market will do to you next. Traders join crowds
when they feel stressed or threatened. Battered by emotions, they lose their
independence and begin imitating other group members, especially the group
leader.
When children feel frightened, they want to be told what to do and look
up to their parents. They transfer that attitude to teachers, doctors, ministers,

60

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

bosses, and assorted experts. Traders turn to gums, trading system vendors,
newspaper columnists, and other market leaders. But, as Tony Plummer brilliantly pointed out in his book, Forecasting Financial Markets, the main
leader of the market is price.
Price is the leader of the market crowd. Traders all over the world follow
the market's upticks and downticks. Price seems to say to traders, "Follow
me, and I will show you the way to riches." Most traders consider themselves independent. Few of us realize how strongly we focus on the behavior
of our group leader.
A trend that goes in your favor symbolizes a strong, bountiful parent calling you to share a meal or risk being left out. A trend that goes against you
symbolizes an angry, punishing parent. When you are gripped by these feelings, it is easy to overlook objective signals that tell you to exit. You may
feel defiant, or bargain, or beg forgiveness-while avoiding the rational act
of accepting your loss and getting out of a losing position.
