
they don't use enough information?
I'm not sure that is the disadvantage. I think the disadvantage is that stock index prices are too close
to random to develop enough clear-cut trends because the inputs—the individual stocks—are
mostly random.
What are your thoughts on the recent attacks against program trading?
The people that are complaining ought to be ashamed of themselves.
Do you mean people in the financial community?
Yes. They should have enough sophistication to understand the inanity of what they are
complaining about.
Do you see program trading as a convenient scapegoat for a declining market?
Sure. It is a good excuse for doing a lousy job for yourself and your clients. The claim is that
program traders are taking money out of the pockets of the people who are investing in the stock
market. Nothing could be further from the truth. Program trading may move the stock market
around a bit, but not in any systematic way. If program trading caused prices to go too high or too
low, that should provide better opportunities for the value investor. Of course, it's bad for those
people who pretend they are value investors, but are really traders.
How do you handle a losing streak?
Cut back. If it is really bad, stop and get out.
Do you sometimes need to get away from the markets for a few days?
Generally, it just takes a day or two, but you do need to stop for a period of time. It is almost like a
pitcher not balking. Before he throws the ball, he has to stop at least for that second. That is what I
try to do—at least have a pause. It could be for just one day.
What is the biggest public fallacy about market behavior?
That markets are supposed to make sense.
How about fallacies regarding technical analysis?
The belief that technical factors are not as important as the fundamentals.
Are there any analysts whose work you respect?
There are a lot of them/Zweig) for example, is good.
Would you consider the work of outside analysts as an input in a trade?
No. When we taught our people to trade, I had a hypothetical question: Suppose everything you
know about the markets indicates a "buy." Then you call the floor and they tell you that I'm selling.
Do you: (a) buy, (b) go short, (c) do nothing? If they didn't eventually understand that (a) was
correct because they have to make their own market decisions, then they didn't fit into the program.
Why do you handle other people's money? You are doing very well on your own.
Well, there is one big advantage: managed money offers potential return with no risk. For ten years,
people have been asking me if I'm getting tired of all the risk. Do I think I'm going to bum out? Do
I think I'm going to stop? For the longest time I didn't understand what they were talking about. But
I have to admit, at this point, I understand the value of cutting down your own risk. I could have
traded smaller and had a smaller profit and smaller risk. But if customer money comes in, I could
use that to supplement the profitability and still keep my risk lower. It just gives you a better deal.
In a later interview, Dennis changed his mind on this subject, possibly influenced by the
aggravation related to large losses in his public funds. Dennis decided to extricate himself gradually
from the money management business, saying: "I found that it was more trouble than it was worth.
The costs were not financial; they were psychological." The material that follows is from that
second interview.
I know this is not going to be your favorite subject, but I've got to ask you about it. Some of
the public funds you managed ceased trading in April 1988. Is that because they reached the
automatic 50 percent loss cutoff point?
Actually, they were down just under 49 percent when we stopped trading. Rather than trigger the
55

automatic termination point, we liquidated all positions and resolicited the investors to allow a
lower cutoff point.
Would you do anything differently in the future because of this particular experience?
I would cut back a little faster than I did, but the trades would still be the same. Someone said to
me, "You claim the markets were bad. Well, since you could have done the exact opposite and
made a lot of money, weren't they really good?" I told him that the last thing I would have wanted
to do was to be on the opposite side of those trades. In the long ran, that is a way to lose an infinite
amount of money.
The short side of the interest rate markets in October 1987 resulted in one of your worst
losses. What went wrong there?
A large part of that loss was due to the fact that the market gapped way past our point for covering
our short position. For example, on October 20, we would normally have been out of our short
Eurodollar position about 40 to 50 points higher, but the market opened 240 points higher that day.
We blew 190 points in a skid that was absolutely unavoidable.
If the market is that much out of line, do you still get out of your position right away?
Sure. If you have any doubt about getting out as fast as possible in a situation like that, then you are
really in big trouble.
Do you think the sharp losses you suffered were due to any change in the markets?
That's hard to say. The only factor I can objectively identify is the tendency toward more false
breakouts.
Do you feel the recent prevalence of false breakouts is related to the tremendous increase in
computerized trend-following trading during the past five to ten years? Are there just too
many people doing the same thing, getting in each other's way?
Yes, there is no doubt about it. In a perverse sort of way, it represents the ultimate triumph of
technical trading over fundamental trading. I say perverse because it is a victory that devalues
technical trading.
Do you think we may see the day when trend-following systems no longer work?
There will come a day when easily discovered and lightly conceived trend-following systems no
longer work. It is going to be harder to develop good systems.
Given that, can the approaches you were using before still work with the same efficacy?
Actually, I believe that if you view the problem correctly, you can make the fact that there are
many other trend followers in the market work to your advantage. I can't get too specific about the
solution, because if we are right, that is pretty valuable information. To be successful you always
have to be one step ahead of everyone else.
It sounds like you started working on this problem well before your performance problems
began in late 1987.
That's right. During the past ten years, there has been a virtual bandwagon-effect of people using
trend-following approaches. We have been thinking about this problem for a long time. Half the
work in solving a problem is finding the right way to conceptualize it. It took us years before we
figured out the right questions to ask.
When did you finally arrive at what you considered a satisfactory solution?
Ironically, right around the time we closed down the public funds.
I know you can't be specific, but does your solution to false breakouts involve being far more
short-term oriented, so that you can respond more quickly to those situations?
The secret is being as short term or as long term as you can stand, depending on your trading style.
It is the intermediate term that picks up the vast majority of trend followers. The best strategy is to
avoid the middle like the plague.
When you talk about the experience of managing well over $100 million and losing roughly 50
percent, not to mention your personal large losses, you discuss it with great emotional
56

detachment. Do you really take it that calmly? Isn't there an emotional side to it?
I try for there not to be. It is totally counterproductive to get wrapped up in the results. Trading
decisions should be made as unemotionally as possible.
Yes, but how do you do that?
You have to maintain your perspective. There is more to life than trading. Also, to me, being
emotionally deflated would mean lacking confidence in what I am doing. I avoid that because I
have always felt that it is misleading to focus on short-term results.
So you are able to avoid the emotional trap?
Yes, but the flip side is that I also avoid the emotional elation when things are going well. There is
no way to play just one side of that street. If you feel too good when things are going well, then
inevitably you will feel too bad when they are going poorly. I wouldn't claim that I realized that
after three years of trading, but after you've done it for twenty years, it either drives you crazy, or
you learn to put it into perspective.
Does it become easier after twenty years?
Not necessarily [he laughs]. It gets easier to put it into perspective, but everyone has shock
absorbers that deteriorate over time. Being a trader is like being a boxer: Every now and then, the
market gives you a good wallop. After twenty years you get a bit punch-drunk.
Is there any advice you can give to other traders on how to stay emotionally calm during
periods of trading losses?
It is a little bit like playing golf: You can throw your clubs around after making a bad shot, but
while you are making the next shot you should keep your head down and your eye on the ball.
Do you use long-term scenarios about economic growth, inflation, and the dollar in making
your trading decisions?
I have mental pictures, but I try not to use them when I'm trading. Trading to me is like betting on
independent roles of the dice that you think are loaded a little bit in your favor, because you know
some statistical things about the market. Long-term scenarios can prove to be right or wrong, but
even if they are right, on balance, I'm not convinced that they make much difference over the term
of any individual trade.
Even if you think the dollar is going to collapse, that doesn't affect your basic trading
pattern?
I would like to say it doesn't, and I don't think it should, but it probably has in the past. The worst
thing you can do is miss a profit opportunity (assuming you are already disciplined enough to cut
your losses short). And if you think about it, rigid long-term views are the kind of thing most likely
to lead you to that mistake. For example, if I believe the dollar is going to weaken, and because of
this I ignore a sell signal in the foreign currencies, I might risk missing a large profit. What is my
reward if my view was right? Avoiding a small loss. Therefore, the risk/reward is all wrong for my
type of trading.
Acknowledging that caveat, as a long-time market observer, what major trends do you see
shaping up over the coming years?
I bet we will be at record levels of inflation by the end of 1990. [This interview was conducted in
mid-1988.]
What is going to be the driving force behind that inflation?
It is going to be driven by trying to avoid a deep recession. The recession is going to be caused by
the federal budget deficit as investors require higher and higher levels of real interest rates to buy
the debt. The' government will try to avoid the recession by stimulating the economy, a tactic
which essentially doesn't work.
In other words, fear of a recession will cause tremendous monetary easing, which in turn will
lead to inflation?
It is, unfortunately, a very Republican idea, but I think it is right. Whether you like it or not, the
financial markets are in conservative hands. People who lend money to the government and
57

business will not buy monetary easing as a solution to a recession.
Are you implying that the deficit problem is just a time bomb, which will eventually shatter
the economy?
Sure. We tend to think that since it is not a problem now, that means it won't be. We expect
continuity in our lives, but the economy, and certainly the markets, are more discontinuous than
continuous.
And you are saying that people look at the deficit year after year and think, "Well, it can't be
so bad, the economy is strong," and one day everybody wakes up—
It is like having termites in the foundation of your house. You may not notice them until one day
they gnaw away a big chunk and the house collapses. I don't think anybody should take a large
amount of comfort in the fact that things appear to be holding together.
Hypothetically, if you were President and could influence change, would the deficit be the
first thing you would change?
Sure. I think it is especially important for Democrats, since they were the first ones to pick up the
banner of Keynesianism [the advocacy of government programs to increase employment], to admit
that while it may be a great theory, it doesn't work in the real world.
I don't think Keynes ever proposed using deficit spending in strong economic times.
No, that's true. He proposed surpluses that were supposed to be countercyclical to deficits.
Surpluses in good times; deficits in bad times. The trouble is that we have only one side of that
equation because of the lack of political will to create the surpluses when times are good. So what
we really ought to do is admit that Keynesian economics is just an excuse for easy money,
overspending, and overconsuming. We ought to just admit that the government is a debt junkie and
the whole concept of deficit spending is flawed in practice.
You mean Keynesianism as it is being applied, not Keynesian economics as he himself
purported it?
The theory is fine, it just doesn't work in the real world. Therefore, we shouldn't use it. Besides,
Keynesian economics was a solution to the problem of oversaving and underconsumption, which
was a fair enough attempt to pull us out of the Great Depression. The problem now is the exact
opposite: undersaving and overconsumption. Even if Keynesianism were politically tenable, you
still need a different solution because you have the exact opposite problem.
Is there an economic theory that you feel fits the times and makes sense?
We have to get rid of deficit spending. We need to retire the deficit in some orderly way, and the
federal government should have to balance its budget just as the states do. At that point, Milton
Friedman's proposal for a constant money supply adjusted by a growth factor would probably be a
good idea.
What is the most important advice you could give the novice trader?
Trade small because that's when you are as bad as you are ever going to be. Learn from your
mistakes. Don't be misled by the day-to-day fluctuations in your equity. Focus on whether what you
are doing is right, not on the random nature of any single trade's outcome.
After Dennis announced his retirement from trading to pursue his political interests full time, I
called with some follow-up questions. I spoke to an aide who took down the questions. Several
days later, he called back with Dennis' replies. These questions and answers follow.
Individuals who invested in your funds during your final year as a money manager fared
poorly. How would an investor have done if he started on your first day as a money manager
and kept his money fully invested until your last day in that role?
Each $1,000 invested would have been worth $3,833 when the accounts were closed. [This works
out to approximately a 25 percent annual compounded return. The figure would have been more
than double that at the equity peak about one year earlier.]
You are rumored to have lost a very substantial portion of your own net worth during your
final year of trading. Are these stories true or exaggerated?
58

I lost about 10 percent of the money I had made in the markets. Of course, measured as a
percentage of my net worth, the figure is much higher because of my charitable and political
contributions over the years.
Did your poor trading results during the past year speed your career transitions?
It made no difference.
Have you really gone cold turkey, or are you still trading lightly?
I am not trading at all.
Richard Dennis is one of the legendary commodity traders of our time. He is the type of trader you
might visualize implementing large long positions near market bottoms and large short positions
near market tops. It is thus surprising that Dennis downplays the value of trying to pick major
turning points. In fact, he claims that such trades have done little, if anything, to contribute to his
trading success.
Dennis believes that one of the worst mistakes a trader can make is to miss a major profit
opportunity. According to his own estimate, 95 percent of his profits have come from only 5
percent of his trades. Missing only a few such profit opportunities could have a dramatic negative
impact on performance. As a corollary, you need to guard against holding too rigid an opinion on a
market, since such an opinion could easily lead to missing a major trend.
One particularly useful piece of advice offered by Dennis is that the times when you least want to
think about trading—the losing periods—are precisely the times when you need to focus most on
trading.

59

Paul Tudor Jones-The Art of Aggressive Trading
October 1987 was a devastating month for most investors as the world stock markets witnessed a
collapse that rivaled 1929. That same month, the Tudor Futures Fund, managed by Paul Tudor
Jones, registered an incredible 62 percent return. Jones has always been a maverick trader. His
trading style is unique and his performance is uncorrelated with other money managers. Perhaps
most important, he has done what many thought impossible: combine five consecutive, triple-digit
return years with very low equity retracements. (I am fudging slightly; in 1986, Paul's fund realized
only a 99.2 percent gain!)
Jones has succeeded in every major venture he has tried. He started out in the business as a broker
and in his second year grossed over $1 million in commissions. In fall 1980, Jones went to the New
York Cotton Exchange as an independent floor trader. Again he was spectacularly successful,
making millions during the next few years. His really impressive achievement though was not the
magnitude of his winnings, but the consistency of his performance: During his three and a half
years as a floor trader, he witnessed only one losing month.
In 1984, partially out of boredom, and partially out of fear of eventually losing his voice—an
occupational hazard for a pit trader— Jones again abandoned his successful career for a new
venture: money management. He launched the Tudor Futures Fund in September 1984 with $1.5
million under management. At the end of October 1988, each $1,000 invested in this fund was
worth $17,482, while the total amount of money he managed had grown to $330 million. In fact,
the amount under management would have been higher, but Jones stopped accepting new
investment funds in October 1987 and has also made cash disbursements since that time.
If one believes in cycles—as Jones does—it appears that he is due for another career change. It is
hard to imagine what he can do for an encore.
Jones is a compendium of contrasts. In private conversation he is relaxed, but as a trader he shouts
his orders with the ferocity of a drill sergeant. His public image is one of a swaggering, egotistical
trader, but one-on-one he is easygoing and unassuming. The media usually dramatizes the
flamboyant elements of his lifestyle—Chesapeake Bay Mansion, private 3,000-acre wildlife
preserve, beautiful women, fine restaurants—but he has also made helping the poor a second
avocation.
Jones has emulated New York businessman Eugene Lang by setting up a fund to finance the
college education of eighty-five elementary school graduates in Brooklyn's economically depressed
Bedford-Stuyvesant section. This is not merely a matter of donating money; Jones has become
personally involved by meeting with his adopted students weekly. More recently, he started the
Robin Hood Foundation, whose endowment has grown to $5 million. This organization, true to its
name, raises money from the rich and distributes it to private groups and individuals working to aid
the poor.
Jones had arranged our interview for 3:15 P.M., a time by which all the futures markets are closed,
except for the stock indexes. Even with only one market trading, I was a little concerned about the
practicality of starting the interview at that time, since I knew that the S&P stock index futures
contract was one of Jones' primary trading vehicles. In fact, when I arrived he was in the midst of
trading the S&P.
I waited until he finished shouting orders over the speakerphone and explained that I did not want
to interrupt his trading. "Maybe we should delay the interview until the market closes," I suggested.
"No problem," he answered, "let's go."
As it turned out, Jones was not merely trading the S&P that afternoon, he was building up a major
position in anticipation of a huge break in the stock market. There is an intensity in Jones'
placement of an order that is reminiscent of a tennis player aggressively returning a volley. ("Buy
300 at even! Go, go, go! Are we in? Speak to me!") Yet, he shifted easily between trading and our
conversation.
Jones speaks with admiration about his first tutor in the business, the legendary cotton trader, Eli
Tullis. Perhaps the one trait of Tullis that made the greatest impression on Jones was his steel-hard
emotional control. He recalls how Tullis could carry on a polite, relaxed conversation with visitors,
without blinking an eye, at the same time his positions were getting decimated in the market.
60

Jones' casualness in seeing visitors, talking to his staff, and participating in this interview at the
same time he was trading a heavy S&P position reflected the same trait. A rally in stock index
futures in the closing minutes of trading that day caused over a $ 1 million loss in Jones' position.
Yet, he was so composed that I didn't realize the market had moved against him until I checked the
closing prices later that day.
There was insufficient time to complete the interview at our first meeting. I returned about two
weeks later. Two things were notable about this second meeting. First, whereas he had been
strongly bearish and heavily short the stock market at the time of our first conversation, Jones'
short-term opinion on the stock market had shifted to bullish in the interim. The failure of the stock
market to follow through on the downside at the price and time he had anticipated convinced him
that the market was headed higher for the short term.
"This market is sold out," he emphasized at our second meeting. This 180-degree shift in opinion
within a short time span exemplified the extreme flexibility that underlies Jones' trading success.
He not only quickly abandoned his original position, but was willing to join the other side once the
evidence indicated his initial projection was wrong. (Yes, his change of heart proved well timed.)
Second, Jones had suddenly adopted a very cautious tone regarding projections p Ttaining to the
stock market and the economy. He was concerned that a second major selling wave in the stock
market—the first being October 1987—could lead to a type of financial Mc-Carthyism. Indeed,
there is historical precedence for such concern: During the Senate hearings held in the 1930s,
committee members were so desperate to find villains responsible for the 1929 stock crash that they
dragged up New York Stock Exchange officials who had held long positions during the price
collapse.
Jones feared that, as a prominent speculator and forecaster of economic trends, he might make a
convenient target for any future governmental witch-hunts. Jones had been particularly rattled by a
call from a prominent government official regarding his trading. "You wouldn't believe how highplaced this person was," he explained to me in a voice tinged with incredulity, taking particular
care not to divulge anything specific.
Although Jones remained friendly, the directness of the first interview was replaced by an almost
prerecorded quality in his replies. For example, a question about trading strategy was met with a
response about frmit-running^-an illegal practice in which a broker places his own order
m^ront~oralarge customer order. This reply virtually bordered on the absurd since Jones handles no
customer orders. It made as much sense as a football fan, who bets in his office pool, denying that
he took a bribe to throw the game. It sounded as if Jones was using the interview as a forum for
making an official statement, perhaps to be used as evidence in some hypothetical future
congressional hearing. I thought that Jones was being overly cautious—if not paranoid—but then
again, the expectation that a true economic crisis would lead to "killing the messengers of bad
news" does not really seem that far-fetched.
When did you first get interested in trading?
When I was in college I read an article on Richard Dennis, which made a big impression on me. I
thought that Dennis had the greatest job in the world. I already had an appreciation for trading
because my uncle, Billy Dunavant, was a very successful cotton trader. In 1976, after I finished
college, I went to my uncle and asked him if he could help me get started as a trader. He sent me to
Eli Tullis, a famous cotton trader, who lived in New Orleans. "Eli is the best trader I know," he told
me. I went down to see Eli and he offered me a job on the floor of the New York Cotton Exchange.
How come you went to work for Eli instead of your uncle?
Because my uncle was primarily involved in the cash side of the business, merchandising cotton. I
was interested in becoming a trader straightaway.
How long did you work on the floor of the exchange? What was your job there?
I was a floor clerk; that is how everybody begins. But I also did a lot of analytical work, watching
the market to try to figure out what made it tick. I clerked in New York for about six months and
then returned to New Orleans to work for Eli.
Did you learn a lot about trading from Eli?
61
