
FIGURE 8.54 Safeway Stores provides a classic example of a stock trying to get
above its trendline only to exhaust itself and fall in earnest.

208

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.55 This close-up of Safeway illustrates what an excellent short sale
this stock presented.

When you right-click on a trendline, one of the choices in the popup
menu is Duplicate. Choosing this creates another trendline right next to
the selected one (Figure 8.62), and the trendline will be the same length,
color, and angle as the selected original. The handles of the duplicate will
be preselected so you can move it immediately to the desired location.
You do not have to leave the duplicate trendline parallel, since either
of the two handles can be moved. But the most practical value of the Duplicate command is to create a parallel trendline for the purpose of drawing
a channel pattern. As shown in Figure 8.63, dragging the parallel trendline
to its destination makes the formation of a channel pattern simple.
Up to this point, we have examined price patterns that were ideal for
trendline analysis. But real-life trading isn’t always so clean and easy to
track. We will complete our examination of trendlines by looking at the
times when the price action isn’t so predictable and apparent.

FALSE BREAKOUTS
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the violation of a trendline by price
action can be a meaningful signal that the current trend has ended and is
possibly even reversing. This is absolutely not a hard and fast rule, and with

Trendlines and Reversals

209

FIGURE 8.56 The Morgan Stanley High-Tech Index shows two examples of price
levels ﬁghting back toward broken support. The ﬁrst support was broken in January
2008, and that line was almost recovered by May. By September of that year, the
lower support line was broken, and it took over a year to re-approach the same line.

any chart, only time will tell the ultimate destination of the prices. It is your
task to make a prediction of future price action with enough statistical likelihood that your odds of winning are better than your odds of being wrong.
For one thing, trendlines represent very potent boundary lines, and
prices piercing a trendline do not necessarily make that trend moot.
Figure 8.64 shows the S&P 100 index moving sharply higher and piercing
the upper trendline, representing resistance. One might conclude that the
index should push above the resistance line and henceforth treat it as support. In this case, prices simply got ahead of themselves and were pushed
back well underneath the resistance line in just a couple of trading sessions.
Another interesting example is that of MicroStrategy (Figure 8.65),
which was enjoying a very healthy uptrend in price. Late in April, during
two trading sessions, the stock lost about 10 percent of its value, and in

210

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.57 The Dow Transports has an entire series of lines which, in turns,
represented support and resistance. Both the horizontal levels, tinted in green, and
the angled levels, shown with red lines, have a powerful eﬀect on the prices.

doing so it crossed plainly beneath the ascending, supporting trendline.
Those long the stock may have made a swift exit. Even more aggressive
traders might have decided the stock was ready for a big tumble and entered a short position on the stock. This would have been a costly mistake,
as the stock quickly recovered and nearly matched its all-time high within a
few days.
In retrospect, were holders of this stock wrong to sell it? And were
those bearish on this stock wrong to sell it short? As of this writing, it is
impossible to know whether this stock will be $200 in a year, or $50, or
anywhere in between. In the very short-term analysis, two things can be
said: First, those long the stock were probably wise to close (or at least
reduce) their positions in the stock since the uptrend was violated. It is
very hazardous to speculate what the meaning of a trendline break is. If
one is to ignore it and see what happens, there is much less value in even

Trendlines and Reversals

211

FIGURE 8.58 It took nearly a year, but Photronics staged a 1500 percent price
recovery to try to get back to its former support zone.

bothering to watch a trendline in the first place. So the disciplined trader
would have been wise to take the trendline break seriously.
A less generous analysis could be made of the people selling the stock
short. A more careful approach would have been to wait for a few days
to see if the stock consolidated and touched the underside of the trendline, demonstrating that it was “respecting” the former support line as its
new resistance line. By waiting, the potential short seller would have seen
prices blast right back above the trendline, indicating not only that the line
didn’t represent resistance, but that it probably didn’t have much meaning
at all. The more times a former trendline is penetrated from either direction, the less meaningful it is. Simply stated, it has worn out its usefulness
as an observational tool.
A similar example of a security that broke below—and then above—a
trendline is shown with the S&P 400 MidCap index in Figure 8.66. In this

212

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.59 The Russell 2000 index had a support level going back over four
years. Once it was broken, the fall was swift and brutal. Prices approached the underside of former support almost exactly a year later.

case, prices broke below the trendline and stayed there for a full month before breaking above the former support line again. From there, it regained
its former bullish disposition and soared another 20 percent. Interestingly,
in spite of the damage caused to the support line by the price action being
beneath it for a full month, the prices still seemed to have a healthy respect
for this as a support line once it regained its composure.
A close-up view of this month-long hiatus from support levels is illustrated with Figure 8.67. It is interesting to see how, on a day-by-day basis,
price actions behave with respect to the supporting trendline.
More often than not, trendline breaks do indicate directional change,
so let us turn our attention to some chart examples that show this concept
in action.

Trendlines and Reversals

213

FIGURE 8.60 Typically, the longer a support level is in place, the more formidable
it will be as resistance later. Diodes’ stock enjoyed years of support at about $22.
After plunging to $3, it soared much higher, only to be stopped by its former support
level.

MULTIPLE TRENDLINES OVER THE
LONG HAUL
The chart in Figure 8.68 is worth careful study. On the chart, five separate trendlines are shown, each of which lasts a significant period—in
some cases, many years. There are a couple of fascinating things about
this graph, which help drive home the power of trendline analysis. First,
there are five clear directional trends, and they toggle to a different direction each time: up, down, up, down, and then up again (although this last
uptrend is violated on the extreme right portion of the graph, suggesting
that perhaps even a sixth line is in the process of being formed).
Second, each trendline has multiple “touch points” on the price data.
In spite of all of the events that happened during the 11 years of this

214

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.61 Relatively low-risk entry points for short positions can be enjoyed
when a price pushes back up to its former support, as illustrated with the Dow Jones
Utility Index.

FIGURE 8.62 Choosing the Duplicate function creates a parallel trendline of the
same length and style with its handles preselected.

Trendlines and Reversals

215

FIGURE 8.63 Drag the parallel trendline to an appropriate location to form a
channel pattern, which consists of two trendlines.

graph—economic booms and busts, changes in Presidential administrations, dozens of earnings releases for this stock, hundreds of news releases,
and all the ups and downs of the stock market in general—the price action
can still be clearly bounded by a series of simple, straight lines.
Harrah’s Entertainment had a similar situation of multiple trend
changes, although the chart in Figure 8.69 shows three trendlines as opposed to five. It’s important to notice that even though it would not
have been apparent in 1999, the descending trend was in the process of
ending just as the ascending trend was in the process of being formed.
Trends rarely change instantly; it takes time, sometimes measured in many
months. This explains why, when drawn with the benefit of hindsight,
trendlines often overlap with respect to time.
Take a closer look at this trend change with a zoomed-in view of the
same graph (Figure 8.70). As the stock is downtrending, it starts to make
a move up and tries to push above the descending trendline, but it fails.
It falls hard and fast, making a low in October, and then again makes an
assault on the descending trendline. This time, it succeeds, and you can
plainly see how, after it pushes its way above the trendline, it finds support
on the same line, bouncing off it several times. Even though the stock once

216

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.64 The S&P 100 just barely pushed above its resistance line before
succumbing.

FIGURE 8.65 MicroStrategy appeared to be breaking down, but it quickly
recovered.

Trendlines and Reversals

217

FIGURE 8.66 The S&P 400 MidCap seemed to be seriously breaking down, but it
composed itself and pushed on to new highs.

FIGURE 8.67 This close-up of the S&P 400 shows the brief period it was below
its support line.

218

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.68 This chart illustrates ﬁve distinct trend changes for symbol KMI.

FIGURE 8.69 Trendlines working together are invaluable in identifying core
trend changes in a stock.

Trendlines and Reversals

219

FIGURE 8.70 Harrah’s clearly shifted from a downtrend to an uptrend during this
time period.

again falls very badly, it does not fall below its new support level, and this
lends credence to the idea that the trend has changed. From this point, it
enjoyed a 400 percent price increase.
Knowing when a trend changes is not easy, but it is made possible with
experience and well-placed lines. But even a beginning chartist can gain
value from the signals trendlines provide, both when they are obeyed and
when they are violated.

INTERPRETING AMBIGUITY
Using trendlines when the price action is neat and well-defined is pretty
simple. When prices don’t bounce precisely off trendlines and the price
behavior is “mushy” with respect to support and resistance levels, it is far
more challenging. Although, by definition, there aren’t any absolute rules
when dealing with this ambiguous behavior, it is still helpful to look at
some past, real-life examples to see how they played out.
The S&P 600, showed in Figure 8.71, enjoyed a long, persistent
uptrend. There are two trendlines shown, both of them ascending. The

220

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.71 Although the trendline has been violated, the basic direction
remains intact.

higher trendline was violated about halfway along the graph, and although
it briefly moved above this line later, it fell once more, clearly showing this
uptrend was history.
The line beneath it had a similar result, although in the opposite sense.
In this instance, support held for virtually the entire graph, although it
was briefly violated. But both of these trendlines tell the same story: Even
though price action can move to the other side of a line, so long as this
violation is brief, and provided that the prices resume “obeying” the trendline afterward, the trendline still does have meaning. There’s no doubt that
the validity of the trendline is diminished with any violation, but it is not
eliminated completely.
An extremely interesting example of this is shown with Raven Industries (Figure 8.72). From 2000 through 2004, five whole years, the prices
steadily climbed, never piercing the ascending support line. Early in 2005,
when the prices broke the trendline, they did not signal a trend change. Instead, the trend continued upward, simply shifted downward several price
points. What’s remarkable about this graph is how the prices clung to the
former support line, crossing above and below it many times, but generally
sticking rigidly to the line as if it were a magnet.

Trendlines and Reversals

221

FIGURE 8.72 After RAVN breaks through its trendline, the price seems to cling
to the line as a median instead of either support or resistance.

The softening of a trend’s direction can take the form of a price reduction, as with Raven Industries, or the form of a reduction in the steepness
of a trend, such as with Figure 8.73. In this case, the NASDAQ 100 market
violated its major ascending trendline, but over time it continued a softer
uptrend. Compare the medium-length trendline, shown on the right side of
the graph, with the longer trendline that spans virtually the entire graph.
As you can see, the medium-term line has a reduced slope, indicating that
even though the uptrend is continuing, it is doing so with less potency.
A close-up of this graph (Figure 8.74) highlights the breakdown from
the long-term trendline, the establishment of the medium-term trendline,
and—in the end—the violation of this trendline as well. Another element
at play here is the horizontal line at the 1,760 price level. If the market had
been stronger, the prices would have pierced above this horizontal line,
completing a small saucer-shaped pattern. Instead, in spite of an attempt
to reach this line, the market didn’t have enough power, and it quickly
fell away from this line and instead pierced beneath the medium-term
trendline.
The main lesson with all of these graphs is that price charts are,
in a sense, living creatures, and you need to keep them updated with

222

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.73 Multiple trendlines can work together to show the softening of a
market, as shown here with the NASDAQ 100 index.

FIGURE 8.74 This close-up of the NASDAQ 100 shows its value pushing above
its horizontal resistance as well as its subsequent trendline failure.

Trendlines and Reversals

223

FIGURE 8.75 American International Group provides a beautiful example of resistance changing to support as well as the creation of a new resistance line.

appropriate drawn objects in order to interpret their action and have
your attention drawn to meaningful price events. You should treat your
trendlines seriously—certainly not moving them here and there each
day in order to falsely bound price action that has no business being
bounded—but you also need to be open to the creation of new trendlines
(and other drawn objects) as the price action gets hammered out, day by
day, one bar at a time.
American International Group (Figure 8.75) gives us another fine example of a graph whose price momentum changed both direction and
angle. Notice how the prices fell steadily from 2000 to 2003. Late in
2003, prices pushed above the descending resistance line. Notice the
exceptional behavior of the prices after this—in two instances (late in
2004 and early in 2005) prices fell swiftly and perfectly touched the
support line (the still-intact trendline that had been resistance before).
Afterwards, prices started moving up. In retrospect, we can see three
exceptionally well-formed trendlines: the large one (representing resistance and, later, support); the other descending line above it (representing resistance); and the ascending trendline, illustrating the rapid
recovery of the stock along this support level. It is easy to see what an

224

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.76 It is helpful to leave older trendlines in place, as they can help
illustrate the general strength or weakness of a stock historically.

advantage a trader has if he has equipped himself with information such
as this.
Even when trendlines have been violated, it is worthwhile to leave
them in place unless the price action around them becomes so noisy as
to render them meaningless. An old trendline may yield new insight later
in the graph, since price levels may ultimately push up against that line
again. Or, as in the graph shown in Figure 8.76, older trendlines can help
you see broad market changes, such as the softening of ascending prices
when comparing the first trendline here with the second.

SUMMARY
We have covered a tremendous amount of ground in this chapter. We’ve
learned how to construct and interpret trendlines in many different circumstances. We can see how to make use of them to measure resistance
and support levels and to judge when a trend has changed. Now we will
add to this knowledge in the next chapter by learning about trendline pairs
that make up the much rarer, but still very useful, channel pattern.

CHAPTER 9

Expansion and
Channels

n this chapter we are going to undertake two different but related subjects: chart resizing and drawn channels. A channel is a drawn object
that consists of two parallel trendlines, so many of the same principles
you learned in Chapter 8 apply. First, though, we will examine charting
resizing since it is relevant not just to channels but to almost all drawn
objects.

I

RESIZING AND EXPANSION
The ability to resize the space allocated to a chart is one of the most
unique and vital features in ProphetCharts. To understand this concept,
think about what the right side of virtually all charts looks like, ending
with the most recent data point and the most recently available date. This
makes sense, because charts are read from left (earliest date) to right (latest date), and it seems logical for the chart to end wherever the data end.
In addition, it makes sense for a chart’s upper and lower extremes to be
bounded by extremes in price. If you are charting a stock that, during the
time period shown, ranges in price from $5 to $10, it would unnecessarily
flatten the chart if the price range available on the y-axis started at $0 and
ended at $500.
However, there is real value in being able to modify how much empty
space is above, below, and to the right of a chart. To make this easier to
understand, think of the entire area available (the entire y-axis, which is

225

226

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

vertical, and the entire x-axis, which is horizontal) as the “chart area” and
think of the area in which prices are actually displayed as the “price area.”
Usually, the price area and the chart area are one and the same.
This is certainly the case with most printed and electronic charts. In
ProphetCharts, however, you can create empty space in the upper, lower,
and right portions of the chart with pixel-by-pixel flexibility, which means
the price area can be smaller—even much smaller—than the chart area.

WHY RESIZE?
Those relatively new to ProphetCharts may wonder what value there is in
resizing. After all, it is simply going to create empty space without any price
data. You will be adding either dollar values that are higher or lower than
the stock’s historical range, or you will be adding dates in the calendar that
have not occurred yet.
The reason this has value is because, as you examine charts, you will
find it helpful to be able to picture what may be in store for the stock you
are charting in the future. When you are using drawn objects or trying to
recognize certain chart patterns, it is invaluable to look using your mind’s
eye into the future to predict the most likely direction of a stock’s price and
how high or low the stock will go during that movement.
You will see some examples of this soon, but as a start, it is valuable to
know how to expand a chart in the first place. This is accomplished with
the item in the toolbar second from the left (or, from the menu, the item
Resize Graph). Clicking the resize tool (Figure 9.1) instantly allows you to
reshape the price area to any rectangular shape within the chart area.
The moment you click on the Resize tool, the entire chart area becomes
grey, and a message appears in the center of the chart: “Drag the graph’s
corner or edge handles to resize. Click inside the graph when finished.”
(See Figure 9.2.) And that really tells you everything you need to know.
There are five handles you can grab—one on the top, one on the bottom, one on the right, and one on both the upper-right and lower-left corners (Figure 9.3). You can click on any of these and drag to resize the chart
to your liking. It is more common to create x-axis (time-based) space as

FIGURE 9.1 Clicking the resize tool lets you change the height and width of the
area allocated to the chart data.

Expansion and Channels

227

FIGURE 9.2 When you click Resize, ProphetCharts gives you basic instructions
about what to do next.

opposed to y-axis (price-based) space, but the extra blank space you form
is totally up to you, and of course it can be changed at any time. Once you
are satisfied with the new size of your chart, you can click anywhere within
the chart to set that size.
Let’s look at a simple example of how a resized chart might be useful.
Figure 9.4 shows a graph of the S&P 500 index over the span of a couple
of years, and it has a channel (with a median line) drawn on top of it. The
graph shows that the market fell quickly from about 1,330 to about 1,255.
Suppose you were interested in shorting this market, but you wanted to
wait until the price had climbed back to the median line in order to reduce
the risk of the trade. If you had a normal graph, it would not be possible
to judge this accurately. However, by being able to see six weeks into the
future (albeit without price data), you can easily picture how a retracement
might take place, and, using your cursor and the data line, you could point
at the likely “touch point” on the median and get an accurate estimate as to
the price the S&P needs to hit before you place your trade.
To take a far more dramatic example, suppose you were taking an extremely long-range view of the market, and you used the Fibonacci time
series study (which you will read about in Chapter 15) to project when the
next major market top might take place. It would be entirely impractical
to do this without being able to resize the chart. But as Figure 9.5 shows,

FIGURE 9.3 Five handles appear on the chart area, any one of which can be
dragged to reshape the chart. One of the handles is shown here.
