
AN EXPERIMENT WITH MARKET TIMING

All this, however, gets me years ahead of my story, because back in the
1930's there were other things I also had to learn through trial and
error as my investment philosophy was gradually taking shape. In my
casting around for ways to make money through common stocks, I
began realizing that | might have a worthwhile by-product from my
study of the Food Machinery Corporation. Enough of their business
was dependent on the fruit and vegetable canning industry so that in
order to be reasonably sure I was right about my Food Machinery
purchases, I had inadvertently learned a good deal about what influ-
enced the fortunes of the fruit and vegetable canning companies
themselves. This industry was highly cyclical because of both fluctuating


Learning from Experience 249

general business conditions and erratic weather influences as they
affected specific crops.

As long as I was becoming somewhat familiar with the characteris-
tics of the packing industry anyway, | decided I might as well try and
take advantage of this knowledge, not through long-term investments,
as | was doing with Food Machinery, but through in and out transac-
tions in the shares of the California Packing Corporation, then an inde-
pendent company and the largest fruit and vegetable canner. Three dif-
ferent times, from the depths of the Big Depression to the end of that
decade, I bought shares of this company. Each time, I sold them at a
profit.

Superficially, this might sound like I was doing something quite
worthwhile. Nevertheless when, for reasons [ will explain shortly, I
endeavored a few years later to analyze the wise and unwise moves I made
in my business, it became increasingly apparent to me how silly these
activities were. They took a great deal of time and effort that could well
have been devoted to other things. Yet the total rewards in dollars in
relation to the sums at risk were insignificant in comparison to the prof-
its I had made for my people in Food Machinery and in other situations
where I had bought for long-range gains and held over a considerable
period of years. Furthermore, I had seen enough of in and out trading,
including some done by extremely brilliant people, that I knew that
being successful three times in a row only made it that much more like-
ly that the fourth time I would end in disaster.'The risks were consider-
ably more than those involved in purchasing equal amounts of shares in
companies I considered promising enough to want to hold them for
many years of growth. Therefore, at the end of World War II, by which
time much of my present investment philosophy was largely formulat-
ed, I had made what I believe was one of the more valuable decisions
of my business life. This was to confine all efforts solely to making major
gains over the long run.

REACHING FOR PRICE, FOREGOING OPPORTUNITY

During the 1930’s | learned, or at least partially learned, something else
which I consider truly important. I have already mentioned my complete
failure to benefit from my correct forecasts of the Great Bear Market
which started in 1929. All the correct reasoning in the world is of no


250 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

benefit in stock investment unless it is turned into specific action. My
first experience in operating my own business occurred during the
depth of the Great Depression, when very small amounts of money
became of abnormal significance. Possibly because of this, or possibly
because of my personal characteristics, as I started my business I found
myself constantly battling for “eighths and quarters.” Brokers who knew
much more than I did kept telling me if I believed that a stock would
rise in a few years to several times its current price, it really made very
little difference whether I acquired its shares at $10 or $1014. Yet I con-
Unually placed limit orders with no better reason for a lit than a purely
arbitrary decision on my part that I would pay, say, $10'% and no more.
Logically, this is ridiculous. I have observed it to be a bad investment
habit that is deeply ingrained in many people besides myself, but not
ingrained at all in others.

The potential dangers of arbitrary limits were made clear to me as
the result of a mistake of someone else. I remember as though it were
yesterday running into one of my more important clients by chance on
the sidewalk in front of a San Francisco bank. | told him that I had just
come back from visiting the Food Machinery Corporation, the outlook
was never so exciting, and that I thought he should buy some addition-
al shares. He completely agreed with me and asked where the stock had
closed that particular afternoon. 1 told him $34. He gave me a signif-
icant order and said he would pay $33% but no more. Over the next
day or two the stock fluctuated in a range just fractionally above his bid.
It never got down to it. I phoned him twice, urging him to go up a
quarter of a point so that I could buy stock. Unfortunately he replied,
“No, that is my price.” Within a few weeks the stock had risen over
50 percent and, after allowing for stock split-ups, never again in the
company’s history was it to come down to anywhere near where he
could have bought it.

This gentleman’s actions made an impression on me that my own
stupidity had not. Gradually, I was to overcome much of this weakness
of mine. I am thoroughly aware that if a buyer desires to acquire a very
large block of stock, he cannot completely ignore this matter of an
eighth or a quarter, because by buying a very few shares he can signifi-
cantly put the price up on himself for the balance. However, for the great
majority of transactions, being stubborn about a tiny fractional difference
in the price can prove extremely costly. In my own case, I have com-
pletely conquered it in regard to buying, but only partially in regard to


Learning from Experience 251

selling. Within the past year, my placing a small sell order with a limit
rather than at the market caused me to miss a transaction by exactly a
quarter of a point, with the result that, as I write this, the shares are now
down 35 percent from where I placed my order. At levels only halfway
between that limit order and current prices, I sold only part of this not
very large holding.


3

,

The Philosophy Matures

cance in the development of my investment philosophy. Early in
1942 I found myself in an unaccustomed role as a ground officer
doing various business related jobs for the Army Air Corps. For three and
a half years, I simply “beached” my business as I performed my not very
valuable services on behalf of Uncle Sam. In recent years, I have fre-
quently said that I did quite a job for my country. Neither Hitler nor
Emperor Hirohito ever succeeded in getting a man into the territories I
defended. These were Arkansas, lexas, Kansas, and Nebraska! At any rate,
during this time of various desk type jobs wearing Uncle Sam’s uniform,
I found that almost without warning I would alternate between two dif-
ferent types of periods. For a while, I would have so much to do that the
last thing I would be able to think about was my peacetime business. At
other times, I would sit at my desk with very little to do. When things
were slow, I found it less unpleasant to analyze in great detail just how I
would build up my business when the happy day that I would no longer
be wearing a uniform might arise than it was to think of the personal
living and Army type problems with which, from a short-range point of
view, I was confronted. It was during such periods that my present invest-
ment philosophy took steadily more definite shape. It was then I decid-
ed there was not enough future in the type of in and out trading that I
have described in the stock of California Packing,
During this period, I reached two other conclusions that were to be
of some significance to my future business. Before the war I had served
all types of clients, large and small, with varying types of objectives.

0: entry into World War II was not entirely without some signifi-


The Philosophy Matures 253

Most, but not all, of my business had been focused on finding unusual
companies that would enjoy significant, above-average growth in future
years. After the war, I would limit my clientele to a small group of large
investors with the objective of concentrating solely on this single class
of growth investment. For tax reasons, growth was more likely to ben-
efit these clients.

My other major conclusion was that the chemical industry would
enjoy a period of major growth in the postwar years. Therefore, a high
priority project on returning to civilian life was to endeavor to find the
most attractive of the larger chemical companies and make this a major
holding for the funds I was handling. I by no means spent 100 percent
of my time doing this, but in the first year after restarting my business
I did spend a rather considerable amount of time in talking to anyone I
could find who had real knowledge of this complex industry. Such peo-
ple as distributors who handled the lines of one or more large compa-
nies, professors in the chemical departments of the universities who had
intimate knowledge of chemical business people, and even some of
those in the major construction companies that had put up plants for
various of the chemical producers all proved extremely worthwhile
sources of background information. By combining these inputs with
analyses of the usual financial data, it only took about three months to
narrow the choices down to one of three companies. From there on, the
going was slower and the decisions more difficult. However, by the
spring of 1947 I decided that the Dow Chemical Company would be
my choice.

E PLURIBUS UNUM

There were many reasons for the choice of Dow Chemical from the
many promising chemical firms. I believe it might be worthwhile to
enumerate some of them because they are clear examples of the type of
things I seek in the relatively small numbcr of companics in which |
desire to place funds. As I began to know various people in the Dow
organization, I found that the growth that had already occurred was in
turn creating a very real sense of excitement at many levels of manage-
ment. The belief that even greater growth lay ahead permeated the
organization. One of my favorite questions in talking to any top busi-
ness executive for the first time is what he considers to be the most


254 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

important long-range problem facing his company. When I asked this
of the president of Dow, I was tremendously impressed with his answer: “It
is to resist the strong pressures to become a more military-like organization
as we grow very much larger, and to maintain the informal relationship
whereby people at quite different levels and in various departments con-
tinue to communicate with each other in a completely unstructured way
and, at the same time, not create administrative chaos.”

I found myself in complete agreement with certain other basic
company policies. Dow limited its involvement to those chemical prod-
uct lines where it either was or had a reasonable chance of becoming
the most efficient producer in the field as the result of greater volume,
better chemical engineering and deeper understanding of the product
or for some other reason. Dow was deeply aware of the need for cre-
ative research not just to be in front, but also to stay in front. There was
also a strong appreciation of the “people factor” at Dow. There was in
particular a sense of need to identify people of unusual ability early, to
indoctrinate them into policies and procedures unique to Dow, and to
make real efforts to see if seemingly bright people were not doing well
at one job, they be given a reasonable chance to try something else that
might be more suitable to their characteristics.

I found that although Dow’s founder, Dr. Herbert Dow, had died
some seventeen years before, his beliefs were held in such respect that
one or another of his sayings was frequently quoted to me. While his
comments were directed primarily at matters within Dow, I decided
that at least two of them were equally appropriate to my own business,
in that they could be applied at least as well as to optimizing the selec-
tion of investments as to matters internal to the Dow Chemical Com-
pany. One of these was “Never promote someone who hasn’t made
some bad mistakes, because if you do, you are promoting someone who
has never done anything.” The failure to understand this element by so
many in the investment community has time and again created unusu-
al investment opportunities in the stock market.

The truly worthwhile accomplishment in the business world near-
ly always requires a considerable degree of pioneering, in which inge-
nuity has to be seasoned with practicality. This is particularly true when
the gains are sought through leading edge technological research. No
matter how able the people are and no matter how good may be most
of their ideas, there are times when such efforts are bound to fail, and
fail dismally. When this happens and the current year’s earnings drop


The Philosophy Matures 255

sharply below previous estimates as the costs of the failure are added up,
time and again the investment community’s immediate consensus is to
downgrade the quality of the management. As a result, the immediate
year’s lower earnings produce a lower than the historic price earnings
ratio to magnify the effect of reduced earnings. The shares often reach
truly bargain prices. Yet if this is the same management that in other
years has been so successful, the chances are the same ratio of average
success to average failure will continue on in the future. For this reason,
the shares of companies run by abnormally capable people can be
tremendous bargains at the time one particular bad mistake comes to
light. In contrast, the company that doesn’t pioneer, doesn’t take
chances, and merely goes along with the crowd is liable to prove a rather
mediocre investment in this highly competitive age.

The other of Dr. Dow’s comments which I have tried to apply to
the process of investment selection is “If you can’t do a thing better than
others are doing it, don’t do it at all’ In this day of heavy-handed gov-
ernment intervention in so many types of business activitics, of high
taxes and labor unions, and of rapid shifts in public taste from one prod-
uct to another, it seems to me that the risk of common stock ownership
is seldom warranted unless it is confined to companies with enough
competitive spirit constantly to be trying and frequently succeeding in
doing things in a manner superior to industry in general. In no other
way are profit margins usually broad enough to meet the demands of
growth. This is, of course, particularly true during periods when infla-
tion is having a significant effect in eating away at reported profits.

HISTORY VERSUS OPPORTUNITY

There were some remarkable parallels between the period when I was
starting my business at the depths of the Great Depression and during
the years 1947 through the very early 1950's, when I was restarting it
after a military service interlude of three and a half years. Both periods
were times when it was unusually hard to obtain immediate results for
clients in the face of overwhelming general pessimism. Both were times
that. were to prove spectacularly rewarding for those who had the
patience. In the earlier period, stocks were driven to perhaps the lowest
level in relation to real value seen in the Twentieth Century, not just
because of the economic havoc wrought by the Great Depression, but


256 DEVELOPING AN {INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

also because prices were discounting the worry of many investors as to
whether the American system of private enterprise would itself survive.
It survived, and in the ensuing years the rewards of those able and willing
to invest in the right stocks were fabulous.

Just a few years after World War II, another fear kept stocks at levels
almost as low in relation to intrinsic value as those seen at the depths of
the Great Depression. [his time, business was good and corporate earn-
ings were steadily rising. Nevertheless, almost the entire investment
community were mesmerized by a simple comparison. A relatively few
years after the Civil War, a period of immediate prosperity was followed
by the Panic of 1873, and almost six years of deep depression. A some-
what similar period of prosperity after World War I was followed by the
Crash of 1929 and the even deeper depression of about the same length.
In World War II, the costs of war had run on a per diem basis about ten
times that of World War I. “Therefore,” reasoned the dominant invest-
ment view of this period, “current excellent earnings don’t mean any-
thing.” They will be followed by a horrendous crash and a period of
extreme adversity when all would suffer.

Year after year went by, and the per-share earnings of more corpo-
rations rose. Along about 1949, this period became known as the era in
which “American business is worth more dead than alive,” because as
soon as word spread that a publicly owned company was about to go
out of business, its shares would rise dramatically. The liquidating value
of many a company was so much more than its current market valua-
tion. Year followed year, and slowly it began dawning on the investment
public that perhaps stocks were being held back because of a myth. The
expected business decline never did arrive and, excepting for two rela-
tively minor recessions in the 1950's, the stage was being set for the great
rewards to long-term investors that were to follow.

As I write these words in the closing weeks before the decade of the
80’s is about to start, it amazes me that more attention has not been paid
to restudying the few years of stock market history that started in the
second half of 1946 to see whether true parallels may actually exist
between that period and the present. Now, for the third time in my life-
time, many stocks are again at prices which, by historic standards, are
spectacularly low. In relation to reported book value, they may not be
quite as cheap as they were in the post-World War II period. However, if
that reported book value is adjusted for replacement value in real doilars,
they may perhaps be cheaper than in either of the two prior, bargain


The Philosophy Matures 257

