
T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[85]

with below-average returns on capital, either. (Businesses
like Just Broccoli are unlikely to earn a high return on
capital for even one year!)
So by eliminating companies that earn ordinary or poor
returns on capital, the magic formula starts with a group of companies that have a high return on capital.
Sure, some of the companies chosen by the magic formula won’t be able to maintain their high return on capital.
As we just learned, businesses with high returns on capital
tend to attract competition. Also, even mediocre businesses can have a good year or two and temporarily achieve
a high return on capital.
But, on average, the high-return-on-capital companies
chosen by the magic formula are more likely to have the
opportunity to reinvest a portion of their profits at high
rates of return. They are more likely to have the ability to
achieve high rates of earnings growth. They are also more
likely to have some special competitive advantage that will
allow them to continue to earn an above-average return on
capital. In other words, on average, the magic formula is finding us good companies!
And what does the magic formula do with this group
of good companies . . . ?
It tries to buy them at bargain prices!

[86]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

The formula chooses only good companies that also
have a high earnings yield. A high earnings yield means
that the formula will buy only those companies that earn a
lot compared to the price we are paying.
Hmmm . . . buying above-average companies at below
average prices, it sounds like it should work!
But how do your bones feel about that?

Quick Summary

1. Most people and businesses can’t find investments
that will earn very high rates of return. A company
that can earn a high return on capital is therefore
very special.
2. Companies that earn a high return on capital may
also have the opportunity to invest some or all of
their profits at a high rate of return. This opportunity is very valuable. It can contribute to a high rate
of earnings growth.
3. Companies that achieve a high return on capital are
likely to have a special advantage of some kind.
That special advantage keeps competitors from
destroying the ability to earn above-average profits.
4. By eliminating companies that earn ordinary or
poor returns on capital, the magic formula starts

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[87]

with a group of companies that have a high return
on capital. It then tries to buy these above-average
companies at below-average prices.
5. Since the magic formula makes overwhelming
sense, we should be able to stick with it during
good times and bad.
And finally,
6. If you must vomit under the 3em-spaces, don’t forget to run!

Chapter Ten

I LOVE SAILING.
I’m not very good at sailing.
I know this, not just from the fact that my wife and
kids are scared to go with me, but from hard experience. Once, through a slight miscalculation of wind and
water speed, I was 20 feet away from being slammed by
a barge at least three football fields long. I remember
this quite well, because I had my wife as a passenger
(who hates boats anyway) while I was busy pulling the
starter cord on my little five-horsepower outboard
engine (darn thing never works when you really need it)
as the giant barge blasted its horn for me to get out of
the way.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[89]

Usually sailboats have the right of way over motorboats, but since 9-billion-pound barges don’t steer all that
quickly, the right-of-way thing gets switched around (good
to keep in mind if it ever comes up). So there I was,
repeatedly pulling the worthless starter cord while trying
to act like I had everything under control (just so my
wife’s last words wouldn’t be “I hate this stupid boat!”),
when a final puff of wind helped us sail out of danger.
I’m recounting this story not because I enjoy sailing
alone. I actually like having company (preferably brave or
blind company). I’m telling you this because even though
I’m clearly not a good sailor, I still love sailing. And that’s
the same way many people feel about investing in the stock
market. They may not be particularly good at it, or they may
not know whether they are any good at it, but there’s something about the process or the experience that they enjoy.
For some of these people, investing by using a magic
formula may take away some of that fun. I understand
this. There are also people who are good or would be
good at picking individual stocks—without using a magic
formula. And that’s fine, too. The next chapter should
give both groups an idea of what they’ll need to know if
they want to be successful at picking stocks on their own.
It should also show them how the principles behind the
magic formula can still be used to guide individual investment decisions. But before even thinking about whether

[90]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

to go forward investing with or without the magic formula, there are still a few more things you should know.
First, the magic formula has a better track record
than I’ve been letting on. I didn’t reveal this good news
earlier for a reason. A good track record is not why you
should want to follow the magic formula. A good track
record is not why you will have good results in the future.
A good track record is not why you will keep following the
magic formula even when results turn against you. The
truth is that a good track record only helps once you
understand why the track record is so good. Now that you
do—simply put, the magic formula makes perfect sense—I can
trust you not to get carried away with a little more good
news.
As you recall, the magic formula was tested over a
recent 17-year period. A portfolio of approximately 30
stocks selected by the magic formula was held throughout
that time, with each individual stock selection held for a
period of one year. Performance was then measured over
193 separate one-year periods.* The stock portfolios
*Performance was measured from January 1988 to January 1989, then February 1988 to February 1989, then March 1988 to March 1989, and so on,
for 193 one-year periods ending December 31, 2004. This is commonly
referred to as 193 rolling one-year periods. Measuring three-year rolling
periods would mean measuring performance from January 1988 to January
1991, February 1988 to February 1991, and so on.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[91]

chosen by the magic formula usually beat the market averages, but there were one-, two-, and even three-year-long
periods when this was not the case. This created the risk
that investors might give up on the formula before it had
a chance to work its magic.
As we discussed, over one-year periods, the magic
formula stock portfolios underperformed the market averages in one out of every four years tested. Following the
formula for any two-year period in a row (starting with any
month during the 17 years), the magic formula underperformed the market averages in one out of every six periods tested. Remember, while that may not sound all that
bad, underperforming for two years in a row is actually
pretty hard to take! But here comes the good news. Following the formula for any three-year period in a row, the
magic formula beat the market averages 95 percent of the
time (160 out of 169 three-year periods tested)!*
But that’s not all! Over three-year periods, if you followed the magic formula, you would never have lost
money. That’s right. Sticking with the magic formula for
any three-year period during those 17 years, you would
have made money 100 percent of the time (169 out of 169
*There are fewer three-year periods tested than one-year periods because
the last three-year period that could be tested started in January 2002 and
ended December 31, 2004. The last one-year period started in January
2004.

[92]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

three-year periods).* Of the 169 separate three-year periods tested, the worst return for the magic formula was a
gain of 11 percent. The worst return over a three-year
period for the market averages was a loss of 46 percent.
That’s a pretty big difference!
But that’s still not all. All those numbers you just read
about were based on the results achieved by choosing
from only the largest 1,000 stocks (those with a market
value over $1 billion). The results from choosing from the
largest 3,500 stocks (market values over $50 million), a
group of stocks individual investors can generally buy,
were even better. Every three-year period tested (169 of
169) was positive for the magic formula portfolios, and
every three-year period beat the market averages (169 out
of 169). That’s right. The magic formula beat the market
averages in every single period! Hey, maybe there is something to this magic formula, after all!†
But can we really expect such great results without
taking much risk? Well, the answer often depends on how
you choose to look at risk.‡ Although over the last 50
*In other words, during our 17-year test period, the magic formula portfolios were still profitable even when they didn’t beat the market.
†
With this group of 3,500 companies, the worst three-year return for the
magic formula portfolios was a gain of 35 percent. For the market averages,
the worst three-year return was a loss of 45 percent!
‡
Though, in this case, the magic formula looks pretty darn good no matter
how we choose to measure risk.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[93]

years professors in the financial field have come up with
interesting ways to measure or compare the risks of different investment strategies, most of these involve measuring risk in a way that should have no meaning to you.
This is true especially if you choose to invest with a truly
long-term time horizon. When thinking about risk, rather
than making things unnecessarily complicated, there are
really two main things you should want to know about an
investment strategy:
1. What is the risk of losing money following that strategy
over the long term?
2. What is the risk that your chosen strategy will perform
worse than alternative strategies over the long term?
So how does the magic formula stack up under this
definition of risk? Since it is fairly easy to design an investment strategy to equal the return of the market averages*
(and yet, as we’ll discuss later, most professional investors
do even worse than the market averages), we can, at the
very least, make a reasonable comparison of these two
simple strategies. So let’s see.
During our test period and using even a relatively
short three-year time frame, the magic formula strategy
*Such as an investment in an index fund or an exchange-traded fund (ETF).

[94]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

did pretty darn well. The returns from the magic formula
strategy were far superior to the returns of the market
averages. The magic formula strategy never lost money.*
The magic formula strategy beat the market averages over
almost every single three-year period tested. In short, the
magic formula strategy achieved better results with less risk
than the market averages.
Though sticking with the magic formula strategy for
even three years paid off incredibly well during our test
period, this may not always be the case. Even superior
investment strategies may take a long time to show their
stuff. If an investment strategy truly makes sense, the
longer the time horizon you maintain, the better your
chances for ultimate success. Time horizons of 5, 10, or
even 20 years are ideal.
Though not easy to do, even maintaining a three- to
five-year horizon for your stock market investments should
give you a large advantage over most investors. It is also
the minimum time frame for any meaningful comparison of
the risks and results of alternative investment strategies.
We now have a better understanding of just how powerful and low risk the magic formula truly is, but we still
*The market averages lost money in 12 percent of the three-year periods
tested. Of course, despite the 100 percent success rate of the magic formula
during the test period, it is almost certain that the magic formula strategy will
have negative performance periods in the future.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[95]

have one problem left to solve before we can move on to
the next chapter. It has to do with our old friend Mr. Market, and maintaining a proper time horizon plays a key
role here, too.
As you may recall from the first day of business
school in Chapter 4, it is Mr. Market’s constantly changing emotional state that creates the bargain opportunities
that the magic formula is able to put to its advantage. But
these same emotions create a problem. If Mr. Market is
so unstable, how can we be sure that he will eventually pay
a fair price for our bargain purchases? If we don’t eventually get a fair price from Mr. Market, a bargain could
remain a bargain forever (or worse, become even more of
a bargain!).
So here’s the other thing you need to know about Mr.
Market:
• Over the short term, Mr. Market acts like a wildly

emotional guy who can buy or sell stocks at depressed
or inflated prices.
• Over the long run, it’s a completely different story:
Mr. Market gets it right.
Yep. Over the long term, crazy Mr. Market is actually
a very rational fellow. It may take a few weeks or a few
months, and not infrequently a few years, but eventually

[96]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

Mr. Market will pay a fair price for our shares. I actually
give a guarantee to my MBA students at the beginning of
each semester. I guarantee them that if they do a good job
valuing a company, Mr. Market will eventually agree with
them. I tell them that, though it can occasionally take
longer, if their analysis is correct, two to three years is
usually all the time they’ll have to wait for Mr. Market to
reward their bargain purchases with a fair price.
How can this be? Isn’t Mr. Market an emotional basket case? Well, although it’s true that Mr. Market can
often be ruled by emotion over the short term, over time
facts and reality take over. If the price of a stock has been
beaten down unfairly in the short term by an overly emotional Mr. Market (this could happen, for instance, when
a company announces some bad news or is expected to
receive some bad news in the near future), a few things
can take place.
First, there are a lot of smart people out there. If the
price offered by Mr. Market is truly a bargain, some of
these smart people will eventually recognize the bargain
opportunity, buy stock, and push the price closer to fair
value. This doesn’t have to happen right away. Sometimes
uncertainty about the prospects for a particular company
over the near term will keep potential buyers away. Sometimes the influence of emotions can last for years. But
here’s the thing. Eventually, the problem or the reason for

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[97]

the emotional reaction is resolved. It could be a positive
resolution or a negative one. It doesn’t really matter. If
there is uncertainty about a company’s earnings over the
next two or three years, by waiting long enough we eventually find out the answer (even if this takes the full two or
three years!). Once the reality of the situation is known,
smart investors will buy stock if the bargain opportunity
still exists.
Second, even if these so-called “smart” people don’t
recognize the bargain opportunity and buy shares, there
are other ways that stock prices can move toward fair
value. Often companies buy back their own shares. If a
company believes its shares are undervalued, the management of the company can decide that it is a good investment to use its own cash and repurchase some of the
company’s shares.* So this action of companies buying
back their own shares is another activity that causes prices
to rise and may help eliminate some bargain opportunities.
If that doesn’t work, there are still other ways that
share prices tend to move toward fair value. Remember, a
share of stock represents an ownership interest in an
actual company. Anyone who buys all of the shares
*This would reduce the amount of cash the company had, but it would also
reduce the number of shares outstanding of the company. If ownership of
the company is distributed among fewer shares, each remaining shareholder
would own a larger percentage interest in the company.

[98]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

outstanding would then own the entire company. Often, if
a bargain opportunity persists for too long, another company or a large investment firm may decide to make a bid
for all of the shares outstanding and purchase the entire
company. Sometimes even the possibility that a buyer for
the whole company may emerge can cause share prices to
rise toward fair value.
In short, over time the interaction of all of these
things—smart investors searching for bargain opportunities, companies buying back their own shares, and the
takeover or possibility of a takeover of an entire company—work together to move share prices toward fair
value. Sometimes this process works quickly, and sometimes it can take several years.
Although over the short term, Mr. Market may set stock
prices based on emotion, over the long term, it is the value of the
company that becomes most important to Mr. Market.
This means that if you buy shares at what you believe to be
a bargain price and you are right, Mr. Market will eventually
agree and offer to buy those shares at a fair price. In other
words, bargain purchases will be rewarded. Though the process
doesn’t always work quickly, two to three years is usually enough
time for Mr. Market to get things right.
So now that we have all that good news out of the way,
let’s see if we can sail through the next chapter without
hitting anything.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[99]

Quick Summary

1. The magic formula works. It works even better
than I let on before.
2. The magic formula achieved its far superior results
with far less risk than the market averages.
3. Although over the short term Mr. Market may
price stocks based on emotion, over the long term
Mr. Market prices stocks based on their value.
4. If you couldn’t vomit under the 3em-spaces, try
sailing with me.

Chapter Eleven

SO THE MAGIC FORMULA ISN’T YOUR THING. The high returns,
the low risk, the simplicity, the logic—these things mean
nothing to you. You want—in fact, you need—to pick stocks
all by yourself! No one, and especially no silly formula, is
going to stand in your way. You’re out there on the ledge,
and there’s no use talking you down! Don’t worry. I get it,
and that’s just fine. But to borrow from something I once
wrote, remember this:
Choosing individual stocks without any idea of what you’re
looking for is like running through a dynamite factory with a
burning match. You may live, but you’re still an idiot.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[101]

So how can you pick stocks intelligently? What should
you be looking for? Even if you’ve decided not to follow
the magic formula, how can you still use it to keep from
blowing yourself up? Well, glad you asked. Let’s see.
As we already know, the magic formula picks stocks that
have both a high earnings yield and a high return on capital.
For earnings yield, the formula looks for companies that
earn a lot compared to the price we have to pay. For return
on capital, the formula looks for companies that earn a lot
compared to how much the company has to pay to buy the
assets that created those earnings. To calculate these ratios,
the magic formula doesn’t look at future earnings. That’s
too hard. The magic formula uses last year’s earnings.
The funny thing is, that seems like the wrong thing to
do. The value of a company comes from how much money
it will earn for us in the future, not from what happened
in the past. If a company earned $2 per share last year,
but will earn only $1 per share this year and even less in
the future, using last year’s earnings to calculate earnings
yield and return on capital will be very misleading. But
that’s precisely what the magic formula does!
In fact, often the near-term prospects for the companies selected by the magic formula don’t look so good. In
many cases, the outlook for the next year or two is downright ugly. But that’s one reason the magic formula can

[102]

J O E L G R E E N B LAT T

find companies whose prices seem like bargains. The
magic formula uses last year’s earnings. If, instead, estimates for this year’s or next year’s earnings were used,
many of the companies selected by the magic formula
might not look like such bargains at all!
So what should we be doing? Ideally, better than blindly
plugging in last year’s earnings to the formula, we should be
plugging in estimates for earnings in a normal year.* Of
course, last year’s earnings could be representative of a normal year, but last year may not have been typical for a number of reasons. Earnings could have been higher than
normal due to extraordinarily favorable conditions that may
not be repeated in most years. Alternatively, there may have
been a temporary problem with the company’s operations,
and earnings may have been lower than in a normal year.
Plugging in estimates for next year’s earnings to our formula may suffer from the same problem. Next year may not
be typical. So one solution might be to look ahead even further to our estimates of what earnings will be three or four
years from now in a normal or average environment. Shortterm issues that may have affected last year’s earnings or
that may affect earnings over the next year or two could
then largely be eliminated from our thinking.
*A normal year is one in which nothing extraordinary or unusual is happening within the company, its industry, or the overall economy.

T H E L I T T L E B O O K T H AT B E ATS T H E M A R K E T

[103]

In this ideal world, we would then be able to take our
estimates of normal earnings and calculate earnings yield
and return on capital. Using the principles of the magic
formula, we could look for companies that had both a
high earnings yield and a high return on capital based on
normal earnings. Of course, we would also need to assess
how confident we were in our estimates and make a judgment on whether those earnings were likely to grow in the
future.* We could then compare the earnings yield based
on normal earnings to a risk-free 6 percent government
bond and to our other investment opportunities.
Does that sound hard to do? Well, it is. Yet it’s not
impossible. There are people who can do this type of
analysis. In fact, this is precisely the way my partners and
I use the principles behind the magic formula to make our
own investment decisions. But if you can’t do this type of
analysis (and here comes the main point of this chapter):
You have no business investing in
individual stocks on your own!
That’s right. Forget about it!
But wait a second. The magic formula does pretty
well, and it just uses last year’s earnings. It doesn’t make
*As well as whether there was an honest management team that would reinvest those profits wisely.
