
 Though Furth couldn’t have known it, Buffett had fancied toll-booths ever since, as a boy, he had gazed at the traffic cruising past his friend Bob Russell’s house. And Blue Chip actually did own 24 percent of the stock of Detroit International Bridge Co., the owner of the Ambassador Bridge between Detroit and Windsor, across Lake Erie from Buffalo. 30 It was a real toll bridge—the only one owned by stockholders in the United States—and Buffett controlled a quarter of it. Furth had missed it. Still, he had drawn blood. 
 Blue Chip’s lawyers thought Buffett had made an outstanding, and credible, witness. But had he been too credible? Had he revealed too much of his keenness for dominant businesses? The vivid toll-bridge metaphor hung over the court. 
 On November 9—four days before the inaugural Sunday—Judge Brieant ordered an injunction against the Evening News , pending a trial. Though technically he did not grant all of what the morning paper sought, his lengthy opinion—delivered with what seemed remarkable speed—was devastating. 
 Judge Brieant ruled that the Courier-Express would likely be able to prove at a trial that its rival was adopting unfair tactics, that it was doing so with the intent to monopolize, and that if not stopped the Courier-Express would fail: 

 There are only two newspapers now. If the plan works as I find it is intended to work, there will be but one left. 31 

 Buffett appears in the judge’s rather awestruck opinion as an impressive but archetypal financier—supremely shrewd but darkly enhanced. Page for page, Buffett can barely take a breath without its reeking of motive. Judge Brieant, unaware that Buffett made a habit of buying businesses on the numbers, views even his failure to visit the newspaper plant or to talk to the employees as “evidence of specific intent to monopolize.” Even the judge’s subtitle, Mr. Buffett Comes to Buffalo , has a loaded ring. The judge elegantly acknowledges, “Intent exists only in the unfathomable human mind.” But he has no problem discerning intent from Buffett’s footprints: 

 Mr. Buffett made no secret of his economic motivations and his acute awareness of the value which would be attached to ownership of the Evening News were it to become a monopoly. But for the awareness of this likelihood, it seems the acquisition of the Evening News for this price, all in cash, and in this manner, makes no economic sensed. 32 

 The injunction permitted the Sunday paper to go ahead, but severely restricted its ability to promote, market, and circulate the edition to readers and advertisers. While these half measures hurt, Judge Brieant’s strongly worded opinion did the real damage, costing the Evening News dearly in public support, and at a crucial time. The verdict was splashed all over the Courier-Express , along with an approving photograph of the judge and a flurry of favorable stories and testimonials. The president of the local AFL-CIO Council, representing 122,000 Buffalonians, was quoted on the front page as saying: “Don’t buy that Sunday newspaper.” Just to make sure that no one forgot whom it was fighting, the Courier-Express slapped a new nameplate on the front page: “Buffalo Family Owned and Operated.” 
 On the eve of the new edition, Buffett showed up at the Evening News for a bash in the newsroom, accompanied by a blue-jeaned Susie. He pressed a button, and the presses rolled. But sales had been measurably slowed by the bad publicity. Readers and advertisers, fearing the loss of jobs if the Courier-Express went under, were rallying to the weaker paper. Most painfully, employees at the Evening News could not respond to the bad press, as they were legally enjoined from making defamatory remarks about the Courier-Express . By December 18—the fifth Sunday of publication—the Evening News had only 147 inches of ads, as compared to 579 for the Courier-Express , despite having 40 percent more news space. 33 In short, Buffett’s newspaper had suffered a crushing setback. To put it in perspective, Berkshire Hathaway’s share price, which had rebounded in 1977, was trading at 132 a share, so Buffett’s net worth was in the neighborhood of $70 million. About a fifth of his personal fortune was sunk into the Evening News . 
 Both papers plunged into an all-out, old-fashioned newspaper war, which in Buffett’s opinion only one of them was likely to survive. 34 The Courier-Express , sensing that the injunction had bought it time, modernized in a hurry. Typesetting was automated, equipment upgraded. Douglas Turner, the executive editor, said, “They gave me things I’d been asking for for years: split pages, outlook sections, bigger comics, a bigger magazine. I built up the payroll by 25 percent.” 
 The news staffs combed the city like rival fifth columns. Robert McCarthy, a reporter for the Evening News , said, “You didn’t dare show your face if the Courier beat you on a story. You stayed all night to beat them.” One of the few things that Buffett could control was the size of the news hole, and he went at it full blast. “We made a point of having more news than the other paper,” Buffett recalled. “If they had eight pages of sports, we were going to have more. All the traditional ratios—I told ’em to hell with it.” 35 
 In the newsroom, people had a sense that this owner would be different. As one veteran put it, “Warren seemed to take a real interest.” He occasionally sent a note commending a story, and he showed up at a staff picnic wearing, of all things, a T-shirt. The reporters, a cynical bunch, loved his skepticism. Rather than pontificate on the redeeming value of capitalism, he tipped the paper to a story on a topic that concerned him much more—namely, how greedy and perhaps unethical he considered his fellow tycoons to be. 
 The story concerned a secret encampment in Santa Rosa, California, known as Bohemian Grove. Each summer, conservaüve business types such as Merv Griffin, Gerald Ford, and Ray Kroc flew out in corporate jets to meet in the redwoods and bewail the fate of Western civilization. According to Lee Coppola, the Evening News ’s crack investigative reporter, “The angle Buffett wanted was to examine whether or not the businessmen were taking a tax deduction for the jets. It was during the gas crisis. He thought it was wrong.” Coppola, who wrote a page-one blowout, turned down a job offer partly because of his high hopes for how the paper would be run under Buffett. 
 But in the financially crucial battle for Sunday supremacy, the paper continued to hurt. In 1978, the Courier-Express trounced the Evening News by 100,000 papers every Sunday. As Buffalo fell into a recession, the sight of laid-off factory workers enhanced people’s fears that the Courier-Express would fold. “The community had bought their line,” the editor Murray Light recalled. “I’d call Warren on Wednesday or Thursday to tell him how many ads we had for Sunday. And there were only a handful.” 
 Buffett would frequently call Light—his eyes and ears in Buffalo—at Light’s home, and pick his brain over how to jump-start the Sunday paper. An hour was a short conversation. “He had enormous interest in every facet of the Sunday product,” Light said. Buffett came to town and met the big advertisers and retailers. He approved promotional series, contests—“We did everything,” Buffett recalled. 

 We had these special circulation teams. All week they would tell me, “We got 828 starts this week, 750 starts this week.” Then, on Friday night, I would get the draw for Sunday and we’d be down to 412 or something. 36 

 Buffett’s instinct in such a jam was to turn to a Man Friday, a Harry Bottle or a Ken Chace. The guy he wanted was in Omaha—Stan Lipsey, his buddy and the publisher of the Omaha Sun . Lipsey, though, had no desire to go to Buffalo. 
 “What about just going up there once a month doing whatever you think needs done?” Buffett asked. 
 Lipsey thought to himself, “What kind of a job description is that?” Buffett, reading his mind, added, “The place will just run better if you’re there.” 
 Lipsey went to Buffalo. He spent a week there each month, in theory as an assistant to the publisher, who was a holdover from the previous owner. 
 But the Evening News remained badly hampered by the injunction. Judge Brieant required the paper to show a signed customer order authorizing each and every Sunday delivery. And every word that was uttered by an Evening News salesman, executive, or other employee was picked over by opposition lawyers in the hope of finding a violation of the court order. One time, the Evening News was found in contempt—a serious matter. Mason, a lawyer for the other side, said, “Things didn’t go well for the News . We had the ability to police their activities. We had discovery, we had access to their records.” Essentially, the paper was operating at the mercy of a federal judge. 
 In 1978, the Evening News lost $2.9 million pretax—easily Buffett’s biggest hit. Lipsey, who would regularly phone him from Buffalo, was amazed at how upbeat Buffett remained. “He’s put all his money in. He’s got a Sunday section going to zip. He’s got an antitrust action. He’d be encouraging. He’d say thanks for calling.” 
 Munger was another story. After the contempt citation, Munger called Murray Light in a state of high agitation, with the supposedly big news that Buffett was planning to give a speech someplace. “Talk to Warren,” Munger said excitedly. “You have more influence than I do. Get him to be more careful with some of the things he’s saying.” Munger lived in mortal fear of another toll-bridge comment. Buffett shrugged it off. 
 But Munger saw that the paper was no longer in control of its destiny. In Blue Chip’s annual letter, he even allowed the possibility that the paper might not make it. 

 Litigation is notoriously time-consuming, inefficient, costly and unpredictable. The ultimate security of the Buffalo Evening News remains in doubt, as it will for a very extended period. 37 

 In April 1979, two years after Blue Chip’s purchase, the U.S. Court of Appeals in New York reversed the injunction and the contempt citation and strongly rebuked Judge Brieant. 

 Taking first the issue of intent, we find simply no evidence that Mr. Buffett acquired the News with the idea of putting the Courier out of business as distinguished from providing vigorous competition, including the invasion of what had been the Courier’s exclusive Sunday market.… All that the record supports is a finding that Mr. Buffett intended to do as well as he could with the News and was not lying awake thinking what the effect of its competition on the Courier would be. This is what the antitrust laws aim to promote, not to discourage. 38 

 Legally, Buffett was vindicated. But in practical terms, the suit had served its purpose. Though the Evening News remained by far the dominant paper during the week, the Courier-Express ’s lead on Sunday was holding fast at 100,000 papers. And two months after the appellate reversal, the morning paper was sold to the Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co., owned by the Cowles family of Minneapolis. Now the Evening News faced a protracted war against another, also deep-pocketed out-of-town owner. In 1979, the Evening News lost a whopping $4.6 million. For the first time, Buffett and Munger were losing serious money. Munger recalled, “I went through the calculations personally—I figured out exactly how much my share would cost me and exactly how much the Munger family could afford to lose.” 
 In 1980, Lipsey moved to Buffalo full-time. † Buffett hadn’t asked him to do it, but Lipsey knew that Buffett, in his none too casual way, wanted him there—badly. And Lipsey had gotten hooked on the battle with the Courier-Express . 
 When Lipsey took charge of the Evening News , the paper faced a new crisis with labor. Prior to Buffett’s purchase, the paper’s thirteen unions had played the company off against itself, resulting in what Munger termed a “leapfrogging of benefits.” 39 Determined to break this pattern, Buffett and Munger sent a message, presumably intended for the unions, in the Blue Chip report that appeared early in 1980: 

 If any extended strike shuts down the Buffalo Evening News, it will probably be forced to cease operations and liquidate. 40 

 The teamsters decided to test them. Late in 1980, the delivery truck drivers demanded new manning requirements and pay for work even if not performed, 41 hot-button issues that were really about control. Buffett turned them down. At the eleventh hour, a Monday evening in December, Ray Hill, who represented the Newspaper Guild, the largest union at the paper, was called from a church meeting to come down to the paper and try to help avert a strike. Hill knew Buffett, and sensed that he wasn’t bluffing. He advised the teamsters not to play poker with him. The teamsters’ representative was Martin Brogan, a former bar bouncer and a ringleader in the only previous strike in the paper’s history. Brogan figured that Buffett wouldn’t risk a strike in the midst of the battle with the Courier-Express . Someone called a mediator, who showed up drunk. The talks lasted all night. Finally, the mediator turned to Hill and said, “Look, Ray, they want to strike.” At 6:00 A.M. Tuesday, the teamsters walked. 
 The Evening News started to put out a paper, with the help of other unions, who crossed the picket line. Then the pickets sacked a delivery truck, and the pressmen stopped work and pulled the page plates. 42 The paper shut down, and subscription calls lit up the Courier-Express . The nightmare in Buffalo had hit bottom. 
 Buffett, according to a close confidant, was sweating. He knew that if the paper shut down for long, it would suffer a ruinous loss of market share. 43 He had to reopen it soon or never. On the other hand, if he gave in, twelve other unions would demand the same deal. 
 Early Tuesday, he announced that if the paper didn’t publish he couldn’t meet a payroll, and ordered the entire staff to leave. What’s more, he said, if the drivers didn’t return for the all-important Sunday edition, he would close the paper for good. Richard Feather, the Evening News ’s chief bargainer, hung up the phone feeling certain that Buffett meant it. 
 Brogan, who was under pressure from the other unions, was sweating, too. Hill told him, “Marty, whatever you’re fighting for, you’re taking everyone over the side.” Finally, Brogan blinked. The teamsters accepted a face-saving concession, and the Evening News was back on the streets by Thursday afternoon. 
 Hill said, “Warren, when this is over, I want our cooperation recognized.” 
 “Ray, an empty sack doesn’t stand very tall.” 
 Hill took this to mean that if the paper recovered from the war with the Courier-Express , his members would be rewarded. But the balance of power had shifted in Buffett’s favor. As Hill said, “Things are never the same after a strike.” 
 Both papers were hurting badly from the recession, which had hit Buffalo hard. And the war of Sundays dragged on. The Evening News made some gains, but it did not close the gap. After five years, it trailed in circulation, 195,000 to 265,000. 44 And it continued to lose money, though at a diminished rate. Since Buffett had bought the paper, pretax losses had amounted to $12 million. 45 Early in 1982, Munger concluded that they had dug a hole from which they would never recover. 

 We would now have about $70 million in value of other assets, earning over $10 million per year, in place of the Buffalo Evening News and its current red ink. No matter what happens in the future in Buffalo we are about 100% sure to have an economic place lower than we would have occupied if we had not made our purchase. 46 

 In the next few months, Sunday circulation crept over 200,000, though it remained far below the Courier-Express . Meanwhile, Buffalo was rife with rumors that one or the other paper would fold. Buffett vehemently denied that he would even consider it. 47 But the city could not support two papers. The question, again, was who would blink first. And then, in September, the Courier-Express did; it folded. 
 The morning paper had been losing $3 million a year, twice as much as the Evening News . Otto Silha, chairman of the Courier ’s parent Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co., said the decisive factor was that its flagship Minneapolis paper also was doing badly. In contrast, he knew that Blue Chip could be sustained indefinitely by the increasingly lucrative See’s Candy. 
 The day the Courier-Express died, the Evening News changed its name to the Buffalo News and started a morning edition. Within six months, Sunday circulation topped 360,000—far surpassing the peak Sunday readership of its rival. Ad rates, reflecting the surviving paper’s higher readership—and its monopoly—surged. The paper became a gold mine, or perhaps even a toll bridge. It was soon clear that Munger had been wrong; the paper would be not merely profitable, but immensely so. 
 The News earned $19 million, pretax, in its first year without competition. (Those profits belonged to Berkshire Hathaway, which fully absorbed Blue Chip Stamps in a merger.) By the late eighties, the News would earn more than $40 million a year—more than Buffett had invested in Berkshire and Blue Chip combined. His ascent up the investment food chain had a certain inexorable momentum: stamps provided the cash for See’s Candy; the profits from candy fueled the Buffalo Evening News , and the News could bankroll an even bigger prize still. 
 Buffett disabused the employees of any illusions over who would share in that prize. Soon after the Courier ’s demise, Buffett attended a meeting for the newspaper’s middle-level managers, in Buffalo’s Statler Hotel. “What about profit-sharing for people in the newsroom?” Buffett was asked. On its face, this seemed reasonable. The newsroom had certainly done its bit. 
 Buffett replied coldly, “There is nothing anybody on the third floor [the newsroom] can do that affects profits.” The staff was shocked, though Buffett was merely living up to his brutal-but-principled capitalist credo. The owners of the Buffalo Evening News had run very great risks. Employees had not come forward during the dark years to share in the losses. Nor, now, would they share in the gains. 
 Alvin Greene, a night editor who was present at the meeting, said, “I was just stunned . It sort of sent a message to everyone in the newsroom.” 
 Employees got a catch-up raise, but not the home run they had hoped for. As Greene said, “The big disappointment was, we won the battle. We got one fairly good raise and then nothing [out of the ordinary].” 
 In the years after the Courier-Express folded, the pay scale at the News slipped to thirtieth among Guild papers nationwide—down from seventh when Buffett had bought the paper. 48 Still, Ray Hill, the Guild unit chairman, judged that Buffett had delivered on what he promised. Had the roles been reversed, Hill said, he would not have behaved much differently. 
 As the sole survivor in Buffalo, the News faced a problem that had been unthinkable during its war with the Courier . As Buffett noted in an annual letter to Berkshire, a monopoly newspaper has no economic incentive to maintain its quality. 

 Owners, naturally, would like to believe that their wonderful profitability is achieved only because they unfailingly turn out a wonderful product. That comfortable theory wilts before an uncomfortable fact.… Good or bad [a dominant paper] will prosper. 49 

 Buffett pledged to keep it a good paper anyway, and in a statistical sense he kept his word. The News continued to publish the same number of news columns as advertising, giving it the highest news ratio of any comparable daily in the country. 50 
 Buffett also remained a close friend of Stan Lipsey’s. But he went to the newspaper less often, and reporters stopped hearing that he was reading their stories. Gradually, the staff came to feel a certain disappointment. Buffett was a decent owner, probably no tighter than others. But the reporters had hoped that Buffett would be more—a larger presence if not a more munificent one. And the wartime spirit of the paper was lost. 
 Lee Coppola, the investigative sleuth who had been so motivated by Buffett, left the paper, went into broadcasting, and eventually became an assistant U.S. prosecutor in Buffalo. He continued to exchange an occasional note with Buffett. His feelings—like those of others who had invested Buffett with expectations not of Buffett’s doing—were mixed. “The dream that I had was not fulfilled,” Coppola said. But, he added, “To this day, I respect the man.” 
 A decade after its war with the Courier-Express , the News reached three-fourths of the households in Buffalo—the highest such ratio of any metropolitan paper in the country. 51 But Buffalo was the poorer for having one newspaper instead of two, and total newspaper readership in the city was much less than when the Courier-Express had been alive. 52 
 Certainly, Buffett had every right, and also every reason, to start a Sunday paper. And given what has occurred in other cities, there was little chance that two papers could have survived even had Buffett not come to town. In effect, he had merely given the Invisible Hand a push. Still, a paper had been buried and jobs had been lost. And in some remove of “the unfathomable human mind,” Buffett must have suspected, even in court, that it would turn out that way. Consider his words to a colleague on the survival prospects of second newspapers: 

 In years past, hundreds of newspaper owners, putting up their own money, as well, I am sure, as most of the “experts”, felt that large cities would sustain more than one healthy newspaper. It just wasn’t so. 53 
