
Index futures
Index futures are based on the expected direction of the value of indexes like
the S&P 500 and the New York Stock Exchange Composite indexes. They can
be the riskiest types of futures. No underlying commodities, stocks, or bonds
ever change hands with these futures contracts. Any differences in these contracts must be settled with good old, cold hard cash. Leverage also is high on
these types of futures. For example, a Dow Jones Industrial Average contract
has a value that’s 25 times the value of the underlying DJIA Index.
Smaller index futures contracts, known collectively as e-minis, are targeted
at individual traders. These minicontracts are available for indexes such as
the S&P 500, the NASDAQ 100, the S&P mid-cap, and the Russell 2000. Their
respective individual values range from 20 times to 100 times those of the
underlying indexes.
The S&P 500 e-mini contract, for example, is 50 times the value of the S&P 500
index. In other words, if a trader takes a position in the S&P 500 e-mini contract, every time the underlying S&P 500 index moves one point, the value of
the S&P 500 e-mini contract changes by $50. Another way to think about this
is for every .25 point, the value of the S&P 500 e-mini contract changes by
50 cents. If you take a long position in the S&P 500 e-mini contract when the
underlying index is at 1,000, and the index moves to 1,010, you have a $500

Chapter 18: Doing It by Derivatives
profit. The trader who took the other side of this trade, the short position, is
in exactly the opposite position, losing $500.

Bond futures
Bond futures are based on the price of future delivery of a specific type of
bond in a specific denomination at a specific interest rate on a specified date.
Speculators basically are betting on whether the price of that bond goes up
or down. Changes in interest rates have a big impact on the values of bonds.
In general, when interest rates fall, bond prices go up, and when interest
rates rise, bond prices go down. Speculators in bond futures basically enter
positions based on whether interest rates will go up or down. For example, a
speculator who thinks interest rates will go up sells contracts for the future
delivery of bonds. If interest rates, indeed, go up as expected, the price for
the underlying bonds goes down, and speculators can do one of two things:
✓ Buy the lower-priced bonds, and, in turn, earn a profit by selling them
to the buyer to settle at the higher price named in the original futures
contract.
✓ Close the contract to realize a profit.

Stock futures
Stock futures are contracts in which you agree to either deliver or purchase
upon delivery 100 shares of a particular stock on or before a designated date
in the future (known as the expiration date). For example, a trader who enters
into a contract to buy 100 shares at $30 a share for a total of $3,000, and who
expects the price of that stock to go up, can lock in the lower price and then
buy the actual stock at that lower price on the settlement date or close the
contract and realize a profit. Traders who enter into this type of contract
generally must have about 20 percent of the cash value of 100 shares of the
underlying stock in their brokerage accounts, so a trader in the earlier example would have to have $300 in a brokerage account.

Foreign currency futures
Future currency contracts are contracts that involve the future delivery of
certain foreign currencies. We discuss these types of futures in Chapter 19.
Yes, futures contracts are riskier than options, because you actually have to
come up with the underlying commodity, bond, stock, or currency to satisfy
the contract, sell the future at a loss before the settlement date, or pay the
difference in cash to settle the contract. Futures are binding contracts that
require you to fulfill the obligations specified in the contracts. Options are less
risky because they’re not an obligation to perform. Rather, they instead give
the buyer of the option the right to exercise the option, but the buyer is not
obligated to do so.

291

292 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Options
Although futures have been available in the United States since the 1850s,
options did not become available until 1982, when they were part of a government pilot program. The big advantage that options have over futures is
that you buy the right to exercise the option contract, and yet you still can
decide to allow the option to expire without ever exercising that right. When
you let an option expire, you lose only the amount you paid for the option
and not the full amount that otherwise can be lost in trading the underlying
asset. Option sellers take the riskier stance, because they can lose the value
of whatever asset they promised to sell or buy if the option buyer decides to
exercise the option.
Options are financial instruments that give the buyer the right, but not the
obligation, to buy or sell a particular asset at a predetermined date in the
future at a specified price.

Options lingo
Trading in options has a language all its own, and you’ll need to understand it
before we get into the mechanics, so here are some key terms:
✓ Puts: A put option is a contract that gives the buyer the right to sell a
particular asset at a specified price at any time during the life of the
option.
✓ Calls: A call option is a contract that gives the buyer the right to buy
a particular asset at a specified price at any time during the life of the
option.
✓ Option grantor: The person who writes or sells any option is called the
option grantor. This person or financial entity must come up with the
underlying asset promised in the option, even if doing so means a loss,
whenever an option buyer decides to exercise an option. For example, if
an option grantor agrees to sell you 100 shares of ABC stock for $50 per
share on or before May 1, and the stock price rises to $60 on April 20,
then the grantor must sell you that stock for $50 and take the $10-pershare loss. You get to sell ABC at the current price and reap the benefits.
✓ Covered calls: If an option seller holds an equivalent position, or owns
the same number of shares of the underlying asset that is offered in the
call, then the contract is considered a covered call. Options traders selling covered calls are trying to take advantage of a neutral or declining
stock. If the option expires unexercised, the writer (seller) of the option
keeps the premium. If, on the other hand, the holder (buyer) of the
option exercises it, the stock must be delivered. However, because the
option writer already owns the stock, the risk is limited. The opposite

Chapter 18: Doing It by Derivatives
scenario is an uncovered call, which is when the writer sells a call for
a stock that he or she doesn’t own. The seller of an uncovered call is
taking virtually unlimited risk.
✓ Covered puts: When the seller of a put option also has sold short an
equivalent amount in the underlying security, then this option is considered a covered put. If the writer has neither established a short position
in the underlying security nor deposited a corresponding amount of
cash equal to the value of the put, then the put is called a naked put. The
seller of a naked put also is taking virtually unlimited risk.
✓ Option holder: The person who buys the option is called the option
holder. If the option buyer buys the right to sell an asset at some time
in the future, then he or she buys a put option. If the option buyer buys
the right to purchase an asset at some time in the future, then he or she
buys a call option. The most an option holder can lose is the amount
paid for the option contract.
✓ Underlying asset: An option contract is based on an underlying asset —
usually either a futures contract or specific number of shares of stock —
that can be bought or sold.
✓ Premium: The actual price paid for the option is called the premium,
which is what the option holder pays to the option grantor to gain the
right to either buy or sell the underlying asset. Premiums for options are
set by the open market. Option buyers must pay the premium plus whatever fees their brokers charge for such transactions.
✓ Expiration date: The expiration date is the last day that an option buyer
can exercise the rights specified in the contract. Options based on
futures contracts usually expire one month before the settlement date
of the underlying futures contract. After an option expires, the option
holder no longer has any rights and the option has no value. So option
buyers lose whatever premium they paid plus any commissions or transaction costs that had to be paid when the option was purchased. In that
case, the option is said to expire worthless.
✓ Exercise: Option buyers can exercise the rights they purchase with the
option any time before the expiration date, if, that is, the option they
purchased is an American-style option. European-style options, on the
other hand, can be exercised only on their expiration dates. Exercising
a call option means the option buyer buys the underlying asset at the
price set in the option regardless of the current market price for the
asset. Exercising a put option means the option buyer sells the underlying asset at the price set in the option. An option buyer can always
decide not to exercise the rights set forth in his or her option and simply
let it expire. The option holder also can sell the option contract at its
current market value.

293

294 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
✓ Strike price: The strike price is the price of the underlying asset at which
the option can be exercised.
✓ Offset: If option buyers or sellers want to realize their profits or limit
their losses, they can offset their option through a sale or purchase
that also is called liquidating an option or closing an option. When an
option is liquidated, no position is actually taken in the underlying asset.
Offsetting is usually done on the same exchange where the buyer first
bought or sold the option. If they can sell the option for more than they
bought it, then they will realize a profit. If they sell the option for less
than they paid, then they will take a loss.
✓ In-the-money: An option is said to be in-the-money when it is worthwhile
to exercise the option and buy or sell the underlying asset. A call option
is in-the-money when the market price for the underlying asset is above
the strike price set in the option contract. A put option is in-the-money
when the price for the underlying asset is lower than the strike price set
in the option contract.
✓ At-the-money: An option is deemed to be at-the-money when the strike
price for the option is the same as the market price for the underlying
asset.
✓ Out-of-the-money: An option is said to be out-of-the-money when it’s not
worthwhile to exercise the option. A call option is out-of-the-money
when the strike price is higher than the market price for the underlying
asset. A put option is out-of-the-money when the strike price is less than
the market price for the underlying asset.

Option pricing
The three factors affecting the price of an option premium are as follows:
✓ Date of expiration: As the option moves closer to its date of expiration,
the value of the option declines, and that’s why an option is considered
a wasting asset. The more time that you have until an option expires, the
greater possibility you have for the option to reach the point of being inthe-money. Longer options therefore have higher premiums.
✓ Strike price: For out-of-the-money options, when the current market
price moves more and more out-of-the-money and away from the strike
price, the premium price gets lower and lower. The premium for an
in-the-money option, on the other hand, rises in value if the underlying
asset moves further into the money in relationship to the strike price.
✓ Volatility: The more volatility that’s in the market for the underlying
asset, or stock, the greater the chance that the option will become
worthwhile to exercise. When the market for an asset is volatile, premiums for options on that asset are higher.
Option-pricing techniques are considered to be among the most mathematically complex of all applied areas of finance. One common example, the

Chapter 18: Doing It by Derivatives
Black-Scholes option-pricing model (named for its developers Fischer Black
and Myron Scholes), takes into consideration the stock’s price, the option’s
strike price and expiration date, the risk-free return, and the standard deviation of the stock’s return, which are all measures of volatility.
When you get a quote for an option, you may have to choose from numerous
strike prices and expiration dates that are available. When you’re thinking
about buying a call option, and its strike price is low and yet close to becoming
worthwhile to exercise, the premium price (the price you pay for the option)
will be much higher than for an option with a higher strike price. If you’re
thinking about buying a put option, then you’ll pay more of a premium for an
option with a high strike price than you will for one with a lower strike price.
Just to give you an idea of how the pricing of options is affected by strike
price and time, Table 18-1 is an options quote for an imaginary stock we call
ABC. Settle is the time of expiration for the option.

Table 18-1

ABC Stock Sample Option Quotation (In Dollars)

Strike Price

Calls/Settle

Puts/Settle

Apr

May

July

Apr

May

July

$50

4.50

4.60

5.40

0.25

0.50

1.50

$52

3.50

3.60

4.40

0.50

1.00

3.50

$54

2.50

2.60

3.40

0.75

2.00

5.50

$56

1.50

1.60

2.40

2.00

3.00

7.50

$58

0.50

0.60

1.40

4.00

5.00

9.50

You can see from the options quotes for ABC stock that a May call with a
strike price of $54 commands a premium of $2.60 per share. To buy an option
for 100 shares, the premium would be $260 plus whatever fees your exchange
or broker charges. Buying a call is much less of a cash outlay than if you
were to buy 100 shares of ABC stock at $54. That would cost you $5,400. The
premium of $260 is paid to the option seller, minus any fees charged by the
broker or exchange.
Fees include commission charges plus any costs involved in executing the
order on the trading floor of the exchange. Commissions vary greatly from
broker to broker, so be certain you understand all the possible fees before
initiating a trade. Some brokers charge commissions per trade, but others
charge on the basis of a round trip, including both the purchase and the sale
of the option. Some brokerage firms charge per-option transaction fees, while
others charge on the basis of a percentage of the option premium that’s usually subject to a minimum charge.

295

296 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
Commission charges can have a major impact on whether you’re able to earn
a profit or have to suffer a loss on an option. A high commission charge
reduces your potential for making a profit and can even drive what little profit
you make into a loss. So be careful. Know what charges you have to pay and
compare them with other brokers before you trade.
Options and futures are quoted with bid and ask prices just like stocks,
and the spreads with options can grow pretty wide as a percentage of the
option’s premium, which, in turn, can have a significant impact on the profitability of your option position. The wider the spread, the harder it is for
you to make a profit. As an option trader, you typically buy at the ask, the
higher price, and sell at the bid, the lower price. That means that any trade
must recover the difference between the bid and the ask before you can earn
a profit. As with stock trading, you can use a limit order to put your order
between the bid and the ask, but there is no guarantee that your order will be
filled. See Chapter 14 for more about bid-ask spreads.

Buying Options and Futures Contracts
All types of options and futures are traded on a commodities exchange. In
addition, some types of options can be traded on stock exchanges. The NYSE
Alternext U.S. (formerly the American Stock Exchange, or Amex) trades stock
options, index options, and options on exchange-traded funds. The NASDAQ
OMX trades the index and currency options that used to trade on the
Philadelphia Stock Exchange. The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE)
handles stock and several specialized futures options. You can trade stock
options and some index options in a traditional stock account. Special risk
release forms must be signed, but otherwise, the account remains the same.
(For more about establishing an account, see Chapter 3.) Covered options
and naked short positions require a margin account.

Opening an account
If you want to buy futures or options on futures, you must do so through
an individual account that you open with a registered futures commission
merchant (FCM) or through your broker. Your broker transmits any transactions through an FCM as an introducing broker. Your broker won’t collect the
funds from you for your options trades. You have to deposit them directly
with the FCM.

Chapter 18: Doing It by Derivatives
You have the choice of opening either a discretionary account or a nondiscretionary account. A discretionary account is an account in which you sign a
power of attorney over to either your FCM, your broker, or a commodity trading advisor (CTA) so he or she can make trading decisions on your behalf. A
nondiscretionary account is an account in which you make all the trading decisions. You also may want to consider trading through a commodity pool. When
trading through a commodity pool, you purchase a share or interest in a pool
of other investors, and trades are executed by an FCM or CTA. Any profits or
losses are shared proportionately by the members of the pool.
When you open an individual account, you need to make a deposit that
amounts to a margin payment or performance bond for the options or futures
you trade. This payment is relatively small compared to the size of your
potential market position, and it gives you the opportunity to greatly leverage your money. Small changes in options and futures prices can result in
large gains or large losses in relatively short periods of time.
Your broker calculates the values of the futures and option contracts in
your account on a daily basis, and you need to maintain a margin level that’s
approximately 75 percent of the amount required when you originally enter
your positions. If your holdings fall below that level, you’ll be asked to come
up with the cash to restore your margin account to the initial level, a situation that’s known as a margin call. If you can’t meet the margin call in a reasonable period of time, which can be as little as an hour, your brokerage firm
closes out enough of your positions to reduce your margin deficiency. If your
positions are liquidated at a loss, you can be held liable for that loss, which
sometimes can be substantially more than your original margin deposit.

Calculating the price and making a buy
Before buying an option, you first must calculate the break-even price, but
you must know the option’s strike price, the premium cost, and the commission or other transaction costs to be able to do it. With those three details
in hand, you can determine a break-even price for a call option using this
formula:
Option strike price + option premium costs + commission and
transaction fees = break-even price
Using the example in Table 18-1, here is the per-share break-even price for
buying a May call option with a strike price of $54 and a commission of $25,
or 25 cents per share:
$54 + $2.60 + $0.25 = $56.85

297

298 Part V: Risk-Taker’s Paradise
To make a profit on this call option, the stock price of ABC has to rise above
$56.85. If the stock price doesn’t rise above $56.85, you won’t make a profit
on this option purchase (unless you’re somehow able to sell the option for
more than $2.85 before the expiration date — see the next section). These
calculations are correct only when your broker has one fee for a roundtrip option exchange. If you have to pay fees in both directions, which is
common, then you need to double the fee in the calculation. Most brokers do
charge fees in both directions. The fees are the same in each direction, so the
cost for trading would be double.
When calculating the break-even price for a put option, you subtract the premium, commission, and transaction costs. Here is the break-even calculation
for a May put option for ABC stock at a strike price of $54 with a commission
of $25, or 25 cents per share:
$54 – $2.00 – 25 cents = $51.75
In this scenario, ABC stock has to drop below $51.75 for this put option to be
worthwhile.
If you’re expecting a stock price increase, you want to consider purchasing
a call option, but if you expect a price decline, you want to consider purchasing a put option. In both scenarios, you need to check the fundamental
and technical analyses information you gathered on the underlying stock or
asset, so you can be certain that any break-even prices you’ve calculated reasonably match what your analysis indicates.

Options for Getting Out of Options
After you buy an option, you have to decide how you want to opt out of that
position. You can choose one of the following three alternatives:
✓ Offset the option.
✓ Continue holding the option.
✓ Exercise the option.

Offsetting the option
You offset an option by liquidating your option position, usually in the same
marketplace that you bought the option. If you want to get out of an option
before its expiration date, you can try to sell it for whatever price you can

Chapter 18: Doing It by Derivatives
get. Doing so either enables you to take your profits or reduces your potential loss by the amount you receive for the option. As long as you bought
your option in an active market, other investors usually are willing to pay for
the rights your option conveys. The key, of course, is how much they’re willing to pay.
Your net profit or loss for this option is determined by the difference between
what you originally pay in premiums, commissions, and other transaction
costs minus the premium you receive when you liquidate the option after
deducting commissions and other transaction costs.

Holding the option
If your option is not yet in-the-money, but you still believe it may get there,
you can continue to hold the option until the exercise date. If you’re right,
you can exercise the option before the expiration date or liquidate at a later
date, which means to buy or sell the option before the expiration date at
some time in the future. If you’re wrong, you risk the possibility that you
won’t find a buyer or that you’ll have to let the option expire and take a loss
that is equal to the amount of the premium, commission, and transaction
costs you paid. Some traders take an even more risky position by buying
options that are deeply out-of-the-money for just pennies a share. Even if
these options never grow any nearer to being in-the-money, as long as they
move in the right direction, the premiums will rise. Although we don’t recommend using this strategy, profits can be made as long as you’re able to sell
the option before its expiration date.
Options decline in value as they get closer to their expiration dates, so if you
think you’ve made a mistake and the market moves against your position, bite
the bullet as soon as possible and try to liquidate your option to minimize
your losses.
