
126

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

which case we have methods to follow the market’s flow, which we will
cover in the next few chapters. By focusing in on just a few select numbers
and learning how to filter out excess information, I eliminate the analysis
paralysis from information overload. Do yourself a favor and keep reading
because this does get exciting. The following list shows how the numbers
would break down by order, what typically occurs, and how the market behaves. Keep in mind that this is a general description. You will learn what
to look for at these price points in order to spot reversals so you can become more profitable from trading in the markets.
• Resistance Level 3—Extreme bullish market condition generally created by news-driven price shock. This is where a market is at an overbought condition and may offer a day trader a quick reversal scalp
trade.
• Resistance Level 2—Bullish market price objective or target high number for a trading session. It generally establishes the high of a given
time period. The market often sees significant resistance at this price
level and will provide an exit target for long positions.
• Resistance Level 1—Mild bullish to bearish projected high target number. In low volume or light volatility sessions or in consolidating trading periods, this often acts as the high of a given session. In a bearish
market condition, prices will try to come close to this level but most
times fail.
• Pivot Point—This is the focal price level or the mean that is derived
from the collective market data from the prior session’s high, low, and
close. It is the strongest of the support and resistance numbers. Prices
normally trade above or below this area before breaking in one direction or the other. As a general guideline, if the market opens above the
primary pivot, be a buyer on dips. If the market opens below this level,
look to sell rallies.
• Support Level 1—Mild bearish to bullish projected low target number
in light volume or low volatility sessions or in consolidating trading periods. Prices tend to reverse at or near this level in bullish market conditions but most times fall short of hitting this number.
• Support Level 2—Bearish market price objective or targeted low
number. The market often sees significant support at or near this
level in a bearish market condition and is a likely target level to cover
shorts.
• Support Level 3—Extreme bearish market condition generally created
by a news-driven price shock. This level will act as the projected target
low or support area. This is where a market is at an oversold condition
and may offer a day trader a quick reversal scalp trade.

Pivot Points

127

Most of the research and books written on technical analysis cover the
topic of trade entry and how to use indicators, oscillators, and moving average studies. Few go over how to target exits. Longer-term traders have
read the works done on volume analysis to help determine the strength or
the weakness of a trend. There is further information on consensus studies,
such as the Commitment of Traders (COT) reports; the VIX, which is a
volatility index, is based on calculations using options on the Standard &
Poor’s (S&P) 500 Stock Index. Plus, the put-to-call ratio helps give investors
an idea if a trend is ready to change. None of these studies actually helps a
trader with targeting a potential trading range in a given time period. That
information will help a trader with setups and triggers on entering a position and, most important, exiting a position. This is where pivot point
analysis will help you.
Think for a moment: If most technical tools are lagging indicators and
if most traders follow and use these trading indicators to make trading decisions, then it would make sense that most traders get trading signals and
execute entering into a position on a lagging basis or well after a move has
been established. Then, if the same indicator gives the exit signal too late,
perhaps that is what perpetuates habit or the consistency of losing money
in the markets, from entering or exiting later, based on lagging indicators.
Then, in order to adjust getting in too late, traders anticipate a market
turn; and more times than not, that turns out to be a bad trading decision.
Or traders may decide to just “hang in there” a while longer, thinking that
the market may just return and give them back the sweet profits that were
just accumulated in the trade. That is a syndrome that many traders tell me
they fell victim to. By using pivot point support and resistance levels, you
can speed up the analytical process on entries; and by employing certain
trade management techniques that we will go over in a later chapter, you
can effectively help improve your exits. After all, that is one of the most important aspects of trading. A profit is just a paper asset until a position is
offset. The offset relies on an exit strategy. Ask yourself this question: How
many times have I been in a trade and thought I was doing the correct thing
by letting my winners ride, by holding on to the position only to see my
paper profits erode and then perhaps turn into a loss? The flip side to this
is: How many times have I taken a quick profit, banked the money, and no
more than a few moments later watched the market explode dramatically
further in the direction of my original position? Just when you say the market can’t move any further, that’s when it usually does. You need discipline
and patience to stay with a trade. These situations will likely happen; but by
utilizing pivot points and by watching the market’s behavior at or near
these levels, you will be better prepared to make better trading decisions,
especially on exits.

128

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

POSSIBLE OUTCOMES WHEN PRICES ARE
NEAR PIVOT AREA
You need to stay in the “now,” to focus on the current market condition or
environment. Keep telling yourself that what happened in the past or perhaps even your last trade is of no concern to the current trade you are in.
Remember that each trade will have a different outcome. The patterns we
see and the way a market behaves at or near a pivot point support or resistance level will be different. Therefore, the velocity and the magnitude of a
price move will vary every time. For example, as shown in Figure 5.1, prices
could come close to but not exactly hit the pivot level. That does not mean
prices will do that every time. As Figure 5.2 shows, prices can exceed resistance by a small margin; this may invite you to buy a breakout of the resistance level and trap you into buying the high. Then, as Figure 5.3
illustrates, prices can hit the pivot support number exactly, which does
happen frequently. But if you program yourself to anticipate, that will be
the outcome every time; you will be in for a rude awakening due to the potential that Figure 5.4 represents the occurrence that sometimes prices just
come close and consolidate or congest near the pivot point support or resistance levels for a period of time before reacting off those levels. Once
again, the market’s past performance is not indicative of future results; so
we need more information in the thought process to initiate a trade and to
exit a trade. The pivot point levels will allow you to set up a particular
game plan; therefore, when you apply more layers of analysis, such as candle patterns and a moving average approach of the pivot point, that is
where you will improve on your trading decisions, from both your entries
and your exits.

FIGURE 5.1 Prices could come
close but not exact.

FIGURE 5.2
resistance.

Prices exceed

129

Pivot Points

FIGURE 5.3 Prices can hit
exactly at the pivot level.

FIGURE 5.4

Prices congest near

support.

DETERMINE THE RANGE
Data should be used for the all session trading markets with the close of
business as the settlement price. In the futures markets, I do not use just
the U.S. markets’ open outcry trading session. Here is why: The night sessions of most markets include the Asian and the European markets; and
those participants do trade in U.S. financial markets. If an event took place
that caused a market to move and a trade price was recorded, then it is a
valid price point and will be put in the history books as a trade occurring.
Therefore, I consider that information as accurate from a valid trading session. Most U.S. retail or individual speculators may not be up at 3 A.M. (CT)
trading off a market move; but potentially, professional traders are, and
therefore the information is considered valid. Gosh, even the exchanges
seem to believe it’s valid since money moves into and out of an account if
a trade is made; so the high or low of that period should be considered.

MULTIPLE TIME FRAME ANALYSIS
Daily, weekly, and monthly time frames can and should be utilized as well.
To understand how price moves within the pivots, begin by breaking down
the time frames from longer-term to shorter-term. So start with a monthly
time frame, for which, as you know, there is a price range, or an established
high and low for that given period; so we should be watching these predictive price points as well. Think of this: There are approximately 22 business
days, or about four weeks, in every month; and each month, there will be an
established range—a high and a low. In a week, there are typically five trading days. Now consider that on one day of one week in one month, a high
and a low will be made. It is likely that the high and the low may be made

130

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

in a minute or within one hour of a given day of a given week of a given
month. That is why longer-term time frames, such as monthly or weekly
analysis, should be included in your market analysis. It is also the reason
why I do not use the R-3 or the S-3 targets. I rely more on the longer-term
time frames targeted support and resistance levels. Pivot point analysis relies on data from specific time frames in order to determine support and resistance levels for the next particular trading session. It is prodictive and
both time- and price-sensitive information.
The analysis or calculations for the prior day, week, or month may not
be applicable two or three sessions later. At the end of each time period,
data will need to be recalculated. The exception to this rule is that if there
is a time period after a wide-range session that is a smaller range, then I
would keep the data from the session with the wider range in mind for another one or two trading periods. For example, using a daily analysis, if
Tuesday had a wide trading range and then Wednesday had a small range,
I would keep the targeted support and resistance numbers derived from
Tuesday in mind for Thursday’s session. The same principle applies to a
week or a month.
In the world of 24-hour trading, the most popular question I get from
those studying and using pivot points is, “What are the times that you derive
the high-low-close information from?” There are many different people
telling many different stories. Here is what I do and what seems to work
best. For starters, just keep things simple and apply some good old-fashioned common sense. If the exchanges and the banking system use a specific time to settle a market, then that is the time that you should consider
a close. The exchanges and banks should know—their rules make the
money move. I want to follow the money flow.
• Stock traders use the settlement price from the close of business at 4
P.M. (ET).
• Forex traders should use the 5 P.M. (ET) New York bank settlement
close.
• Futures traders, in the e-mini–S&P, Nasdaq, and Russell contracts, use
the close of 3:15 P.M. (CT). For the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
mini-Dow contract, I take the close at 4 P.M. (CT).
• For the weekly calculations, take the open from Sunday night’s session, and use the close on Friday.
• For the monthly calculations, take the open from the first day of the
month, and use the close of the last day of the month.
We have established the reasons why we use all sessions for extracting
the range, or high and low, and what time periods constitute the closes. We
know where and how and when. Now, let me show you what pivot point

131

Pivot Points

FIGURE 5.5

projected supports and resistance line up to look like. In Figure 5.5, we
have a good representation of how the R-3 down to the S-3 levels would line
up based on a previous session’s high, low, and close data. The hash marks
between each level are the midpoint numbers. As you can see, this presents
13 price points to monitor. To most traders, including myself, this is simply
information overload. If you include using these 13 levels for each day,
week. and month, that would put 39 trading support and resistance numbers on your chart for each trading day. That could cause a trader to possibly go blind or, at the very least, could create analysis paralysis. Granted,
you may be right in stating that you picked the top or the bottom of each
trading session, but it is impractical or highly unlikely that you can trade off
that information. I am not saying that at times it may help having the midpoints or R-3 or S-3 target levels in front of you; I just believe in keeping
things simple, and less is better.

FILTER OUT INFORMATION OVERLOAD
I have developed a method to filter out the pivot numbers; this is just one
facet that I explain to attendees of my trading seminars and to students.

132

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Keep in mind that this methodology applies to all markets, including stocks,
futures, and especially spot foreign currency markets, or forex. This
method can work for a short-term application for identifying a potential
range for a day, a week, or a month. By having a good idea, well in advance,
of what the high or the low for a given time period might be, you are able to
use this information to apply the right trading vehicle or strategy, such as
whether it is simply selecting an entry level or getting in or selecting a profit
objective or getting out of a trade. You could also determine whether to
apply an option strategy or when to use an exchange traded fund, as we
discussed in Chapter 1.

Predicting Highs and Lows Using the
Calculations
What I do to determine the potential range for a given session is to take the
R-1 and the S-1 initially for my analysis, especially in low-volume consolidating trading sessions.
I use the actual pivot point for many things; one that is useful is understanding that it can be used as an actual trading number in determining the
high or the low of a given time period, especially in strong bull or bear market conditions. In an extremely bullish market condition, the pivot point
can become the target low for the trading session. This number represents
the true value of a prior session. In an up-trending market, if the market
gaps higher above the pivot point, then a retracement back to the pivot will
attract buyers. Until that pivot point is broken by prices trading below that
level, traders will step in and buy the pullback. The opposite is true in an extremely bearish market condition; the pivot point will act as the target high
for the session. If a news-driven event causes the market to gap lower, once
traders access the news and discover it is not as bearish as thought, prices
may trade back up to test the pivot point; if the market fails to break out
above that price level and trades higher, sellers will enter the market and
take action, pressing the market lower again.

Filtering the Numbers
Technically speaking, in a bearish market, the highs should be lower and
the lows should be lower than those of the preceding time frame. If they
are, then I use that information to help me filter out unnecessary data or excessive support and resistance numbers on my charts. I use the actual pivot
point up to the R-1 number for resistance, and then I target the S-2 for the
potential low or for that time period’s trading range.
As you can see in Figure 5.6, if I determine the market is bearish and if

Pivot Points

133

FIGURE 5.6

I understand the relationship of the geometric distance of the resistance
and support targets, I can eliminate the R-2 number, since in a bearish environment we should see a lower high. If I am looking for a lower low, then
I can eliminate the S-1 support number as well; and now I have reduced the
field to just three numbers. If I apply the same methodology on daily,
weekly, and monthly charts, instead of 39 numbers, I am now working with
just 9 numbers. Once again, I am not using the numbers to place orders
ahead of time (even though you could); I use the numbers as a guide. These
numbers work so well and often act as a self-fulfilling prophecy because so
many institutions and professional traders do use them. Many have different size positions on. Some traders may not wait for the exact number to
hit and may start scaling out of positions (as I do); and so should you. With
this method, you can use these numbers as exit areas on your trades. As
Figure 5.7 depicts, in a bullish market environment, by definition you may
agree that the highs should be higher and the lows should be higher than
those of the preceding time period. When I have determined that we are in
a bullish trend, I target the S-1 up to the pivot point for the low of the session and the R-2 for targeting the high; and that will give me an idea of what
the potential trading range will be.

134

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 5.7

Lining Up the Numbers
When the market goes through the projected daily target numbers, I then
use the next time periods for a better gauge or reliability as to the next price
objective. That is where the significance of the weekly and the monthly
numbers comes into play.
Back in the late 1990s when I owned a brokerage firm, I developed a
method to help me line up the pivot point levels as shown in Figure 5.8; I
had all my brokers use these numbers, and many still do to this day. The
table of information was for the trading session of 1/18/2006.
My method categorizes the pivot point levels to the various market conditions, such as neutral (Target Key) bullish, and bearish. I like to know
what the prior time period’s range and close were for fast access, so I included that in as well. Since the pivot point is important, I include that on
the sheet, as shown in the last column on the right. The third column from
the right states Market Direction. That is a moving average of the actual
pivot point.
If the pivot point and the close or settlement price are below the market direction number, then the market condition is deemed to be in a bearish mode; and it helps me to line up the R-1 and S-1 numbers as the
projected target range for that next session. If you look down the far-left

135

FIGURE 5.8
Used with permission of www.nationalfutures.com.

136

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

column to where you see “Bonds,” you will see that the market direction
number classified the market condition as bullish due to the location of the
previous settlement and that the pivot point was above the pivot point moving average.
The numbers targeted the high in bonds to be 11510⁄32 (R-2) and the low
to be 11416⁄32 (S-1). The pivot point was 11423⁄32.
Since the market closed at 11428⁄32, there was a strong chance to see
10
115 ⁄32, as well as a low of 11416⁄32. Figure 5.9 shows the exact trading session
activity on a 15-minute candle chart. If you are a candle chart aficionado,
you will have spotted that the high was formed by a shooting star pattern
and that the low was made by a bullish engulfing pattern. While the market
broke out above the targeted resistance, it certainly did not stay there long.
Notice how the price penetrated the low but reversed off the projected low
as well. We will use this chart later in the book as we share statistical information on which candle patterns have high frequency of forming tops
and bottoms. At this point, just heighten your awareness that there was a
doji after the star at top and a doji near the bottom.
This chart also has another component—a moving average method
that we will discuss a variation of as well. By using the true value of the

FIGURE 5.9 Bonds trade the predicted pivot range.
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Pivot Points

137

market, which I refer to as the pivot point, we can help determine the market condition and the projected price ranges as well as potential turning
points as market conditions change from bullish (uptrend) to bearish
(downtrend).

Pivots Combined with Candles
The CBOT mini-Dow is one of several great day trading futures products for
selecting trades that connect with pivot and candle patterns as Figure 5.10
shows. Notice how prices do penetrate briefly above the pivot targeted high
by forming the shooting star candle. See the market’s reaction as the price
declines over 70 Dow points (each point is $5 on the mini-Dow). That is a
$350.00 move in less than 75 minutes per contract. Since most futures firms
carry a $500.00 day trade margin per contract that translates into a healthy
return. Now that we know how to line up the numbers, we need to wait for
a setup or signal to trigger a short position. The shooting star, the moving
average crossover, and the dark candles all confirmed a technical signal
to sell.

FIGURE 5.10
Used with permission of esignal.com.

138

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

The graph in Figure 5.11 represents the e-mini–S&P 500 Stock Index
Futures on November 10, 2005; the targeted range was determined to be S1 and R-2, a bullish market condition. The actual low of the day was formed
by a hammer candle pattern (keep notes of what candle patterns form near
tops and bottoms, as we will be discussing this in detail in later chapters).
A buy signal is triggered with the sequence of higher highs and higher lows
but, more important, higher closing highs, as well. The moving average
crossover also helps trigger a long buy signal. The market rallies right up
within a tick or two of the R-2 number. As a day trader, it is great to have a
predetermined exit strategy. In this case, pivot point analysis accommodated you in that respect. Other times, you will need to rely on your timing
to exit a trade; for example, as a day trader, once the market is near the
close of the business day, you should be offsetting your position. In the example in Figure 5.11, you had a timing and a price element working for you
to help target an exit on what was a beautiful trade. The trigger to go long
was after the crossover of the moving average one candle after 11:30, as
prices established a higher closing high.
This trade would have resulted in a stellar 12.50-point gain from the
