
firms make money.

Conclusion
These aren’t the only four areas of the market with worthwhile investments—
I've highlighted these because they contain so many wide-moat companies.

There are great firms in even the least likely areas of the stock market.

185


186 A GUIDED TOUR OF THE MARKET

You may want to read the next 13 chapters straight through, or you might
want to use them as a reference guide the next time you find yourself analyzing
a company in a specific area of the market. However you use these chapters,
our goal in writing this section of the book is to help you answer a few essen-
tial questions: How do companies in this industry make money? How can they
create economic moats? What quirks does this industry have that an investor
should know about? How can you separate successful from unsuccessful firms
in each industry? What pitfalls should you watch out for?

Over the long haul, a big part of successful investing is building a mental
database of companies and industries on which you can draw as the need
arises. The next section of the book should give you a jumpstart in compiling

that mental database, and that will make youa better investor.


14

Health Care

Most PEOPLE COULD survive without gourmet coffee or the latest DVD
player, but health care is one of the few areas of the economy that’s directly
linked to human survival. New medical innovations can significantly improve
or extend patients’ lives. The vital importance of health care—combined with
the relatively free regulatory environment in the United States—gives this
sector the potential for above-average financial returns. Many areas in the
health care sector are dominated by a few big players that don’t need to com-
pete on price. As a result, health care companies are often highly profitable,
with strong free cash flow and returns on capital.

Health care has also benefited from powerful growth trends. Between 1980
and 2002, total health care spending increased from 9 percent of the total U.S.
economy to almost 15 percent. Although this growth rate may slow, the Cen-
ters for Medicare and Medicaid, which tracks health care statistics for the gov-
ernment, still estimates 5 percent annual growth in health spending over the
next decade versus 3 percent growth for the economy. If this forecast holds

true, health care will make up 18 percent of the U.S. economy in 10 years.

Jill Kiersky, Debbie Wang, and Damon Ficklin with Pat Dorsey.


188

HEALTH CARE

Health care firms benefit from consistent demand, as well. Even when the
economy is in the tank, people still get sick and need doctors and hospitals. As
a result, the health care sector has traditionally been a defensive safe haven.

The health care sector includes drug companies, biotechs, medical de-
vice firms, and health care service organizations. Of all these areas, we think
drug companies and medical devices firms are usually the most promising
because they typically have the widest economic moats. However, investors
often get swept away by these companies’ heady growth rates, so valuations

can be steep.

Economic Moats in Health Care

Health care companies often benefit from economic moats in the form of
high start-up costs, patent protection, significant product differentiation, and
economies of scale. This makes it tough for new players to enter the market,
particularly for drug companies with valuable patent rights, managed care or-
ganizations with large provider networks, or medical device firms with long
clinical track records. These characteristics make for great profitability: The
market-weighted return on equity for health care firms has averaged 23 per-
cent over the last five years, despite the economic recession.

For example, in big pharmaceutical companies, patent protection often
prevents direct competition, so firms charge the highest price the market will
bear for prescription drugs. And because most costs are paid by insurance
plans, there’s even less price sensitivity for the end consumer. These higher
prices—combined with economies of scale—have led to gross margins often
surpassing 75 percent to 85 percent.

Size is another barrier to entry for drug companies. Developing a single
drug can take 15 to 20 years to get through the entire research, development,
and regulatory process and can cost hundreds of millions over that time frame.
Few scientists and entrepreneurs have access to that kind of capital. Even if
they surmount the time and money hurdles, going head-to-head against a
Pfizer or Merck when selling to physicians requires a large salesforce and lots of
advertising dollars. In contrast to, say, software or restaurants, where start-up
costs are low and new entrants spring up frequently, consolidation has been the
trend for many health industries in the last several decades, and established

players usually have an edge. Smaller firms often cant compete,


PHARMACEUTICALS

Health care’s vast size and rapid expansion makes investing in the sector
look like a no-brainer. But it is also fraught with complex relationships, intense
controversy, and political pressures to regulate who gets what and who pays for
it. Unlike clothing, computers, or consulting services, health care consumers
are frequently not the ones writing the check for the products and services they
use, and many times they aren't even the ones making the buying decision.

Whereas Wal-Mart shoppers can easily see which brand of paper towels is
cheapest and works best on big spills, pricing is often opaque to health care
consumers and irrelevant to physicians helping make the decisions. Thus, there
is little incentive to shop around for the best price to keep costs lower. (This
trend has shown some signs of changing, as companies have been shifting a
greater percentage of the health care burden to their employees. But overall,
price generally isn’t the primary consideration for a patient seeking medical
care or a doctor prescribing a drug.)

In the following sections, we explore the dynamics and trends of some of
the major health care industries. We won't cover every corner—health care is
too broad and diverse to cram everything into a couple of dozen pages—but
we'll introduce you to the sector's biggest industries.

Pharmaceuticals
Big pharmaceutical companies typically have wide moats and some of the
most attractive financial characteristics of any industry. Branded pharmaceu-
tical companies (as opposed to generics, which have a lower return business
model) generally boast top-notch profit margins. Most global pharmaceutical
companies have returns on invested capital (ROICs) in the mid-20s. Top-
notch companies such as Pfizer are often in the 30s. Drug-company margins
are also worth salivating over, with gross margins often near 80 percent and
operating margins between 25 percent and 35 percent. What's more, drug
companies offer plentiful free cash flow and virtually debt-free balance sheets.
But innovation isn’t cheap. It takes money to make money, and the aver-
age cost of taking a drug from discovery to the pharmacy shelf is 800 million.
Only a third of those drugs ever return their costs of development. Plus, drugs
take years to develop. The clinical testing phase (trials in humans) alone can
take a decade. All the while, the company is pumping money into the research

process with ho guarantee ofa return.

189


190 HEALTH CARE

There's also budgetary pressure in the United States to reduce health care
costs, specifically the dollars spent on prescription drugs. Since 1980, pre-
scription drug costs have increased faster than every other health care cost, al-
most doubling as a percentage of total health care dollars, from 4.9 percent to
9.4 percent. But if political pressure leads to lower drug prices (as a Medicare

prescription drug plan might), big pharma could see its margins come down.

Demystifying the Drug Development Process

Drugs are discovered in many different ways. Sometimes they're discovered
by mistake, like Viagra. (Pfizer scientists noticed the “side effect” from a
blood pressure drug.) Other times, they're discovered only after an exhaustive
process of testing thousands of compounds in petri dishes and lab rats. This
process of identifying possible targets and determining whether they should
move down the development chain can take five years or more and cost in the
hundreds of millions of dollars.

With new technology and supercomputers, scientists are finding ways to
“virtually” test molecules against different genes to narrow the number of
compounds before they start testing in live animals. But for now, drugs still go
through years of initial research before being tested in mice, let alone humans.

Drugs typically take the path outlined in Figure 14.1 before they get to the
pharmacy shelf.

Preclinical Testing: This animal testing phase is called preclinical testing. The
primary objective is to evaluate potential toxic effects. Before a drug gets any-
where near a human, scientists must have a clear understanding of the possi-
ble damage it could do. It takes two to three years on average to discover a
viable drug candidate and another year to find out if it is fit for human test-
ing, For the small percentage of drugs that survive, an investigational new
drug (IND) application is filed with the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). Approximately 85 percent of INDs move on to Phase I.

Human Clinical Trials (Phase 1): Phase I is the first of three stages of
human clinical testing. In Phase I, a drug is tested in a small group (fewer
than 100) of healthy volunteers with the goal of gathering initial data on
safety and efficacy—whether the drug has the ability to produce the desired


PHARMACEUTICALS

a& | Preclinical Testing Clinical Trials
S To Market
~ 100%
3g FDA
8 —————. 1%
Ba Phase Ill 12-18
2 61% mths
= 2-4yrs
3
=
oe ————
Phase Il
———— 29%
Drug Discovery, Animal Testing Phasel 93 yrs
0.05% 20%
a& | 8-10 yrs 1-2 yrs
S
Year 0 Drug Development Timeline Year 20

Figure 14.1 Drug development timeline and cumulative probability af success. Source: Professor Alicia
Loffler, Kellogg Schaal af Management and Biachem Pharma 1998 Annual Repart.

effect. Safety is the number-one concern here, though scientists and physicians
also evaluate the body’s reaction to the drug. A drug in Phase I has only a 20
percent chance of eventual approval but can still cost a few million dollars, in-

cluding the cost of development, clinical trials, and continuous communica-

tion with the FDA.

Human Clinical Trials (Phase I): In Phase Il, the drug is tested in a larger
population (usually 300 to 500) of patients afflicted with the targeted disease to
get a more comprehensive profile of how well the drug works. The managers of
these trials use them to compile additional data on safety and side effects.
Here, physicians and scientists test for how much of the drug to give and how
often to give it. This phase often costs more than $5 million, and more than

half of all drugs in Phase II fail to move to the next phase.

Human Clinical Trials (Phase LI): The final testing hurdle is Phase III. These

trials involve testing the drug in a much larger group of afflicted patients over
longer periods. Safety is still an issue—Phase III trials are the first trials to


192

HEALTH CARE

focus on long-term patient safety—but efficacy gets more attention. Because
of the number of patients (often 5,000 patients or more), administrative needs,
and time and resources involved, Phase III trials are very expensive. These tri-
als consume the bulk of the $800 million cost of developing the average drug,
and a drug in Phase III has about a 60 percent chance of eventual approval.

Role of the United States Food and Drug Administration

So far, a drug has spent two to three years in preclinical testing, 8 to 12 years
in clinical testing, and still hasn’t brought in dime one. And its toughest test
is still to come. Once a drug clears Phase III testing, the company files a new
drug application with the U.S. FDA (and other regulatory agencies around
the world) to be able to place the drug on pharmacy shelves and actually mar-
ket the drug. An FDA filing is a tome that may weigh more than some small
cars, so preparing it can take months. According to PhRMA, the U.S. phar-
maceutical industry's trade group, it takes about 17 months for the FDA to
review an application, and a drug under review with the FDA still has only
about a 70 percent chance of approval.

Each filing typically seeks approval in a single (and highly specific) indi-
cation. For example, Rituxan is a drug approved to treat specific types of lym-
phoma patients who no longer respond to other forms of treatment. Once
Rituxan was approved, that particular indication was the only one for which
its maker can market the drug (although physicians can prescribe it for any-
thing they choose, often referred to as “off-label usage”).

The FDA has advisory committees that meet several times per year to dis-
cuss the applications. These committees submit their opinion to the FDA,
which then decides the fate of the drug. The FDA can exercise any number of
judgments for a new drug application, including granting marketing ap-
proval (which means the company can market the drug for the specified in-
dication), requesting additional data or another round of testing, or denying
the application.

The last outcome is definitely bad for the company filing the application.
It comes as a “not-approvable letter” and means that the information in the
filing did not convince the FDA of the drug’s merits. It’s not always death for
the compound, however. Drug applications can be re-filed, but if an applica-
tion gets all the way through the FDA review process and is rejected, it’s likely


PHARMACEUTICALS

the company has no more information to back its claims. That means it’s back
to the drawing board. Another filing is probably years away, and millions
more will have to be spent researching the compound. Or the company can

scrap the project and move on. Either way, it’s painful.

Patents, Intellectual Property Rights, and Market Exclusivity

Once a drug gets the nod from the FDA, the marketing can begin. Brand name
drugs enjoy patent protection for 20 years from the date the company first com-
pletes the patent application (or 17 years from the issue date). However, because
a patent application is usually filed as soon asa drug is identified and not when
it hits the market, drugs rarely enjoy 20 years of monopoly profits because a sig-
nificant portion of the protected period is eaten up by trials and the approval
process. Many drugs enjoy only 8 to 10 years of patent protection after they are
launched in the marketplace. During that period, no other company can mar-
ket the same chemical compound, although competitors are still free to de-
velop different compounds that treat the same condition.

To find out about a drug company’s patent protection, look at the 10-K
report, under the section titled “Patents and Intellectual Property Rights.”
You should find a discussion of the company’s patents and when they expire,
but because drug companies often engage in fierce legal battles to try to ex-
tend their patents, you'll likely need to visit the company’s Web site for com-
plete information. The 10-K also discusses any pending lawsuits, which can
be a sign of trouble on the horizon.

Generic Drug Competition
After a drug goes off patent or loses market exclusivity, whichever comes
later, the field is open to competition from generic medications. Generic
drugs have the same chemical composition as brand name drugs but cost sig-
nificantly less—usually 40 percent to 60 percent less. Generic drug makers
can charge much less because they don’t have to recoup the $800 million in
per drug research and development costs. And for most drugs, the manufac-
turing costs are nominal (20 percent to 25 percent of sales), so the price can
be nominal as well.

The entrance of a generic competitor in the United States can be devas-

tating for its brand name counterpart, Drugs have been known to lose as

193


194

HEALTH CARE

much as 80 percent of their sales in the first six months after going off patent.
Eli Lilly’s famous depression drug, Prozac, is a case in point. In 2001, when
Prozac lost its patent protection, the drug’s quarterly revenues dropped from
$575 million in the second quarter to $96 million two quarters later. So if
you're considering buying shares in a drug company that depends on a spe-
cific drug for a significant percentage of its sales, don’t bank on the money

continuing to come in after the patent expires.

Hallmarks of Success for Pharmaceutical Companies
Branded pharmaceutical companies have historically offered high margins,
little debt, and cash flow galore. To find companies that can continue to pro-

vide stellar performance, focus on these traits:

> Blockbuster drugs (typically defined as drugs with more than 1 billion in
sales): Companies with blockbusters gain manufacturing efficiencies by
spreading fixed costs over more products. Selling the drug at high
prices, driven by strong demand, inflates a drug maker's profitability
and provides more bang for the buck. Pfizer is the perfect example: In
1997, only two Pfizer drugs had annual sales greater than $1 billion, but
by 2002, eight drugs surpassed the $1 billion mark, with four drugs
breaking the $2 billion mark. Thanks in part to these blockbusters,
Pfizer's operating margins improved from 20 percent in 1997 to 38 per-
cent in 2002.

> Patent protection: All drugs eventually lose patent protection, but the
companies that manage those losses the best will generally provide in-
vestors with a steadier stream of cash flows. Bristol-Myers Squibb
showed what can happen when a drug firm loses patent protection on
large products without replacement drugs waiting in the wings. Be-
tween the second quarter of 2000 and the first quarter of 2002, Bristol
lost the U.S. patents on three heavy hitters, and nearly 20 percent of the
firm’s total revenue evaporated in less than two years. On the other
hand, when AstraZeneca’s Prilosec was about to lose its U.S. patent in
2001, the company had already begun switching patients from the first-
generation drug to the patent-protected second-generation version. By

the time a generic competitor entered the market, AstraZeneca’s new


GENERIC DRUG COMPANIES

drug had established itself in the market and was bringing in 35 percent
of the revenue of the first-generation drug.

» A full pipeline of drugs in clinical trials (and the larger the population those
drugs serve, such as cancer and arthritis, the better): Merck is a decent model
for this strategy. It generally has had an abundance of products in devel-
opment and has directed research efforts toward unmet medical needs
with millions of potential patients. Merck’s five top-selling products in
2002 had a combined potential market of 138 million Americans.

> Strong sales and marketing capabilities: Physicians rely on pharmaceutical
salespeople to learn about new products, and a salesforce that has success-
fully penetrated the physician market in the company’s core therapeutic
franchises already has physicians’ ears and often their trust as well. Pfizer's
relationship with cardiologists, Wyeth’s access to gynecologists, and Eli
Lilly's close ties with psychiatrists shouldn't be ignored. This expertise is
so valuable that biotech firms often partner with large drug firms and
give up a sizeable chunk of their profits just to leverage the marketing re-
sources of their drug-company partners.

> Big market potential: Drugs that treat conditions affecting a large percent-
age of the population (such as erectile dysfunction, high cholesterol, de-
pression, or high blood pressure) typically have better potential than niche
products. So do drugs that treat chronic conditions, because patients must

continue taking the medication to stay healthy.

All of this information can be found in the company’s 10-K. Specific disease
Web sites (such as the National Kidney Foundation or cancer.gov) also often
have information on clinical trials and drugs available to treat a disease or dis-
order as well as the number of patients suffering from those diseases. Being
able to analyze the depth and breadth of a company’s drugs and development
pipeline is half the battle when looking at pharmaceutical and biotechnology
stocks. So, roll up your sleeves and dig into the 10-K to get the details on the

strength of the company’s drug pipeline.

Generic Drug Companies
Generic drug makers don’t have the extraordinary margins of branded drug

makers, but they are growing much faster as generic drugs become more

195


196 HEALTH CARE

Common Investing Pitfall: Too Much Single-Product Risk

It might sound strange to view megablockbuster drugs as a negative, but they can
become a disadvantage. If a drug's revenues become a large enough piece of the pie,
a company’s fate can be linked tao heavily to that drug. Because that drug will eventu-
ally lose its patent protection, we think it's wise for investors to account for the
single-product risk by demanding a slightly larger margin of safety.

Pfizer's Lipitor brought in a staggering $8 billion in sales far 2002. By the time Lipitor
lases its U.S. patent protection in 2011, annual U.S. sales could easily be more than
$10 billion. That's such a huge amount that it will be nearly impossible for Pfizer to
fill the gap ance generic competition hits. In addition, just five drugs pull in half the
company’s revenue. Megablockbusters such as Lipitor not only contribute large por-
tions of total revenue, but also are often high-margin products. When the patent
expires, the maker loses a chunk of revenue and its profitability usually declines

as well.

popular, These copycat companies usually have gross margins in the 40 per-
cent to 50 percent range, with operating margins around 15 percent to 20 per-
cent. Returns on invested capital vary dramatically depending on the
company’s exposure to branded drugs. (Most generic drug makers also sell
nonblockbuster branded drugs.) Teva Pharmaceuticals, the closest thing to a
pure-play generic company, has ROICs around 10 percent, whereas Watson
Pharmaceuticals, which generates a little more than half its revenue from
branded drugs, has ROICs in the low to mid teens.
