How to Make a
Living Trading
Foreign
Exchange

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe,
Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market’s ever-changing temperament and have prospered—some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
trader, professional, or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, please visit our Web site at www.
WileyFinance.com.

How to Make a
Living Trading
Foreign
Exchange
A Guaranteed Income for Life

COURTNEY D. SMITH

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

C 2010 by Courtney D. Smith. All rights reserved.
Copyright 

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the Web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)
748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional
where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or
other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our Web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Smith, Courtney, 1952–
How to make a living trading foreign exchange : a guaranteed income for life /
Courtney D. Smith.
p. cm. — (Wiley trading series)
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-44229-6 (cloth)
1. Foreign exchange market. 2. Foreign exchange futures. 3. Investment analysis.
4. Risk management. I. Title.
HG3851.S59 2010
332.4 5–dc22
2009031709
Printed in the United States of America
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

To my parents and my foxhole buddy

Contents

Preface
CHAPTER 1

xi
The Basics of Foreign Exchange
Trading

1

Sell a Yard of Cable

2

Don’t Want to Trade!

4

Transaction Costs

7

It Never Stops

8

My Biggest Losing Trade

8

The Bottom Line

11

CHAPTER 2

13

Trend Analysis

What Is a Trend?

14

How to Proﬁtably Trade Bull and Bear Markets

18

How to Trade the Trend

21

Megaphones and Pennants

25

Average Directional Index

27

The Bishop

28

The Bottom Line

30

CHAPTER 3

Channel Breakouts

31

The Beginnings of Channel Breakouts

31

What Is a Channel Breakout?

32

Better Channel Breakouts

35

The Pros and Cons of Channel Breakouts

39

vii

viii

CONTENTS

The Bishop

40

ADX Filter

43

The Principle of Instant Gratiﬁcation

46

Rejection Rule

46

The Last Bar Technique

51

Tactics

52

Taking Proﬁts

52

The Bottom Line

53

CHAPTER 4

The Conqueror

55

The Beginnings of the Conqueror

55

What Is True Range?

56

Enhancing the Conquistador

57

Adjusting the Stop

63

The Bottom Line

65

CHAPTER 5

67

Stochastics

What Are Stochastics?

67

How to Use Stochastics as an Overbought and
Oversold Indicator

69

Trading Signals from Crossovers

71

Proﬁtability of Stochastics

74

Warnings

75

The Best Way to Make Money Using Stochastics

76

Go with the Trend

81

How I Use Stochastics

81

Interview with George Lane

82

The Bottom Line

89

CHAPTER 6

91

Pattern Recognition

Inside Days

91

Double Whammy

94

Multiunit Tactic

95

Reversal Days

97

ix

Contents

Riding the Rejection Rule

101

The Bottom Line

103

CHAPTER 7

105

Risk Management

Stopping Bad Risk Management

105

How to Make Sure We Are Never Wiped Out

108

Good Risk Management: Fixed Fractional

108

How Many Contracts Should I Put On?

109

Highly Correlated Positions

109

Kelly Formula

110

Trade Your Equity Curve

114

Take a Time Out

115

Turning Poor Systems into Good Systems

115

How Big a Position Should I Take?

116

The Bottom Line: Diversify through Time

117

CHAPTER 8

119

Slingshot

The Importance of Minimizing Losses

120

Beware of Taking Proﬁts Too Early

121

Psychological Proﬁts

122

Conﬁrmations

123

Maximum Excursion Analysis

124

Using the Slingshot for Proﬁts

125

The Mini-Slingshot

128

The Bottom Line

130

CHAPTER 9

The Psychology of Successful
Trading

131

Why Do You Trade?

132

The Pressures of Trading

136

Why Do You Lose?

137

Addressing a Lack of Knowledge

138

Addressing a Lack of Capital

140

Addressing a Lack of Self-Discipline

141

x

CONTENTS

An Example of Overcoming the Bizarre Twists and
Turns of the Mind

143

Treat Trading as Education

144

Stress-Free Trading

147

Be the Casino

148

Developing Your Trading Plan

149

Filling Out the Plan

150

The Importance of a Postmortem

153

The Bottom Line

155

CHAPTER 10 Putting It All Together

157

Diversifying to Reduce Risk

157

Use a Mental Checklist

158

How to Trade Only One Method

159

The Bottom Line

160

Epilogue: Key Insights for Maximizing Your
Trading Profits

161

Appendix: Suggested Reading

177

Acknowledgments

179

About the Author

181

Index

183

Preface

rading foreign exchange (forex) is one of the most exciting and potentially lucrative activities in the world. Yet about 90 percent of traders
lose money. This book is designed to create profitable traders.
Can you make a living trading forex?
Yes!
And no.
Let me explain.
It is common wisdom that about 90 percent of traders lose money trading forex, about 5 percent break even, and about 5 percent make money.
I have not seen any scientific evidence that this is true but I have talked
to senior executives at brokerage houses and they tell me that this is a
rough guide to what happens to traders. My own experience as a senior executive in the futures and options industry also confirms the same dreary
results.
There was a study by the federal government back in the 1960s of
futures traders and they found that futures traders had those same statistics. However, the underlying data were not so dismal.
It was true that 90 percent lost money, but that was after commissions.
They actually had about a 7 percent return on their investment before commissions. The main reason that they were losing was commissions. The
theory back then was that the 7 percent gain was the equivalent of an
insurance premium that commercial companies paid to speculators to take
over the risk of the commercials. Trading forex does not incur any commissions (and futures commissions are much lower now) so I doubt that this
factor is so important anymore.
However, forex does have other transaction costs in the form of the
bid/ask spread. The cost of buying at the ask and selling at the bid on every
trade is a significant drag on performance over a given year.
Let’s assume a $10,000 account trading mini-contracts. Let’s further assume that there is a 3 pip bid/ask spread for each trade. Now assume that
we do almost one trade per day, or 250 trades per year. That comes to a
$750 expense off the top of trading. We have to overcome that vig each

T

xi

xii

PREFACE

year to make a profit. We effectively start out in the hole by 7.5 percent
when we start the year trading. We need to make at least 7.5 percent profit
just to break even.
I think those assumptions are similar to many traders’. Take a look at
your own experience to see where you stand and how much headwind you
have to overcome to break even.
It might actually be worse than that. The most common form of forex
trading is spot forex through a retail forex broker such as FXCM or Sterling
Gent. Brokers take an additional profit from the roll every day. I’ll explain
what the roll is in Chapter 1, but please note that brokers effectively take
a bid/ask spread every day. This is worth another, say, $3 per day per open
position. Let’s assume that you only have on one position per day and that
adds up to another $750 per year. We are now up to a 15 percent headwind
to make any money. Stock investors tend to make money but that is largely
because the stock market drifts higher over any decent, long period of
time, not because stock investors are better investors. In addition, there
is no time limit when you invest with stocks. Futures and options expire.
Forex doesn’t expire but the high leverage keeps people from hanging
on to positions for years the way they can with stocks. Investors will
often hang on to losing positions in stocks for years waiting for them
to return to profitability. That is technically possible in forex, but it’s
rarely done.
The high leverage creates a mentality toward trading that works
against traders. Basically, trading forex attracts a “get rich quick” mentality that works against the trader. Contrast this mentality with the normal
stock investing mentality that looks to buy and hold.
The pressures of dealing with high leverage cause the usual forex
trader to make a lot of mistakes. And those mistakes cost more than in
the unleveraged stock world. The high leverage puts a lot of mental pressure on the forex trader that is simply not there in as high a degree for a
stock trader.
The sum of all these differences is that the forex trader has a much
harder time making money than a stock trader. But . . .
The subtitle of this book is A Guaranteed Income for Life. This title
was inspired by an infamous poker book from 20 years ago. I truly believe
that the material in that book can create a guaranteed income for life. This
is not BS. Here’s what it requires: You must do exactly what I say to do in
this book. You must not deviate. You must execute flawlessly. Only after
you have mastered this material should you start to be creative. This
self-discipline is critical to your success. A lackadaisical attitude will put
you back in the category of a losing trader. You and I both don’t want that
to happen.

Preface

xiii

I can’t repeat it enough: Execute the plan in this book and you will be
a profitable trader. You will live a life that few can even comprehend.
I wrote much of this book while hanging out near the beach in Belize.
I’m writing this Preface on a plane to Singapore where I will first give a
speech to about 2,200 people and then relax in several Asian countries in
beach houses.
How can I do this? Internet access. That’s it. I do all my analysis and
trading online. I can’t live in the real boondocks because I need Internet
access but I can live a remarkable lifestyle anyway. My first stop after the
Singapore speech is a week in Bali.
Guess what? I don’t even really need constant Internet access. I really
only need Internet access for about 15 minutes a day. I prefer more than
that because I post a lot of instructional videos on my educational Web
sites and that takes more time and bandwidth. But how about just a few
minutes at an Internet café in China or London or wherever? That’s all I
need. The true goal for me, and most people trading forex, is not to make a
lot of money but to gain freedom.
I know that I presented a rather dismal picture about how hard it is to
make money in the forex world. But I’m not only saying that you will make
money, I am also saying that you can have a guaranteed income for life.
This is a very strong statement.
How do I know that this is true? How can I be so sure?
I have spent many years training traders. I have been teaching these
techniques for over 25 years. More important, I have been training retail
investors with no experience at all trading let alone trading forex. It has
been a very gratifying experience. I have really enjoyed watching people
create a new life for themselves. Every single one of my retail educational
clients has made money trading forex, except one. (And he is down just
a little.)
At one point, I foolishly offered a mentoring program called Extreme
Profits. This was a short but intensive program that I charged $2,000 to
take. Here’s the insane part: I offered a money-back guarantee if students
didn’t double their money in a year. What an idiot I am!
All but one student doubled their money. These were normal retail investors; no trading pros in the group. The one woman who didn’t double
her money asked for her money back and I gave it to her. By the way, she
was up 70 percent for the year.
So I know that it can be done. I know that you can do it!
But (isn’t there always a but?) you must execute flawlessly.
That’s it. That’s the secret.
Now go through this book. Execute the plan. Make money. Live the life
you dream about.

xiv

PREFACE

OVERVIEW OF THE CONTENTS
I’ve designed this book to be useful for anyone who is interested in making
money trading forex, from novice to pro.
This book explains all the basics that a novice needs to know to get
going. At the same time, experienced traders will find the systems and
methods, particularly my enhancements of classic methods, to be of significant value. Every trader will find the sections on the psychology of trading
and risk management will sharply enhance their profitability.
Chapter 1 outlines the basic information you need to get started in trading forex. Perhaps you’ve traded stocks or mutual funds or even futures.
But I assume that you know nothing about trading forex. I’ve also included
a number of real stories of my trading, to give some flavor of the life of a
professional institutional trader. Even if you have some experience trading
forex, this chapter is worth reading for the examples.
Chapter 2 is where we really start the methods of making money in
the forex market. This chapter introduces trend analysis. This technique is
similar to what have been called 123s. However, I add in a unique method
to truly define which trends to jump onto and which ones to sidestep.
In addition, I introduce to the public for the first time the Bishop technique. This unique indicator has a tremendous track record of getting out
of trades at major highs or lows. It doesn’t give a lot of signals but you
should pay very close attention when it does. I will exit all my open positions on any technique whenever I see a Bishop buy or sell signal. It’s that
powerful.
I’m also introducing in this book a new way to filter trades. This filter eliminates about half of my losing trades while only eliminating about
5 percent of my winning trades. What a great tradeoff! It dramatically
enhances the profit of the trend analysis and other techniques.
Chapter 3 is all about channel breakouts. This classic technique has
been around since the 1960s. It’s been around that long because it is
that profitable. I’d estimate that most of the largest and most profitable
forex hedge fund traders are using some variation of this technique. However, I introduce several major enhancements to the classic technique that
turbo-charge the profitability.
The first enhancement is the principle of instant gratification, which
is an underlying principle that will show you how to greatly enhance your
understanding of the market, how to profitably trade, and how to boost
your profits. I also introduce the rejection rule. This powerful enhancement
cuts the risk of trading channel breakouts by at least half, yet it retains all
the profit potential. It basically monitors the health of a breakout and leaps
out of the position if there is no follow-through. In addition, it cuts down on
the psychological stress of trading channel breakouts. The concept behind

Preface

xv

the rejection rule can be applied to other trading methods. You won’t want
to miss this idea. I then add in another exit strategy called the last bar. I got
this idea from ace trader Peter Brandt. It sharply reduces the risk in any
given trade to a trivial amount. As you can imagine, cutting risk to small
amounts dramatically enhances your profits at the end of the year.
I introduce the Conqueror in Chapter 4. This is a truly unique trading system that was originally designed by legendary trader/analyst Bruce
Babcock, enhanced by ace system researcher Nelson Freeburg, and finally
tweaked by me. This system monitors the market from three different time
perspectives and doesn’t enter the market until all three are calling for an
entry into the market. Another unique feature of this method is that it uses
different exit techniques than the entry techniques. This is the only method
I know that uses different exit and entry techniques.
The Conqueror is a technique that has a very hard time entering the
market. It wants all the conditions to be perfect before entering a trade
but jumps out of the position at the slightest intimation of weakness in the
trade. I love this system and I think you will, too!
Chapter 5 introduces how to use stochastics profitably. It seems like
everybody uses stochastics; they are perhaps the most popular indicator in
chart services. Yet everyone is using them wrong. This chapter shows you
how to profitably use stochastics while sidestepping the usual traps that
drain money from your account. I show you how I use stochastics to identify short-term turning points and, more important, how to identify major
turning points. As a bonus, I have included an amazing interview with the
inventor of stochastics, George Lane. I had the privilege of interviewing
him before he passed away. This hard-hitting interview reveals how he
invented stochastics, where they got their name, and, most important, how
George himself used stochastics to make money in his trading. He literally
states that, used correctly, “it is damned near infallible”! This interview
is priceless.
Another unique feature of this book is that I show you different
profitable techniques to use over different time horizons. The techniques
discussed here are techniques that look at the market from the perspective
of days to weeks. Chapter 6 introduces several techniques that trade over
a much shorter term. These techniques hold positions for less than one
day. These pattern-recognition techniques are great for those traders who
want to make money during the day rather than over the next week or
month. I like to think about these trades as just churning out some nice
profits day after day. No monster profits because you can’t make monster
profits in just a day. But making a nice chunk of money during the day is
a very nice thing.
This chapter also introduces the multiunit tactic. This technique uses
multiple contract positions to give you more flexibility in your exits.

xvi

PREFACE

This technique has a lot of positive psychological benefits while also giving
a kick to your profits.
You cannot control the profit you make unless you control the risk in
your account. You are doomed to losses if you don’t control the risk in
your account. Ninety percent of forex traders lose money while only about
5 percent make money. I argue that one of the critical differences between
the winners and the losers is that the winners know how to control the risk
in their account.
Chapter 7 drills down on this important subject and gives you clear
instructions on how to control the risk in your account to ensure that you
will be a profitable trader. I even take risk management one step further
and show you how to use it as an offensive weapon, not just a defensive
one. The concept of using risk management as a method for enhancing
profits is rarely talked about in the markets. This chapter is critical because
you need to be able to survive the inevitable losing streaks without losing
any significant money and to also be able to maintain the proper mental
state. You must never get to a situation that is both financially and mentally
debilitating.
The next chapter, Chapter 8, shows a new technique called the Slingshot as well as the mini-Slingshot. I also use this chapter to extend the
discussion of risk management. The Slingshot is a very interesting chapter
due to the unique concepts embedded in it. It builds on the risk management concepts from the previous chapter.
I believe that risk management is actually the second-most important
factor for investment success. Chapter 9 looks at the biggest block against
making money in the markets: you. It is your psychology. You are the
biggest problem. Intellectual skills are trivial. You will rarely have problems with the methods that I present in this book. The basic risk management rules are also easy to apply. But the psychology of trading is intense
and few can master it. I want you to be a huge success; it is the real key
to making money in the market. Please do not disregard it or push it to the
side. I am laying out a lot of profitable techniques in this book. But you will
not make any money with them if you don’t have the proper psychology.
For example, what good is a profitable method if you don’t have the selfdiscipline to execute the trades on a daily basis? You will fail. You need to
be able to execute the techniques or the techniques are useless.
I am a big believer in stress-free trading. Why should I trade if I get all
wound up in stress while doing it? I may make money but I shouldn’t trade
if the stress is overwhelming. Life is too short. Once again, we need to deal
with the psychology of trading.
This chapter goes into the reasons people trade. No, it’s not just to
make money. I also go into all the reasons that people lose money and
show specifically how to overcome those reasons. There may not be any
