
8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 203

THE CRASH OF 1929

• 203 •

Livermore did not stop. His affairs continued, but his private life
never interfered with his business life, because his business life was
his real life, the life he truly loved and the game he could never get
enough of. The mental challenge of speculation was the high of
his life, the vital force that coursed through his veins. It was an
endless thrill for him, just as the ticker tape itself endlessly unraveled its secrets. Each secret he found on trading the market was a
revelation to him, made him feel like an explorer opening the door
to King Tut’s tomb and viewing the secrets within for the first
time.

8467_Smitten_10_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:35 PM Page 204

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 205

*

chapter eleven

*

When to Hold and
When to Fold

There is a tide in the affairs of men
which taken at the flood leads on to fortune.
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
is bound in shallows and in miseries.
Shakespeare, Julius Caesar

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 206

• 206 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

LIVERMORE SPENT A GREAT DEAL OF TIME AT THE BEACH

Club in Palm Beach during 1930. He and Ed Bradley, the owner,
had become fast friends. Gambling was illegal in Florida when
Bradley set up the club, but he had the tacit approval of Henry
Flagler, the railroad baron and partner in Standard Oil. This was
the only real approval necessary.
Bradley’s articles of incorporation said that the Beach Club was
incorporated for social purposes, including any games or amusements that the management and its members might from time to
time agree upon.
The rules included an age restriction of 25, a prohibition on
smoking in the gambling area, a requirement that all debts be settled in 24 hours, and a strict dress code that required full evening
dress after 7 P.M., without exceptions. White tie and tails were
standard attire; a tuxedo was the minimum dress allowed.
An unwritten rule of the Beach Club was that no Florida residents were to be admitted. This rule was copied from Monte
Carlo, where the locals were not allowed entry to the casino. But
this was just a convenient rule for Bradley to apply at his discretion. He did not want any of the locals hurt too badly financially,
because they might raise a ruckus with the law. He used his own
personal judgment, and he admitted only those locals whom he
considered suitable for admission. These, of course were the rich
and powerful citizens who helped guarantee he would remain
open. Bradley’s Beach Club operated in Palm Beach under these
and other rules for more than 45 years.
One January evening in 1930, close to 7 P.M., Livermore walked
into the casino dressed in white tie and tails. Livermore enjoyed
clothes. They hung very well on his slim body. The tails had been
custom made for him in England. He had had four sets made several years before, and they remained unaltered. Livermore’s weight
never varied.

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 207

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 207 •

He went into the gaming room and found his close friend Walter P. Chrysler, still in his golfing outfit, sitting at the roulette
wheel, fully engrossed in the spinning wheel and the little black
bouncing ball. He sat down next to him. Chrysler looked up and
saw that Livermore was dressed for the evening.
“Hello, Walter.”
“Hi, J.L., you’re dressed. Is it that late?”
“It’s ten to seven,” Livermore answered.
“Time flies when you’re losing money.”
“Bad?”
“About five grand on the wrong side of things.”
As the clock moved minutes away from 7, Bradley walked up to
the roulette wheel. The croupier looked at him. Bradley reached
out for the little black ball. The croupier handed it to him.
“Walter, it’s almost seven. You need to change clothes.”
“I need to change my luck. Ed, I’m down about five grand here.
I want to play it out.”
“When you change and come back. We’ll keep your seat for
you. We’re open until four in the morning,” Bradley said.
“Ed look . . .”
“Walter,” Bradley stared at him for a second. He was not used
to being questioned. Neither was Chrysler. Bradley reached into
his pocket and took out his lucky silver dollar. “Suppose we flip for
whatever you’re down.”
“All right.”
“You call it, Walter.”
“Heads.”
Bradley flipped the coin and as it arched over and headed downward he snatched the coin out of the air.
“You win, Walter,” Bradley said, not looking at the coin. He
nodded at the croupier to replace the chips that Chrysler had lost.
After Chrysler left, Livermore and Bradley settled down at a small

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 208

• 208 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

cocktail table in the dining room. The dining crowd did not hit
the club until at least 8. It was quiet. Bradley ordered his soda water,
Livermore his old-fashioned. They sat in silence for a moment.
Livermore broke the silence. “You always get your own way, Ed?”
“Not always, but I don’t like to see my rules broken. You must
have rules, don’t you J.L.?”
“Yes, and I’m sorry to say I break them once in a while.”
“I hear you didn’t break them in the Crash.”
“No, not this time. This time I played by my rules and I did
okay.”
“A gambler and a stock speculator have to play by their rules,
don’t they, J.L.?”
“Yes, it takes long enough to figure them out, doesn’t it?”
“A lifetime, because you never entirely figure them out, like you
never really figure a person out.”
“Ed, how can you figure a person out when you can’t figure
yourself out?”
Bradley laughed. “You’re right there. We live with ourselves
twenty-four hours a day and there’s nothin’ more important to us
than ourselves, and most of us still don’t know about ourselves.”
“And let’s not even bring up the subject of women.”
“No, I’m perplexed enough as it is.” Fresh drinks came and
Bradley held up his glass. They clinked in a toast. “Here’s to never
understanding women. The mystery is too much fun. And here’s
to some good luck in that department once in a while.”
“Cheers,” Livermore responded.
They sat in a comfortable silence for a few moments. Livermore
broke it. “Ed, I can say with no flattery that you are one of the
greatest gamblers in the world. You have played all over the country, and you consistently win. I have a question for you.”
“Shoot.”
“What do you think it takes to win in the stock market?”

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 209

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 209 •

“I asked you that same question a while back, J.L. Besides, what
would I know about the stock market?”
“Please, Ed.” Livermore took a sip of his drink. “I know you
won in a big way in the commodities market in Chicago, years
ago.”
“All right, I’ll try to answer you, J.L.” Bradley paused for a
moment, then answered. “I think it takes three things. Timing.
When to get in the market and when to get out, or when to hold
and when to fold. It takes money management. You can’t ever lose
your stake, or the entire game is over. And it takes emotional stability. Yes; maybe most important, it takes the ability to control
your emotions when you’re in the play. That’s it.”
“Sounds like the principles of a good gambler.”
“Life’s a gamble, J.L.”
Livermore smiled, and this time he held up his glass. “How
about a toast to people who live by their wits?”
“Who live by their wits and know when to call it quits.” They
clinked glasses. “I like that, J.L. Yes sir, I like that.”
Timing was everything to a speculator. It was never if a stock was
going to move; it was when a stock was going to move up or down.
The crash of 1929 solidified Livermore’s belief in what he called
pivotal points. Black Tuesday was the biggest pivotal point in the
history of the stock market—the market fell 11.7 percent in one
day. Livermore formed the core of his timing strategy based on
pivotal points.
He attempted to explain the concept to his sons when they were
older. “Boys, pivotal points became one of my true trading keys, a
trading technique that was basically unknown in a formal way in
stock speculation in the 1920s and early 1930s. Pivotal points are a
timing device I use to get in and out of the market.
“I divide pivotal points into two categories: The first I call a

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 210

• 210 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

reversal pivotal points and the second I call the continuation pivotal
points.
“The reversal pivotal point is not easily defined. In my mind, it
is a change in basic market direction, the perfect psychological
time at the beginning of a new move, a change in the basic trend.
For my style of trading, it did not matter if it was at the bottom or
the top of a long-term trending move. The essential thing to
understand about this technique is that the reversal pivotal point
marks a definite change in direction. The continuation pivotal
point only confirms the move.
“The reversal pivotal point flags for me the optimum trading
time. Reversal pivotal points are almost always accompanied by a
heavy increase in volume, a climax of buying, which is met with a
barrage of selling, or vice versa. This battle, this war between buyers and sellers, causes the stock to reverse its direction, to top out,
or to bottom out in a decline. It is the start of a new direction in
trend for the stock. These confirming volume spurts often end the
day with a 100 to 500 percent increase in the average daily volume.
“I have noticed that these reversal pivotal points usually come
after long-term trending moves. This is one of the reasons why I
always felt that patience was so necessary for success in catching the
big moves.
“You definitely need patience to be sure that you have identified
the reversal pivotal point of a stock. I developed tests. First of all, I
would send out a probe—I would buy a small percentage of the
position I would eventually establish if I were correct with the first
trade. I also checked the entire industry group, or at least one other
stock in the group, to see if it had the same pattern. This was all
the confirmation I needed.
“The second very important type of pivotal point, the continuation pivotal point, usually occurs during a trending move as a
natural reaction for a stock in a definite trend. This is a potential

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 211

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 211 •

FIGURE 11.1 Schlumberger, Ltd., July 15, 1997 to July 15, 1999.
(Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

additional entry point in an ongoing move, or a chance to increase
your position, providing the stock emerges from the continuation
pivot point headed in the same direction as it was before the correction.*
“For me, a stock’s price is never too high to buy, or too low to sell
short. By waiting for continuation pivotal point signals, I gained the
opportunity to either open a new position or add to a current position, if I had already established one. I don’t chase a stock if it gets

*Figure 11.1 shows two clear reversal pivotal points made by Schlumberger, an
oil drilling and service company. The first, in late 1997, led to a decline in price,
and the second, at the end of 1998, led to an increase in price. The company
also formed a continuation pivotal point in mid-1998 when it hit $86, confirming the descent—in this case, to $40 near the end of 1998.

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 212

• 212 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

away from me. I would rather wait and pay more after the stock has
regrouped and formed a new continuation pivotal point, because
this continuation pivotal point is a confirmation and provides insurance that the stock will most likely continue with its move.
“I also used this pivotal point theory to find many successful
short-selling plays. I looked for stocks that had traded down to a
new low for the past year or so. If they formed a false pivotal
point—that is, if they rallied from this new low and then
dropped down through the new low—they would most likely
continue down from there and establish additional new lows for
the move.
“By correctly catching the pivotal points, I could make my initial
purchase at the right price from the beginning of the move. This
insured that I was never in a loss position and could therefore ride
out the normal stock fluctuations without risking my own capital.
Once the stock had moved off the pivotal point and I was in profit,
I was risking only my paper profits, not my precious capital.
“My early years of getting crushed because I had bought the
stock at the wrong time in its move gave me the clues to develop
this new theory of pivotal points. If you buy before the pivotal
point is established then you may be too early. This is dangerous,
because the stock may never form a proper pivotal point to clearly
establish its direction. If you buy more than 5 or 10 percent above
the initial pivotal point then you are too late. You may have lost
your edge, because the move is already under way.
“The pivotal point gives the only tip-off you need to trade and
win. A speculator has to be patient, because it takes time for a
stock to run out its logical and natural course.
“The key to my later theory of trading is to trade only on the
pivotal points. I have always made money when I was patient and
traded on the pivotal points.

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 213

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 213 •

“I also believe that the largest part of a stock movement often
occurs in the last two weeks or so of the play, and that the same
applies for commodities. So, once again, a speculator has to be
patient, get into position and wait, but at the same time must be
completely alert for the clues when they come, good or bad.”
A danger signal, often a signal to exit a trade, a signal that made
Livermore sit up and take notice, was the one-day reversal. This is
a stock movement that often happens at the end of a long-term
move. A one-day reversal occurs when the high of the day is
higher than the high of the previous day, but the close of the day
is below the close of the previous day and the volume of the current day is higher than the volume of the previous day.
Figure 11.2 shows an example. All during Schwab’s rise, following the trend, the line of least resistance, it had only normal
reactions. Then it suddenly had an aberrant reaction—a dramatic
rise of over 15 points in three days that developed into a spike.
During the last day of the ascent, the rally broke near the end of
the day, and the price of the stock fell, closing near the low of the
day. The next morning, it opened and fell further. These one-day
reversals are often accompanied by increased volume. This scenario was a screaming danger signal to Livermore.
Livermore believed that if a trader had the patience to sit with
the stock all during its rise, after the one-day reversal the trader
must have the courage to do the right thing, acknowledge this
danger signal, and consider selling the stock. Livermore firmly
believed in patience and courage.
The pivotal point theory allowed Livermore the chance to buy
at the exact right time. He never wanted to buy at the lowest price
or sell at the top. He wanted to buy at the right time and sell at the
right time.

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 214

• 214 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

FIGURE 11.2 Charles Schwab Corporation, July 15, 1997 to July
15, 1999. (Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

This required patience to wait for the perfect trading moment
to form. He did not care if the right formation did not occur on a
particular stock he was following, because the pattern would
appear on another stock sooner or later. Patience, patience,
patience—that was his key to timing success.
Livermore always considered time as a real and essential trading
element. He often would say it’s not the thinking that makes the
money—it’s the sitting and waiting that makes the money.
This has been incorrectly interpreted by many people to mean
that Livermore would buy a stock and then sit and wait for it to
move. This is not so. There were many occasions where Livermore
sat and waited in cash, holding little or no stock, until the right
situation appeared. He was able to sit and wait patiently in cash
until the perfect situation presented itself to him. When these

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 215

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 215 •

conditions came together, when as many of the odds as possible
were in his favor, then and only then would he strike.
Buying on the pivotal point assured him the best chance of
coming into the situation, just as the action was about to begin.
And once he was sure of his play, he was not afraid to make his
commitment. He was not called the Boy Plunger for nothing.
His decision was always clear, as he wrote in his own book, published in 1940, How to Trade in Stocks:
When a speculator can determine the Pivotal Point of a stock
and interpret the action at that point, he may make a commitment with the positive assurance of being right from the start.
But bear in mind when using Pivotal Points in anticipating
movements, that if the stock does not perform as it should,
after crossing the Pivotal Point, this is an important danger
signal which must be heeded.
I have found the study of Pivotal Points fascinating almost
beyond belief. You will find a golden field for personal
research. You will derive a singular pleasure and satisfaction
from successful trades based on your own judgment. You will
discover that profits made in this way are immensely more
gratifying than any which could possibly come from tips, or
the guidance of someone else. If you make your own discovery, trade your own way, exercise patience, and watch for the
danger signals, you will develop a proper trend of thinking.
Every time I lost patience and failed to await the Pivotal
Points and fiddled around for some easy profits, I would lose
money.
Livermore knew that this pivotal point theory applied to trading in
commodities, as well. While he did not consider this method foolproof, it was a core part of his trading strategy.

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 216

• 216 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

He also stated that there was probably a lot more to perfecting
the use of pivotal points in the future. He was sure people would
develop better trading methods from his basic premise. He promised that he would not be jealous of their success.
Livermore said that it was okay to anticipate the action of the
market or a stock, but that traders should not take action until the
market has confirmed that their judgment is correct by its action.
Then, and only then, should they move with their money.
Pivotal points were an essential confirming signal for Livermore.
He explained further to his sons that the market will often go contrary to what speculators have predicted. At these times, successful
speculators must abandon their predictions and follow the action
of the market. Prudent speculators never argue with the tape.
Markets are never wrong, but opinions often are.
New highs were always good news for Livermore. To him, they
meant that the stock had pushed through the overhead resistance
and was very likely to advance. Livermore was not a chartist. He
calculated everything from a numerical base.
Figures 11.3 and 11.4 show several new-high breakout formations like those that appeared to Livermore on a regular basis. Livermore worked with them in numerical form, but charts have been
used here for expediency. Figure 11.3 shows that Best Buy, a consumer retailer of electronics, appliances, and entertainment software,
broke out of a long consolidation at $30 in December 1998 and kept
right on climbing to new highs. Figure 11.4 shows that Nortel Networks, a manufacturer of telecommunication equipment, formed a
strong reversal pivotal point at $30 in September 1998 and powered
through to a new all-time high of $65 in April 1999.
Why these formations repeat themselves is basically unknown.
Livermore explained it as human nature in his own book, How to

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 217

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 217 •

FIGURE 11.3 Best Buy, Inc., July 15, 1997 to July 15, 1999.
(Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

Trade in Stocks: “All through time, people have basically acted the
same way in the market as a result of greed, fear, ignorance, and
hope. That is why the numerical formations and patterns recur on
a constant basis.”
For his overall market and industry-group timing cues, Livermore was always very sensitive to the market leaders. He tracked
them carefully, watching them like a hawk through the glass panels of his office as they were posted on the green chalkboard.
Tracking the leaders provided strong timing clues for the general
overall direction of the market. Trading several stocks in each of
the major leading groups also helped confirm when a specific
industry group was falling out of favor and reversing—or, vice
versa, coming into favor.

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 218

• 218 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

FIGURE 11.4 Northern Telecom, Ltd., July 15, 1997 to July 15,
1999. (Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

The leaders, in Livermore’s mind, were also surrogates for the
Dow Jones averages. When these leading groups faltered, it was a
warning signal, and his attention to the overall direction of the
market was heightened. The signal occurred when the leaders
stopped making new highs and stalled, often reversing direction
before the overall market turned.
This was one of the essential timing clues for Livermore in the
1907 and 1929 crashes. The leaders faltered and began to turn as
the craze for secondary stocks in the overall market broadened. Of
course, the wild speculation in these ancillary issues spoke volumes
to Livermore, because he had been through crashes before.
Livermore developed a sophisticated system of following the
current leaders. His interest in them was twofold. First, they were

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 219

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 219 •

the only stocks he would speculate in. He wrote in How to Trade in
Stocks:
Confine your studies of stock market movements to the
prominent issues of the day, the leaders. It is where the action is. If you cannot make money out of the leading active
issues, you are not going to make money out of the stock
market.
Second, this will also keep your trading universe small and
controllable, so you can focus and trade the stocks with the
greatest potential. Don’t let greed drive your moves by trying
to catch the exact top and the exact bottom.
Livermore also believed that timing should never be dictated by
high prices. High prices were never a timing signal to sell a stock.
He often said that just because a stock was selling at a high price
did not mean it would not go higher.
Livermore was also just as comfortable on the short side, if that
was the direction of the trend—just because a stock had fallen in
price did not mean that it would not go lower. He never bought
stocks on declines, and he never shorted stocks on rallies.
Buying stocks as they made new highs and selling short as they
made new lows was a contrarian point of view, and this has
remained a contrarian point of view with many investors through
history.
Livermore let the market tell him what to do, he got his clues
and his cues from what the market told him. He did not anticipate,
he followed the message he received from the tape. Some stocks
keep making new highs and can be held for a very long time, as
shown in Figure 11.5. Cisco Systems, a leader in networking solutions for the Internet, had basically gone up for five straight years.
