
What Currencies Will You Trade?
The second step is to determine which currency pairs you want to trade,
because not all currencies are created equal. In FX, there are generally

P1: JYS
c11
JWBK299-Lein

August 7, 2008

12:31

How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager

Printer: Yet to come

209

two types of trading strategies—trend following or range trading. Most
hedge funds are trend following because of the one-way directional bias
of the currency market, but many people are contrarians by nature and
may choose to range trade instead. There is no wrong or right choice, but
in order to increase the probability of success, many hedge fund managers
will narrow the currency pairs that the system will trade. Rarely have I seen
professional traders apply the same strategy to every single currency pair.
They will almost always have currency pairs that they trade often and currency pairs that they never trade. For example, if your trading strategy calls
for a risk of no more than 100 pips on each trade, currency pairs with wide
ranges like the GBP/JPY and the EUR/CAD should be avoided and probably
not traded, because even if the currency pair eventually moves in your desired direction, its wide swings may stop you out before doing so. Another
example would be to apply range-trading strategies only to range-trading
currency pairs and apply trending strategies to trending currency pairs.
The CHF/JPY, for example, is a great currency pair for a range-trading strategy and a horrible one for a trend-trading strategy, because except for one
spike lower, it has been trapped in a 300-pip range from September 2007 to
March 2008. Therefore, a person with a range-trading strategy should look
to trade only currency pairs like the CHF/JPY, while trend traders should
avoid the CHF/JPY at all costs.
When it comes to currencies, another thing to consider is majors versus crosses. Major currency pairs such as the EUR/USD or the USD/JPY
tend to be very sensitive to what is happening in the U.S. dollar, whereas
this is generally not the case for the crosses, because they do not include
the U.S. dollar. News traders may find this tip particularly useful, because
unless you are trading U.S. data, crosses could actually be better bets because their price action may be less distorted by the market’s appetite for
U.S. dollars.

What Time Frame Will You Trade?
The third step to defining your trading strategy is to determine what time
frame you want to trade. A strategy that works on a daily chart will probably have far less accuracy on a 5-minute chart. For example, if you are
using the inside day strategy, you will see that inside days are far more
common on intraday charts and far less common on daily charts. This is
why they are extremely accurate when they do appear on daily charts; the
rarest things can be the most valuable.
Finally, when it comes to time frames, other things that need to be
considered include whether you will hold positions overnight and over the
weekend. For example, short-term traders may find it more profitable to
close their trades if they are not working after a certain number of hours

P1: JYS
c11
JWBK299-Lein

210

August 7, 2008

12:31

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

or when the market switches into the Asian trading session. This would apply for traders reacting to news, because if the trade does not move in your
favor after a few hours, the momentum from the news release has probably waned. As for the weekend, occasionally something big may happen
between Friday night and Sunday afternoon. Unless you have stops that
can absorb any shocks or you know that there isn’t a significant event risk,
closing positions before the weekend may also be something to consider.

THE ART OF ENTERING AND EXITING
In an interview for Millionaire Traders: How Everyday People Beat Wall
Street at Its Own Game, Rob Booker made a fantastic analogy. We were
talking about whether the entry of a trade or the exit is more important, and
Rob likened this to flying and asking a pilot which is more important, the
takeoff or the landing. Without even needing to ask a pilot, as passengers,
we will all agree that the same degree of precision needs to be applied to
both the takeoff and the landing. This is true for trading as well.
The majority of traders spend their time trying to figure out the best
entry strategies by looking for the perfect combination of indicators for
buy and sell signals, while their exit strategies are usually relegated to being nothing more than an afterthought. Yet this afterthought often is what
differentiates consistently profitable traders from ones who are perpetually looking for a better trading strategy. Too often have I heard traders
complain about how they let a winning trade become a losing one.
When hedge fund managers design trading strategies, they give a great
deal of thought to both entries and exits. There are primarily four different
ways to enter or exit a trade:
1. Single entry, single exit: With a single entry and a single exit, traders

basically put on their entire position at one price and exit the entire
position at one price.
2. Single entry, multiple exits: With a single entry and multiple exits,
traders enter their entire position at one price but scale out of the position at different prices. This tactic is usually used to ride a breakout
or trend for as long as possible while banking some profits along the
way.
3. Multiple entries, single exit: With multiple entries and a single exit,
traders scale into a position at different prices but end up closing the
entire position at one price. This tactic is used by traders who are
averaging down and averaging up. To average down means to add to
a position as it moves against you with the hope of attaining a better

P1: JYS
c11
JWBK299-Lein

August 7, 2008

12:31

How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager

Printer: Yet to come

211

average price. To average up means to add to a position as it moves in
your favor.
4. Multiple entries, multiple exits: With multiple entries and multiple

exits, traders scale both into and out of their positions. This is a tactic
frequently used by trend traders. They average up into a position by
adding to winning trades and scale out of the position to capitalize on
as much of the trend as possible.
With automatic systems, entry and exit strategies are set in stone and
coded into the system. Traders should try to approach entries and exits in
the same way by deciding which of the four combinations to use before
laying on a trade. For those traders who like to average up or down, an
important question to ask is how low or how high you are willing to buy. If
you keep on adding to a losing trade, at some point it just becomes smarter
to bite the bullet, take the loss, and admit that the move you were initially
looking for will not happen or the trend has changed. A good rule of thumb
is to average down no more than three times. When it comes to stops, there
should be no art involved—have a set rule on placing stops and stick to it.

TEST DRIVE
You will never buy a car without test-driving it, so you should never trade
a strategy without back-testing it! For hedge funds and developers of automated trading systems, back-testing is extremely important because if
a trading strategy did not make money in the past, how can they believe
that the strategy will make money in the future? Many FX traders will learn
strategies from their friends, trading coaches, or even this book, but no one
should ever just follow a strategy blindly. Make sure it is back-tested and
forward-tested.
For traders who are particularly good at programming, code your strategy using something like TradeStation, eSignal, or Meta Trader, run the
results, and make sure that it is profitable.
Traders who do not know how to code should do the visual back
test. Open your charts, apply your indicators, and look for a minimum of
20 examples of the strategy working. Then downgrade the time frame of
your charts to make sure that the strategy could have been executed at
your desired price. For example, if you are trading a strategy based on
hourly charts, make sure there are no spikes on the 5-minute charts.
Once you have found your back-tested examples, it is time to forwardtest. One of the great things about trading currencies is the wide availability
of demo and mini accounts. It is important to live test with a small amount

P1: JYS
c11
JWBK299-Lein

212

August 7, 2008

12:31

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

of money, because once there is actual money involved, a whole different set of emotions will arise, and controlling those emotions is an important part of developing the discipline you need to trade larger amounts of
money. The best thing to do is to focus on the changes in pips and not the
changes in dollars.

GETTING INTIMATE
The fourth step to thinking like a hedge fund manager is to get intimate
with your trading strategy, because not all trading strategies are alike.

Understanding Performance
When it comes to performance, there are two primary types of trading
strategies—one that has a high percentage of profitable trades and one that
has a high profit factor.
In strategies that have a high percentage of profitable trades, usually
the amount of pips made in winning trades is approximately the same as
the amount of pips lost in losing trades. An example would be a strategy
where 8 out 10 trades are winners, with each winning trade making 20 pips
and each unprofitable trade losing 20 pips. Although this does not satisfy
the textbook description of a good risk-to-reward ratio, if the number of
profitable trades is far higher than the number of losing trades, the strategy
is still a solid one. In the previous example, the net profit for the 10 trades
would still be 120 pips. Therefore, if you have a strategy similar to this and
it starts to have six or seven consecutive losers, you know that it is time to
seriously reexamine the strategy.
For strategies that have a high profit factor but a low percentage of
profitable trades, having a string of losers may be a part of the trading
strategy. This applies particularly to breakout traders who may take small
positions with tight stops in anticipation of a big breakout. Although they
may get stopped out often for 30 or 40 pips, when the breakout occurs, the
eventual move could be to the degree of 400 or 500 pips.
The key here is to know exactly what type of market environment your
strategy performs well in and what type of market environment your strategy fails in, because only then will you know when it is time to pull the plug.

Understanding Drawdown
In the currency market, managing losses is extremely important. Many people who are new to the currency market argue that trading FX is far more
dangerous than trading any other asset. In some ways they are wrong and

P1: JYS
c11
JWBK299-Lein

August 7, 2008

12:31

How to Trade Like a Hedge Fund Manager

Printer: Yet to come

213

in some ways they are right. With only eight major currencies to trade, the
FX market is much easier to understand than other markets. Also, since
most people trade only the G-10 currencies, economic data cannot really
be manipulated and there will almost never be a scenario like WorldCom
or Enron. On a day-to-day basis, currency rates usually move no more than
1 to 2 percent, which actually makes them one of the least volatile assets
to invest or trade in. However, the availability of very high leverage does
make trading currencies more dangerous. Some brokers offer as much as
400-to-1 leverage, which makes a 1 percent move more like 400 percent. It
therefore becomes much easier to blow up your trading account. Thankfully, leverage is customizable, and it is important for traders to actively
manage their risk.
Understanding the drawdown of your trading strategy helps to manage risk by giving you a frame of reference for determining when to pull
the plug and when to sit tight. A drawdown is defined as the reduction
in account equity from a trade or series of trades. All professional money
managers know the maximum drawdowns of their trading strategies. For
example, I once tested a strategy involving carry trades, and the maximum
drawdown for the strategy over the past 10 years was 15 percent. With that
number in mind, I knew that if the drawdown going forward hits 10 percent, it does not necessarily mean that the strategy has failed. However,
if the drawdown hits 15 percent I should start getting very worried; and if
it hits 20 percent, then I know that this may be a completely new trading
environment not previously accounted for in the back test, and for that reason, it may be time to seriously consider pulling the plug, admitting that I
am wrong, and terminating the strategy.
When it comes to drawdowns, there are three main things that all
traders need to know about their strategies. The first is the average drawdown on a given trade; this is important because it lets you know whether
the trade is behaving in accordance with your strategy. The second is the
degree of the biggest drawdown; this lets you know how bad it can get.
Finally, you need to know whether the drawdown is on a closing or an
intratrade basis. Oftentimes the drawdown or maximum loss on a closed
trade may be different from the drawdown or floating loss on an open
trade.

SELF-REFLECTION
The last step of thinking or trading like a hedge fund manager is selfreflection. A few years ago, after I conducted an FX trading workshop in
Malaysia, a trader came to me for advice. He told me that he had a trading
strategy that worked well in nearly all market environments except when

P1: JYS
c11
JWBK299-Lein

214

August 7, 2008

12:31

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

news was being released. Interestingly enough, he asked me what I thought
he should do, and I simply said, “Don’t trade when news is being released!”
Oftentimes we become so absorbed with trading that we do not notice
the obvious. This why it is important to spend some time on a weekly or
monthly basis to go over or reflect on your trading. At the end of every
week, Boris Schlossberg, with whom I run BKTraderFX, and I will sit down
and go over each and every one of our trades. We will ask ourselves why
a particular trade worked, why it did not work, and what we could have
done better. We will review both the winning and losing trades to look to
find room for improvement. In fact, with every trade that we take, we will
ask ourselves if this is in line with our trading strategy, and if not, will
we end up regretting making the same mistakes at our end-of-week review
sessions.
For the trader in Malaysia, the small improvement that he needed to
make may have simply involved avoiding news releases, which can be applicable for range traders in general. Other people may realize that they are
taking profits too early or find that their performance improves by limiting
their trading to certain times of the day. Small and simple changes such as
these can make a long-term difference for all traders.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

C H A P T E R 12

Profiles and
Unique
Characteristics
of Major
Currency Pairs

t is important for all traders to have a good grasp of the general economic characteristics of each of the most commonly traded currencies
in order to gauge what economic data and factors in general may have
the most significant impact on a currency’s movements. Some currencies
tend to track commodity prices, while others may move in complete contrast. Traders also need to be aware of the difference between expected
and actual data. That is, the most important aspect of interpreting news and
its impact on the foreign exchange markets is the determination of whether
the market is expecting a piece of news. This is known as the “market
discount mechanism.” The correlation between the currency markets and
news is very important. News or data that are in line with expectations have
less of an impact on currency movements than unexpected news or data.
Therefore, short-term traders need to closely monitor expectations of the
market.

I

CURRENCY PROFILE: U.S.
DOLLAR (USD)
Broad Economic Overview
The United States is the world’s leading economic power, with gross domestic product (GDP) valued at over US$13 trillion in 2006. This is the
highest in the world, and, based on the purchasing power parity model, it
is three times the size of Japan’s output, five times the size of Germany’s,
215

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

216

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

and seven times the size of the United Kingdom’s. The United States is
primarily a service-oriented country with nearly 80 percent of its GDP
coming from real estate, transportation, finance, health care, and business
services. Yet the sheer size of the U.S. manufacturing sector still makes
the U.S. dollar particularly sensitive to developments within the sector.
With the United States having the most liquid equity and fixed income
markets in the world, foreign investors have consistently increased their
purchases of U.S. assets. According to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), foreign direct investments into the United States are equal to approximately 40 percent of total global net inflows for the United States.
On a net basis, the United States absorbs 71 percent of total foreign savings. This means that if foreign investors are not satisfied with their returns in the U.S. asset markets and they decide to repatriate their funds,
this would have a significant effect on U.S. asset values and the U.S. dollar. More specifically, if foreign investors sell their U.S. dollar-denominated
asset holdings in search of higher-yielding assets elsewhere, this would typically result in a decline in the value of the U.S. asset, as well as the U.S.
dollar.
The import and export volume of the United States also exceeds that
of any other country. This is due to the country’s sheer size, as true import
and export volume represent a mere 12 percent of GDP. Despite this large
activity, on a netted basis, the United States is running a very large current
account deficit of over $800 billion as of 2006. This is a major problem
that the U.S. economy has been grappling with for more than 10 years.
However, in the past five years, it has become an even larger problem since
foreign funding of the deficit has been languishing as foreign central banks
consider diversifying reserve assets out of dollars and into euros. The large
current account deficit makes the U.S. dollar highly sensitive to changes in
capital flows. In fact, in order to prevent a further decline in the U.S. dollar
as a result of trade, the United States needs to attract a significant amount
of capital inflows per day (in 2006, this number was over $2 billion per day).
The United States is also the largest trading partner for most other
countries, representing 20 percent of total world trade. These rankings are
very important because changes in the value of the dollar and its volatility
will impact U.S. trading activities with these respective countries. More
specifically, a weaker dollar could boost U.S. exports to its trade partners,
whereas a stronger dollar could curb foreign demand for U.S. exports. Here
are the breakdowns of the most important trading partners for the United
States (in order of importance).
The list of export markets is important because it ranks the importance
of growth and political stability of these countries for the United States. For
example, should Canadian growth slow, its demand for U.S. exports would
also fall, which would have a ripple effect on U.S. growth.

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

Proﬁles and Unique Characteristics of Major Currency Pairs

217

Leading Export Markets
1. Canada
2. Mexico
3. Japan
4. United Kingdom
5. European Union

Leading Import Sources
1. Canada
2. China
3. Mexico
4. Japan
5. European Union

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, “U.S. International Transactions,”
2006 Report.

Monetary and Fiscal Policy Makers—The Federal
Reserve
The Federal Reserve Board (Fed) is the monetary policy authority of the
United States. The Fed is responsible for setting and implementing monetary policy through the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The voting members of the FOMC are the seven governors of the Federal Reserve
Board, plus five presidents of the 12 district reserve banks. The FOMC
holds eight meetings per year, which are widely watched for interest rate
announcements or changes in growth expectations.
The Fed has a high degree of independence to set monetary authority.
It is less subject to political influences, as most members are accorded long
terms that allow them to remain in office through periods of alternate party
dominance in both the presidency and Congress.
The Federal Reserve issues a biannual Monetary Policy Report in
February and July followed by the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony where
the Federal Reserve chairman responds to questions from both the
Congress and the Banking Committees in regard to this report. This report
is important to watch, as it contains the FOMC forecasts for GDP growth,
inflation, and unemployment.
The Fed, unlike most other central banks, has a mandate or “long-run
objectives” of “price stability and sustainable economic growth.” In order
to adhere to these goals, the Fed has to use monetary policy to limit infla-

P1: JYS
c12
JWBK299-Lein

218

September 15, 2008

17:48

Printer: Yet to come

DAY TRADING AND SWING TRADING THE CURRENCY MARKET

tion and unemployment and to achieve balanced growth. The most popular
tools that the Fed uses to control monetary policy are open market operations and the federal funds rate.
Open Market Operations Open market operations involve Fed purchases of government securities, including Treasury bills, notes, and
bonds. This is one of the most popular methods for the Fed to signal and implement policy changes. Generally speaking, an increase in Fed purchases
of government securities decreases interest rates, while selling of government securities by the Fed boosts interest rates.
Federal Funds Target The federal funds target rate is the key policy target of the Federal Reserve. It is the interest rate for borrowing that
the Fed offers to its member banks. The Fed tends to increase this rate to
curb inflation or decrease this rate to promote growth and consumption.
Changes to this rate are closely watched by the market, tend to imply major changes in policy, and typically have large ramifications for global fixed
income and equity markets. The market also pays particular attention to
the statement released by the Federal Reserve, as it can offer signals for
future monetary policy actions.
In terms of fiscal policy, that is in the hands of the U.S. Treasury. Fiscal policy decisions include determining the appropriate level of taxes and
government spending. In fact, although the markets pay more attention to
the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury is the actual government body that
determines dollar policy. That is, if the Treasury feels that the USD rate on
the foreign exchange market is under- or overvalued, the U.S. Treasury is
the government body that gives the New York Federal Reserve Board the
authority and instructions to intervene in the foreign exchange market by
physically selling or buying U.S. dollars. Therefore, the Treasury’s view on
dollar policy and changes to that view is generally very important to the
currency market.
Over the past few decades, the Treasury and Fed officials have maintained a “strong dollar” bias. This was particularly true under former Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill, who was frequently very vocal in advocating
a strong dollar. Under the Bush administration, Treasury Secretary Henry
Paulson has reiterated this view and stated that he, too, favors a strong dollar. However, the Bush administration has done little to stem the dollar’s
slide between 2003 and 2008, which has led the market to believe that the
administration actually favors a behind-the-scenes weak dollar policy and
uses it as a tool to spur growth. Yet, for political reasons, it is not likely
that the government would vocally change its stance to supporting a weak
dollar policy.
