
Volatility 67

VOLATILITY AND OBSERVED PRICE CHANGES

Why is it important for a trader to be able to estimate daily or weekly price changes from
an annual volatility? Volatility is the one input into a theoretical pricing model which
cannot be directly observed. Yet many option strategies, if they are to be successful,
require an accurate assessment of volatility. Therefore, an option trader needs some
method of determining whether his expectations about volatility are indeed being
realized in the marketplace. Unlike directional strategies, whose success or failure can
pe immediately observed from posted prices, there is no posting of volatilities. A trader
must determine for himself whether he is using a reasonable volatility input into the
theoretical pricing model.

For example, suppose a certain underlying contract is trading at 40 and a trader is
using a 30% volatility for theoretical evaluation. A one standard deviation daily price
change is approximately 30%/16 x 40 = .75. Over five days of trading a trader notes
the following five settlement-to-settlement price changes: ,

+.43, —06, -.61, +.50, -.28

Are these five price changes consistent with a 30% volatility?

The trader expects to see a price change of more than .75 (one standard deviation}
about one day in three, or between one and two times over a five-day period. Yet during
this five-day period he did not see a price change of this magnitude even once. What
conclusions can be drawn from this?4 One thing is certain: these five price changes are
not consistent with 30% volatility. The trader might explain the discrepancy in one of
two ways. On the one hand, perhaps this was expected to be an abnormally quiet week
(perhaps it was a holiday week); and next week when trading returns to normal the
market will go right back to making moves which are more consistent with a 30%
Volatility. If the trader comes to this conclusion, perhaps he ought to continue to use a
30% volatility for his calculations. On the other hand, perhaps there is no apparent
reason for the market being less volatile than predicted by a 30% volatility. He may
simply be using the wrong volatility. If the trader comes to this conclusion, perhaps he
ought to consider using a new volatility input which is more consistent with the
observed price changes. If he continues to use a 30% volatility in the face of price
changes which are significantly less than predicted by that number, he will be assigning
the wrong probabilities to the possible price outcomes for the underlying contract.
Consequently, he will generate incorrect theoretical values, defeating the purpose of
using a theoretical pricing model in the first place.

Exactly what volatility is associated with the five price changes in the foregoing
example? Without some rather involved calculations it is difficult to say. (The answer
is actually 18.8%.)] However, ifa trader has some idea beforehand of what price changes
he expects, he can easily see that the changes over the five-day period are not consistent
with a 30% volatility.

4. — Five days is admittedly a very small sample from which to draw a meaningful conclusion about
volatility. The method and reasoning, however, are still valld.


68 Chapter 4

Let’s look at another example. Now the underlying contract is trading at 33214
and a trader notes the following five daily price changes:

-5, +24, +1, -7%, -44

Are these price changes consistent with an 18% volatility? At 18% a one standard
deviation price change is approximately 18%/16 x 33214 = 354. Over five days we
expect to see a price change of more than 334 between one and two times. Yet here we
have a price change of more than 3% three days out of five. And once the price change
was 794 (more than two standard deviations) which we expect to see only one day in
twenty. Again, unless the trader believes that the five price changes occurred during an

extraordinary week, then perhaps he ought to consider changing his volatility figure so
that it is more consistent with the observed price changes.

A NOTE ON INTEREST RATE PRODUCTS

Suppose Eurodollars are at 93.00 and we assume a volatility of 16 percent. We can apply
the method previously described to calculate an approximate one standard deviation
daily price change: 16%/16 x 93.00 = .93. As any trader familiar with the Eurodollar
market will attest, a daily price change of .93 is wildly unlikely. How can we account
for this seemingly illogical answer? One might conclude that we simply have the wrong
volatility, and some lower number is more accurate. In fact, the 16% volatility is not at
all unusual for Eurodollars, so the explanation must lie elsewhere.

Eurodollars, like many other interest rate contracts (U.S. Treasury Bills, Short
Sterling, Euromarks, Euroyen) are indexed from 100. This means that the interest rate
associated with a Eurodollar contract is 100 less the value of the contract. It also means
that, barring the unlikely advent of negative interest rates, the contract cannot take on
a value greater than 100. In this respect, 100 acts as a limiting value for Eurodollars in
the same way that zero acts as a limiting value for traditional underlying contracts such
as stocks and commodities. We can integrate this characteristic into our calculations by
assuming that the value of a Eurodollar contract is actually 100 less its listed price. If
the listed price is 93.00, for theoretical evaluation purposes we must use a value of 100
— 93.00, or 7.00, in our pricing model. If we define the value of the contract as 7.00, a
one standard deviation price change is 16%/16 x 7.00 = .07. This is certainly a more
realistic result than .93.

To be consistent, if we index Eurodollar prices from 100 we must also index
exercise prices from 100. Therefore, a 93.50 exercise price in our pricing model is really
a 6.50 (100 ~ 93.50) exercise price. This also requires us to reverse the type of option,
changing calls to puts and puts to calls. To see why, consider a 93.50 call. For this call
to go into-the-money, the underlying contract must rise above 93.50. But this requires
that interest rates fall below 6.50 percent. Therefore, a 93.50 call in listed terms is the
same as a 6.50 put in interest rate terms. A model which is correctly set up to evaluate
options on Eurodollar or other types of indexed interest rate contracts automatically
makes this transformation. The price of the underlying contract and the exercise price


Volatility 69

are subtracted from 100, while listed calls are treated as puts and listed puts are treated
as calls.

Note that this type of transformation is not required for most bonds and notes.
Depending on the coupon rate, the prices of these products may range freely without
upper limit, often exceeding 100, They are therefore most often evaluated using a
traditional pricing model, although interest rate products present other problems that
may require specialized pricing models.

It is possible to take an instrument such as a bond and calculate the current yield
based on its price in the marketplace. If we were to take a series of prices and from these
calculate a series of yields, we could also calculate the yield volatility, i.e., the volatility
based on the change in yield. We might then use this number to evaluate the theoretical
value of an option on the bond, although to be consistent we would also have to specify
the exercise price in terms of yield. Because it is possibie to calculate the volatility of an
interest rate product using these two different methods, interest rate traders sometimes
refer to yield volatility (the volatility calculated from the current yield on the instrument)
versus price volatility (the volatility calculated from the price of the instrument in the
marketplace).

TYPES OF VOLATILITIES

When traders discuss volatility, even experienced traders may find that they are not
always talking about the same thing. When a trader makes the comment that the
volatility of XYZ is 25%, this statement may take on a variety of meanings. We can avoid
confusion in subsequent discussions if we first define the various ways in which traders
interpret volatility.

Future Volatility

Future volatility is what every trader would like to know, the volatility that best
describes the future distribution of prices for an underlying contract. In theory it is this
number to which we are referring when we speak of the volatility input into a
theoretical pricing model. If a trader knows the future volatility, he knows the right
“odds.” When he feeds this number into a theoretical pricing model, he can generate
accurate theoretical values because he has the right probabilities. Like the casino, he
may occasionally lose because of short-term bad luck. Butin the long run, with the odds
on his side, a trader can be fairly certain of making a profit.

Of course, traders rarely talk about the future volatility since it is impossible to
know what the future holds.

Historical Volatility

Even though one cannot know the future, if a trader intends to use a theoretical pricing
Model he must try to make an intelligent guess about the future volatility. In option
evaluation, as in other disciplines, a good starting point is historical data. What typically
has been the volatility of this contract over some period in the past? If, over the past ten
years the volatility of a contract has never been less than 10% nor greater than 30%, a
guess for the future volatility of either 5% or 40% hardly makes sense. This does not


70 Chapter 4

mean that either of these extremes is impossible (in option trading the impossible always
seems to happen sooner or later), but based on past performance, and in the absence of
any extraordinary circumstances, a guess within the historical limits of 10% and 30% is
probably more realistic than a guess outside these limits. Of course, 10% to 30% is still
a huge range, but at least the historical data offers a starting point. Additional informa-
tion may further narrow the estimate.

Note that there are a variety of ways to calculate historical volatility, but most
methods depend on choosing two parameters, the historical period over which the
volatility is to be calculated, and the time interval between successive price changes.
The historical period may be ten days, six months, five years, or any period the trader
chooses. Longer periods tend to yield an average or characteristic volatility, while
shorter periods may reveal unusual extremes in volatility. To become fully familiar with
the volatility characteristics of a contract, a trader may have to examine a wide variety
Of historical time periods.

Next, the trader must decide what intervals to use between price changes. Should
he use daily price changes? Weekly changes? Monthly changes? Or perhaps he ought
to consider some unusual interval, perhaps every other day, or every week and a half.
Surprisingly, the interval which is chosen does not seem to greatly affect the result.
Although a contract may make large daily moves, yet finish a week unchanged, this is
by far the exception. A contract which is volatile from day to day is likely to be equally
volatile from week to week, or month to month. This is typified by the graphs in Figure
4-8. The data points on the three graphs represent the volatility of the S&P 500 index
over successive 50-day periods. For the solid line daily price changes were used, for the
dotted line price changes every two days were used, and for the broken line price
changes every 5 days were used. Even though the graphs occasionally diverge, for the
most part they exhibit the same general volatility levels and trends.

As a general rule, services which supply historical volatility data base their calcula-
tions on daily settlement-to-settlement price changes. If this is not the case, an explana-
tion of how the volatility was calculated will usually accompany the data. If, for
example, a service gave the volatility of a contract for the month of August as 21.6%, it
can be assumed that the calculations were made using the daily settlement-to-settlement
price changes for all the business days during that month.

Historical and future volatility are sometimes referred to as realized volatility.

Forecast Volatility

Just as there are services which will attempt to forecast future directional moves in the
price of a contract, there are also services which will attempt to forecast the future
volatility of a contract. Forecasts may be for any period, but most commonly cover
Periods identical to the remaining life of options on the underlying contract. For an
underlying contract with three months between expirations, a service might forecast
volatilities for the next three, six, and nine months. For an underlying with monthly
expirations, a service might forecast volatilities for the next one, two, and three months.
Due to the relatively recent introduction of options, volatility forecasting is still in its
infancy, and must be considered an inexact science at best. Nonetheless, a trader’s guess


71

Volatility

Aep pug Aenea
Rep Auane

:seBueyo sod uo paseq

(%) Aumelon pezienuuy

ve
Anejo, jeouoysipy Aeg-og xepul 00s d#S :s-p enbly



72 Chapter 4

about the future volatility of a contract might very well take into consideration any
volatility forecast to which he has access.

Implied Volatility

Generally speaking, future, historical, and forecast volatility are associated with an
underlying contract. We can talk about the future volatility of the S&P 500 index, or the
historical volatility of U.S. Treasury Bonds, or a forecast volatility for IBM stock. In each
case we are referring to the volatility of the underlying contract. There is, however, a
different interpretation of volatility which is associated with an option rather than with
the underlying contract.

Suppose a certain futures contract is trading at 98.50 with interest rates at 8%.
Suppose also that a 105 call with three months to expiration is available on this contract,
and that our best guess about the volatility over the next three months is 16%. If we
want to know the theoretical value of the 105 call we might feed all these inpwts into
a theoretical pricing model. Using the Black-Scholes Model, we find that the option has
a theoretical value of .96, Having done this we might compare the option’s theoretical
value to its price in the marketplace. To our surprise, we find that the option is trading
for 1.34. How can we account for the fact that we think the option is worth .96, while
the marketplace seems to believe it is worth 1.34?

One way to answer the question is to assume that everyone in the marketplace is
using the same theoretical pricing model that we are, in this case the Black-Scholes
Model. If we make this assumption, then the discrepancy between our value of .96 and
the marketplace’s value of 1.34 must be due to a difference of opinion concerning one
or more of the inputs into the model. We can therefore start going down the list of inputs
and try to identify the culprits.

We know that it can’t be either the amount of time to expiration or the exercise
price, since these inputs are fixed in the option contract. What about the underlying
price of 98.50? Perhaps we think the price of the underlying is at 98.50, but it is really
trading at some higher price, say 99.00. Indeed, in sttch circumstances it is always wise
to double check the inputs. But suppose we still find that the underlying is at 98.50.
Even given that there is a spread between the bid and ask price, if the market is
reasonably liquid it is unlikely that the spread would be wide enough to cause a
discrepancy of .38 in the value of the option. Perhaps our problem is the interest rate of
8%. But, as we noted in the last chapter, the interest rate component is usually the least
important of the inputs into a theoretical pricing model. And in the case of futures
options, the interest rate component is often trivial. This leaves us with only one likely
culprit, and that is volatility. In some sense, the marketplace must be using a volatility
other than 16% to evaluate the 105 call.

What volatility is the marketplace using? To find out, we can ask the following
question: If we hold all other inputs constant (time to expiration, exercise price,
underlying price, interest rates}, what volatility must we feed into our theoretical pricing
model to yield a theoretical value identical to the price of the option in the marketplace?
In our example, we want to know what volatility will yield a value of 1.34 for the 105
call. Clearly the volatility has to be higher than 16%, so we might sit down with a


Volatility 73

computer programmed with the Black-Scholes Model and start to raise the volatility. If
we do, we will find that at a volatility of 18.5% the 105 call has a theoretical value of
1.34, We refer to this volatility as the implied volatility of the 105 call. It is the volatility
we must feed into our theoretical pricing model to yield a theoretical value identical to
the price of the option in the marketplace. We can also think of it as the volatility being
implied to the underlying contract through the pricing of the option in the marketplace.

When we solve for the implied volatility of an option we are assuming that the
theoretical value (the option’s price) is known, but that the volatility is unknown. In
effect, we are running the theoretical pricing model backwards to solve for this
unknown, as shown in Figure 4-9. In fact, this is easier said than done since most
theoretical pricing models cannot be reversed. However, a number of computer
programs have been written which can quickly solve for the implied volatility when all
other inputs are known.

Note that the implied volatility depends on the theoretical pricing model being
used. For some options, a different model can yield a significantly different implied
volatility. The accuracy of an implied volatility also depends on the accuracy of inputs
into the model. This not only includes the price of the option, but the other inputs as
well. In particular, problems can occur when an option has not traded for some time,
but market conditions have changed significantly. Suppose in our example the price of
1.34 for the 105 call reflected the last trade, but that trade took place two hours ago
when the underlying futures contract was actually at 99.25. If the price of the
underlying contract is 99.25, the implied volatility of the option at a price of 1.34 is
actually 17.3%. This is a significant difference, and underscores the importance of
accurate and timely inputs when calculating implied volatilities.

Services which supply theoretical analysis of options usually include implied
volatilities. The implied volatilities may be for each option on an underlying contract,
or there may be one implied volatility which is representative of all options on the same

Figure 4-9
Using the Model to Solve for a Theoretical Value
Knowns Unknowns
Exercise Price (105) Theoretical Value
Time to Expiration (3 months) (2? = .96)

Underlying Futures Price (98.50)
Interest Rates (8%)
Volatility (16%)

Using the Model to Solve for an Implied Volatility

Knowns Unknowns
Exercise Price (105) Implied Volatility
Time to Expiration (3 months) (2? = 18.5%)

Underlying Futures Price (98.50)
Interest Rates (8%)
Option Price (1.34)



74 Chapter 4

underlying. In the latter case, the figure will usually represent an average of all the
individual implied volatilities. The single implied volatility is weighted according to
some criteria, such as volume of options traded, open interest, or, as is most common,
by assigning the greatest weight to the at-the-money options.

The implied volatility in the marketplace is constantly changing because option
prices, as well as other market conditions, are constantly changing. It is as if the
marketplace were continuously polling all participants to come up with a consensus
volatility for the underlying contract. This is not a poll in the true sense, since all traders
do not huddle together and eventually vote on the correct volatility. However, as bids
and offers are made, the trade price of an option will represent the equilibrium between
supply and demand. This equilibrium can be translated into an implied volatility.

Even though the term premium really refers to an option’s price, it is common
among traders to refer to the implied volatility as the premfum or premium level If the
current implied volatility is high by historical standards, or high relative to the recent
historical volatility of the underlying contract, a trader might say that premium levels
are high; if implied volatility is unusually low, he might say that premium levels are low.

Assuming a trader had a reliable theoretical pricing model, if he could look into a
crystal ball and determine the future volatility of an underlying contract he would be
able to accurately evaluate options on that contract. He might then look at the difference
between each option’s theoretical value and its price in the marketplace, selling any
options which were overpriced relative to the theoretical value, and buying any options
which were underpriced. If given the choice between selling one of two overpriced
options, he might simply seli the one which was most overpriced in total dollars.
However, a trader who has access to implied volatilities might use a different yardstick
for comparison. He might compare the implied volatility of an option to either a volatility
forecast, or to the implied volatility of other options on the same underlying contract.
Going back to our example of the 105 call, we might say that with a theoretical value
of .96 and a price of 1.34, the 105 call is .38 overpriced. But in volatility terms it is 2.5%
overpriced since its theoretical value is based on a volatility of 16% (the trader’s volatility
estimate) while its price is based on a volatility of 18.5% (the implied volatility). Due to
the unusual characteristics of options, it is often more useful for the serious trader to
consider an option’s price in terms of implied volatility rather than in terms of its total
dollar price.

For example, suppose a Treasury Bond 98 call is trading for 3-32 ($3,500) with a
corresponding implied volatility of 10.5%. Suppose also that a 102 call with the same
expiration date is trading for 1-16 ($1,250) with an implied volatility of 11.5%. In total
dollar terms the 102 call is $2,250 cheaper than the 98 call. Yet an experienced trader
will probably conclude that in theoretical terms the 98 call is actually less expensive
than the 102 call because the implied volatility of the 98 call is a full percentage point
less than the implied volatility of the 102 call. Does this mean that one ougnt to buy the
98 call and sell the 102 call? Not necessarily. If the future volatility of the Treasury
