
your own picture on it captivated him. He began carrying a Rockford bill in his wallet.
Heretofore, Buffett had not wanted his picture on a bill or anywhere else. He had more or less shunned the
spotlight while managing the partnership. True, a few more stories and photographs of his family had found
their way into the local paper than might be expected of someone who wanted privacy.4 Nevertheless, except
for his letters to the partners, he had gone through the sixties with his lips sealed—he didn’t want anyone
coattailing him. He didn’t talk about how he invested and he didn’t broadcast his results, in contrast to the
flash and razzle-dazzle shown by other money managers of the era, whose self-promotion propelled them to
nearly instant fame.
Even when the opportunity to promote himself arrived on his doorstep, he hadn’t used it. A few years earlier,
John Loomis, a securities salesman, visited Buffett at Kiewit Plaza. Loomis’s wife, Carol, wrote the investing
column for Fortune magazine. She had once interviewed a money manager named Bill Ruane, who told her
that the smartest investor in the United States lived in Omaha. Some time later, her husband arrived at the
pale monolith of Kiewit Plaza and made his way upstairs to the 2271/2-square-foot space that looked nothing
like the office of one of the richest men in town.
Buffett took him over to the restaurant at the Blackstone Hotel across the street, where he downed a
strawberry malt and told Loomis what he did. Loomis talked about his wife’s job as a journalist, and Buffett
found that interesting. He said that if he had not become a money manager, he would have pursued
journalism as a career.5
Warren and Susie met with the Loomises when they were in New York not long after. “They got us a special
little room someplace where we had lunch,” Buffett says. The well-connected young money manager from
Omaha with the stellar track record and the ambitious reporter for Fortune found they shared many
attributes: a zeal for unmasking the flimflam of fat cats, a magpie obsession with minutiae, and a streak of
competitiveness as long as the interstate from New York to Omaha. Carol Loomis was a tall, athletic-looking,
no-nonsense woman with short brown hair who tolerated shoddy journalism about as well as Buffett tolerated
losing money, and she was a punctilious editor. They began to correspond and she ushered him into the world
of big-league journalism. He began helping her with her story ideas. “Carol very quickly became my best
friend other than Charlie,” he says.6 At first she did not publish anything about Buffett.
By the late 1960s, however, the rising market had made investing in stocks less viable for the partnership.
The advantage of a higher profile when trying to buy entire businesses began to outweigh the advantage of
secrecy in buying stocks. And thus it was in the late 1960s that Buffett’s longtime interest in newspapers and
publishing came together with his newly recast investing goals and his desire for personal attention in a way
that would fundamentally change his world.
Before long, Buffett was immersed in the black-and-white world of journalism. Page by page, newspapers fell
to cover the litter of financial reports from the publishers of newspapers and magazines that lay scattered on
his desk. When he went to sleep, more newspapers—pulled from a bundle and folded into tidy packets—flew
through his dreams. On his most restless nights, he dreamed of oversleeping his childhood paper route.7
Buffett’s fortune had grown large enough for him to afford the purchase of a newspaper or a magazine, or
both. His dream was to be not just an investor but a publisher—to have the influence that went with owning
the means through which the public learned the news. Around 1968, he and some friends tried to buy the
entertainment newspaper Variety, but this came to naught.8 Then another acquaintanceship bore fruit.
Stanford Lipsey was a friend of Susie’s who liked to go to clubs with her and listen to jazz. One day, he
showed up in Warren’s office and said he wanted to sell the Omaha Sun Newspapers. Buffett was
immediately interested; he had already tried to buy it once.
The Sun was a chain of weekly neighborhood newspapers that Stan and Jeannie Blacker Lipsey had inherited
from her father. It published seven editions in the Omaha suburbs; its meat-and-potatoes stories were the
police blotter, local society news, neighborhood business doings, high school sports—and gossip about who
was going steady with whom, which made it a must-read for both parents and kids. Although the Sun was the

underdog in Omaha, its editor, Paul Williams, specialized in investigative journalism, and competed by
publishing stories that the leading paper, the Omaha World-Herald, missed, often stories that exposed the
follies and misdeeds of city bigwigs, stories that would offend major advertisers of the World-Herald. Usually
these advertisers shunned the Sun.
Despite his own elevation to the Omaha establishment, Buffett took a particular interest in the muckraking
aspect of the Sun. Ever since collecting license-plate numbers to catch bank robbers, he had wanted to play
the cop. And “he’d always had this huge admiration for newspapers,” Lipsey says. “I recognized intuitively
that Warren understood the role of newspapers in our society. There was a new highway about to come
through my plant, and I would have had to borrow a whole lot of money to buy a new press. I didn’t like the
Sun’s business prospects, but I knew that Warren had enough money that the journalism wouldn’t suffer
because of the economics. In twenty minutes, it was done.”
“I figured we’d pay a million and a quarter for it and take out a hundred thousand a year,” Buffett says.
This return was eight percent, about as much as a bond would provide—less, far less, than he expected to
earn on a business or a stock, and the long-term outlook suggested that return would decline, not increase.
But the partnership’s money was lying fallow, and he really wanted to be a publisher. “Part of my deal,”
Lipsey says, “was that, even though the partnership was closed, he had to take me in.” Buffett wanted the
Sun so much that he agreed even though he knew he was beginning to consider shutting the partnership
down.
Berkshire Hathaway became owner of the Omaha Sun Newspapers on January 1, 1969. But this little
neighborhood newspaper was only a beginning; Buffett wanted to be a publisher on a national scale. Joe
Rosenfield introduced him to West Virginia’s Secretary of State Jay Rockefeller, whom Rosenfield
considered a rising political star. Soon, the Buffetts were hosting the Rockefellers for dinner in Omaha;
Rockefeller, in turn, introduced Warren to Charles Peters, an idealist whose start-up magazine, the
Washington Monthly, seemed like the right national voice to express viewpoints on important ideas. Buffett
talked to Gilbert Kaplan, who ran Institutional Investor magazine, to get a handle on magazine publishing.9
Then he wrote to Rockefeller: “You have found my Achilles’ heel. I am a pushover for publishing
deals—when I like the product…. I might mention that my enthusiasm for publishing adventures is in exact
inverse proportion to my calculated assessment of their financial probabilities.”10
Buffett introduced Fred Stanback and Rosenfield to the idea of investing in the Washington Monthly,
warning them that it was unlikely to be a financial table-pounder. But the scandals it might uncover—the
ideas it could promote—the minds it could awaken—the exposés it could expose! They put in a little
money.11
In short order, the Washington Monthly ran through its initial capital stake. Buffett held out the possibility of
another $50,000. Then he and Peters had a fifty-minute phone conversation. And, “Oh God,” says Peters.
“As an investment it reeked of the potential for failure. There was his instinct as a hard businessman, and his
philanthropic, good-citizen instinct on the other side, and they were clearly at war. He was worried about his
business reputation and would come within an inch of pulling out, and I would slowly try to pull him back.
Warren kept finding new plausible escape routes, and I tried to block the exits. But the glorious thing was, he
ended up staying in.”12 Buffett added the condition that the editors had to put in some of their own money
while Peters raised some outside, which Buffett said he would match eighty percent.13
Peters was a better journalist than an accountant. They raised the money; the checks went out; then nobody
heard from the Washington Monthly for months. “They just vanished,” says Buffett. “Fred Stanback
complained that he was getting IRS forms late, and had to amend his tax returns.”14 Although the
Washington Monthly was indeed putting out strong stories—as Buffett had wanted—it wasn’t enough. He
had known from the beginning that it would not make money, but he thought it ought to be accountable for
the money that it had. He was embarrassed at having drawn Stanback and Rosenfield into a bear hunt. The
investors felt they were being treated like bank tellers. Buffett wanted to be a partner in journalism, a fellow
newshound, not just the guy who bankrolled idealism.

Yet even with mixed results, Buffett was now pursuing the personal concerns of which he had spoken in his
October 1967 letter to his partners. Meanwhile, the market continued to dry up and deprive him of
opportunities. Spending part of his time as a publishing magnate was no help in adjusting to that reality.
Whatever else occupied him, he remained wholly committed to the partnership, too, and it turned out that a
“less compulsive approach” to investing was not in his nature. So he started to figure out the best way to
wind down the partnership. He says he received offers from a couple of people to buy the management firm,
which would have meant the opportunity to sell at a large profit, but he thought this was not right. It was
unusual for a money manager to forgo a large sum of money, even in those days, and so far, Buffett had
shown no inclination to avoid getting richer. But he had always stayed on the same side as his partners,
harnessing his avarice to their benefit as well as his own. Around Memorial Day 1969, Buffett wrote the
partners to tell them that simply lowering his goal hadn’t lessened his intensity:
“If I am going to participate publicly, I can’t help being competitive. I know I don’t want to be totally
occupied with outpacing an investment rabbit all my life. The only way to slow down is to stop.”15 And then
he delivered his bombshell: He announced he would be giving his formal notice of retirement by year-end
and closing down the partnership in early 1970. “I am not attuned to this market environment, and I don’t
want to spoil a decent record by trying to play a game I don’t understand just so I can go out a hero.”16
What would he do now?
“I don’t have an answer to that question,” he wrote. “I do know that when I am sixty, I should be attempting
to achieve different personal goals than those which had priority at age twenty.”17
The partners howled with disappointment, and a few with fear. Many were naïfs, like his aunt Alice. They
were ministers, rabbis, schoolteachers, grandmothers, and mothers-in-law. His announcement amounted to a
market call on stocks. He did not think the game would be worth playing anytime soon. He had taught even
the inexperienced to be wary of an overheated market. Some trusted no one other than him. But “he just
didn’t want to operate in an environment where he didn’t feel comfortable with the opportunities,” says John
Harding, “especially when it was something that he felt he had to devote all his time to.”
***
Susie Buffett was happy that Warren was shutting down the partnership, at least for the kids’ sake. They
cared desperately what their father thought of them. Susie Jr. had always gotten most of what little attention
Warren provided, and Peter felt rewarded for being quiet and staying in the background. But fourteenyear-old Howie, who had always sought some emotional connection to his father that was never forthcoming,
had grown wilder as he grew up. Susie Jr. would find a pair of mannequin legs covered with fake blood
sticking out of her closet. He climbed on the roof in the gorilla costume to spy on her when she came home
from dates and drenched her with the sprayer from the kitchen sink when she appeared in her prom dress.
When their parents were in New York City, Howie seized the chance for an experiment in anarchy.18
Warren, still relying on Susie for everything, assumed she would take care of whatever Howie and the other
kids needed. But by now, Susie herself had stopped trying to control her children. And she had long since let
go of any idealistic expectations regarding her marriage. Her attention was increasingly taken up by an
expanding number of “vagrants,” as one friend put it, who wandered through the house, sought her help, and
occupied her time.19
Since she almost always accepted people unconditionally, some of those “clients” had pasts as felons, con
men, addicts, or, in one case, as the purported proprietor of a bawdy house. From time to time these people
conned her out of money. She didn’t really mind. Buffett was infuriated at the thought of being cheated
himself, but he had eventually come to think of this as part of Susie’s giveaway budget and even accepted it
as part of her charm.
Her large group of women friends continued to expand: Bella Eisenberg, Eunice Denenberg, Jeannie Lipsey,

Rackie Newman, and others. Though Warren recognized who most of them were, this was Susie’s circle, not
his. Other ties of hers, people like Rodney and Angie Wead, came from the activist community; another set
of friends centered around the tennis courts at Dewey Park. And there was always the family: Leila,
especially now that Roy Ralph had died and she had taken back the Buffett name; Fred and Katie Buffett
and their son Fritz, who had married Warren and Susie’s former babysitter, Pam—also, of course, a friend of
Susie’s now. Her nephews Tom and Billy Rogers were often around, as was another guitarist from the local
music scene whom she had met through Billy, David Stryker. Like the Rogers boys and Dave Stryker, a
number of Susie’s friends were younger: She was close to Renee and Annette Gibson, daughters of the
baseball player Bob Gibson and his wife, Charlene. Several of the black students to whom she had given
scholarships had come under her wing and wandered in from time to time: Russell McGregor, Pat Turner, and
Duane Taylor, son of the jazz great Billy Taylor. And so it went.
Even though Susie was the fountainhead of all this generosity, she was starting to need a little attention too. It
wouldn’t have taken much, according to her friends, just an ounce of effort on her husband’s part. She
disagreed that making money was life’s purpose. She felt impoverished denying herself travel, museums,
theater, art, and most other forms of culture because of his lack of interest. Warren praised her effusively in
public but when at home or work, lapsed into his normal preoccupied state. If he would make an effort by
going to an art gallery with her now and then, or take her on a trip just because she wanted to go, it would
make a difference, she said. But while he did sometimes show up when asked, if she had to ask, it was a
favor, not a gift.
Now that Susie realized that Warren was never going to take off to Italy for weeks on end, she began to
travel on her own or with her women friends, sometimes to visit family—such as Bertie, who now lived in
California—and sometimes to attend personal-growth seminars.
One day at the Chicago airport, a man stopped in front of her as she sat on a bench. “Are you Susie
Thompson?” he asked. She looked up, embarrassed to have been caught with a mouth full of hot dog. It was
Milt Brown, her high school sweetheart, whom she had not seen in years. He sat down and they began to get
reacquainted.20
Susie, who was always reaching out for emotional connections, would later say that her husband wasn’t
lacking in emotion, he was just cut off from his own feelings. And it certainly seemed as though his strongest
emotional bonds were with his friends and partners, to whom he felt an intense obligation, and with whom he
had created a de facto family. The other Buffetts could not help but notice the way he lit up in their
company, in contrast to the dutiful but preoccupied manner he displayed while attending his own family
events.
Thus, even now that he was preparing to close the partnership that had consumed most of his waking hours
for the last thirteen years, he remained fully engaged with his partners and seemed a little reluctant to let go
of his connection to them. He went to extremes to help them place their money in good hands, writing them
another letter describing their options in meticulous detail.
Explaining his dedication to them, he says, “The question of finding other advisers is a tough one. When I
wound up my partnership, I had these partners that had counted on me and I was going to be distributing a
lot of money. I felt an obligation to at least suggest some alternatives for them.”
This was unusual behavior for a money manager, to say the least. Even Ben Graham had only said, “Oh, buy
AT&T,” when asked, and mentioned Buffett offhandedly to a few people. But Buffett made elaborate efforts
to shepherd his partners on to their future investing life. Some of them were already in the Munger
partnership, and Buffett sent one or two more to him. But Munger was queasy about the market. “Who wants
to be around people when you’re disappointing them?” he says. “Particularly when you sucked them into the
relationship?” He also lacked Buffett’s genius for promotion.
“I recommended two people to the partners whom I knew were exceptionally good and exceptionally
honest: Sandy Gottesman and Bill Ruane. I’d been around the investment world for a long time at that
point, and I’d gotten to know them over the years. So I not only knew their results, but I knew how they’d

accomplished their results, which was terribly important.”21
So the richer partners would go to Gottesman at First Manhattan. But Sandy didn’t want the small-fry, so
Buffett sent the rest to Ruane, who was now leaving Kidder, Peabody to set up his own investment advisory
firm—Ruane, Cunniff & Stires—with two partners, Rick Cunniff and Sidney Stires, and creating the Sequoia
Fund specifically to take on the smaller accounts. They hired John Harding, who would be out of a job when
the partnership dissolved, to run an Omaha office for the new company. John Loomis, the securities salesman
who was Carol Loomis’s husband, and Buffett’s trusty researcher Henry Brandt also went to Ruane, Cunniff
—giving it in effect a full staff. These connections also kept Harding, Loomis, and Brandt in Buffett’s
extended “family.”
Buffett brought Ruane to Omaha and promoted the Sequoia Fund to the partners. He endorsed Ruane in
typically mathematical terms. Unremarkably, even though he had known Ruane for years, he still felt it
necessary to leave a small escape hatch, fearing blame in case things didn’t work out, and wrote: “There is
no way to eliminate the possibility of error when judging humans…[but] I consider Bill to be an
exceptionally high-probability decision on character and a high-probability one on investment
performance.”22
Yet while Buffett made arrangements to close the partnership, the first signs appeared that the market’s
sparks were going to cool. By July 1969, when U.S. troops began withdrawing from Vietnam, the Dow had
dropped nineteen percent. Even though the triumphant moon landing that summer gave the country a lift,
Wall Street did not feel it. Exotic stocks like National Student Marketing and Minnie Pearl’s Chicken System,
Inc.—which had garnered a huge following in a market where half the money managers and brokers had
been working in the business for no more than seven years—were starting to collapse.23
Blue Chip Stamps, the trading-stamp stock painstakingly accumulated by Buffett, Munger, and Guerin, now
became a striking exception to the general trend. The three of them had been betting on whether the
company could settle its antitrust lawsuit with Sperry & Hutchinson. When a settlement was reached, this
stock—which the Buffett partners didn’t know they owned—showered nearly $7 million in profit on them in
return for a $2 million investment less than a year ago.24 Now Blue Chip decided to have a public offering,
and Buffett elected to sell the partnership’s shares as part of that deal.25 It seemed that the partners were
going to have a splendid final year in 1969.
That October, Buffett called another meeting of the Grahamites, including those who had gathered in San
Diego the year before, sans Ben Graham himself. This time the wives were also invited, and although they
did not join the meetings in which the men talked about stocks, their presence made the atmosphere more
festive, like a vacation. Buffett delegated the planning to Marshall Weinberg, who lived in New York City
and liked to travel. But Weinberg, who also liked to shave a dime and had no more experience of the jet-set
life than Buffett, asked around and then made the unfortunate choice of the Colony Club, a Palm Beach,
Florida, resort, where they were treated like rubes and snooted at even by the bellboys.
Ruane reported at the first night’s dinner that the bellhop had handed him back his five-dollar tip with a
sneer, saying, “You need it more than I do.” Bill Scott had given his bellhop a handful of the dimes he always
carried in his pocket to make phone calls for Buffett. The bellhop threw the change all over the floor in the
hallway on his way out.
For the next five days, as the group enjoyed bad food, small rooms, high winds, and lashing rains, the men sat
classroom style, with Buffett most often in his usual place at the front. They batted thoughts back and forth in
an encoded shorthand derived from many years of conversation and a closely shared set of concepts and
values.26 “Charlie told some horror stories,” Buffett wrote later, and “I drew the same gloomy conclusions,
[while Walter Schloss] said that two mislocated steel companies with obsolete plants were still below book
value so all was not lost.”27
Buffett posed the Desert Island Challenge. If you were stranded on a desert island for ten years, he asked, in
