had to do what Dan Williamson in his kindness wished
done. Altogether it was more unsatisfactory than doing
business with a relative. Bad business!
And that wasn't the worst thing about it. It was that
after that there was practically no opportunity for me to
make big money. The market flattened out. Things drifted
from bad to worse. I not only lost all I had but got into
debt again—more heavily than ever. Those were long lean
years, 1911, 1912, 1913 and 1914. There was no money to be
made. The opportunity simply wasn't there and so I was
worse off than ever.
It isn't uncomfortable to lose when the loss is not
accompanied by a poignant vision of what might have
been. That was precisely what I could not keep my mind
from dwelling on, and of course it unsettled me further. I
learned that the weaknesses to which a speculator is prone
are almost numberless. It was proper for me as a man to
act the way I did in Dan Williamson's office, but it was
improper and unwise for me as a speculator to allow
myself to be influenced by any consideration to act against
my own judgment. Noblesse oblige but not in the stock
market, because the tape is not chivalrous and moreover
does not reward loyalty. I realise that I couldn't have acted
differently. I couldn't make myself over just because I
wished to trade in the stock market. But business is
business always, and my business as a speculator is to back
my own judgment always.
It was a very curious experience. I'll tell you what I
think happened. Dan Williamson was perfectly sincere in
what he told me when he first saw me. Every time his firm
did a few thousand shares in any one stock the Street
jumped at the conclusion that Alvin Marquand was buying
or selling. He was the big trader of the office, to be sure,
and he gave this firm all his business; and he was one of
the best and biggest traders they have ever had in Wall
Street. Well, I was to be used as a smoke screen,
particularly for Marquand's selling.
190

XIII

Alvin Marquand fell sick shortly after I went in. His
ailment was early diagnosed as incurable, and Dan
Williamson of course knew it long before Marquand
himself did. That is why Dan covered my Chesapeake &
Atlantic stock. He had begun to liquidate some of his
brother-in-law's speculative holdings of that and other
stocks.
Of course when Marquand died the estate had to
liquidate his speculative and semi-speculative lines, and by
that time we had run into a bear market. By tying me up
the way he did, Dan was helping the estate a whole lot. I do
not speak boastfully when I say that I was a very heavy
trader and that I was dead right in my views on the stock
market. I know that Williamson remembered my
successful operations in the bear market of 1907 and he
couldn't afford to run the risk of having me at large. Why,
if I had kept on the way I was going I'd have made so much
money that by the time he was trying to liquidate part of
Alvin Marquand's estate I would have been trading in
hundreds of thousands of shares. As an active bear I would
have done damage running into the millions of dollars to
the Marquand heirs, for Alvin left only a little over a
couple of hundred millions.
It was much cheaper for them to let me get into debt
and then to pay off the debt than to have me in some other
office operating actively on the bear side. That is precisely
what I would have been doing but for my feeling that I
must not be outdone in decency by Dan Williamson.
I have always considered this the most interesting and
most unfortunate of all my experiences as a stock operator.
As a lesson it cost me a disproportionately high price. It
put off the time of my recovery several years. I was young
enough to wait with patience for the strayed millions to
come back. But five years is a long time for a man to be
poor. Young or old, it is not to be relished. I could do
without the yachts a great deal easier than I could without
a market to come back on. The greatest opportunity of a
191

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

lifetime was holding before my very nose the purse I had
lost. I could not put out my hand and reach for it. A very
shrewd boy, that Dan Williamson; as slick as they make
them; farsighted, ingenious, daring. He is a thinker, has
imagination, detects the vulnerable spot in any man and
can plan cold-bloodedly to hit it. He did his own sizing up
and soon doped out just what to do to me in order to
reduce me to complete inoffensiveness in the market. He
did not actually do me out of any money. On the contrary,
he was to all appearances extremely nice about it. He loved
his sister, Mrs. Marquand, and he did his duty toward her
as he saw it.

192

XIV
It has always rankled in my mind that after I left
Williamson & Brown's office the cream was off the market.
We ran smack into a long moneyless period; four mighty
lean years. There was not a penny to be made. As Billy
Henriquez once said, "It was the kind of market in which
not even a skunk could make a scent."
It looked to me as though I was in Dutch with destiny. It
might have been the plan of Providence to chasten me, but
really I had not been filled with such pride as called for a
fall. I had not committed any of those speculative sins
which a trader must expiate on the debtor side of the
account. I was not guilty of a typical sucker play. What I
had done, or, rather, what I had left undone, was
something for which I would have received praise and not
blame north of Forty-second Street. In Wall Street it was

193

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

absurd and costly. But by far the worst thing about it was
the tendency it had to make a man a little less inclined to
permit himself human feelings in the ticker district.
I left Williamson's and tried other brokers' offices. In
every one of them I lost money. It served me right, because
I was trying to force the market into giving me what it
didn't have to give to wit, opportunities for making money.
I did not find any trouble in getting credit, because those
who knew me had faith in me. You can get an idea of how
strong their confidence was when I tell you that when I
finally stopped trading on credit I owed well over one
million dollars.
The trouble was not that I had lost my grip but that
during those four wretched years the opportunities for
making money simply didn't exist. Still I plugged along,
trying to make a stake and succeeding only in increasing
my indebtedness. After I ceased trading on my own hook
because I wouldn't owe my friends any more money I
made a living handling accounts for people who believed I
knew the game well enough to beat it even in a dull
market. For my services I received a percentage of the
profits when there were any. That is how I lived. Well, say
that is how I sustained life.
Of course, I didn't always lose, but I never made enough
to allow me materially to reduce what I owed. Finally, as
things got worse, I felt the beginnings of discouragement
for the first time in my life.
Everything seemed to have gone wrong with me. I did
not go about bewailing the descent from millions and
yachts to debts and the simple life. I didn't enjoy the
situation, but I did not fill up with self-pity. I did not
propose to wait patiently for time and Providence to bring
about the cessation of my discomforts. I therefore studied
my problem. It was plain that the only way out of my
troubles was by making money. To make money I needed
merely to trade successfully. I had so traded before and I
194

XIV

must do so once more. More than once in the past I had
run up a shoe string into hundreds of thousands. Sooner
or later the market would offer me an opportunity.
I convinced myself that whatever was wrong was wrong
with me and not with the market. Now what could be the
trouble with me? I asked myself that question in the same
spirit in which I always study the various phases of my
trading problems. I thought about it calmly and came to
the conclusion that my main trouble came from worrying
over the money I owed. I was never free from the mental
discomfort of it. I must explain to you that it was not the
mere consciousness of my indebtedness. Any business
man contracts debts in the course of his regular business.
Most of my debts were really nothing but business debts,
due to what were unfavourable business conditions for me,
and no worse than a merchant suffers from, for instance,
when there is an unusually prolonged spell of
unseasonable weather.
Of course as time went on and I could not pay I began to
feel less philosophical about my debts. I'll explain: I owed
over a million dollars—all of it stock-market losses,
remember. Most of my creditors were very nice and didn't
bother me; but there were two who did bedevil me. They
used to follow me around. Every time I made a winning
each of them was Johnny-on-the-spot, wanting to know all
about it and insisting on getting theirs right off. One of
them, to whom I owed eight hundred dollars, threatened
to sue me, seize my furniture, and so forth. I can't conceive
why he thought I was concealing assets, unless it was that I
didn't quite look like a stage hobo about to die of
destitution.
As I studied the problem I saw that it wasn't a case that
called for reading the tape but for reading my own self. I
quite cold-bloodedly reached the conclusion that I would
never be able to accomplish anything useful so long as I
was worried, and it was equally plain that I should be
worried so long as I owed money. I mean, as long as any
195

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

creditor had the power to vex me or to interfere with my
coming back by insisting upon being paid before I could
get a decent stake together. This was all so obviously true
that I said to myself, "I must go through bankruptcy."
What else could relieve my mind?
It sounds both easy and sensible, doesn't it? But it was
more than unpleasant, I can tell you. I hated to do it. I
hated to put myself in a position to be misunderstood or
misjudged. I myself never cared much for money. I never
thought enough of it to consider it worth while lying for.
But I knew that everybody didn't feel that way. Of course I
also knew that if I got on my feet again I'd pay everybody
off, for the obligation remained. But unless I was able to
trade in the old way I'd never be able to pay back that
million.
I nerved myself and went to see my creditors. It was a
mighty difficult thing for me to do, for all that most of
them were personal friends or old acquaintances.
I explained the situation quite frankly to them. I said: "I
am not going to take this step because I don't wish to pay
you but because, in justice to both myself and you, I must
put myself in a position to make money. I have been
thinking of this solution off and on for over two years, but
I simply didn't have the nerve to come out and say so
frankly to you. It would have been infinitely better for all
of us if I had. It all simmers down to this: I positively
cannot be my old self while I am harassed or upset by
these debts. I have decided to do now what I should have
done a year ago. I have no other reason than the one I have
just given you."
What the first man said was to all intents and purposes
what all of them said. He spoke for his firm.
"Livingston," he said, "we understand. We realise your
position perfectly. I'll tell you what we'll do: we'll just give
you a release. Have your lawyer prepare any kind of paper
you wish, and we'll sign it."
196

XIV

That was in substance what all my big creditors said.
That is one side of Wall Street for you. It wasn't merely
careless good nature or sportsmanship. It was also a
mighty intelligent decision, for it was clearly good
business. I appreciated both the good will and the business
gumption.
These creditors gave me a release on debts amounting
to over a million dollars. But there were the two minor
.creditors who wouldn't sign off. One of them was the
eight-hundred-dollar man I told you about. I also owed
sixty thousand dollars to a brokerage firm which had gone
into bankruptcy, and the receivers, who didn't know me
from Adam, were on my neck early and late. Even if they
had been disposed to follow the example set by my largest
creditors I don't suppose the court would have let them
sign off. At all events my schedule of bankruptcy
amounted to only about one hundred thousand dollars;
though, as I said, I owed well over a million.
It was extremely disagreeable to see the story in the
newspapers. I had always paid my debts in full and this
new experience was most mortifying to me. I knew I'd pay
off everybody some day if I lived, but everybody who read
the article wouldn't know it. I was ashamed to go out after
I saw the report in the newspapers. But it all wore off
presently and I cannot tell you how intense was my feeling
of relief to know that I wasn't going to be harried any more
by people who didn't understand how a man must give his
entire mind to his business if he wishes to succeed in stock
speculation.
My mind now being free to take up trading with some
prospect of success, un-vexed by debts, the next step was
to get another stake. The Stock Exchange had been closed
from July thirty-first to the middle of December, 1914, and
Wall Street was in the dumps. There hadn't been any
business whatever in a long time. I owed all my friends. I

197

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

couldn't very well ask them to help me again just because
they had been so pleasant and friendly to me, when I knew
that nobody was in a position to do much for anybody.
It was a mighty difficult task, getting a decent stake, for
with the closing of the Stock Exchange there was nothing
that I could ask any broker to do for me. I tried in a couple
of places. No use.
Finally I went to see Dan Williamson. This was in
February, 1915. I told him that I had rid myself of the
mental incubus of debt and I was ready to trade as of old.
You will recall that when he needed me he offered me the
use of twenty-five thousand dollars without my asking
him.
Now that I needed him he said, "When you see
something' that looks good to you and you want to buy five
hundred shares go ahead and it will be all right."
I thanked him and went away. He had kept me from
making a great deal of money and the office had made a lot
in commissions from me. I admit I was a little sore to
think that Williamson & Brown didn't give me a decent
stake. I intended to trade conservatively at first. It would
make my financial recovery easier and quicker if I could
begin with a line a little better than five hundred shares.
But, anyhow, I realised that, such as it was, there was my
chance to come back.
I left Dan Williamson's office and studied the situation
in general and my own problem in particular. It was a bull
market. That was as plain to me as it was to thousands of
traders. But my stake consisted merely of an offer to carry
five hundred shares for me. That is, I had no leeway,
limited as I was. I couldn't afford even a slight setback at
the beginning. I must build up my stake with my very first
play. That initial purchase of mine of five hundred shares
must be profitable. I had to make real money. I knew that
unless I had sufficient trading capital I would not be able
to use good judgment. Without adequate margins it would
be impossible to take the cold-blooded, dispassionate
198

XIV

attitude toward the game that comes from the ability to
afford a few minor losses such as I often incurred in
testing the market before putting down the big bet.
I think now that I found myself then at the most critical
period of my career as a speculator. If I failed this time
there was no telling where or when, if ever, I might get
another stake for another try. It was very clear that I
simply must wait for the exact psychological moment.
I didn't go near Williamson & Brown's. I mean, I
purposely kept away from them for six long weeks of
steady tape reading. I was afraid that if I went to the office,
knowing that I could buy five hundred shares, I might be
tempted into trading at the wrong time or in the wrong
stock. A trader, in addition to studying basic conditions,
remembering market precedents and keeping in mind the
psychology of the outside public as well as the limitations
of his brokers, must also know himself and provide against
his own weaknesses. There is no need to feel anger over
being human. I have come to feel that it is as necessary to
know how to read myself as to know how to read the tape.
I have studied and reckoned on my own reactions to given
impulses or to the inevitable temptations of an active
market, quite in the same mood and spirit as I have
considered crop conditions or analysed reports of
earnings.
So day after day, broke and anxious to resume trading, I
sat in front of a quotation-board in another broker's office
where I couldn't buy or sell as much as one share of stock,
studying the market, not missing a single transaction on
the tape, watching for the psychological moment to ring
the full-speed-ahead bell.
By reason of conditions known to the whole world the
stock I was most bullish on in those critical days of early
1915 was Bethlehem Steel. I was morally certain it was
going way up, but in order to make sure that I would win
on my very first play, as I must, I decided to wait until it
crossed par.
199

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I think I have told you it has been my experience that
whenever a stock crosses $100 or $200 or $300 for the
first time, it nearly always keeps going up for 30 to 50
points and after $300 faster than after $100 or $200. One
of my first big coups was in Anaconda, which I bought
when it crossed $200 and sold a day later at $260. My
practice of buying a stock just after it crossed par dated
back to my early bucket-shop days. It is an old trading
principle.
You can imagine how keen I was to get back to trading
on my old scale. I was so eager to begin that I could not
think of anything else; but I held myself in leash. I saw
Bethlehem Steel climb, every day, higher and higher, as I
was sure it would, and yet there I was checking my
impulse to run over to Williamson & Brown's office and
buy five hundred shares. I knew I simply had to make my
initial operation as nearly a cinch as was humanly
possible.
Every point that stock went up meant five hundred
dollars I had not made. The first ten points' advance
meant that I would have been able to pyramid, and instead
of five hundred snares I might now be carrying one
thousand shares that would be earning for me one
thousand dollars a point. But I sat tight and instead of
listening to my loud mouthed hopes or to my clamorous
beliefs I heeded only the level voice of my experience and
the counsel of common sense. Once I got a decent stake
together I could afford to take chances. But without a
stake, taking chances, even slight chances, was a luxury
utterly beyond my reach. Six weeks of patience but, in the
end, a victory for common sense over greed and hope!
I really began to waver and sweat blood when the stock
got up to $90. Think of what I had not made by not
buying, when I was so bullish. Well, when it got to $98 I
said to myself, "Bethlehem is going through $100, and
when it does the roof is going to blow clean off!" The tape
said the same thing more than plainly. In fact, it used a
200

XIV

megaphone. I tell you, I saw $100 on the tape when the
ticker was only printing $98. And I knew that wasn't the
voice of my hope or the sight of my desire, but the
assertion of my tape-reading instinct. So I said to myself,
"I can't wait until it gets through $100. I have to get it now.
It is as good as gone through par."
I rushed to Williamson & Brown's office and put in an
order to buy five hundred shares of Bethlehem Steel. The
market was then $98. I got five hundred shares at $98 to
$99. After that she shot right up, and closed that night, I
think, at $114 or $115. I bought five hundred shares more.
The next day Bethlehem Steel was $145 and I had my
stake. But I earned it. Those six weeks of waiting for the
right moment were the most strenuous and wearing six
weeks I ever put in. But it paid me, for I now had enough
capital to trade in fair-sized lots. I never would have got
anywhere just on five hundred shares of stock.
There is a great deal in starting right, whatever the
enterprise may be, and I did very well after my Bethlehem
deal so well, indeed, that you would not have believed it
was the selfsame man trading. As a matter of fact I wasn't
the same man, for where I had been harassed and wrong I
was now at ease and right. There were no creditors to
annoy and no lack of funds to interfere with my thinking
or with my listening to the truthful voice of experience,
and so I was winning right along.
All of a sudden, as I was on my way to a sure fortune, we
had the Lusitania break. Every once in a while a man gets
a crack like that in the solar plexus, probably that he may
be reminded of the sad fact that no human being can be so
uniformly right on the market as to be beyond the reach of
unprofitable accidents. I have heard people say that no
professional speculator need have been hit very hard by
the news of the torpedoing of the Lusitania, and they go on
to tell how they had it long before the Street did. I was not
clever enough to escape by means of advance information,
and all I can tell you is that on account of what I lost
201

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

through the Lusitania break and one or two other reverses
that I wasn't wise enough to foresee, I found myself at the
end of 1915 with a balance at my brokers' of about one
hundred and forty thousand dollars. That was all I actually
made, though I was consistently right on the market
throughout the greater part of the year.
I did much better during the following year. I was very
lucky. I was rampantly bullish in a wild bull market.
Things were certainly coming my way so that there wasn't
anything to do but to make money. It made me remember
a saying of the late H. H. Rogers, of the Standard Oil
Company, to the effect that there were times when a man
could no more help making money than he could help
getting wet if he went out in a rainstorm without an
umbrella. It was the most clearly defined bull market we
ever had. It was plain to everybody that the Allied
purchases of all kinds of supplies here made the United
States the most prosperous nation in the world. We had all
the things that no one else had for sale, and we were fast
getting all the cash in the world. I mean that the wide
world's gold was pouring into this country in torrents.
Inflation was inevitable, and, of course, that meant rising
prices for everything.
All this was so evident from the first that little or no
manipulation for the rise was needed. That was the reason
why the preliminary work was so much less than in other
bull markets. And not only was the war-bride boom more
naturally developed than all others but it proved
unprecedentedly profitable for the general public. That is,
the stock-market winnings during 1915 were more widely
distributed than in any other boom in the history of Wall
Street. That the public did not turn all their paper profits
into good hard cash or that they did not long keep what
profits they actually took was merely history repeating
itself. Nowhere does history indulge in repetitions so often
or so uniformly as in Wall Street. When you read
contemporary accounts of booms or panics the one thing
202
