
Looking for trends using
index-number analysis
While balance sheets take a snapshot of a company’s assets, liabilities and
equity at a set time of the year, the parts inside are constantly changing.
When interest rates are low, for instance, a company may decide to leverage
itself by borrowing more. Similarly, when stock prices are lofty, a company
may choose to raise equity by selling stock.

11 506455-ch06.indd 100

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

Chapter 6: Measuring A Company’s Staying Power with the Balance Sheet

101

Because assets, liabilities and equity are evolving, it’s important in fundamental analysis to pay attention to trends and changes between quarters and
years.
The index-number trend method is a great way to help you spot changes in a
company’s capital structure over time. You can do an index-number analysis
by choosing a year to be your starting point and then compare all assets,
liabilities and equity to that point.
For instance, if you want to start your analysis of Coca-Cola since 2005, you
would first download the balance-sheet items for 2007, 2006, and 2005. In
Table 6-4 you can see what some of the key parts of Coke’s balance sheet
were in those years.

Table 6-4

Coca-Cola’s Balance Sheet Since 2005

$ in millions

2007

2006

2005

Cash and cash equivalents

$4,308

$2,590

4,767

Property, plant and equipment

8,493

6,903

5,831

Long-term debt

3,277

1,314

1,154

Shareowners equity

21,744

16,920

16,355

Certainly, you could eyeball the numbers above to get a general idea of the
trends in the company’s assets and liabilities. But the index-number analysis
is easy and will make the changes pop out. To create an index-number table,
divide each line in the balance sheet by the corresponding value for the base
year and then multiply by 100.
For instance, to calculate the index-number value for Coke’s cash and cash
equivalents in 2006, divide its cash and cash equivalents in 2006 ($2,590) by
cash and cash equivalents in 2005 ($4,767) and then multiply by 100. The
result is 54.3. If you complete the analysis of Coke’s balance sheet, you get
something that looks like Table 6-5.
The index-number value of the base year, 2005 in Table 6-5, will be 100. 100 is
the baseline of our analysis.

11 506455-ch06.indd 101

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

102 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Table 6-5 Index-Number Analysis of Coca-Cola’s Balance Sheet
$ in millions

2007

2006

2005

Cash and cash equivalents

90

54

100

Property, plant and equipment

146

118

100

Long-term debt

284

114

100

Shareowners’ equity

133

103

100

After completing the index-number analysis of Coke, you can quickly see
what’s going on with the company’s capital structure. The first thing that
jumps out is the fact Coke started increasing its level of debt in 2006 and
really ramped it up in 2007. In its 10-K, Coke acknowledged a greater use
of leverage, primarily to pay for acquisitions such as Vitamin Water maker
Glaceau and energy drink Fuze. As a fundamental analyst, you note this. After
all, the company has been trying to broaden its lineup of beverages beyond
Coke. That diversification, though, is coming with the expense of greater
financial risk as the company must pay higher interest expense.

Appreciating working capital
When it comes to fundamental analysis, a key consideration is how prepared
a company is to meet its short-term obligations.
A company may have a very bright long-term future ahead of it, but if it can’t
meet payroll and pay its bills in the next month, it might not survive long
enough to reach its potential.
Just as you would certainly pay your heating bill before putting money in a
401(k), companies, too, must make sure they have enough cash to satisfy
short-term obligations.
How do you determine whether a company can handle its short-term bills?
Analyzing working capital is one of fundamental analysts’ favorite tools to
access a company’s immediate financial situation. Working capital tells you
whether a company can access cash needed to pay its most pressing bills
over the coming year. It’s a measure of short-term liquidity.
Working capital will be discussed more in Chapter 8, along with the other
financial ratios. But it’s important enough to start thinking about along with
the balance sheet. The formula for working capital is:
Working capital = Current assets – current liabilities

11 506455-ch06.indd 102

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

Chapter 6: Measuring A Company’s Staying Power with the Balance Sheet

103

If a company has positive working capital and more current assets than current liabilities, that gives a fundamental analyst a bit of comfort. However, if
current assets are less than current liabilities — that means if a company’s
business hits a snag — it may be forced to extreme measures to meet its bills,
including selling off manufacturing plans or equipment in a fire sale.

Analyzing here and now: The current ratio
Closely related to working capital, and perhaps of even more value in fundamental analysis, is a concept called the current ratio. The current ratio
attempts to put a company’s current assets into perspective by comparing
them with current liabilities. The formula is:
Current ratio = Current assets / current liabilities
The higher a company’s current ratio, the better prepared it is to pay for liabilities due within the year. Companies with high current ratios have a greater
safety cushion in case business drops off.
As a very general rule of thumb, fundamental analysts like to see at least a
current ratio of 1, or even 1.5. The typical company in the Standard & Poor’s
500 index had a current ratio of even more than that, 1.72 as of 2008.
But because different businesses require different levels of short-term liquidity, you should always compare a company’s current ratio to its industry. You
can see what the typical current ratios for several industry sectors are by
checking out www.reuters.com.

The Danger of Dilution
Just as it’s possible for a company to borrow too much, it’s also possible
for it to sell too much of itself to shareholders. Remember, shares of stock
are like slices of a pizza. If you have a large pizza that’s cut into eight slices,
everyone gets a decent amount of food. However, if you cut that same pizza
into 16 slivers, then you’re likely to start hearing complaints.
When companies issue too many shares, they are in effect slicing their profits
into smaller and smaller slices. This process of bringing in more investors is
known as dilution. And since dilution can seriously water down the value of
your investment, it’s something worth being aware of as a fundamental analyst.

11 506455-ch06.indd 103

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

104 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Paying for peanut butter with jelly
Many mergers have bad endings. But in what
may be one of the most logical mergers since
peanut butter and jelly first came together to
create PB&J, was the J.M. Smucker acquisition
of Jif peanut butter from Procter & Gamble in
June 2002. Since it paid for the roughly $800 million deal using stock, J.M. Smucker’s number of

shares outstanding roughly doubled to nearly 50
million shares. Was the deal successful, even
though it cut the company’s profits into twice
as many slices? After the deal was done, J.M.
Smucker’s profits more than doubled in the year
after the deal.

You want to keep a close eye on company’s number of shares outstanding. This
number tells you how much of a company’s profit you, as a shareholder, are
entitled to by owning a share of stock. Most companies disclose their number
of shares outstanding on the balance sheet. The more shares outstanding, the
smaller the slice of profits you’re entitled to.

How stock can be watered down
Dilution occurs when a company’s number of shares outstanding increases.
A company may increase its number of shares outstanding for a number of
reasons, including to:
✓ Acquire another company using its stock. When a company’s stock
price is high, relative to competitors’, it may use its shares as a currency
for acquisitions. A company may issue new shares and use them to buy
another firm. Stock deals can be popular with companies, since they
don’t consume precious cash, and investors like them because they may
be tax-free events.
✓ Pay stock options to employees. Hoping to make the workforce feel like
and act like owners, some companies may issue shares to employees
and executives. Stock options allow employees to buy shares of stock at
discounted prices, as long as the company’s stock rises.
✓ Reduce leverage. Companies that have borrowed too much in the past
and have a life-threatening brush with bankruptcy, may try to clean up
their balance sheet by issuing stock and paying down debt.

11 506455-ch06.indd 104

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

Chapter 6: Measuring A Company’s Staying Power with the Balance Sheet

105

Knowing how stock options
can contribute to dilution
When companies dole out stock options to employees, that value of your
stock can be seriously threatened. Stock options, a form of compensation
for employees, are tied to the company’s stock price. If the company’s stock
rises, employees may cash in the options in exchange for company stock, forcing the company to sell additional shares to meet the demand for new shares.
Dot-com companies handed out stock options so freely in the late 1990s that
investors faced seeing the value of their shares shrivel up by 24%, according
to a story in USA TODAY. The risk of dilution is why fundamental analysts
should pay close attention to a company’s diluted earnings per share, which
accounts for the potential dilution, as explained in Chapter 6.
Some companies periodically attempt to reduce the danger of dilution
and make their shares more valuable by buying back shares. In a buyback,
companies use their cash to take shares off the market. Stock buybacks,
in theory, make each share more valuable because a company’s profits are
sliced into fewer pieces. Some companies may buy back stock even if they
haven’t issued options, if they think the shares are cheap.
Stocks will often rally after a company announces a stock buyback. But fundamental analysts know better than to fall for this trap. For one thing, companies
might buy back stock with borrowed money, which increases their interest
costs and risk. Many companies also say they will buy back stock and never
actually do. Other firms end up issuing more new shares than they bought
back, all but erasing any benefit of the buyback.

11 506455-ch06.indd 105

9/24/09 10:29:19 PM

106 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis

11 506455-ch06.indd 106

9/24/09 10:29:20 PM

Chapter 7

Tracking Cash with the
Statement of Cash Flow
In This Chapter
▶ Discovering the key parts of the statement of cash flows
▶ Understanding how the statement of cash flows can give you a picture of a company’s

finances
▶ Digging into why a company’s cash flow can be more telling than monitoring its earnings
▶ Figuring out how to monitor a company’s free cash flow and cash burn rate

“S

how me the money!” Those words screamed out by Cuba Gooding’s
character, a fictitious Arizona Cardinals wide receiver in the 1996
comedy “Jerry Maguire,” captured one football player’s desire for cold hard
cash. And that same line could just as easily apply to fundamental analysis
and the statement of cash flows.
Accounting rules can become so convoluted it’s hard to just see how much
cash a company is bringing in. You might read through a company’s income
statement and balance sheet and feel as if you have a pretty decent understanding of how the company is doing and what it owns. But revenue and
profit are just numbers on a financial statement. It’s cash that really matters.
It’s cash that pays the bills.
The statement of cash flows, or cash-flow statement, is all about showing you
the money. The statement meticulously tracks the flow of cold hard cash in and
out of a company. There’s nothing more reassuring than knowing a company
is bringing in cash.
Fundamental analysts relish in the brutal honesty of the cash-flow statement.
And while the statement has its limitations, in this chapter you’ll find how
tracking the cash flowing in and out of a company can take your analysis
skills to the next level.

12 506455-ch07.indd 107

9/24/09 10:30:12 PM

108 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
Looking at the Cash-Flow Statement
As a Fundamental Analyst
To understand why a company’s cash flow can be more revealing about a
company’s performance, consider this simple example. Imagine your daughter has borrowed $10 from you to start a lemonade stand. The only stipulation for the loan is that she reports back to you on how the business is going.
Excited about being an entrepreneur, your daughter quickly spends the $10
you lent her to get up and running. She buys lemons, sugar, cups, and stirring
spoons. It’s a hot summer day, so it looks like a winning business idea.
At the end of the day, you ask your daughter how she did. Hardly able to
contain her smile, she beams that business was great and she completely
sold out of lemonade. She estimates she sold 50 cups of lemonade at 50 cents
a cup. You do the math quickly and determine her profit was $15. Constructing
an income statement in your head, as explored in Chapter 5, you calculate she
brought in revenue of $25 (50 cups of lemonade at 50 cents) and spent $10 to
make the product. That’s a net income of $15.
But when you extend your hand to ask for your $10 back, thinking you’d let
her keep the $5 profit, she reports that she doesn’t have any cash at all. It
turns out that she accepted IOUs for all the lemonade she sold. Suddenly the
business isn’t necessarily looking so good, since there’s no cash flow.
This example is a gross simplification. But it gets to the point of why cash
flow is critical to analysis.
Accounting rules, even if properly followed, may give the impression a
company is doing better than it really is. Profit, as measured by rules made
by accountants, are subject to dozens of estimates, approximations and
hunches. But cash is cash. You either have it or you don’t.

Getting into the flow with cash flow
You might be wondering why you need to even bother with the statement of
cash flows. After all, the income statement, explored in Chapter 5, tells you how
profitable the company is. And the balance sheet, discussed in Chapter 6, tells
you how solid a company’s financial resources are.
The statement of cash flows, though, deserves a spot in your fundamental
analysis routine. The statement can provide valuable information when
evaluating a company because it:

12 506455-ch07.indd 108

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

Chapter 7: Tracking Cash with the Statement of Cash Flow

109

✓ Cuts through the optics of accounting. As you learned in Chapter 5,
measuring a company’s profit is a pretty convoluted process. There are
even more machinations going on behind the scenes, as accountants
classify expenses and revenue. In contrast, cash is cash. You either make
cash profits or you don’t.
✓ Links the different financial statements together. The income statement and balance sheet are somewhat independent of each other, since
they’re measuring different aspects of a business. The statement of cash
flows, though, draws upon information from both the income statement
and balance sheet to give you one, complete view of the company.
✓ Highlights cash generated from actually doing business. The statement
of cash flows makes it very clear how much of the cash coming into a
business is the result of the company actually selling its products and
services. It’s a helpful way to look past some one-time gains a company
might receive, say, by selling assets.
Accounting standards were tightened in the early 2000s following the implosion of Enron. Even so, the income statement is to be regarded with some
healthy skepticism. The statement of cash flows can let you intelligently look
for potential red flags in a company’s accounting, which is one of the hallmarks of fundamental analysis.
Consider the example of a company that offers customers, who agree to buy
products or services now, a very lenient repayment schedule. Doing so would
allow the company to book revenue now, boosting net income. The trouble,
though, is that the company is essentially stealing net income from a future
period. When companies do this, it’s referred to as channel stuffing, because
the company is pushing product into the hands of customers prematurely to
book sales now. The statement of cash flows, however, makes channel stuffing easy to spot, since the company didn’t receive cash.

Breaking the cash-flow statement
into its key parts
The way the statement of cash flows is organized tells you a great deal about a
company. The statement is divided into three main sections. Cash coming into
or going out of a company is placed into one of three categories, including:
✓ Cash flows from operating activities. Here, investors can get a good
idea of how much cash a company brings in, or uses, during its normal
course of business. It counts cash coming in from customers as well as
cash used to pay suppliers for materials, to the government for taxes,
and to pay workers’ salaries.

12 506455-ch07.indd 109

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

110 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
✓ Cash flows from investing activities. Companies keep careful track of
money they’ve spent upgrading, or investing in, themselves. This section,
for instance, counts the cash consumed buying new assets such as
equipment or facilities.
✓ Cash flows from financing activities. While companies are generally
hoping to become self-sufficient and support their operations with the
cash they generate from their business, sometimes they need cash
injections. This section of the balance sheet tallies up how much cash
is plowed into a company by lenders and investors. And on the flip side,
this section accounts for cash used to pay cash dividends to investors
or to pay down debts.
Unfortunately, many companies aren’t as forthright with their statements of
cash flows as they are with the balance sheet and income statement. When
companies report their earnings using earnings press releases, a vast majority do not provide a statement of cash flows. You can read more about what’s
contained in the earnings press release in Chapter 4. You may need to wait
for weeks after a company reports its earnings before getting the statement of
cash flows. Companies are required to include the statement in their 10-Q or
10-K filings.
A few companies including Amazon.com, though, have started providing a
statement of cash flows with their earnings press release. That’s a positive
trend for fundamental analysts that other companies will hopefully follow.

Examining a company’s cash
flow from operations
Typically, the first section of a company’s statement of cash flows deals with
measuring how much cash a company brings in during its normal course of
business. This key section, the first in the cash-flow statement, measures
cash from operations, or formally called cash provided by / (used in) operating
activities. The section tells you how much cash the company generated, or
used, in the course of doing business. Table 7-2 shows you how much Kraft
Foods generated in cash from its operations.
Reading the statement of cash flows can get complicated because there are
many lines in the statement. Adding to the confusion is the fact some of the
lines are positive and some are negative. Don’t stress. Just remember that the
statement of cash flows is really just converting a company’s net income into
a number that represents a company’s cash flow. Secondly, just remember
when a number in the cash-flow statement is positive, that means the activity
brought cash into the company. Similarly, when the number is negative, the
item consumed cash. If you’re more of a visual person, Table 7-1 shows you
how to think of these adjustments.

12 506455-ch07.indd 110

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

Chapter 7: Tracking Cash with the Statement of Cash Flow

Table 7-1

111

Generating or Consuming Cash

If an Item on the cash flow statement is . . .

It . . .

Negative

Uses cash

Positive

Generates cash

A few of those adjustments made to net income to arrive at a company’s cash
from operations are described in the following sections.

Depreciation and amortization
Usually, the biggest adjustment to net income to convert it into cash from
operations is depreciation and amortization. Depreciation is an expense
companies are required to include on their income statement, that doesn’t
actually cost a company cash. Depreciation tallies the expense of the wear
and tear on its equipment. Amortization, on the other hand, is the erosion of
value of intangible assets, like patents or trademarks.
Depreciation can be a somewhat difficult item for investors to understand. Think
of it this way. Every year, the value of your car falls due to age, and wear and
tear. It’s a real expense, since it is technically costing you money. But when
your car depreciates, you don’t get a bill for it. You don’t have to write a check,
and it doesn’t cost you cash immediately. As a result, depreciation is added
back to net income when measuring a company’s cash flow from operations.

Tax adjustments
Companies keep two sets of books. There’s one set for investors, which measures earnings according to the accounting rules. Then there’s a set required
by the Internal Revenue Service for taxes. The different sets of books have
different rules. As a result, a company may pay taxes to the IRS before the
tax expense is recorded in the books monitored by accountants. Confused
yet? Don’t worry. Just know that when a company actually writes a check and
pays taxes, which aren’t recorded on the income statement, it must subtract
the amount from net income. It’s subtracted since paying the taxes ate up
some of the company’s cash.

Gains on divestitures
When a company sells a unit, it may add the profit on the sale to its net
income. But remember, that profit didn’t result from the company selling
products or services. Since the sale didn’t generate sales from operations,
the amount is subtracted from net income.

12 506455-ch07.indd 111

9/24/09 10:30:13 PM

112 Part II: How To Perform Fundamental Analysis
