
notorious malefactor, well known by the name of Jack Sheppard. What amazing
difficulties has he overcome! what astonishing things has he performed! and all for the
sake of a stinking, miserable carcass; hardly worth the hanging! How dexterously did he
pick the chain of his padlock with a crooked nail! how manfully he burst his fetters
asunder! -- climb up the chimney! -- wrench out an iron bar! -- break his way through a
stone wall! -- make the strong door of a dark entry fly before him, till he got upon the
leads of the prison! then, fixing a blanket to the wall with a spike, he stole out of the
chapel. How intrepidly did he descend to the top of the turner's house! -- how cautiously
pass down the stair, and make his escape to the street door!
"Oh! that ye were all like Jack Sheppard! Mistake me not, my brethren; I don't mean in a
carnal, but in a spiritual sense, for I propose to spiritualise these things. What a shame it
would be if we should not think it worth our while to take as much pains, and employ as
many deep thoughts, to save our souls as he has done to preserve his body!
"Let me exhort ye, then, to open the locks of your hearts with the nail of repentance!
Burst asunder the fetters of your beloved lusts! -- mount the chimney of hope! -- take
from thence the bar of good resolution! -- break through the stone wall of despair, and all
the strongholds in the dark entry of the valley of the shadow of death! Raise yourselves to
the leads of divine meditation! -- fix the blanket of faith with the spike of the church! let
yourselves down to the turner's house of re signation, and descend the stairs of humility!
So shall you come to the door of deliverance from the prison of iniquity, and escape the
clutches of that old executioner the Devil!"
But popular as the name of Jack Sheppard was immediately after he had suffered the last
penalty of his crimes, it was as nothing compared to the vast renown which he has
acquired in these latter days, after the lapse of a century and a quarter. Poets too often, are
not fully appreciated till they have been dead a hundred years, and thieves, it would
appear, share the disadvantage. But posterity is grateful if our contemporaries are not;
and Jack Sheppard, faintly praised in his own day, shines out in ours the hero of heroes,
preeminent above all his fellows. Thornhill made but one picture of the illustrious robber,
but Cruikshank has made dozens, and the art of the engraver has multiplied them into
thousands and tens of thousands, until the populace of England have become as familiar
with Jack's features as they are with their own. Jack, the romantic, is the hero of three
goodly volumes, and the delight of the circulating libraries; and the theatres have been
smitten with the universal enthusiasm. Managers have set their playmongers at work, and
Jack's story has been reproduced in the shape of drama, melodrama, and farce, at half a
dozen places of entertainment at once. Never was such a display of popular regard for a
hero as was exhibited in London in 1840 for the renowned Jack Sheppard: robbery
acquired additional lustre in the popular eye, and not only Englishmen, but foreigners,
caught the contagion; and one of the latter, fired by the example, robbed and murdered a
venerable, unoffending, and too confiding nobleman, whom it was his especial duty to
have obeyed and protected. But he was a coward and a wretch; -- it was a solitary crime - he had not made a daring escape from dungeon walls, or ridden from London to York,
and he died amid the execrations of the people, affording a melancholy exemplification
of the trite remark, that every man is not great who is desirous of being so.

Jonathan Wild, whose name has been immortalised by Fielding, was no favourite with
the people. He had none of the virtues which, combined with crimes, make up the
character of the great thief. He was a pitiful fellow, who informed against his comrades,
and was afraid of death. This meanness was not to be forgiven by the crowd, and they
pelted him with dirt and stones on his way to Tyburn, and expressed their contempt by
every possible means. How different was their conduct to Turpin and Jack Sheppard, who
died in their neatest attire, with nosegays in their button-holes, and with the courage that
a crowd expects! It was anticipated that the body of Turpin would have been delivered up
to the surgeons for dissection, and the people seeing some men very busily employed in
removing it, suddenly set upon them, rescued the body, bore it about the town in triumph,
and then buried it in a very deep grave, filled with quick-lime, to hasten the progress of
decomposition. They would not suffer the corpse of their hero, of the man who had
ridden from London to York in four-and-twenty hours to be mangled by the rude hands
of unmannerly surgeons.
The death of Claude Duval would appear to have been no less triumphant. Claude was a
gentlemanly thief. According to Butler, in the famous ode to his memory, he
"Taught the wild Arabs of the road To rob in a more gentle mode; Take prizes more
obligingly than those Who never had breen bred filous; And how to hang in a more
graceful fashion Than e'er was known before to the dull English nation."
In fact, he was the pink of politeness, and his gallantry to the fair sex was proverbial.
When he was caught at last, pent in "stone walls and chains and iron grates," -- their grief
was in proportion to his rare merits and his great fame. Butler says, that to his dungeon
"-- came ladies from all parts, To offer up close prisoners their hearts, Which he received
as tribute due-- * * * * Never did bold knight, to relieve Distressed dames, such dreadful
feats achieve, As feeble damsels, for his sake, Would have been proud to undertake, And,
bravely ambitious to redeem The world's loss and their own, Strove who should have the
honour to lay down, And change a life with him."
Among the noted thieves of France, there is none to compare with the famous Aimerigot
Tetenoire, who flourished in the reign of Charles VI. This fellow was at the head of four
or five hundred men, and possessed two very strong castles in Limousin and Auvergne.
There was a good deal of the feudal baron about him, although he possessed no revenues
but such as the road afforded him. At his death he left a singular will. "I give and
bequeath," said the robber, "one thousand five hundred francs to St. George's Chapel, for
such repairs as it may need. To my sweet girl who so tenderly loved me, I give two
thousand five hundred; and the surplus I give to my companions. I hope they will all live
as brothers, and divide it amicably among them. If they cannot agree, and the devil of
contention gets among them, it is no fault of mine; and I advise them to get a good strong,
sharp axe, and break open my strong box. Let them scramble for what it contains, and the
Devil seize the hindmost." The people of Auvergne still recount with admiration the
daring feats of this brigand.

Of later years, the French thieves have been such unmitigated scoundrels as to have left
but little room for popular admiration. The famous Cartouche, whose name has become
synonymous with ruffian in their language, had none of the generosity, courtesy, and
devoted bravery which are so requisite to make a robber-hero. He was born at Paris,
towards the end of the seventeenth century, and broken alive on the wheel in November
1727. He was, however, sufficiently popular to have been pitied at his death, and
afterwards to have formed the subject of a much admired drama, which bore his name,
and was played with great success in all the theatres of France during the years 1734, 5,
and 6. In our own day the French have been more fortunate in a robber; Vidocq bids fair
to rival the fame of Turpin and Jack Sheppard. Already he has become the hero of many
an apocryphal tale -- already his compatriots boast of his manifold achievements, and
express their doubts whether any other country in Europe could produce a thief so clever,
so accomplished, so gentlemanly, as Vidocq.
Germany has its Schinderhannes, Hungary its Schubry, and Italy and Spain a whole host
of brigands, whose names and exploits are familiar as household words in the mouths of
the children and populace of those countries. The Italian banditti are renowned over the
world; and many of them are not only very religious (after a fashion), but very charitable.
Charity from such a source is so unexpected, that the people dote upon them for it. One
of them, when he fell into the hands of the police, exclaimed, as they led him away, "Ho
fatto pitt carita!" -- " I have given away more in charity than any three convents in these
provinces." And the fellow spoke truth.
In Lombardy, the people cherish the memory of two notorious robbers, who flourished
about two centuries ago under the Spanish government. Their story, according to
Macfarlane, is contained in a little book well known to all the children of the province,
and read by them with much more gusto than their Bibles.
Schinderhannes, the robber of the Rhine, is a great favourite on the banks of the river
which he so long kept in awe. Many amusing stories are related by the peasantry of the
scurvy tricks he played off upon rich Jews, or too-presuming officers of justice -- of his
princely generosity, and undaunted courage. In short, they are proud of him, and would
no more consent to have the memory of his achievements dissociated from their river
than they would to have the rock of Ehrenbreitstein blown to atoms by gunpowder.
There is another robber-hero, of whose character and exploits the people of Germany
speak admiringly. Mausch Nadel was captain of a considerable band that infested the
Rhine, Switzerland, Alsatia, and Lorraine during the years 1824, 5, and 6. Like Jack
Sheppard, he endeared himself to the populace by his most hazardous escape from prison.
Being confined, at Bremen, in a dungeon, on the third story of the prison of that town, he
contrived to let himself down without exciting the vigilance of the sentinels, and to swim
across the Weser, though heavily laden with irons. When about half way over, he was
espied by a sentinel, who fired at him, and shot him in the calf of the leg: but the
undaunted robber struck out manfully, reached the shore, and was out of sight before the
officers of justice could get ready their boats to follow him. He was captured again in

1826, tried at Mayence, and sentenced to death. He was a tall, strong, handsome man, and
his fate, villain as he was, excited much sympathy all over Germany. The ladies
especially were loud in their regret that nothing could be done to save a hero so goodlooking, and of adventures so romantic, from the knife of the headsman.
Mr. Macfarlane, in speaking of Italian banditti, remarks, that the abuses of the Catholic
religion, with its confessions and absolutions, have tended to promote crime of this
description. But, he adds, more truly, that priests and monks have not done half the
mischief which has been perpetrated by ballad-mongers and story-tellers. If he had said
play-wrights also, the list would have been complete. In fact, the theatre, which can only
expect to prosper, in a pecuniary sense, by pandering to the tastes of the people,
continually recurs to the annals of thieves and banditti for its most favourite heroes.
These theatrical robbers; with their picturesque attire, wild haunts, jolly, reckless, devilmay-care manners, take a wonderful hold upon the imagination, and, whatever their
advocates may say to the contrary, exercise a very pernicious influence upon public
morals. In the Memoirs of the Duke of Guise upon the Revolution of Naples in 1647 and
1648, it is stated, that the manners, dress, and mode of life of the Neapolitan banditti were
rendered so captivating upon the stage, that the authorities found it absolutely necessary
to forbid the representation of dramas in which they figured, and even to prohibit their
costume at the masquerades. So numerous were the banditti at this time, that the Duke
found no difficulty in raising an army of. them, to aid him in his endeavours to seize on
the throne of Naples. He thus describes them; [See also "Foreign Quarterly Review," vol.
iv. p. 398.]
"They were three thousand five hundred men, of whom the oldest came short of five and
forty years, and the youngest was above twenty. They were all tall and well made, with
long black hair, for the most part curled, coats of black Spanish leather, with sleeves of
velvet, or cloth of gold, cloth breeches with gold lace, most of them scarlet; girdles of
velvet, laced with gold, with two pistols on each side; a cutlass hanging at a belt, suitably
trimmed, three fingers broad and two feet long; a hawking-bag at their girdle, and a
powder-flask hung about their neck with a great silk riband. Some of them carried
firelocks, and others blunder-busses; they had all good shoes, with silk stockings, and
every one a cap of cloth of gold, or cloth of silver, of different colours, on his head,
which was very delightful to the eye."
"The Beggars' Opera," in our own country, is another instance of the admiration that
thieves excite upon the stage. Of the extraordinary success of this piece, when first
produced, the following account is given in the notes to "The Dunciad," and quoted by
Johnson in his "Lives of the Poets." "This piece was received with greater applause than
was ever known. Besides being acted in London sixty-three days without interruption,
and renewed the next season with equal applause, it spread into all the great towns of
England; was played in many places to the thirtieth and fortieth time; at Bath and Bristol,
&c. fifty. It made its progress into Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, where it was performed
twenty-four days successively. The ladies carried about with them the favourite songs of
it in fans, and houses were furnished with it in screens. The fame of it was not confined to
the author only. The person who acted Polly, till then obscure, became all at once the

favourite of the town; [Lavinia Fenton, afterwards Duchess of Bolton.] her pictures were
engraved and sold in great numbers; her life written, books of letters and verses to her
published, and pamphlets made even of her sayings and jests. Furthermore, it drove out
of England, for that season, the Italian Opera, which had carried all before it for ten
years." Dr. Johnson, in his Life of the Author, says, that Herring, afterwards Archbishop
of Canterbury, censured the opera, as giving encouragement, not only to vice, but to
crimes, by making the highwayman the hero, and dismissing him at last unpunished; and
adds, that it was even said, that after the exhibition the gangs of robbers were evidently
multiplied. The Doctor doubts the assertion, giving as his reason that highwaymen and
housebreakers seldom frequent the playhouse, and that it was not possible for any one to
imagine that he might rob with safety, because he saw Macheath reprieved upon the
stage. But if Johnson had wished to be convinced, he might very easily have discovered
that highwaymen and housebreakers did frequent the theatre, and that nothing was more
probable than that a laughable representation of successful villany should induce the
young and the already vicious to imitate it. Besides, there is the weighty authority of Sir
John Fielding, the chief magistrate of Bow Street, who asserted positively, and proved his
assertion by the records of his office, that the number of thieves was greatly increased at
the time when that opera was so popular.
We have another instance of the same result much nearer our own times. Schiller's
"Rauber," that wonderful play, written by a green youth, perverted the taste and
imagination of all the young men in Germany. An accomplished critic of our own
country (Hazlitt), speaking of this play, says it was the first he ever read, and such was
the effect it produced on him, that "it stunned him, like a blow." After the lapse of fiveand-twenty years he could not forget it; it was still, to use his own words, "an old dweller
in the chambers of his brain," and he had not even then recovered enough from it, to
describe how it was. The high-minded, metaphysical thief, its hero, was so warmly
admired, that several raw students, longing to imitate a character they thought so noble,
actually abandoned their homes and their colleges, and betook themselves to the forests
and wilds to levy contributions upon travellers. They thought they would, like Moor,
plunder the rich, and deliver eloquent soliloquies to the setting sun or the rising moon;
relieve the poor when they met them, and drink flasks of Rhenish with their free
companions in rugged mountain passes, or in tents in the thicknesses of the forests. But a
little experience wonderfully cooled their courage; they found that real, every-day
robbers were very unlike the conventional banditti of the stage, and that three months in
prison, with bread and water for their fare, and damp straw to lie upon, was very well to
read about by their own fire sides, but not very agreeable to undergo in their own proper
persons.
Lord Byron, with his soliloquising, high-souled thieves, has, in a slight degree, perverted
the taste of the greenhorns and incipient rhymesters of his country. As yet, however, they
have shown more good sense than their fellows of Germany, and have not taken to the
woods or the highways. Much as they admire Conrad the Corsair, they will not go to sea,
and hoist the black flag in emulation of him. By words only, and not by deeds, they
testify their admiration, and deluge the periodicals and music shops of the hand with
verses describing pirates' and bandits' brides, and robber adventures of every kind.

But it is the play-wright who does most harm; and Byron has fewer sins of this nature to
answer for than Gay or Schiller, and the modern dramatizers of Jack Sheppard. With the
aid of scenery, fine dresses, and music, and the very false notions they convey, they
vitiate the public taste, not knowing,
"----------- vulgaires rimeurs Quelle force ont les arts pour demolir les moeurs."
In the penny theatres that abound in the poor and populous districts of London, and which
are chiefly frequented by striplings of idle and dissolute habits, tales of thieves and
murderers are more admired, and draw more crowded audiences, than any other species
of representation. There the footpad, the burglar, and the highwayman are portrayed in
unnatural colours, and give pleasant lessons in crime to their delighted listeners. There
the deepest tragedy and the broadest farce are represented in the career of the murderer
and the thief, and are applauded in proportion to their depth and their breadth. There,
whenever a crime of unusual atrocity is committed, it is brought out afresh, with all its
disgusting incidents copied from the life, for the amusement of those who will one day
become its imitators.
With the mere reader the case is widely different; and most people have a partiality for
knowing the adventures of noted rogues. Even in fiction they are delightful: witness the
eventful story of Gil Blas de Santillane, and of that great rascal Don Guzman d'Alfarache.
Here there is no fear of imitation. Poets, too, without doing mischief, may sing of such
heroes when they please, wakening our sympathies for the sad fate of Gilderoy, or
Macpherson the Dauntless; or celebrating in undying verse the wrongs and the revenge of
the great thief of Scotland, Rob Roy. If, by the music of their sweet rhymes, they can
convince the world that such heroes are but mistaken philosophers, born a few ages too
late, and having both a theoretical and practical love for
"The good old rule, the simple plan, That they should take who have the power, That they
should keep who can,"
the world may, perhaps, become wiser, and consent to some better distribution of its good
things, by means of which thieves may become reconciled to the age, and the age to
them. The probability, however, seems to be, that the charmers will charm in vain, charm
they ever so wisely.

INFLUENCE OF POLITICS AND RELIGION ON THE HAIR AND BEARD.
Speak with respect and honour
Both of the beard and the beard's owner.
-- HUDIBRAS,
The famous declaration of St. Paul, "that long hair was a shame unto a man" has been
made the pretext for many singular enactments, both of civil and ecclesiastical
governments. The fashion of the hair and the cut of the beard were state questions in
France and England from the establishment of Christianity until the fifteenth century.
We find, too, that in much earlier times men were not permitted to do as they liked with
their own hair. Alexander the Great thought that the beards of his soldiery afforded
convenient handles for the enemy to lay hold of, preparatory to cutting off their heads;
and, with the view of depriving them of this advantage, he ordered the whole of his army
to be closely shaven. His notions of courtesy towards an enemy were quite different from
those entertained by the North American Indians, amongst whom it is held a point of
honour to allow one "chivalrous lock" to grow, that the foe, in taking the scalp, may have
something to catch hold of.
At one time, long hair was the symbol of sovereignty in Europe. We learn from Gregory
of Tours that, among the successors of Clovis, it was the exclusive privilege of the royal
family to have their hair long, and curled. The nobles, equal to kings in power, would not
show any inferiority in this respect, and wore not only their hair, but their beards, of an
enormous length. This fashion lasted, with but slight changes, till the time of Louis the
Debonnaire, but his successors, up to Hugh Capet, wore their hair short, by way of
distinction. Even the serfs had set all regulation at defiance, and allowed their locks and
beards to grow.
At the time of the invasion of England by William the Conqueror, the Normans wore
their hair very short. Harold, in his progress towards Hastings, sent forward spies to view
the strength and number of the enemy. They reported, amongst other things, on their
return, that "the host did almost seem to be priests, because they had all their face and
both their lips shaven." The fashion among the English at the time was to wear the hair
long upon the head and the upper lip, but to shave the chin. When the haughty victors had
divided the broad lands of the Saxon thanes and franklins among them, when tyranny of
every kind was employed to make the English feel that they were indeed a subdued and
broken nation, the latter encouraged the growth of their hair, that they might resemble as
little as possible their cropped and shaven masters.
This fashion was exceedingly displeasing to the clergy, and prevailed to a considerable
extent in France and Germany. Towards the end of the eleventh century, it was decreed
by the Pope, and zealously supported by the ecclesiastical authorities all over Europe,
that such persons as wore long hair should be excommunicated while living, and not be
prayed for when dead. William of Malmesbury relates, that the famous St. Wulstan,
Bishop of Worcester, was peculiarly indignant whenever he saw a man with long hair. He
declaimed against the practice as one highly immoral, criminal, and beastly. He
