
Ironically, generic drug companies can still benefit from some competitive
barriers. The first company to file a legitimate patent challenge against a branded
drug enjoys 180 days of marketing exclusivity, which allows the generic company
to cash in before others join the party. The windfall can dramatically change the
company’s profitability in the short term; a 10-percentage point increase in oper-
ating margins isn’t uncommon. Once the multitude is allowed to join the fray,

the only company that comes out ahead is the low-cost manufacturer. Given the


BIOTECHNOLOGY

crucial importance of manufacturing scale, you're usually better off with an es-
tablished player in generic drugs.

Generic companies have benefited from some longer term trends. As of
mid-2003, nearly 50 percent of all prescriptions were filled with generics, up
from about 20 percent in the mid-1980s. This trend should keep moving up,
thanks to the numerous drugs coming off patent each year, as well as pressure
to rein in rising prescription costs. Even at lower margins, these drugs can be
profitable with the right cost structure. Last, the political winds are blowing
in favor of generic companies as politicians and the general public look for

‘ways to lower health care costs.

Biotechnology

Although the best biotech companies can generate enormous free cash
flow—biotech giant Amgen threw off more about $1.5 billion in free cash
flow in 2002—most are too speculative for all but the most aggressive in-
vestors. Picking successful firms requires a bit of skill, some understanding of
the science, and a lot of luck.

Biotechnology firms are often thought of as younger, hipper, more in-
novative, and faster growing than their pharmaceutical counterparts. They
seek to discover new drug therapies using biologic—cellular and molecu-
lar—processes rather than the chemical processes used by big pharma.
Biotech firms are also on the cutting edge of developing novel therapeutic
products, using groundbreaking technology platforms such as proteomics
and genomics.

However, biotech drug development is still all about probabilities, but
with even more product risk because the therapies are often completely new
forms of treatment. For example, Genentech has been developing a treat-
ment that attempts to stop the body's mechanism for growing new blood
vessels (a process called angiogenesés) on the theory that a cancerous tumor
will die if it no longer receives blood. Although several companies are work-
ing on similar therapies, none have been successful to date. Even if they are
successful, the true size of these markets is anyone’s guess. This adds another
layer of uncertainty to the drug development process—as well as volatility in

stock prices.

197


198

HEALTH CARE

Hallmarks of Success for Biotech Companies
Think about biotech firms in three categories: established, up and coming,

and speculative.

Established: These are the bigwigs of biotech and include companies such as
Amgen, Genentech, and Biogen IDEC, which each have annual product rev-
enues of more than $1 billion and market capitalizations beginning to rival
those of big drug companies. They generate positive earnings and cash flow,
and their drug development pipelines are large enough to sustain decent sales
and earnings growth. As these firms become larger, their future cash flows be-
come less risky.

In this category, look for:

> Firms with a large number of drugs in late-stage clinical trials

> Plenty of cash on hand, plus cash flow to cover several years of research
and development expenditures

> Firms that have built a salesforce of their own—so they no longer have
to pay another firm to market their products and can begin to build
relationships with physicians

» A stock price that provides a margin of safety of around 30 percent to
40 percent to its fair value

Up and Coming: Many biotech firms are on the cusp of success, either with a
product on the market or within arm’s length. Some are on the verge of break-
ing into the black, while others have already demonstrated small but positive
earnings. In other words, they've got more than a cell in a petri dish, but they
still have a lot to prove. All of these firms hold lots of risk and typically have a
narrow economic moat or none at all, depending on competing products.
Cash is king during this stage, and these companies are often able to raise
capital during the market’s periodic biotech booms. But it’s worth keeping
an eye on how quickly they are spending that cash because the last phases
of clinical trials are the most expensive, and preparing literally truckloads of
documents for the FDA isn’t cheap. That’s why it often makes sense for

up-and-comers to form partnerships with bigger pharmaceutical or biotech


BIOTECHNOLOGY

firms. Although a partnership agreement means giving up a chunk of the
profits, getting to market faster can be worth the cost.

Investors should ask the following questions to reduce their risk:

> Does the company have enough cash to get through the final (and most
expensive) stages of testing? Compare the amount of cash on the balance
sheet to the amount of cash that the firm burns through in a typical year.
Phase ITI trials can cost tens of millions. Can the company write a check
for these trials, or will it have to go outside for capital?

> Have larger biotechnology firms or pharmaceutical companies been will-
ing to join forces with the firm? Partnerships can be a double-edged sword.
They often validate the viability of a biotech’s technology and provide
knowledge and sales expertise, but they also take a huge chunk of the prof
its. For example, Biogen IDEC’s cancer drug Rituxan has gone gangbusters
since its 1997 approval, but because of the company’s partnership with
Genentech, Biogen IDEC sees only about a third of the drug’s sales.

> Because future cash flows are so difficult to predict, does the stock price
trade at a big enough discount to fair value to provide a margin of safety?
A 50 percent margin of safety is reasonable given the risks of biotech.

Speculative: Newer biotech companies, which make up the majority of all
companies in this industry, are too risky for the vast majority of investors.
Although firms in this category undoubtedly have interesting technology
and could be extremely successful some day, real revenues from real drug
products are many years away, and positive cash flow from operations is even
further out. Compound that risk with the slim odds that most early-stage
drugs will ever reach the market, and we'd classify them as high-risk, no-
moat stocks—which means we'd need a gargantuan margin of safety before
we'd be willing to own them. These stocks are more like lottery tickets than
anything else.

If you're doing research on a biotech company, the company’s 10-K is the
best place to start. Here, the company typically explains in layman’s terms
the technology and drugs in development and explains how the company is

funding its research and partnerships. Disease Web sites cancer.gov and

199


200 HEALTH CARE

MedicineNet.com and science journals often have information about drug
classifications, market sizes, and competing and substitute products. In addi-
tion, industry resources such as the Biotech Industry Organization and Bio-

Space each have drug, company, and industry information.

Medical Device Companies

Medical device companies are probably the most straightforward of the
health care industries. These are the companies that make the hardware, such
as pacemakers and artificial hips, for medical procedures. There are two main
types of device firms—cardiovascular and orthopedic—and they're well
worth getting to know, given how many firms in this industry have wide eco-
nomic moats.

As with the other health care sectors, the aging population and increase in
life expectancy will drive sales growth in medical devices. Both the incidence
of heart disease and the need for joint replacement rise substantially among
older people. Also, now that physically active Baby Boomers are suffering
from a few aches and pains of aging, physicians are starting to perform more
joint replacement procedures in younger patients. Because a new hip has an
average life of about 10 years, this should eventually expand the market for re-
vision surgeries when the first hip wears out.

The ongoing pressure on medical costs also helps spur demand for some
medical device companies, as new surgical techniques dramatically reduce the
cost of some procedures by reducing the length of the associated hospital stay.

For example, traditional cardiac bypass surgery, aimed at increasing blood
flow to the heart, involves a 10- to 12-inch incision down the chest, cracking
open the rib cage, and approximately eight days in the hospital, followed by
two months of recuperation. Less invasive cardiac bypass surgery is performed
with a three- to five-inch incision between the ribs (or several one-inch inci-
sions) and requires a three-day hospital stay and about two weeks of recovery
time. What's more, minimally invasive procedures typically cost 25 percent
less than the traditional open-heart bypass.

In addition to their attractive growth characteristics, device companies
also typically boast wide economic moats. Economies of scale, high switching
costs, and long-term clinical histories (in excess of 30 years for some orthope-

dic devices) all serve as high barriers to new entrants. As a result, a few major


MEDICAL DEVICE COMPANIES

players dominate both the cardiac and orthopedic device markets. Patent
protection on devices and instrumentation used for installation also provides
a measure of protection from competitors for each company.

Switching costs tend to be high for orthopedic devices because physicians
are often reluctant to drop one firm’s devices in favor of another's. Installing
an artificial hip or knee is complicated, and the procedures require specialized
tools and training. Because each company makes its own proprietary set of
tools that work exclusively with its own joint replacements, a surgeon who de-
cides to use a different company’s artificial hip must squeeze in time to receive
training on how to use the new instrumentation system. Given how busy sur-
geons generally are, that’s unlikely to happen unless the new joint is signifi-
cantly better than the one the surgeon is currently using. It also takes time to
complete enough procedures to become comfortable with the new system.

Medical device companies hold a great deal of pricing power as well.
Medicare and insurance companies have so far been reluctant to limit brand
choices when it comes to joint replacements and pacemakers, which has al-
lowed orthopedic device makers (for example) to consistently raise prices by
3 percent to 5 percent each year.

Finally, some device firms face less risk than pharmaceutical firms because
product improvements tend to be evolutionary rather than revolutionary.
This benefits industry players in two ways. First, it decreases regulatory risk
because incremental improvements to existing devices can go through a
streamlined review process at the FDA. Second, it reduces the odds that one
company will leapfrog the rest by rolling out a truly revolutionary product.
Although major advances in medical devices do occur, they’re less common
than in some other areas of health care, so industry players tend to compete
by making each successive generation of any particular device just a little bit
better than the previous one. (Contrast this type of competition with the
winner-take-all structure of the drug industry, in which a new drug can liter-
ally wipe out the market for competing drugs in very short order.)

However, device firms are not without risk. Product cycles can be very
short, so companies must spend heavily on research and development to keep
up with their competitors. Especially in cardiac devices, where switching costs
for surgeons are lower, market share among the major competitors can change

dramatically within the space of 12 or 18 months as new products arrive on the

201


202 HEALTH CARE

market. The implantation procedure for a cardiac device is largely the same
whether you're using this year’s model or last year’s, which makes it easy for
physicians to switch over to the latest product very quickly.

Legal risks are also an issue. In recent years, cardiac device companies have
used litigation as a defensive (and sometimes offensive) tactic against com-
petitors. All the suits and countersuits eat up a great deal of time and money

and increase risk as well because the outcomes are usually difficult to predict.

Hallmarks of Success for Medical Device Companies
Medical device firms often enjoy high margins and strong earnings. Here are

the key factors we look for in a device firm:

> Salesforce penetration: Many firms train their sales reps to serve as consul-
tants, with some even assisting in surgeries. For example, Biomet sales
representatives attend the majority of joint replacement surgeries where
the company’s products are being used and often contribute their expert-
ise on the devices and instruments to the surgeon during the procedure.
This deep relationship with physicians can increase the cost to switch to a
competing product.

> Product diversification: Firms can reduce their risk by offering a strong
mix of high-margin products (such as replacement hips or pacemakers)
and commodity or recurring products that often have lower margins. For
example, Medtronic has been working on adapting its core electronic
stimulation technology (used in pacemakers) for use in controlling
tremors from Parkinson's disease. Developing this higher margin product
should help offset anticipated declines in its lower margin stent business.

> Product innovation: Looking at new product introductions relative to re-
search and development costs is a good way to measure a firm’s ability to
pump out new products. A firm’s annual report will mention new prod-
ucts being released in a given year as well as R&D expenditures. Going

back several years may take some digging into past reports.

Health Insurance/Managed Care
Insurance and managed care firms are subject to intense regulatory pressure

and widespread litigation, making them somewhat less attractive than some


HEALTH INSURANCE/MANAGED CARE

other health care industries. They typically don’t have wide economic moats.
Although firms that focus on making a profit can throw off large amounts of
free cash flow, we'd tread carefully and require a hefty margin of safety before
investing in most companies in this industry. Most health care consumers
don’t spend much time thinking about how money gets from their pockets to
their physician’s because they’re not responsible for paying the full bill at the
end of the day. As a result, there’s little incentive to shop around for the best
prices, and insurance companies are the ones who ultimately foot the bill if
they underestimate the growth in health care costs.

Starting in the 1980s, insurers tried to gain some pricing control by creat-
ing managed-care organizations (MCOs) to coordinate and consolidate
providers and buyers. MCOs make money in two primary ways. One is by
underwriting medical insurance. Because it’s tough to predict future medical
expenses, this is known as risk-based business. Under this model, the MCO
bears the risk of rising health care costs. The other way that MCOs make
money is by providing administrative services—such as claims processing or
network access—for a monthly fee. In this instance, employers underwrite
their employees’ medical insurance, and the MCO simply administers the
health plan. In this model, called fee-based business, the employer bears the
risk of rising costs.

Companies with a greater proportion of fee-based business hold less risk
because cash flows are more predictable. In risk-based accounts, each trip to
the hospital takes more money out of the MCO’s pocket. So the upside
might be great because if nobody gets sick, the MCO keeps all the premiums.
But if hospital costs or prescription drug prices increase more than expected,
acompany’s profits can be wiped out. Because medical costs are generally in-

creasing, we think fee-based businesses are usually more attractive.

Hallmarks of Success for Health Insurance/Managed Care Companies
Although managed care generally isn’t the most rewarding place for your
health care dollars, some companies manage to do well. Here’s how to find

them:

> Effective medical cost management and underwriting: The medical loss ratio

(medical costs paid divided by premium revenue) is the best measure of a

203


204 HEALTH CARE

firm’s effectiveness in this area. Be sure not to include fee-based revenues
and investment income when calculating this ratio, though. The average
medical loss ratio has been about 84 percent to 85 percent over the past
several years, and this measure captures both pricing and medical cost
management, reflecting a company’s overall success and consistency in
managing its risk-based business.

> Minimal dual-option business: Managed care organizations often give indi-
viduals the opportunity to choose from two or more types of plans (such as
an HMO, PPO, or traditional indemnity plan). Watch out for companies
with a large portion of this dual-option, also known as slice, business.
These slice accounts not only often promote hypercompetition among
managed care groups, but also are more susceptible to mispricing because
demand for each option in a sponsoring company is difficult to predict.

> Large mix of fee-based business: Underwriting health insurance has proved
to be risky business, and lower exposure to this risk is generally a positive
in our book. For example, UnitedHealth Group increased its fee-based
membership to 64 percent of total members at the end of 2002, up from
55 percent at the end of 1999, and its overall financial results improved
over the same period.

> Minimal exposure to government accounts: Government-funded programs,
such as Medicare and Medicaid, aren't increasing reimbursement rates in
tandem with rising medical costs. Companies with less exposure to govern-

ment accounts will outperform those that rely on government revenues.

The company’s Web site will have information about products and ser-
vices offered—it’s also a good way of seeing how customer-friendly the com-
pany is. The 10-K will have information about underwriting, account mix if
any customer is a large source of revenues (10 percent or greater), as well as

product information and financial statements.

Investor's Checklist: Health Care
> Developing drugs is time-consuming, costly, and there are no guarantees
of success. Look for companies with long patent lives and full pipelines to

spread the development risk.


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

Drug companies whose products target large patient populations or sig-
nificant unmet needs have a better chance of paying off.

Make sure you have a big margin of safety for pharmaceutical companies
with megablockbuster drugs that make up a large percentage of sales. Any
unexpected developments can send cash flow, and the stock price, reeling.
Unless you have a deep understanding of the technology, don’t invest in
biotech startups. Payoffs could be large, but the cash flows are so far out
and uncertain that it’s easier to lose your shirt than win big.

Don't overlook the medical device industry, which is full of firms with
wide economic moats.

Cash is king for firms that rely on development (pharmaceuticals, biotech-
nology, and medical devices). Make sure firms have enough cash or cash
from operations to get through the next development cycle.

Keep an eye on the government. Any drastic changes in Medicare/
Medicaid spending or regulatory requirements can have a deep impact
on pricing throughout the sector.

Managed care organizations that spread risk—whether through a high
mix of fee-based business, product diversification, strong underwriting, or

minimal government accounts—will provide more sustainable returns.

205




Ty

Consumer Services

Not SURPRISINGLY, WE generally don’t find a ton of great long-term stock
ideas in retail and consumer services because most economic moats for the
sector are extremely narrow, if they exist at all. The only way a retailer can
earn a wide economic moat is by doing something that keeps consumers
shopping at its stores rather than at competitors. It can do this by offering
unique products or low prices. The former method is tough to do on a large
scale because unique products rarely remain unique forever. It’s rare to find a
retailer or consumer service firm that maintains any kind of economic moat
for more than a few years.

The few consumer service firms that have established a wide economic
moat include Home Depot and Lowe's in the home improvement area, Wal-
greens for prescription drugs and convenience items, and Wal-Mart for just
about everything. These firms developed distinctive store prototypes that set
them apart from their competitors, and they now enjoy vast economies of

scale that make it tough for competitors to earn consistent profits. Identifying

Tom Goetzinger and Carl Sibilski with Pat Dorsey.


208

CONSUMER SERVICES

and investing in firms like these (at the right price) is the best way to make
money over the long haul in this classic “buy what you know” area of the
market. Although you can also do well buying high-quality specialty and
clothing retailers when the industry sees one of its periodic sell-offs, very few
of these kinds of firms make great long-term holdings.

Companies We See Every Day

Most of the companies in the consumer services sector are very familiar: We
shop at their stores and eat their food just about every day. The sector contains
discount stores such as Wal-Mart and Target, drugstores such as Walgreen and
CYS, clothing stores such as Gap, home improvement shops such as Home
Depot and Lowe's, restaurants such as McDonald’s and Outback Steakhouse,
and scores of other well-known names. Being able to peruse the aisles of these
stores, interact with employees, and sample products is a huge advantage from
an investment standpoint. After all, when was the last time you tinkered with
a semiconductor before buying shares of Intel or spoke with a claims repre-
sentative before investing in Aetna or Cigna?
