
97

produce a result falling somewhere between temporary anguish
and default.
We wouldn't have liked those 99:1 odds-and never will. A
small chance of distress or disgrace cannot, in our view, be offset by
a large chance of extra returns. If your actions are sensible, you
are certain to get good results; in most such cases, leverage just
moves things along faster. Charlie and I have never been in a big
hurry: We enjoy the process far more than the proceeds-though
we have learned to live with those also.
G.

Junk Bonds 24

Lethargy bordering on sloth remains the cornerstone of our
investment style: This year we neither bought nor sold a share of
five of our six major holdings. The exception was Wells Fargo, a
superbly-managed, high-return banking operation in which we increased our ownership to just under 10%, the most we can own
without the approval of the Federal Reserve Board. About onesixth of our position was bought in 1989, the rest in 1990.
The banking business is no favorite of ours. When assets are
twenty times equity-a common ratio in this industry-mistakes
that involve only a small portion of assets can destroy a major portion of equity. And mistakes have been the rule rather than the
exception at many major banks. Most have resulted from a managerial failing that we described last year when discussing the "institutional imperative:" the tendency of executives to mindlessly
imitate the behavior of their peers, no matter how foolish it may be
to do so. In their lending, many bankers played follow-the-Ieader
with lemming-like zeal; now they are experiencing a lemming-like
fate.
Because leverage of 20:1 magnifies the effects of managerial
strengths and weaknesses, we have no interest in purchasing shares
of a poorly-managed bank at a "cheap" price. Instead, our only
interest is in buying into well-managed banks at fair prices.
With Wells Fargo, we think we have obtained the best managers in the business, Carl Reichardt and Paul Hazen. In many ways
the combination of Carl and Paul reminds me of another-Tom
Murphy and Dan Burke at Capital Cities/ABC. First, each pair is
stronger than the sum of its parts because each partner understands, trusts and admires the other. Second, both managerial
24 [Divided by hash lines: 1990; 1990 Wesco Financial Corporation Letter to
Shareholders, by Charles T. Munger. Reprinted with permission.]

98

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

teams payable people well, but abhor having a bigger head count
than is needed. Third, both attack costs as vigorously when profits
are at record levels as when they are under pressure. Finally, both
stick with what they understand and let their abilities, not their
egos, determine what they attempt. (Thomas J. Watson Sr. of IBM
followed the same rule: "I'm no genius," he said. "I'm smart in
spots-but I stay around those spots.")
Our purchases of Wells Fargo in 1990 were helped by a chaotic
market in bank stocks. The disarray was appropriate: Month by
month the foolish loan decisions of once well-regarded banks were
put on public display. As one huge loss after another was unveiled-often on the heels of managerial assurances that all was
well-investors understandably concluded that no bank's numbers
were to be trusted. Aided by their flight from bank stocks, we
purchased our 10% interest in Wells Fargo for $290 million, less
than five times after-tax earnings, and less than three times pre-tax
earnings.
Wells Fargo is big-it has $56 billion in assets-and has been
earning more than 20% on equity and 1.25% on assets. Our
purchase of one-tenth of the bank may be thought of as roughly
equivalent to our buying 100% of a $5 billion bank with identical
financial characteristics. But were we to make such a purchase, we
would have to pay about twice the $290 million we paid for Wells
Fargo. Moreover, that $5 billion bank, commanding a premium
price, would present us with another problem: We would not be
able to find a Carl Reichardt to run it. In recent years, Wells Fargo
executives have been more avidly recruited than any others in the
banking business; no one however, has been able to hire the dean.
Of course, ownership of a bank-or about any other business-is far from riskless. California banks face the specific risk of
a major earthquake, which might wreak enough havoc on borrowers to in turn destroy the banks lending to them. A second risk is
systemic-the possibility of a business contraction or financial
panic so severe that it would endanger almost every highly-leveraged institution, no matter how intelligently run. Finally, the market's major fear of the moment is that West Coast real estate values
will tumble because of overbuilding and deliver huge losses to
banks that have financed the expansion. Because it is a leading
real estate lender, Wells Fargo is thought to be particularly
vulnerable.
None of these eventualities can be ruled out. The probability
of the first two occurring, however, is low and even a meaningful

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

99

drop in real estate values is unlikely to cause major problems for
well-managed institutions. Consider some mathematics: Wells
Fargo currently earns well over $1 billion pre-tax annually after expensing more than $300 million for loan losses. If 10% of all $48
billion of the bank's loans-not just its real estate loans-were hit
by problems in 1991, and these produced losses (including foregone interest) averaging 30% of principal, the company would
roughly break even.
A year like that-which we consider only a low-level possibility, not a likelihood-would not distress us. In fact, at Berkshire
we would love to acquire businesses or invest in capital projects
that produced no return for a year, but that could then be expected
to earn 20% on growing equity. Nevertheless, fears of a California
real estate disaster similar to that experienced in New England
caused the price of Wells Fargo stock to fall almost 50% within a
few months during 1990. Even though we had bought some shares
at the prices prevailing before the fall, we welcomed the decline
because it allowed us to pick up many more shares at the new,
panic prices.
Investors who expect to be ongoing buyers of investments
throughout their lifetimes should adopt a similar attitude toward
market fluctuations; instead many illogically become euphoric
when stock prices rise and unhappy when they fall. They show no
such confusion in their reaction to food prices: Knowing they are
forever going to be buyers of food, they welcome falling prices and
deplore price increases. (It's the seller of food who doesn't like
declining prices.) Similarly, at the Buffalo News we would cheer
lower prices for newsprint-even though it would mean marking
down the value of the large inventory of newsprint we always keep
on hand-because we know we are going to be perpetually buying
the product.
Identical reasoning guides our thinking about Berkshire's investments. We will be buying businesses-or small parts of businesses, called stocks-year in, year out as long as I live (and longer,
if Berkshire's directors attend the seances I have scheduled).
Given these intentions, declining prices for businesses benefit us,
and rising prices hurt us.
The most common cause of low prices is pessimism-sometimes pervasive, sometimes specific to a company or industry. We
want to do business in such an environment, not because we like
pessimism but because we like the prices it produces. It's optimism
that is the enemy of the rational buyer.

100

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

None of this means, however, that a business or stock is an
intelligent purchase simply because it is unpopular; a contrarian
approach is just as foolish as a follow-the-crowd strategy. What's
required is thinking rather than polling. Unfortunately, Bertrand
Russell's observation about life in general applies with unusual
force in the financial world: "Most men would rather die than
think. Many do."

* * * * *
Our other major portfolio change last year was large additions
to our holdings of RJR Nabisco bonds, securities that we first
bought in late 1989. At yearend 1990 we had $440 million invested
in these securities, an amount that approximated market value.
(As I write this, however, their market value has risen by more
than $150 million.)
Just as buying into the banking business is unusual for us, so is
the purchase of below-investment-grade bonds. But opportunities
that interest us and that are also large enough to have a worthwhile
impact on Berkshire's results are rare. Therefore, we will look at
any category of investment, so long as we understand the business
we're buying into and believe that price and value may differ significantly. (Woody Allen, in another context, pointed out the advantage of open-mindedness: "I can't understand why more people
aren't bi-sexual because it doubles your chances for a date on Saturday night.")
In the past we have bought a few below-investment-grade
bonds with success, though these were all old-fashioned "fallen angels"-bonds that were initially of investment grade but that were
downgraded when the issuers fell on bad times. . . .
A kind of bastardized fallen angel burst onto the investment
scene in the 1980s-"junk bonds" that were far below investmentgrade when issued. As the decade progressed, new offerings of
manufactured junk became ever junkier and ultimately the predictable outcome occurred: Junk bonds lived up to their name. In
1990-even before the recession dealt its blows-the financial sky
became dark with the bodies of failing corporations.
The disciples of debt assured us that this collapse wouldn't
happen: Huge debt, we were told, would cause operating managers
to focus their efforts as never before, much as a dagger mounted on
the steering wheel of a car could be expected to make its driver
proceed with intensified care. We'll acknowledge that such an attention-getter would produce a very alert driver. But another cer-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

101

tain consequence would be a deadly-and unnecessary-accident
if the car hit even the tiniest pothole or sliver of ice. The roads of
business are riddled with potholes; a plan that requires dodging
them all is a plan for disaster.
In the final chapter of The Intelligent Investor Ben Graham
forcefully rejected the dagger thesis: "Confronted with a challenge
to distill the secret of sound investment into three words, we venture the motto, Margin of Safety." Forty-two years after reading
that, I still think those are the right three words. The failure of
investors to heed this simple message caused them staggering
losses as the 1990s began.
At the height of the debt mania, capital structures were concocted that guaranteed failure: In some cases, so much debt was
issued that even highly favorable business results could not produce the funds to service it. One particularly egregious "kill-'emat-birth" case a few years back involved the purchase of a mature
television station in Tampa, bought with so much debt that the interest on it exceeded the station's gross revenues. Even if you assume that all labor, programs and services were donated rather
than purchased, this capital structure required revenues to explode-or else the station was doomed to go broke. (Many of the
bonds that financed the purchase were sold to now-failed savings
and loan associations; as a taxpayer, you are picking up the tab for
this folly.)
All of this seems impossible now. When these misdeeds were
done, however, dagger-selling investment bankers pointed to the
"scholarly" research of academics, which reported that over the
years the higher interest rates received from low-grade bonds had
more than compensated for their higher rate of default. Thus, said
the friendly salesmen, a diversified portfolio of junk bonds would
produce greater net returns than would a portfolio of high~grade
bonds. (Beware of past-performance "proofs" in finance: If history
books were the key to riches, the Forbes 400 would consist of
librarians.)
There was a flaw in the salesmen's logic-one that a first-year
student in statistics is taught to recognize. An assumption was being made that the universe of newly-minted junk bonds was identical to the universe of low-grade fallen angels and that, therefore,
the default experience of the latter group was meaningful in predicting the default experience of the new issues. (That was an error
similar to checking the historical death rate from Kool-Aid before
drinking the version served at Jonestown.)

102

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

The universes were of course dissimilar in several vital respects. For openers, the manager of a fallen angel almost invariably yearned to regain investment-grade status and worked toward
that goal. The junk-bond operator was usually an entirely different
breed. Behaving much as a heroin user might, he devoted his energies not to finding a cure for his debt-ridden condition, but rather
to finding another fix. Additionally, the fiduciary sensitivities of
the executives managing the typical fallen angel were often, though
not always, more finely developed than were those of the junkbond-issuing financiopath.
Wall Street cared little for such distinctions. As usual, the
Street's enthusiasm for an idea was proportional not to its merit,
but rather to the revenue it would produce. Mountains of junk
bonds were sold by those who didn't care to those who didn't
think-and there was no shortage of either.
Junk bonds remain a mine field, even at prices that today are
often a small fraction of issue price. As we said last year, we have
never bought a new issue of a junk bond. (The only time to buy
these is on a day with no "y" in it.) We are, however, willing to
look at the field, now that it is in disarray.
In the case of RJR Nabisco, we feel the Company's credit is
considerably better than was generally perceived for a while and
that the yield we receive, as well as the potential for capital gain,
more than compensates for the risk we incur (though that is far
from nil). RJR has made asset sales at favorable prices, has added
major amounts of equity, and in general is being run well.
However, as we survey the field, most low-grade bonds still
look unattractive. The handiwork of the Wall Street of the 1980s is
even worse than we had thought: Many important businesses have
been mortally wounded. We will, though, keep looking for opportunities as the junk market continues to unravel.
It is interesting to compare Wesco's approach (deliberate nondiversification of investments in an attempt to be more skillful per
transaction) with an approach promoted for years by Michael
Milken to help sell junk bonds. The Milken approach, supported
by theories of many finance professors, argued that (1) market
prices were efficient in a world where investors get paid extra for
enduring volatility (wide swings in outcomes); (2) therefore, the
prices at which new issues of junk bonds came to market were fair
in a probabilistic sense (meaning that the high promised interest
rates covered increased statistical expectancy of loss) and also pro-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

103

vided some premium return to cover volatility exposure; and (3)
therefore, if a savings and loan association (or other institution)
arranged diversification, say, by buying, without much examination, a large part of each new Milken issue of junk bonds, the association would work itself into the sure to-get-better-than-averageresults position of a gambling house proprietor with a "house"
edge. This type of theorizing has now wreaked havoc at institutions, governed by true-believers, which backed their conclusions
by buying Milken's "bonds." Contrary to the theorizing, widely diversified purchases of such "bonds" have in most cases produced
dismal results. We can all understand why Milken behaved as he
did and believed what he had to believe in order to maintain an
endurable self-image. But how can we explain why anyone else
believed that Milken was paid 5% commissions to put "bond" buyers in the position of the house in Las Vegas? We suggest this
cause: many of the foolish buyers, and their advisers, were trained
by finance professors who pushed beloved models (efficient market
theory and modern portfolio theory) way too far, while they ignored other models that would have warned of danger. This is a
common type of "expert" error ....
H.

Zero-Coupon Bonds25

Berkshire issued $902.6 million principal amount of ZeroCoupon Convertible Subordinated Debentures, which are now
listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Salomon Brothers handled the underwriting in superb fashion, providing us helpful advice and a flawless execution.
Most bonds, of course, require regular payments of interest,
usually semi-annually. A zero-coupon bond, conversely, requires
no current interest payments; instead, the investor receives his
yield by purchasing the security at a significant discount from maturity value. The effective interest rate is determined by the original issue price, the maturity value, and the amount of time between
issuance and maturity.
In our case, the bonds were issued at 44.314% of maturity
value and are due in 15 years. For investors purchasing the bonds,
that is the mathematical equivalent of a 5.5% current payment
compounded semi-annually. Because we received only 44.31 cents
on the dollar, our proceeds from this offering were $400 million
(less about $9.5 million of offering expenses).
25

[1989.]

104

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

The bonds were issued in denominations of $10,000 and each
bond is convertible into .4515 shares of Berkshire Hathaway. Because a $10,000 bond cost $4,431, this means that the conversion
price was $9,815 per Berkshire share, a 15% premium to the market price then existing. Berkshire can call the bonds at any time
after September 28, 1992 at their accreted value (the original issue
price plus 5.5% compounded semi-annually) and on two specified
days, September 28 of 1994 and 1999, the bondholders can require
Berkshire to buy the securities at their accreted value.
For tax purposes, Berkshire is entitled to deduct the 5.5% interest accrual each year, even though we make no payments to the
bondholders. Thus the net effect to us, resulting from the reduced
taxes, is positive cash flow. That is a very significant benefit. Some
unknowable variables prevent us from calculating our exact effective rate of interest, but under all circumstances it will be well below 5.5%. There is meanwhile a symmetry to the tax law: Any
taxable holder of the bonds must pay tax each year on the 5.5%
interest, even though he receives no cash.
Neither our bonds nor those of certain other companies that
issued similar bonds last year (notably Loews and Motorola) resemble the great bulk of zero-coupon bonds that have been issued
in recent years. Of these, Charlie and I have been, and will continue to be, outspoken critics. As I will later explain, such bonds
have often been used in the most deceptive of ways and with
deadly consequences to investors. But before we tackle that subject, let's travel back to Eden, to a time when the apple had not yet
been bitten.
If you're my age you bought your first zero-coupon bonds during World War II, by purchasing the famous Series E U.S. Savings
Bond, the most widely-sold bond issue in history. (After the war,
these bonds were held by one out of two U.S. households.) Nobody, of course, called the Series E a zero-coupon bond, a term in
fact that I doubt had been invented. But that's precisely what the
Series E was.
These bonds came in denominations as small as $18.75. That
amount purchased a $25 obligation of the United States government due in 10 years, terms that gave the buyer a compounded
annual return of 2.9%. At the time, this was an attractive offer: the
2.9% rate was higher than that generally available on Government
bonds and the holder faced no market-fluctuation risk, since he
could at any time cash in his bonds with only a minor reduction in
interest.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

105

A second form of zero-coupon V.S. Treasury issue, also benign and useful, surfaced in the last decade. One problem with a
normal bond is that even though it pays a given interest rate-say
lO%-the holder cannot be assured that a compounded 10% return will be realized. For that rate to materialize, each semi-annual
coupon must be reinvested at 10% as it is received. If current interest rates are, say, only 6% or 7% when these coupons come due,
the holder will be unable to compound his money over the life of
the bond at the advertised rate. For pension funds or other investors with long-term liabilities, "reinvestment risk" of this type can
be a serious problem. Savings Bonds might have solved it, except
that they are issued only to individuals and are unavailable in large
denominations. What big buyers needed was huge quantities of
"Savings Bond Equivalents."
Enter some ingenious and, in this case, highly useful investment bankers (led, I'm happy to say, by Salomon Brothers). They
created the instrument desired by "stripping" the semi-annual coupons from standard Government issues. Each coupon, once detached, takes on the essential character of a Savings Bond since it
represents a single sum due sometime in the future. For example,
if you strip the 40 semi-annual coupons from a V.S. Government
Bond due in the year 2010, you will have 40 zero-coupon bonds,
with maturities from six months to 20 years, each of which can then
be bundled with other coupons of like maturity and marketed. If
current interest rates are, say, 10% for all maturities, the six-month
issue will sell for 95.24% of maturity value and the 20-year issue
will sell for 14.20%. The purchaser of any given maturity is thus
guaranteed a compounded rate of 10% for his entire holding period. Stripping of government bonds has occurred on a large scale
in recent years, as long-term investors, ranging from pension funds
to individual IRA accounts, recognized these high-grade, zero-coupon issues to be well suited to their needs.
But as happens in Wall Street all too often, what the wise do in
the beginning, fools do in the end. In the last few years zero-coupon bonds (and their functional equivalent, pay-in-kind bonds,
which distribute additional PIK bonds semi-annually as interest instead of paying cash) have been issued in enormous quantities by
ever-junkier credits. To these issuers, zero (or PIK) bonds offer
one overwhelming advantage: It is impossible to default on a promise to pay nothing. Indeed, if LDC governments had issued no
debt in the 1970's other than long-term zero-coupon obligations,
they would now have a spotless record as debtors.
