
367

AU3772_book.fm Page 368 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

368

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

One Definition of the Long-Term Investor
Let us take as a long-term investor now one who expects to at least track
market returns, for it has been demonstrated over a relatively long period
of time that this can be done by passive indexing. At the turn of the century,
as this is written, it would seem neither long-term nor medium-term nor
short-term investors think about the risks involved in matching the market
since, entering the third millennium, it has been so many years since we
have had a really vicious Bear Market. Dow 36000? This is a passing phase.
As each Bull Market reaches higher and higher, the odds are lower and lower
that it will continue — historic Bull Markets of the 1990s notwithstanding.
What then are the strategy and tactics for the long-term investor to
achieve a goal of matching the market? (EN9: Is it necessary to remind the
reader of Chapter 5.1 and the Dow Theory?)
Let us remark immediately that the tactics Magee described for the
speculator — or trader if you will — are not at all in conflict with the
short-term tactics used occasionally by the long-term investor. As buying or
selling time approaches the stops of the long-term investor, that investor
becomes a trader. Then he can and should adopt the trader’s tactics. Sooner
or later the focus even narrows to real time at the moment of trade execution.
Interestingly, the charting techniques we have described here work on
tick-by-tick data in real time also. So if the trader wants to enter into the
real-time environment, he can attempt to time his trade right down to the
real-time chart formations. Of course, only the really active and skilled
long-term investor will be concerned with squeezing the last half point or
points out of his position. But this illustration of the time focus is addressed
to any investor or trader or speculator to demonstrate the fractal nature of
both price data and the applicability of Magee-type technical analysis to it.

The Strategy of the Long-Term Investor
The strategy of the long-term investor is to catch the long trends — to
participate in trades which last months and years. But this strategy does not
intend to be sucked into long Bear Markets. Rather, portfolios are liquidated
or hedged when Bear Market signals are received. As has been previously
seen in examples of the performance of (more or less) mechanical Dow
Theory (Chapter 5), this kind of performance can be quite satisfactory —
better indeed than buy-and-hold strategies which have come much into
vogue because of the Clinton–Gore Bull Markets of the 1990s.
If the goal is to beat not only the markets but the mutual funds (only
20% of which outperform the market over the long term anyway), then
passive indexing is the most likely strategy. This may be done in a number
of ways — index funds, buying the basket, buying the futures, etc. But the
most attractive method might be the use of the SPDRs and DIAMONDS and
the like. The tactics may be calibrated to the risk tolerance and character of
the investor. He might hedge or sell on Dow Theory signals, or on breaks

AU3772_book.fm Page 369 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 18.1:

Strategy and Tactics for the Long-Term Investor

369

of the 200-day moving average, or on breaks of the long-term or intermediate
trends lines with a filter (Magee recommended 2%, and this might be calibrated to the character of the markets, and increased to 3% or a factor relevant
to actual market volatility). Instruments we have previously discussed —
SPDRs, DIAMONDS, index futures, and options — can be used to execute
these tactics.
Suffice it to say that every strategy must provide for the plan gone wrong,
in other words the dreaded Bear Market. Bear Markets would not be so
fearsome if the average investor did not insist on seeing only the long side
of the market. Long-term strategies go out the window quickly when blood
runs on the floor of the NYSE. The well-prepared technical investor has a
plan which provides for the liquidation of positions gone bad and presumably the discipline to execute it.
This involves the regular recomputation of stops as markets go in the
planned direction, and ruthless liquidation of losers which do not perform.
One may think of a portfolio as a fruit tree. Weak branches must be pruned
to improve the yield. Stop computation is treated in a number of places in
this book (cf. Chapter 27). For the investor trading long term, this may be,
as an example only and not as a recommendation, the breaking of the 200-day
moving average and/or the breaking of a long-term trendline. The 200-day
moving average is widely believed to be the long-term trend indicator, and
believing will sometimes make it come true. EN9: Let me emphasize here that
“200” is a parameter and an example. Personal research may fit a better parameter
to the actual market.
In reality, more than the 200-day or a manually drawn trendline should be
looked at. The chart patterns comprising the portfolio should be considered
also, as well as charts of major indexes and averages. Also consider the condition of the averages and their components — their technical state — whether
they are topping, consolidating, trending as indicated by their charts.

Rhythmic Investing
In addition, if Chapter 31 on “Not All in One Basket” is weighed seriously,
one might be rolling a portfolio from long to short gradually in natural
rhythm with the markets and in harmony with the Magee Evaluative Index
described there. That is the preferred strategy of the authors and editor of
this book.
These things all depend on the goals, temperament, and character of the
investor. If he is going to spend full time on the markets, he is probably not
a long-term investor. Such men eat well and sleep soundly at night. The
trader is lean and hungry — not necessarily for money, but for activity. It
behooves one to know his type as a trader or investor. And knowing one’s
type or character is best established before finding it out in the markets, as
the markets can be an expensive place to search for self-knowledge.
There is no inherent conflict in holding long-term positions and also
attempting to profit from intermediate trends, depending on the amount of

AU3772_book.fm Page 370 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

370

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

capital in hand. It depends on how much time and energy and capital the
investor wants to put into trading. A long-term strategy can be implemented with a modicum of time and energy, as follows. Pay attention to
the major indexes and averages and buy on breakouts, at the bottoms of
consolidations and on pullbacks. Sell or hedge on the breaking of
trendlines, calculated on basing points (see Chapter 28) and the penetration
of support zones.
The long-term investor will accept greater swings against his position
than the intermediate-term trader or speculator. As an example with the
method of using basing points in Chapter 28, the speculator is using a
“3-day-away rule,” whereas a long-term investor might be using a 4-week
basing point or some such analogy. And, if interested, when he suspects or
analyzes that a long Bull Market is approaching a climax, he might adopt
the 3-day rule also, or even begin following his stock with a daily stop just
under the market. Beware though. Professionals look for stops just under
the close of the previous day in situations such as these.
It would be wise not to confuse long term investing with “buy and hold”
or as it was expressed in one investment fad in the 1970s, “one decision
investing.” As an example of this misguided thinking, in 1972, the “best and
brightest” investment analysts (fundamental) on the Street picked a portfolio
of stocks for the generation, or twenty years. The companies would be
difficult to argue with as the crème de la crème of American business. After
all who could qvetch at Avon, Eastman Kodak, IBM, Polaroid (unless he
happened to look at Figure 253), Sears Roebuck, and Xerox? Even today if
you didn’t have a close eye on the market, you would immediately respond,
“blue chips.” Here is a table showing the stocks and the results achieved
over the long term.

Stock
Avon Products
Eastman Kodak
IBM
Polaroid
Sears Roebuck
Xerox

Price
4/14/72

Price
12/31/92

Percent
Change

61.00
42.47
39.50
65.75
21.67
47.37

27.69
32.26
25.19
31.13
17.13
26.42

(54.6)%
(24.0)%
(36.2)%
(52.7)%
(21.0)%
(44.2)%

Charts showing activity for IBM and Xerox appear on the following
pages.

AU3772_book.fm Page 371 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 18.1:

Strategy and Tactics for the Long-Term Investor

371

45 IBM LAST-Monthly 02/26/1993
40
35
30
25

20

15

10
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

FIGURE 201.1. The questionable—even bizarre—results of “one-decision investing” are amply illustrated by this chart. First of all, the “best and brightest” recommended IBM at a decade high to see it decline by more than 50%. It subsequently
recovered to double from their original recommendation. Ah, sweet justification!
Only, unfortunately, at the end of 20 years to see it rest approximately 40% beneath
the recommendation. The analytical lines give some hint of how a technician might
have traded the issue. I like to say that there are bulls, bears, and ostriches, and
anyone who followed this one-decision investment proves my case.

AU3772_book.fm Page 372 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

372

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Figure 201.1.1 Like IBM in the previous figure, Xerox was recommended at a place
where it should have been sold instead of bought. The comments there might apply
to the chart here. The foolishness of “buy and hold” or “one decision investing” is
amply illustrated by observing the long term swings of the stock and thus of the
investor's equity. Technical analysis is intended to be an antidote to such foolishness.

Summary
The long-term investor attempts to catch major market moves — those
lasting hundreds, if not thousands of Dow points and stay in trades for many
months if not years.
Within this time frame he expects to take secondary trends against his
position. Depending on his temperament and inclination, he may attempt
to hedge his portfolio upon recognizing secondary market moves against
his primary direction.
His preference for stocks and portfolio will be for market leaders, for
baskets that reproduce the major indexes (or Index Shares) as the ballast for
his portfolio, and he may choose some speculative stocks to add spice to his
portfolio.

AU3772_book.fm Page 373 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 18.1:

Strategy and Tactics for the Long-Term Investor

373

In spite of his penchant for long-lasting trades he will not tolerate weak,
losing, or underperforming stocks. They are the shortest of his trades. He
will cut losses and let profits run, the truest of the market maxims and the
least understood by unsuccessful investors. The other maxim least understood by investors is “buy strength, sell weakness.”
Truly sophisticated investors attempt to participate in Bear Market
trends also. This is the greatest difference between professional and general
investors — professionals have no bias against the short side.
For the convenience of day traders, the URL of Gamblers Anonymous
is noted: www.gamblersanonymous.org.

AU3772_book.fm Page 374 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 375 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter nineteen

The All-Important Details
In this chapter and the one following, we take up a number of elementary
suggestions which are intended largely for the benefit of those who have
never kept charts before. Much of this will seem obvious and repetitive to
the advanced student, although even he may find some thoughts that will
simplify his work. The beginner should read these chapters carefully and
use them for later reference.
The details of how and when you keep the charts will not guarantee
you profits. But if you fail to work out these details in such a way as to make
your work easy, as part of a regular systematic routine, you cannot expect
to keep up your charts properly, or to make any profits either.
Charting, and analyzing your charts, is not a difficult process, nor will
it take too much of your time if you have determined on a reasonable number
of charts, and if you have arranged for doing the work regularly, meaning
every day without fail.
You will need a source of data — the day’s market prices and volume.
If you live in a big city, your evening paper will carry the complete list, and
you can plan to set aside a certain period before dinner, or after dinner, or
during the evening. If you cannot allot such a period and keep it sacred
against all other social or business obligations, then plan to do the charting
in the morning. But set a definite time and let nothing interfere, ever, or you
are lost. EN: Of course, this process is radically simplified by automated computer
downloading procedures and access to data sources and Internet sites. But the
principle is the same.
You should have a suitable place to work and keep your charts. If it is
at home, in the dining room or living room, other members of the family
should understand that what you are doing is important. You should be able
to shut the door and work without interruption. The light should be bright
and as free from shadows as possible. (It makes a big difference, especially
if you are keeping a large number of charts.) The ordinary desk lamp throws
a reflected glare directly across the paper and into the eyes. It can be a strain
if you are doing much of this close work. Better to have an overhead light,
placed just a few inches in front of your head and a convenient distance
above; and if this light can be a fluorescent fixture using two 40-watt lamps,
you will get almost perfect shadowless lighting. These suggestions apply, of
course, in case you are not working by daylight.

375

AU3772_book.fm Page 376 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

376

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Have plenty of room. A big desk top, a dining room table, with a large
clear space for chart books, extra sheets, pencils, scratch paper, ruler, calculator, computer equipment, and anything else you need. If your working
surface is fairly low, say 28 or 29 inches from the floor, it will be less tiring
than the usual 30-inch desk height.
Whether you are working in ink or in pencil, pick out the writing tool
that is easiest for you to use. If you are using pencils, try several different
makes and degrees of hardness. Find one that is hard enough not to smudge
too easily, and yet is not so hard that you have to bear down to make a clean
black mark. The wrong kind of pencil can tire you and irritate you more
than you realize. Also, have plenty of pencils, a dozen at least, well-sharpened, so that as soon as one becomes a trifle dull and you are not getting a
clean, fine line, you can simply lay it aside and continue at once with another
fresh-sharpened pencil.
Keep your charts in loose-leaf books, with big enough rings to make
turning the pages easy. Don’t overcrowd the books. Get new books if a
volume is too crowded. Finished charts may be kept in file folders. The only
ones that need to be in the books are the current sheets and the sheets for
the immediately preceding period. If possible, use a seven-ring binder. Pages
are easily torn loose from two- and three-ring binders, but seven rings will
hold the pages safely and you will seldom have one tear out.
The charts you keep will become increasingly valuable to you as the
chart history builds up. The old chart sheets will be very helpful to you for
reference. Provide a file or space where they can be indexed and kept in
chronological order, and also file folders for brokers’ slips, dividend notices,
corporate reports, clippings and articles, notes on your own methods, and
analyses and special studies of the work you are doing.
In this connection you will, of course, keep a simple but complete record
of each purchase, sale, dividend, etc., on stocks you have bought or sold.
This record will make your work much easier when the time comes to figure
out income taxes. It will also give you all the statistical information you need
to judge the results of your trading operations.
EN: At the beginning of my investment career, and often in the middle of it, I
thought the above was cracker-barrel wisdom. The longer I last the more I think that
homespun wisdom might be the best kind to have in investing — somewhat like
Mark Twain, who was astounded at how much his father increased in wisdom the
older Twain himself got.
We may restate the modest homilies above: Be serious. Be methodical. Be disciplined. Be business-like. Anyone who succeeds in investing without these qualities
is the recipient of blind luck and will be fortunate not to fall into a hole before his
career is over.
These thoughts occur when one is wondering how Magee would have viewed the
advent of the microcomputer and its impact on technical analysis and investing. Might
he have said, “What hath this tool wrought?! — Wonders and abominations!!”
Given the possibilities for complicating analysis and operations when confronted
with all the bells and whistles of the average computer software package, the investor

AU3772_book.fm Page 377 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter nineteen:

The All-Important Details

377

must maintain perspective. What, then, are the all-important details in practicing
technical analysis with the aid of a computer?

The Simplest and Most Direct Way to Use a Computer
for Charting Analysis
In reality, the computer can be used as a simple tool to do a simple job. There is
nothing inherently complicated about keeping a chart on a computer. All computer
software packages enable bar charting. And many, if not most, enable many other
kinds of charting, from candlesticks to oscillator charting. The process, in almost all
commercially available packages, is so simple that explaining it here would be
superfluous (cf. Resources, Appendix D, for demonstrations), except to say, in
general, it consists of retrieving data, updating the program’s price database, and
clicking an icon to run a chart. The software packages themselves explain their
features better than can be done here. What is important here is to give perspective.
In this respect, charting can be done with quite expensive programs and also
on publicly available free programs, or freeware. Charting can also be done with
interactive charting programs on many Internet sites. The basic bar chart can be
enhanced with an unending number of technical studies — moving averages, oscillators, etc., etc. Therein lies the danger. Chart analysis in itself is a qualitative
process. Decorating graphic charts with number-driven information and studies can
lead the general investor astray — and into confusion and indecision.
So the first preference of this analyst is to keep the process as simple as possible.
Get the data. Draw a chart. Analyze the patterns. Consider the volume. Draw the
appropriate analytical lines. This can usually be done by the program on the screen.
Often a better graphic picture may be obtained by printing the chart and handdrawing the analytical lines. And this brings to the fore one of the main problems
of almost all the software packages — that screen graphics are poor and, at least to
old chartists, disorienting. They are especially disorienting to analysts who are
accustomed to working on Tekniplat chart paper. With passing editions of Resources,
this problem will be dealt with. (EN9: In the intervening years since the 8th
Edition two things have occurred: the Editor adjusted to modern technology
and the technology achieved a level of excellence acceptable to a carping
analyst. Internet technical analysis sites such as stockcharts.com and
prophet.net improved to be surprisingly valuable resources at unbelievably
low prices – even free.)
The question of graphic representation of the facts is worth noting as a persistent
one. To a certain extent, the individual analyst will solve this conundrum by
adapting his eye and mind to a graphic environment, using one graphic method
consistently and seeing how it relates to the facts in the market. John Magee-oriented
solutions to this problem will be available on the web site, www.edwards-magee.com.
In Resources, the reader may see some examples of very simple and inexpensive
software packages and Internet sites which are quite adequate to the required tasks
of charting technical analysis, as well as more complex number-driven analysis.

AU3772_book.fm Page 378 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

378

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Summary
The computer is an invaluable tool for analysis. Use of it will enable the
following:
• Data may be acquired automatically via Internet or dial-up sites at little or
no cost. Some of these even offer real-time data, which is a way for the
unsophisticated trader to go broke in real time; but which the general
investor may desire on the day of executing a trade. Many of these sites
offer every kind of analysis from respectable technical analysis (usually too
complicated) to extraterrestrial channeling.
• A computer package and Internet portfolio sites will give the analyst virtually effortless portfolio accounting and mark to the market prices — a
valuable device to have to keep the investor from mixing his cash and accrual
accounting, as Magee says.
• The computer will enable processing of a hitherto unimaginable degree. An
unlimited number of stocks may be analyzed. Choosing those to trade with
a computer will be dealt with in Chapters 20 and 21.
• Resources (Appendix D) contains information on software packages which
the reader may try and purchase at quite reasonable prices. In all likelihood,
the least expensive of these will be adequate to the needs of most general
investors. In addition, I present a brief discussion of Internet sites and
resources.

AU3772_book.fm Page 379 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty

The Kind of Stocks We Want —
The Speculator’s Viewpoint
The specifications of the kind of stock we want to chart are fairly simple,
and they are few. We want a stock which will enable us to make a profit
through trading operations. That means a stock whose price will move over
a wide enough range to make trading worthwhile. There are those who are
concerned mainly with safety of principal and the assurance of income from
a stock. For them, there are (EN9: Or were.) stocks which afford a very
considerable degree of stability. You may (and probably will) want to keep
a substantial part of your total capital in stocks of this type. They move in
a narrow price range. They are extremely resistant to downside breaks in
the market. They are also (and necessarily) unresponsive to fast upside
moves in the market as a whole. These stocks are highly desirable for the
conservative investor. However, they are not the most suitable issues for
trading operations, since their swings are small, and commissions would
tend to diminish the narrow trading profits that could be taken. Also, they
do not make the sharp, clear chart patterns of the more speculative issues,
but move in rounding, sluggish undulations. (EN9: These remarks reflect a
bygone time. The described stocks by and large went the way of the Dodo. When T
can disappear from the market as a factor there is no place to hide, except in bonds,
which, when stagnant, only lose real value at the rate of inflation and loss of
purchasing power of the dollar. And even bonds should be subject to frequent
reevaluation using the tools described in this book.)
To amplify this comment and explain a bit about what underlies what
we are doing, let us assume a certain company has two issues of stock, a
preferred and a common. Since (we will assume) the concern has a certain
steady minimum profit which it has earned for years, sufficient to pay the
preferred dividend, the continuance of these dividends seems practically
assured. But the dividends on the preferred are fixed at, let us say, 6%. Now
the common stock gets all that is left. In one year, there may be 50 cents a
share for the common stockholders. The next year, there may be $2.00 a share
or four times as much. In a case like this, if there are no other factors, you
would expect the preferred stock to sell at a fairly steady price without much
change, whereas the common stock is subject to a “leverage” and might
shoot up to four times its former value. The more speculative issues represent
379
