
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

56

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

bit, but then sells through that support level. The trader looks for the next
support level and buys against it. The market corrects a small amount, but
not nearly close to the average breakeven price, and the market falls again.
The accident is happening. The only difference between the car accident
and this one is that in a car accident, boom and it’s over. Trading accidents
can be more drawn out.
When this happens, I often get an e-mail asking for my thoughts. I may
note that the price has moved below the 100 day moving average, turning
the bias to bearish, then below the 200 day moving average, which confirms the bearish bias. The price may have moved through the 38.2 percent
retracement level, another key downside target and another bearish confirming level, and so on. The market is trending lower.
The client responds, “The Relative Strength Index [RSI] is oversold. We
are due for a bounce.” However, I need to warn him that RSIs can remain
oversold in a trending market for an extended period of time, and I give
him the proverbial trader’s “ticket” for not following the rules of trading.
The client was aware that he ignored looking in his trader’s blind spot. He
was overconfident in his trading abilities. He disregarded the market’s rules
for safe trading when his initial trade did not do what it was supposed to
do, and consequently he got in an accident.
Over time, successful drivers learn the risks of the road. If they choose
to ignore the risks, the consequences may need to be paid in the form of
tickets or worse. Successful traders evaluate, know, and understand their
risks, like conscientious mature drivers. Gauging risk becomes more instinctive the more successful you become, but it is never forgotten.

Rules for Risk
I have two rules when it comes to risk for traders. The rules are this:
1. If the specific risk of a trade is not known, then don’t do the trade.
2. If the risk is too great, don’t do the trade.

The first rule of risk requires traders to take responsibility for their
trades. To not have a specific stop level is like driving with no regard for the
rules of the road. The risk for an accident or ticket goes up exponentially.
In life, and, yes, in trading, you need to take responsibility for all of your
actions. In trading, it is called a stop loss. This defines your specific risk.
Successful traders get used to doing those trades that they see as being profitable. They also look to do trades at levels that limit their risk.
That risk is often defined to a specific price. The reason the level is so
specific is that successful traders will tend to look to trade at prices near

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

57

turning points—near levels that I call borderlines. Borderlines are price
levels where there is a sound reason (or reasons) for the market’s bias
to be bullish (or bearish) at one price, and bearish (or bullish) if the
price moves through that price. By doing this, borderlines keep risk to a
minimum.
I will discuss more about those low risk price areas—borderlines—
later in the book. The important thing to learn now is successful traders
know their exact risk; if it is not known, they don’t do the trade.
The second rule, “If the risk is too great, don’t do the trade,” addresses
taking on too much risk. It also addresses what I call a trader’s worst enemy: fear. You may know your specific risk (the first rule) but if that risk is
too great, then don’t do the trade.
A guideline for most successful traders is to not risk more than 3 to
5 percent of the account value on any one trade. What does that translate
into?
Assume you have a $10,000 retail trading account. The specific risk you
feel comfortable trading is 4 percent of your equity. With that risk profile
you should not risk more than $400 on any trading position ($10,000 ×
0.04% = $400.00).
During most times, the market does not move fast enough for the $400
to be exhausted, assuming a position that is not overleveraged. However,
an important economic report can come out that might send the price
higher or lower quickly and in the process gobble up the $400 cushion
rather quickly. U.S. Unemployment reports can move 75 to 100 pips in the
first few minutes of trading. If the risk is expected to be too great, my suggestion is don’t do the trade. You are just gambling. You are not trading.
Instead, wait and look to do the trades near the borderlines where risk is
not so great.

Jumping on the Bandwagon
Another time where the risk can be too great occurs after a fast-trend-type
move. Many beginner traders will look to jump on the bullish or bearish
bandwagon at trade locations that do not have a close enough stop level.
For example, assume the price of the EURUSD moves through key
moving average support at 1.3428 and moves rapidly to the current price
at 1.3370. You missed the initial break, but don’t want to miss out on the
rest of the move. You do what I call the “bandwagon trade” by selling without thinking at 1.3370. You simply jump on the bandwagon.
After doing the trade, you figure the closest stop level is if the price
moves back above the moving average level at 1.3428. The risk on the trade
is 58 pips. The dollar risk is $580 (58 pips × $10 a pip × 1 lot). You are not

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

58

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

worried; after all, the market has broken support. However, your trading is
not exactly close to the bearish or bullish borderline.
What often happens after a sharp directional move is that the market
stabilizes, reverses, and corrects higher. We have all experienced this. It
is as if the market was waiting for you to panic and enter. The correction
is slow at first but then starts to ratchet higher. When the market moves
above the 1.3400 level, you are now down 30 pips. You sold near the lows
and your mind starts to think toward limiting the loss rather than making a profit. You hope for a 15-pip move down so you can book a modest
$150 loss.
Since hope is for dopes, the price gods will push the price up to 1.3412.
You are down $420, which would be your limit on a normal trade (4 percent). Your internal trading clock says, “I am at my limit.” Instead, your
stop is still 14 pips away, another $140. The market moves up to 1.3420,
comes down to 1.3412. You close the trade out (out of fear) for a loss of
$420. The price moves up to 1.3420 one last time, but then reverses and
continues the trend to the downside. The market moves back below the
1.3400 level and trades between 1.3380 and 1.3400 for a while. You are now
paralyzed, mad, fearful, and out of synch with the market.
The better approach would be to wait for an opportunity where you
can define a risk that is more congruent with your risk tolerance. Wait. If
you missed the bandwagon, don’t try and jump on it. Wait to trade near
the borderline. Your risk will be more comfortable. You are more likely to
be able to live through the corrections if you are more comfortable with
your risk.
Whenever I speak to traders, I tell them there is only one thing I can
100 percent guarantee them. That is, that there will always be another
trade. Successful traders adhere to these rules and as a result, they avoid
the accidents of trading. They also learn to quickly define and limit their
risks.

4. CREATE AND EXECUTE A PLAN
The Division I college football team my son Brian works for as an undergraduate assistant had a keen understanding of the team’s strengths and
weaknesses as it entered the 2009 season. They needed a plan.
The offense was untested. The quarterback was a first-year senior
starter. He lacked game experience. The receivers had more game experience and above-average speed. The running backs did not have a particular star. It would be a “running game by committee.” The offensive line was
intact from the year before, so they had experience. That was the good

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

59

news. The bad news was that in the prior year the line gave up the most
quarterback sacks in the conference.
The defense had a large number of returning players from a team that
was solid. The defensive line had one of the nation’s best pass rushers.
The linebackers were fast, aggressive, smart, and they had good depth at
the position. The secondary had experience but had some question marks
with overall ability.
The special teams were anchored by a potential All-America placekicker. The punter had a strong leg, but could be inconsistent. He also had
difficulty with controlling distance on punts. This was important for pinning an opponent inside his own 20-yard line. The punt and kickoff return
personnel had speed and were a threat to provide good field position. The
other personnel on the kicking teams were unknown. Motivation is key in
special teams play, and the players need to take pride in what they do and
potentially can accomplish.
From this framework, the coaches devised the game plan for the
season.

r The team would be dependent on the defense. The defense would be
called on to hold the opposition deep in their own territory, force punts
that would give the offense good field position, and look to create
turnovers. Finally, they would use their swagger and intimidation to
excite the crowd, motivate the offense, and intimidate the opposition.
r The next most important aspect would be the special teams. With an
inexperienced offense, the punter and punt team would be used to pin
the opponents deep in their territory. If our punter was better than
their punter, the offense could benefit from better field position. Better
field position would open the opportunity to take advantage of the AllAmerican placekicker for needed points from field goals.
r The offense was the weak link. Inexperience at quarterback, lack of a
proven star, and line uncertainty made the whole offense a big question
mark. With the uncertainty, the offense could not afford to turn the ball
over. As a result, the offense would be more conservative in nature.
Risk would be minimized.
r The team needed to have fewer penalties than the opposition, and the
team would need to force more fumbles and interceptions.
The plan was set. It was fairly simple. It defined what needed to be
done. It was up to the coaches to implement the plan and the players (the
tools) to execute the plan.
Traders need a plan, too. Know what you are going to do in various
trading environments. You need to understand and define your risks. You
need to understand what is going to make the most money; that’s going to

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

60

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

put the most dollars (i.e., points) in your account (i.e., on the scoreboard).
You need to understand your limitations or weaknesses and how to avoid
them so that hurtful trades are not made. You need to keep it simple. Being
too complicated can cause confusion, and with it uncertainty. The trading
plan should do all these things so you can maximize your profits.
Does having a plan and executing the plan guarantee that you will be
successful most of the time? No. Trading plans that are designed properly
are there to increase the odds for success. They don’t guarantee winning
trades all the time, but they should increase your trading results and your
account value over time.
A trading plan should also set the stage for a key rule I have for becoming a successful trader. This is what I call the “If . . . Should” rule. The
“If . . . Should” rule says this: “If the market does ABC, the price should do
XYZ. If the market does not do what it is supposed to do, get out.” Putting
it in terms of a market move, an example would sound something like this:
“If the market price moves below the 100-day moving average, the market
price should continue to move lower in the direction of the break. If the
market price does not move lower, get out.”
This rule is a way to remain disciplined about your trading and it comes
directly from a trading plan. There should be no doubt what you should be
doing when you follow the rule. It also does something else important for
successful traders. It puts the blame on the market. Blaming the market
takes blame off you as the trader. This keeps your mind more positive,
and being positive is important as you build trading success. If your plan is
good—I will develop a plan for you to trade the trends—then if the market
does not do what it is supposed to do, there is something happening that is
not normal. Your trading plan needs to focus on what is normal, not what
is abnormal. So whenever you expect the market to do one thing and it
does another, get out and ask questions later. We will talk more about the
“If . . . Should” rule in Chapter 4.
Of course, we all would like our trading plan to be successful a large
percentage of the time. Most everyone would want his or her plan to win
most of the time; let’s assume 80 percent. But what good is the plan if the 80
winning trades make 5 pips each or 400 pips and the 20 losing trades lose
20 pips each or the same 400 pips? I would much rather be right 40 times
out of 100 and make 30 pips for +1,200 pips and be wrong 60 times and
lose 15 pips for −900 pips and a net gain of +300 pips.
What is important for success as a currency trader is the quality of the
wins that your plan has the potential to produce. For a lot of retail traders,
accepting this idea can be hard and can be a major contributor to being
unsuccessful.
Medicine, law, engineering, and accounting are all professions that
attract some of the smartest people. Does that demographic make for a

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

61

successful trader? Not necessarily. The reason is that accepting failure on
a trade is just not part of some people’s makeup. Doctors can’t afford to
make errors. So they don’t. Lawyers are hired to defend their clients. They
cannot make errors that jeopardize their clients. Engineers need to have
their calculations correct when they build a bridge or road, devise new
chemicals, or provide the electrical schematic for a structure. There is no
room for failure or error. Accountants are hired to be exact. It is not expected that the financial numbers will be changed.
When people in these types of professions look to trade, they are not
used to losing. This is why having a plan, sticking to the plan, controlling
your risk, practicing, and developing your skill and aptitude are all requirements to be successful in currency trading. The next two attributes are also
key requirements.
So a warning to all those who got straight A’s on their report cards:
Get ready for some C’s, but please avoid the F’s in the process. The fastest
way to an F is to not have a plan. I will develop a plan for your trading as
the book progresses, using tools that will help you attack the trends while
keeping risk to a minimum.

5. CONTROL YOUR FEAR
Fear is a trader’s worst enemy! Fear tends to make traders do things they
normally would not do. Most traders think that fear comes when money is
being lost, and indeed it does. It also rears its ugly head at other times for
traders. Successful traders are able to control their fear better than most.
This gives them a major advantage in their trading results.
Most new traders experience fear literally at all times. The fear comes
from many things, but not having the four attributes we have outlined so
far is a major contributor to that fear. If you don’t develop your skill or
aptitude, you will have fear. If you don’t practice and observe the markets
enough during all conditions, you will have fear. If you don’t quantify your
risk or have too much risk, you will have fear. If you don’t have a trading
plan that helps define risk and plan for reward, you will have fear.
Looking at it from the other side, fear is reduced automatically if you
develop your skills and aptitude. The more you know about the currency
market, the better a trader you will become. So how specifically can fear
be reduced?
Fear is automatically reduced when you:

r Practice. When market rhythms become familiar, when you understand the risk of big economic numbers, when you understand how

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

62

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

markets should react when a key technical level is breached, then your
fear becomes reduced. You need to practice to reduce fear.
r Define the risk. Defining your risk by having a stop loss will automatically reduce your fear. A stop loss level should always be at a price that
says to you, the market was bullish, it is now bearish. If the market is
now bearish, then why be long? A logical stop reduces your fear.
r Create and execute a plan. Part of a trading plan is to focus on the
profit side of the trading equation. Part of it is to focus on where the
plan goes awry. Trading plans have the stop loss as part of the plan. It
also has targets along the way that give confidence to the trade. Both
have the positive effect of lessening trader fear.

So the fifth attribute of a successful trader is the ability to control
fear—an attribute rooted in taking care of attributes 1 to 4. If you take
care of 1 to 4, you will have less fear. Most traders know about the fear
of failure, but there is another fear retail traders tend to have: the fear of
success. Let’s take a quick look at both.
I certainly remember my early days as a trader when I would finally
pony up the courage to do a trade, put the trade on, and immediately have
a feeling that I would prefer to have my position in the exact opposite direction. So I would cover at a loss, go the opposite way, and have the trade
move immediately against me. It is tough being a successful trader when
you have fear as soon as you enter a trade. It also is a horrible way to set
an example for future trades. Traders need to have conviction when they
execute a trade. Not having that confidence is a sure way to not succeed as
a trader. I call this type of fear the fear of failure.
Ironically, traders can also experience fear when they have a gain. I
call this having the fear of success, and it is one of the chief reasons why
traders do poorly trading trends. Even when a trade has been executed and
a profit is secure, a fear can enter the mind of the trader that the gain will
all be taken away by the invisible market thief. So instead of managing the
position and benefiting from the good trade location, the trader cuts the
position before it’s time because of the fear of losing the gain. Later, after
the trend is over, he or she looks at the missed opportunity and laments,
“If only I’d kept my initial position.”
Using a sports analogy, traders with this type of fear are like the coach
who has a big lead and then suddenly abandons all the good the team has
done and becomes ultraconservative. He sits on the lead.
When this happens, the lead is often whittled away instead of being
enhanced. Sometimes the entire lead is lost, and the team loses. Coaches
who do this have the fear of success. They also tend not to last long if the
strategy becomes a habit.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Six Attributes of a Successful Currency Trader

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

63

Traders who have the fear of success also tend not to last long. Eventually, they will find their wins are not good enough to sustain the losses
that inevitably arise. To be successful, you need some trading touchdowns.
You need to score, not just get close.
The solution is to not fear the success, but anticipate, recognize, and
attack the trend. By doing so, a trader is in a position to stay on the trend,
instead of fearing the success early and covering too early in the trade. In
Chapter 4, I will discuss the dynamics of the fear of success further and
show specifically how this hidden fear can be so detrimental to many retail
traders. Even at times more detrimental than the fear of failure.
If I were to blame one thing for traders being unsuccessful, it would be
fear. Fear is a trader’s worst enemy. You need ways to control your fear.
Later in the book we will outline the ways traders can learn to control fear
from the losing side and the equally painful winning side.

6. BE GREEDY ENOUGH
The point is, ladies and gentlemen, that greed, for lack of a better
word, is good.
—Gordon Gekko, Wall Street
In the 1987 Oliver Stone film Wall Street, Michael Douglas, playing
Gordon Gekko, said these oft-quoted words that have since become the
reference for excess of greed—especially in the financial markets.
To say that greed is good after what has happened to the financial foundation of the global economy is hard to justify. Greed played a major role in
the houses of cards in the financial markets being built and in those houses
eventually falling down. Along the way, many benefitted financially. The
ones who haven’t necessarily suffered have been the ones who were the
greediest, the gluttons, the ravenous, and the self-indulgent.
Think of the housing bubble in the United States. Who is to blame?
Do you blame the mortgage brokers who wrote the no-money-down loans?
They benefitted greatly from the writing of the mortgages, taking fees along
the way with no regard for the creditworthiness of the customer. A lot of
these people made a large amount of money, perhaps paid off their own
mortgages in the process, and set themselves up for life financially. Could
they have seen the risk instead of the greed for more and stopped the process? They could have refrained from making the riskier loans or the loans
that leveraged the debt higher.
How about Wall Street, which bundled the mortgages up and sold
them off to insurance companies, pension funds, and state and local

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c02

64

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:49

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

governments? This group collected massive fees bundling and selling the
securities with no consequence, and in the process encouraged the mortgage brokers to do more because more meant more fees for them.
Other greedy contributors on Wall Street were the massive internal
mortgage-backed securities positions taken on by trading desks within
the financial institutions. These positions put the firm and the depositor’s
money at tremendous risk. There was no trading plan. Most did not really know the extent of the risk. They clearly violated attributes 3 and 4
needed to be a successful trader. Moreover, they proved they did not have
the skill or aptitude for doing their job, given the risk they were taking.
Of course, during the run-up, the gains beget more and more greed and
more and more profit. Massive bonuses were paid for the earnings. During
the sell-off, those bonuses may have been reduced, but the damage was
done that crippled the very foundation of the global financial industry. The
repercussions will indeed be felt for years if not decades to come. Could
they have stopped their greed?
The greed from the real estate debacle was devastating. The examples
given were what I call “free option greed.” The participants had unlimited
upside potential with no downside risk. They also paid nothing for the options along the way. Some may argue that they ultimately paid in the form
of losing their jobs or losing the value of the stock options they received
along with their cash salary and bonuses. That is true. However, the job
they lost and the stock options that became worthless were also at the
expense of the lost jobs of many more people. There were very few beneficiaries from the greed that took place.
So how then can greed be good in currency trading? Does not Wall
Street tell us that “bulls and bears get rich but pigs get slaughtered?”
Doesn’t this seemingly universally accepted trader axiom speak directly
to greed? I think the saying is not so much a truism that all traders should
live by, but instead a warning for inexperienced traders who don’t define
their risk or who take too much risk. It is for those who don’t have a serious
trading plan. If a trading plan is to take a large, overleveraged position looking for the big payday with no regard for risk, without a firm plan, without
a stop loss in place, then this type of greed is not good. It may work in the
short run, but in the long run, the odds of failure are great. The pig deserves
to get slaughtered.
However, can a currency trader be successful with greed? The answer
is successful currency traders are. What I like to remind traders is that pig
farmers don’t slaughter the pig when it is still running around the pigpen.
To do so would not maximize the return on the pig. Instead, what the pig
farmer will do is fatten up the pig until that point when the pig is on the
verge of being too big to make it to the trough for its food. At that point,
the pig has reached its maximum value and it is time for the slaughter.
