
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
You will see as you progress through this book, we present many specific
chart patterns and include suggestions for how to enter and manage those
setups. We would suggest you start by keeping it simple and study a couple
of patterns each day.
We also suggest that you work through the patterns in the order
they’re presented. Start with the basics—geometry (Chapter 2) and harmonics (Chapter 3)—before moving on to the pattern formations. This
3

c01

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

7:21

4

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

will help you build a solid foundation and understanding of what we are
teaching.
We include many examples of trades in each pattern chapter. Once
you have a basic foundation in place of the pattern structures, you will be
ready to study how these patterns are traded, and begin to think in terms
of implementing these into your trading. We always recommend traders
do some form of paper trading or simulated trading before committing
real funds.
Learning how markets work is accomplished through time and experience. This is invaluable to the trader or investor. Determining what type of
trading environment one is in, such as a trend environment versus a range
environment, is important. Recognizing the subtle symmetry in all markets
is an absolute prerequisite for a pattern recognition trader; this is done only
one way: practice, practice, and more practice.
The only way the information in this book can be used to make money
is to understand each pattern and apply sound trading principles. To help
each trader accomplish this, we offer guidelines on developing a trading plan, covering pattern recognition, thinking in terms of probabilities,
money management, risk assessment, and techniques for entering and exiting trades. Other subjects include setting up trading as a business and
preparing for the unexpected. Treating trading as anything other than a
business is a mistake. Even if the trader is not trading full-time, trading
activities should be treated and set up as a second business.
A note on some of the charts throughout the book: Many of the chart
examples are of the S&P 500 E-mini contract. This is an extremely popular
market for traders and very conducive to the patterns presented in this
book. You will find some of these charts labeled as “ES,” which is the root
symbol for the S&P 500; others are labeled as S&P 500.

SUCCEEDING OR FAILING IN TRADING
It is each trader’s responsibility to develop the skills and discipline necessary for successful trading. We have not found and do not know of a holy
grail in trading or an easy trading method. In many classic trading books,
like Profits in the Stock Market, by H.M. Gartley (1935), there are observations about what accounts for successful versus unsuccessful trading. Interestingly, we have not seen many changes over the decades in this area.
It seems to be the same aspects that constantly plague traders. There are,
however, many actions the individual trader can implement to succeed.
Trading is like any other profession; the student first learns the basics, and then expands to more sophisticated and in-depth learning in

c01

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Opening Thoughts

August 14, 2007

7:21

Char Count=

5

the chosen field. There are no skilled professionals in any field who have
not reached a level of expertise without hard work and substantial experience. Any professional field requires a commitment and willingness to
go through successes as well as failures. The failures can be the greatest
teachers. Study the failures to develop into a better trader. Perseverance
will be a key to a successful trading career.
Developing a mind-set that is conducive to trading will be essential to
a trader’s success. This will include thinking in terms of probabilities, and
accepting the fact that losses are as much a part of trading as wins. This
is a process in itself to learn. These concepts must be internalized so they
become a part of what you do each day without conscious thought.
Larry Schneider, director of business developments for the Zaner
Group, futures and commodities brokers, states that often too much time is
focused on learning the method or system in the beginning. This approach
is contrary to the steps that must be done to meet success in trading. In his
view and experience, focusing on learning a mental approach first would
be more beneficial to novice traders. He says it is imperative for traders to
understand that there is a learning curve and money can be lost if traders
do not take steps to protect their capital.
Every trader has to go through essentially the same learning curve; no
one seems to be exempt from it. Schneider suggests, from his experience of
34 years in the futures business, that traders start small, perhaps with the
mini contracts available, while they are learning. If traders take the time to
investigate the mental approach they will need to execute their plan, they
will be far ahead of the game. His advice is to approach trading from the
mental side first, then develop your trading methodology and plan.

Why Traders Succeed
We work with, coach, and mentor many traders. We see and have experienced the full gamut of things that can happen in trading. Here are some of
the reasons we feel traders succeed:
Ĺ Solid knowledge and understanding of the markets they are trading.
Ĺ Technical expertise on how to trade their markets.
Ĺ A sound trading methodology with a proven edge.
Ĺ A trading plan based on the methodology.
Ĺ Sufficient capital.
Ĺ Thinking in terms of probabilities, rather than emphasis on the outcome of any one trade.
Ĺ Good money management; adherence to money management rules.
Ĺ Having mentors or seeking out experts and peers to gain trading knowledge.

c01

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

6

August 14, 2007

7:21

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Ĺ Assessing risk first, profits second.
Ĺ Employment of a set of trading rules.
Ĺ A foundation of daily routines, including mental preparation.
Ĺ Use of stop-loss protection.
Ĺ Maintenance of a high level of confidence and a positive attitude.
Ĺ Commitment to the process of trading.
Ĺ Perseverance.
Ĺ Taking 100 percent responsibility for each and everything that happens
in their trading.
Ĺ Being in the habit of forgetting their last trade, win or lose, and moving
on to the next trade.

Why Traders Fail
Conversely, we also see particular reasons traders fail. We would like to
share these observations with you in the hope you can learn from these errors and avoid some of these pitfalls. An ancient proverb states, “The smart
man learns from his mistakes—the wise man learns from the mistakes
of others.”
Ĺ Lack of knowledge; traders enter the business constantly without a
solid understanding of what the business of speculation involves.
Ĺ Lack of capital; small accounts typically lose money. Those few with
smaller accounts who do succeed eventually hang on until they understand how leverage can be friend or foe.
Ĺ No trading methodology; they use a seat-of-the-pants approach.
Ĺ No trading plan.
Ĺ Failure to apply a solid money management system.
Ĺ Not seeking help from experts or mentors; not wanting to invest in an
education of trading.
Ĺ Lack of understanding of the inherent risks present in trading.
Ĺ Failure to recognize the mental preparation necessary for successful
trading.
Ĺ No trading rules applied.
Ĺ Altering a sound trading plan; early entries, early exits, moving stops,
not entering trade setups.
Ĺ Random trading, which is trading anything outside of their trading plan
and is usually emotion-based.
Ĺ Failure to develop the discipline necessary to trade successfully.
Ĺ Not learning from previous mistakes.
Ĺ Lack of commitment to the process of trading.
Ĺ Failure to use stop-loss orders, which is the number one way to turn a
small loss into a large loss.

c01

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

7:21

Char Count=

Opening Thoughts

7

Ĺ Blaming outcomes on external sources and not taking 100 percent responsibility for each and every aspect of their trading.

STEPS TO TAKE FOR SUCCESSFUL TRADING
One very important item to keep in mind while learning to trade: Each action you take repeatedly will become a habit. The habits that form will
lead to either your success or your failure. Habits in and of themselves are
neutral; they do not know if they have a positive or negative effect. However, the results of the habits will have a negative or positive outcome in
your trading. Therefore, it is in the best interest of each trader to strive to
form the very best habits that will ensure success.
Traders want to strive for a point in their trading where they are just
doing the necessary actions. They should have a high confidence level that
over time the edge in their trading will have a positive expectation. This will
be developed through testing and implementing a specific trading strategy.
We hope the items we have listed will help you determine which direction
you are taking.
If you are an experienced trader and you have already formed habits
that are not producing the desired results, then take time to evaluate
your trading and begin to form new habits that will get you the results
you desire in trading. Chapter 13 has a worksheet titled “Twenty Sample Trades Worksheet” (Figure 13.2), designed to help traders instill new
trading habits. It focuses on doing the same positive action through a series of trades to create new habits and to observe how the trading edge is
played out.
Positive habits will produce positive results. Negative habits will produce negative results and will be self-defeating. It may be helpful to make
a list of any negative habits that are present in your trading, and a separate
list of positive habits to replace those.
An example of a negative habit may be that the trader consistently exits a trade before the profit objective is reached. The new positive habit
will have the trader hold for the profit objective. Another example may be
that the trader enters early before a pattern is completed. The new positive
habit will have the trader enter at the correct entry point. Once traders understand and know what their edge is, they will begin to see the importance
of consistently executing their plan. They will see if there is a gap between
where they are and where they want to be. This is a point where the trader
can then fill in the necessary steps to close that gap.
Conversely, pay attention to your positive habits. The actions you are
doing right in your trading can be developed further into strengths.

c01

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

8

August 14, 2007

7:21

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Develop support systems to help you instill new positive habits. A support system may be using a buddy system with another trader. It never
hurts to have accountability with someone else that can help keep you on
the path to your goals, but in the long run each action is your responsibility.
Here is a list you can use to help develop your personal plan of action
to reach the success level you want in trading:
Ĺ Create positive habits.
Ĺ Replace negative habits with positive habits.
Ĺ Take 100 percent responsibility for each outcome.
Ĺ Create a support system to help keep you on the path to your goals.
Ĺ Take a proactive approach to making changes in your trading.
Start with a list of actions that you need to take to reach your goals.
Believe in yourself; know that you are a successful trader.
As you study the trading patterns in this book, we hope that the aforementioned items will help you to develop as a successful trader.

c02

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

7:54

Char Count=

CHAPTER 2

Geometry of the
Patterns and
Fibonacci Ratios

A

ll of the patterns presented in this book are based in geometry; the
structure of each pattern is geometrical. As we go through each pattern chapter, we discuss and present the structure of each pattern
so that you will learn and understand how each pattern is formed. First,
though, this chapter gives an overview and brief history of geometry in the
markets. We hope to impart to you the importance that geometry plays in
the markets and especially in the patterns presented in this book.
We will give you a glimpse into the studies of some of the market forefathers who pioneered this aspect of market study, such as W.D. Gann,
George Bayer, and Bryce Gilmore, author of The Geometry of Markets.
Figure 2.1 gives a clear idea of what we are referring to throughout
the book when we mention a geometric triangle or symmetrical pattern.
It shows a perfect triangle that was formed by price, creating a trading
opportunity.
Figure 2.2, in contrast, shows an asymmetrical geometric pattern, and
generally we want to filter out those patterns and look for the ones with
the best symmetry. This example shows an extreme expansion in this
market that was trending. Note the long range bars signifying a wide price
9

c02

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

10

7:54

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 2.1 Example of symmetrical triangle shape formed by price.

range for the time period; this is a warning sign and is discussed in detail
in Chapter 11.
One more example shows two symmetrical triangles, refer to
Figure 2.3 which are the basis for the AB=CD pattern (covered in Chapter 4). Repeatedly throughout the book we stress symmetry, and after you
study the patterns, you will come away with a good understanding of this
principle.

Figure 2.2 Example of asymmetrical triangle.

c02

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

7:54

Geometry of the Patterns and Fibonacci Ratios

Char Count=

11

HISTORY OF GEOMETRY IN THE MARKETS
The history of technical analysis and its relationship to geometry began in
the 1930s with the work of W.D. Gann. Gann became famous for the use
of Gann angles, which are now found in many charting software packages.
These angles were especially well known for the 45-degree line and his
square of 9 charts, which basically divided a circle into 12 30-degree sections. In fact, this was a way of using harmonic numbers (see Chapter 3
on harmonic numbers), but was arrived at very differently than how we
discuss them in this book.
There was always much speculation around Gann’s life and work after
his death in the early 1950s. There are stories that he made more than $55
million trading, although his surviving four children attested that this was
not the case and that his estate had been worth around $250,000, which in
the 1950s was still a considerable amount.
In the 1930s, a trader by the name of George Bayer introduced the total Fibonacci summation series to traders. He wrote several books; one in
particular, called The Egg of Columbus, was once offered for sale in the
mid-1980s for $25,000. Extremely rare and less than 100 pages long, the
book was difficult for most readers to understand. In it Bayer described
the progression of the Fibonacci series using diagrams of birds, fish, and
mammals as a type of mystical code. The code was apparent to those familiar with the Fibonacci summation series but very difficult for anyone not
familiar with it. He may have been trying to alert his readers to the strong
numerical ties that linked Fibonacci numbers and astronomy.
Unlike Gann’s children, Bayer’s daughter stated that her father had
made a very successful living from the business of speculation. Each year
he would take his private rail car from his home in Carmel, California, and
travel to the Chicago Board of Trade to trade the grains.
One unique common interest that Gann and Bayer shared as market
speculators was an additional study of astrology in the markets, then and
now referred to as astro cycles. Although we do not cover the subject of
astro cycles in this book, it is worth noting an article by Lisa Burrell in the
Harvard Business Review of November 2006 that cites research by Ilia
D. Dichev and Troy D. Janes into stock prices during the 28.5-day cycle
between a new moon and a full moon. The article says the cycle may have
an application in predicting stock prices.
This is not at all surprising, given the fact that the markets are fueled by
the energy of market participants. Changes in people’s moods and behavior
around moon cycles have been well documented throughout the years, and
these can also be found in the changes of price behavior in the markets.
Even the legendary twentieth-century financier J. Pierpont Morgan was
quoted as saying, “Millionaires don’t use astrology, but billionaires do.” For

c02

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

12

August 14, 2007

7:54

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

many years he employed a full-time financial astrologer by the name of
Evangeline Adams.
Arch Crawford is probably the best-known of the contemporary market astrologists and has produced some of the most accurate market predictions, published in his newsletter The Crawford Perspectives. Crawford is a well-known and respected market technician in the trading
arena today.
Another trader and important pioneer in using geometry in the markets
was William Garrett. In 1972 his book Torque Analysis of Stock Market Cycles was published (it is now available through Traders Press). In this book
Garrett describes the progression of a price chart. On page 89, he explains
how it is dissected into triangles that lead through a normal progression
of expansions. These expansions form a circle, which leads to the squaring of the circle (unifying the two shapes by making them equal in area or
perimeter), leading to an ellipse. This is done through the progression of
Fibonacci numbers:
Ĺ .618 – 1.618.
Ĺ 1.618 – 2.618.
Ĺ Pi, 3.14, which is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter.
We assure you the patterns we present in this book are not nearly
as complicated as this may sound. Several extremely accomplished market technicians over the years have made a lifetime study of the markets
through the use of geometry. Because of their breakthroughs and developments, we now have the patterns in this book rooted in geometry, sacred
geometry, and the application of Fibonacci ratios. It should be noted here
that the basis of sacred geometry is not one of a religious nature but rather
one made up of the ratios, square roots, and reciprocals of the numbers 1
through 5.

FIBONACCI RATIOS
So what are Fibonacci ratios, and where did they come from? Let’s start
with what they are; we will go back to ancient times to answer this question. Pythagoras (ca. 580–500 B . C . E .) is considered to be the father of
modern geometry. He was also a great philosopher of ancient Greece and
founder of the Pythagorean brotherhood. He and his students believed and
taught that reality is mathematical in nature. They believed that numbers
and proportion were harmonic and that everything was related through

c02

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

7:54

Char Count=

Geometry of the Patterns and Fibonacci Ratios

13

Figure 2.3 Example of two symmetrical triangles forming an AB=CD pattern.

mathematics. However, the mathematical system we use today was still
many centuries away and was not used by Pythagoras and his students, so
they were limited in proving their theories.
This belief in proportion and harmony has been intricately linked
throughout history to what is referred to as the golden mean. Other terms
for this include divine proportion, golden section, and golden ratio. These
all refer to phi, which is the mathematical term to describe the proportion
of the whole to its parts, which is considered to be the perfect proportion.
These teachings and many others of Pythagoras were passed down
through the centuries. It is even alleged that the Freemasons were an offshoot of the secret school of Pythagoras.
If we move up the time line to circa 300 B . C . E ., this was when one of
the last great ancient Greek philosophers, Euclid, lived. He was the first to
coherently express the golden mean as a mathematical ratio. Figure 2.4 is
an illustration of this proportion. The line AB represents the whole. The
ratio of AB to AC will be the same as the ratio of AC to CB. This calculates
to a ratio of 1.618 to 1, which can also be referred to as phi, the golden
mean.

Figure 2.4 Example of proportion using the golden mean ratio.

c02

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

14

August 14, 2007

7:54

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

The ratio and proportions of the golden mean are abundantly apparent in nature, music, art, science, and the cosmos. The Great Pyramid of
Giza, one of the seven wonders of the world, is structured with these proportions. Other examples include the Parthenon and works of great artists
such as Leonardo da Vinci, Rembrandt, and the nineteenth-century English
artist J.M.W. Turner, to name a few. These are just a few. If you delve into
art history books you will find a plethora of artists who employed these
proportions seeking balance and harmony, some consciously and others
intuitively.
In nature these proportions are endless. They live and grow around us
in all corners of the world. Many species of flowers—sunflowers, roses,
daisies—are all fantastically imbued with these proportions. Seashells,
pineapples, and even our faces, bodies, and limbs are in proportion to the
golden mean. If you were to measure the distance from your elbow to the
tips of your fingers, then the distance between your fingertip to your wrist,
and then wrist to elbow, these proportions would mirror the golden mean
illustrated in Figure 2.4.
In the cosmos there are many examples of these proportions. Planets
move in elliptical fashion, and their orbits coincide with the expansion of
the Fibonacci summation series. An example is Earth’s orbit in relation
to the Venus/Uranus cycle. These planetary orbits possess the unique Fibonacci relationship of.618; it takes 225 days for Venus and Uranus to make
a complete cycle from conjunction to conjunction. If we take 365 days
(Earth’s cycle) and multiply it by.618, we come out with 225. There are
many relationships that repeat these same types of cycles, too numerous
to list here.
On our time line we now move forward to Pisa, Italy, in the twelfth
century A . D . It was here that Leonardo of Pisa (ca. 1170–1240) was born.
He was brought up in times of a revived interest in education, especially in
the Greek sciences and philosophies.
Leonardo was given the nickname “Fibonacci” posthumously, possibly
derived from his father’s name, Bonacci. At any rate, his name today is
synonymous with the famous Fibonacci sequence.
Leonardo initially studied mathematics with a system derived from
Roman numerals. He would soon make an enormous contribution to the
evolution of mathematics that remains with us today. He had learned the
Eastern (Indian) system of using nine numerals and studied intensively
with mathematicians in several Mediterranean countries. It is known that
Leonardo did travel to Egypt and studied the proportions of the pyramids,
including Giza. It must have been of great interest to him to find that the
dimensions of this great pyramid contain the Fibonacci ratios or golden
mean.
Out of these studies he wrote a book called Liber abaci (Book of Calculation). This book introduced to the world, although one copy at a time,
