
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Of course we talked about market matters at great
length. I was not bullish on cotton, but he was. I could not
see the bull side at all, but he did. He brought up so many
facts and figures that I ought to have been overwhelmed,
but I wasn't. I couldn't disprove them because I could not
deny their authenticity, but they did not shake my belief in
what I read for myself. But he kept at it until I no longer
felt sure of my own information as gathered from the trade
papers and the dailies. That meant I couldn't see the
market with my own eyes. A man cannot be convinced
against his own convictions, but he can be talked into a
state of uncertainty and indecision, which is even worse,
for that means that he cannot trade with confidence and
comfort.
I cannot say that I got all mixed up, exactly, but I lost
my poise; or rather, I ceased to do my own thinking. I
cannot give you in detail the various steps by which I
reached the state of mind that was to prove so costly to me.
I think it was his assurances of the accuracy of his figures,
which were exclusively his, and the undependability of
mine, which were not exclusively mine, but public
property. He harped on the utter reliability, as proved time
and again, of all his ten thousand correspondents
throughout the South. In the end I came to read conditions
as he himself read them because we were both reading
from the same page of the same book, held by him before
my eyes. He has a logical mind. Once I accepted his facts it
was a cinch that my own conclusions, derived from his
facts, would agree with his own.
When he began his talks with me about the cotton
situation I not only was bearish but I was short of the
market. Gradually, as I began to accept his facts and
figures, I began to fear I had been basing my previous
position on misinformation. Of course I could not feel that
way and not cover. And once I had covered because
Thomas made me think I was wrong, I simply had to go
long. It is the way my mind works. You know, I have done
170

XII

nothing in my life but trade in stocks and commodities. I
naturally think that if it is wrong to be bearish it must be
right to be a bull. And if it is right to be a bull it is
imperative to buy. As my old Palm Beach friend said Pat
Hearne used to say, "You can't tell till you bet!" I must
prove whether I am right on the market or not; and the
proofs are to be read only in my brokers' statements at the
end of the month.
I started in to buy cotton and in a jiffy I had my usual
line,' about sixty thousand bales. It was the most asinine
play of my career. Instead of standing or falling by my own
observation and deductions I was merely playing another
man's game. It was eminently fitting that my silly plays
should not end with that. I not only bought when I had no
business to be bullish but I didn't accumulate my line in
accordance with the promptings of experience. I wasn't
trading right. Having listened, I was lost.
The market was not going my way. I am never afraid or
impatient when I am sure of my position. But the market
didn't act the way it should have acted had Thomas been
right. Having taken the first wrong step I took the second
and the third, and of course it muddled me all up. I
allowed myself to be persuaded not only into not taking
my loss but into holding up the market. That is a style of
play foreign to my nature and contrary to my trading
principles and theories. Even as a boy in the bucket shops
I had known better. But I was not myself. I was another
man—a Thomasized person.
I not only was long of cotton but I was carrying a heavy
line of wheat. That was doing famously and showed me a
handsome profit. My fool efforts to bolster up cotton had
increased my line to about one hundred and fifty thousand
bales. I may tell you that about this time I was not feeling
very well. I don't say this to furnish an excuse for my
blunders, but merely to state a pertinent fact. I remember
I went to Bayshore for a rest.
171

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

While there I did some thinking. It seemed to me that
my speculative commitments were overlarge. I am not
timid as a rule, but I got to feeling nervous and that made
me decide to lighten my load. To do this I must clean up
either the cotton or the wheat.
It seems incredible that knowing the game as well as I
did and with an experience of twelve or fourteen years of
speculating in stocks and commodities I did precisely the
wrong thing. The cotton showed me a loss and I kept it.
The wheat showed me a profit and I sold it out. It was an
utterly foolish play, but all I can say in extenuation is that
it wasn't really my deal, but Thomas'. Of all speculative
blunders there are few greater than trying to average a
losing game. My cotton deal proved it to the hilt a little
later. Always sell what shows you a loss and keep what
shows you a profit. That was so obviously the wise thing to
do and was so well known to me that even now I marvel at
myself for doing the reverse.
And so I sold my wheat, deliberately cut short my profit
in it. After I got out of it the price went up twenty cents a
bushel without stopping. If I had kept it I might have taken
a profit of about eight million dollars. And having decided
to keep on with the losing proposition I bought more
cotton!
I remember very clearly how every day I would buy
cotton, more cotton. And why do you think I bought it? To
keep the price from going down! If that isn't a super sucker
play, what is? I simply kept on putting up more and more
money more money to lose eventually. My brokers and my
intimate friends could not understand it; and they don't to
this day. Of course if the deal had turned out differently I
would have been a wonder. More than once I was warned
against placing too much reliance on Percy Thomas'
brilliant analyses. To this I paid no heed, but kept on
buying cotton to keep it from going down. I was even

172

XII

buying it in Liverpool. I accumulated four hundred and
forty thousand bales before I realised what I was doing.
And then it was too late. So I sold out my line.
I lost nearly all that I had made out of all my other deals
in stocks and commodities. I was not completely cleaned
out, but I had left fewer hundreds of thousands than I had
millions before I met my brilliant friend Percy Thomas.
For me of all men to violate all the laws that experience
had taught me to observe in order to prosper was more
than asinine.
To learn that a man can make foolish plays for no
reason whatever was a valuable lesson. It cost me millions
to learn that another dangerous enemy to a trader is his
susceptibility to the urgings of a magnetic personality
when plausibly expressed by a brilliant mind. It has always
seemed to me, however, that I might have learned my
lesson quite as well if the cost had been only one million.
But Fate does not always let you fix the tuition fee. She
delivers the educational wallop and presents her own bill,
knowing you have to pay it, no matter what the amount
may be. Having learned what folly I was capable of I closed
that particular incident. Percy Thomas went out of my life.
There I was, with more than nine-tenths of my stake, as
Jim Fisk used to say, gone where the woodbine twineth up
the spout. I had been a millionaire rather less than a year.
My millions I had made by using brains, helped by luck. I
had lost them by reversing the process. I sold my two
yachts and was decidedly less extravagant in my manner of
living.
But that one blow wasn't enough. Luck was against me.
I ran up first against illness and then against the urgent
need of two hundred thousand dollars in cash. A few
months before that sum would have been nothing at all;
but now it meant almost the entire remnant of my fleetwinged fortune. I had to supply the money and the
question was: Where could I get it? I didn't want to take it
out of the balance I kept at my brokers' because if I did I
173

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

wouldn't have much of a margin left for my own trading;
and I needed trading facilities more than ever if I was to
win back my millions quickly. There was only one
alternative that I could see, and that was to take it out of
the stock market!
Just think of it! If you know much about the average
customer of the average commission house you will agree
with me that the hope of making the stock market pay your
bill is one of the most prolific sources of loss in Wall
Street. You will chip out all you have if you adhere to your
determination.
Why, in Harding's office one winter a little bunch of
high flyers spent thirty or forty thousand dollars for an
overcoat and not one of them lived to wear it. It so
happened that a prominent floor trader who since has
become world-famous as one of the dollar-a-year men
came down to the Exchange wearing a fur overcoat lined
with sea otter. In those days, before furs went up sky high,
that coat was valued at only ten thousand dollars. Well,
one of the chaps in Harding's office, Bob Keown, decided
to get a coat lined with Russian sable. He priced one
uptown. The cost was about the same, ten thousand
dollars.
"That's the devil of a lot of money," objected one of the
fellows.
"Oh, fair! Fair!" admitted Bob Keown amiably. "About a
week's wages—unless you guys promise to present it to me
as a slight but sincere token of the esteem in which you
hold the nicest man in the office. Do I hear the
presentation speech? No? Very well. I shall let the stock
market buy it for me!"
"Why do you want a sable coat?" asked Ed Harding.
"It would look particularly well on a man of my inches,"
replied Bob, drawing himself up.
"And how did you say you were going to pay for it?"
asked Jim Murphy, who was the star tip-chaser of the
office.
174

XII

"By a judicious investment of a temporary character,
James. That's how," answered Bob, who knew that
Murphy merely wanted a tip.
Sure enough, Jimmy asked, "What stock are you going
to buy?"
"Wrong as usual, friend. This is no time to buy
anything. I propose to sell five thousand Steel. It ought to
go down ten points at the least. I'll just take two and a half
points net. That is conservative, isn't it?"
"What do you hear about it?" asked Murphy eagerly. He
was a tall thin man with black hair and a hungry look, due
to his never going out to lunch for fear of missing
something on the tape.
"I hear that coat's the most becoming I ever planned to
get." He turned to Harding and said, "Ed, sell five
thousand U. S. Steel common at the market. Today
darling!"
He was a plunger, Bob was, and liked to indulge in
humorous talk. It was his way of letting the world know
that he had an iron nerve. He sold five thousand Steel, and
the stock promptly went up. Not being half as big an ass as
he seemed when he talked, Bob stopped his loss at one and
a half points and confided to the office that the New York
climate was too benign for fur coats. They were unhealthy
and ostentatious. The rest of the fellows jeered. But it was
not long before one of them bought some Union Pacific to
pay for the coat. He lost eighteen hundred dollars and said
sables were all right for the outside of a woman's wrap, but
not for the inside of a garment intended to be worn by a
modest and intelligent man.
After that, one after another of the fellows tried to coax
the market to pay for that coat. One day I said I would buy
it to keep the office from going broke. But they all said that
it wasn't a sporting thing to do; that if I wanted the coat for
myself I ought to let the market give it to me. But Ed

175

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Harding strongly approved of my intention and that same
afternoon I went to the furrier's to buy it. I found out that
a man from Chicago had bought it the week before.
That was only one case. There isn't a man in Wall Street
who has not lost money trying to make the market pay for
an automobile or a bracelet or a motor boat or a painting. I
could build a huge hospital with the birthday presents that
the tight-fisted stock market has refused to pay for. In fact,
of all hoodoos in Wall Street I think the resolve to induce
the stock market to act as a fairy godmother is the busiest
and most persistent.
Like all well-authenticated hoodoos this has its reason
for being. What does a man do when he sets out to make
the stock market pay for a sudden need? Why, he merely
hopes. He gambles. He therefore runs much greater risks
than he would if he were speculating intelligently, in
accordance with opinions or beliefs logically arrived at
after a dispassionate study of underlying conditions. To
begin with, he is after an immediate profit. He cannot
afford to wait. The market must be nice to him at once if at
all. He flatters himself that he is not asking more than to
place an even-money bet. Because he is prepared to run
quick—say, stop his loss at two points when all he hopes to
make is two points—he hugs the fallacy that he is merely
taking a fifty-fifty chance. Why, I've known men to lose
thousands of dollars on such trades, particularly on
purchases made at the height of a bull market just before a
moderate reaction. It certainly is no way to trade. Well,
that crowning folly of my career as a stock operator was
the last straw. It beat me. I lost what little my cotton deal
had left me. It did even more harm, for I kept on trading
and losing. I persisted in thinking that the stock market
must perforce make money for me in the end. But the only
end in sight was the end of my resources. I went into debt,
not only to my principal brokers but to other houses that

176

XII

accepted business from me without my putting up an
adequate margin. I not only got in debt but I stayed in debt
from then on.

177

XIII
There I was, once more broke, which was bad, and dead
wrong in my trading, which was a sight worse. I was sick,
nervous, upset and unable to reason calmly. That is, I was
in the frame of mind in which no speculator should be
when he is trading. Everything went wrong with me.
Indeed, I began to think that I could not recover my
departed sense of proportion. Having grown accustomed
to swinging a big line—say, more than a hundred thousand
shares of stock—I feared I would not show good judgment
trading in a small way. It scarcely seemed worth while
being right when all you carried was a hundred shares of
stock. After the habit of taking a big profit on a big line I
wasn't sure I would know when to take my profit on a
small line. I can't describe to you how weaponless I felt.
Broke again and incapable of assuming the offensive
vigorously. In debt and wrong! After all those long years of
successes, tempered by mistakes that really served to pave
179

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

the way for greater successes, I was now worse off than
when I began in the bucket shops. I had learned a great
deal about the game of stock speculation, but I had not
learned quite so much about the play of human
weaknesses. There is no mind so machinelike that you can
depend upon it to function with equal efficiency at all
times. I now learned that I could not trust myself to
remain equally unaffected by men and misfortunes at all
times.
Money losses have never worried me in the slightest.
But other troubles could and did. I studied my disaster in
detail and of course found no difficulty in seeing just
where I had been silly. I spotted the exact time and place.
A man must know himself thoroughly if he is going to
make a good job out of trading in the speculative markets.
To know what I was capable of in the line of folly was a
long educational step. I sometimes think that no price is
too high for a speculator to pay to learn that which will
keep him from getting the swelled head. A great many
smashes by brilliant men can be traced directly to the
swelled head—an expensive disease everywhere to
everybody, but particularly in Wall Street to a speculator.
I was not happy in New York, feeling the way I did. I
didn't want to trade, because I wasn't in good trading trim.
I decided to go away and seek a stake elsewhere. The
change of scene could help me to find myself again, I
thought. So once more I left New York, beaten by the game
of speculation. I was worse than broke, since I owed over
one hundred thousand dollars spread among various
brokers.
I went to Chicago and there found a stake. It was not a
very substantial stake, but that merely meant that I would
need a little more time to win back my fortune. A house
that I once had done business with had faith in my ability
as a trader and they were willing to prove it by allowing me
to trade in their office in a small way.
180

XIII

I began very conservatively. I don't know how I might
have fared had I stayed there. But one of the most
remarkable experiences in my career cut short my stay in
Chicago It is an almost incredible story.
One day I got a telegram from Lucius Tucker. I had
known him when he was the office manager of a Stock
Exchange firm that I had at times given some business to,
but I had lost track of him. The telegram read:
Come to New York at once. L. TUCKER.
I knew that he knew from mutual friends how I was
fixed and therefore it was certain he had something up his
sleeve. At the same time I had no money to throw away on
an unnecessary trip to New York; so instead of doing what
he asked me to do I got him on the long distance.
"I got your telegram," I said. "What does it mean?"
"It means that a big banker in New York wants to see
you" he answered.
"Who is it?" I asked. I couldn't imagine who it could be.
"I'll tell you when you get to New York. No use
otherwise."
"You say he wants to see me?"
"He does."
"What about?"
"He'll tell you that in person if you give him a chance,"
said Lucius. "Can't you write me?"
"No."
"Then tell me more plainly," I said. "I don't want to."
"Look here, Lucius," I said, "just tell me this much: Is
this a fool trip?" "Certainly not. It will be to your
advantage to come." "Can't you give me an inkling?"
"No," he said. "It wouldn't be fair to him. And besides, I
don't know just how much he wants to do for you. But take
my advice: Come, and come quick." "Are you sure it is I
that he wishes to see?"
"Nobody else but you will do. Better come, I tell you.
Telegraph me what train you take and I'll meet you at the
station."
181

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"Very well," I said, and hung up.
I didn't like quite so much mystery, but I knew that
Lucius was friendly and that he must have a good reason
for talking the way he did. I wasn't faring so sumptuously
in Chicago that it would break my heart to leave it. At the
rate I was trading it would be a long time before I could get
together enough money to operate on the old scale.
I came back to New York, not knowing what would
happen. Indeed, more than once during the trip I feared
nothing at all would happen and that I'd be out my
railroad fare and my time. I could not guess that I was
about to have the most curious experience of my entire
life.
Lucius met me at the station and did not waste any time
in telling me that he had sent for me at the urgent request
of Mr. Daniel Williamson, of the well-known Stock
Exchange house of Williamson & Brown. Mr. Williamson
told Lucius to tell me that he had a business proposition to
make to me that he was sure I would accept since it would
be very profitable for me. Lucius swore he didn't know
what the proposition was. The character of the firm was a
guaranty that nothing improper would be demanded of
me.
Dan Williamson was the senior member of the firm,
which was founded by Egbert Williamson way back in the
'70's. There was no Brown and hadn't been one in the firm
for years. The house had been very prominent in Dan's
father's time and Dan had inherited a considerable fortune
and didn't go after much outside business. They had one
customer who was worth a hundred average customers
and that was Alvin Marquand, Williamson's brother-inlaw, who in addition to being a director in a dozen banks
and trust companies was the president of the great
Chesapeake and Atlantic Railroad system. He was the
most picturesque personality in the railroad world after
James J. Hill, and was the spokesman and dominant
member of the powerful banking coterie known as the Fort
182

XIII

Dawson gang. He was worth from fifty million to five
hundred million dollars, the estimate depending upon the
state of the speaker's liver. When he died they found out
that he was worth two hundred and fifty million dollars, all
made in Wall Street. So you see he was some customer.
Lucius told me he had just accepted a position with
Williamson & Brown—one that was made for him. He was
supposed to be a sort of circulating general business
getter. The firm was after a general commission business
and Lucius had induced Mr. Williamson to open a couple
of branch offices, one in one of the big hotels uptown and
the other in Chicago. I rather gathered that I was going to
be offered a position in the latter place, possibly as office
manager, which was something I would not accept. I didn't
jump on Lucius because I thought I'd better wait until the
offer was made before I refused it.
Lucius took me into Mr. Williamson's private office,
introduced me to his chief and left the room in a hurry, as
though he wished to avoid being called as witness in a case
in which he knew both parties. I prepared to listen and
then to say no.
Mr. Williamson was very pleasant. He was a thorough
gentleman, with polished manners and a kindly smile. I
could see that he made friends easily and kept them. Why
not? He was healthy and therefore good-humored. He had
slathers of money and therefore could not be suspected of
sordid motives. These things, together with his education
and social training, made it easy for him to be not only
polite but friendly, and not only friendly but helpful.
I said nothing. I had nothing to say and, besides, I
always let the other man have his say in full before I do
any talking. Somebody told me that the late James
Stillman, president of the National City Bank—who, by the
way, was an intimate friend of Williamson's made it his
practice to listen in silence, with an impassive face, to
anybody who brought a proposition to him. After the man
got through Mr. Stillman continued to look at him, as
183

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

though the man had not finished. So the man, feeling
urged to say something more, did so. Simply by looking
and listening Stillman often made the man offer terms
much more advantageous to the bank than he had meant
to offer when he began to speak.
I don't keep silent just to induce people to offer a better
bargain, but because I like to know all the facts of the case.
By letting a man have his say in full you are able to decide
at once. It is a great time-saver. It averts debates and
prolonged discussions that get nowhere. Nearly every
business proposition that is brought to me can be settled,
as far as my participation in it is concerned, by my saying
yes or no. But I cannot say yes or no right off unless I have
the complete proposition before me.
Dan Williamson did the talking and I did the listening.
He told me he had heard a great deal about my operations
in the stock market and how he regretted that I had gone
outside of my bailiwick and come a cropper in cotton. Still
it was to my bad luck that he owed the pleasure of that
interview with me. He thought my forte was the stock
market, that I was born for it and that I should not stray
from it.
"And that is the reason, Mr. Livingston," he concluded
pleasantly, "why we wish to do business with you."
"Do business how?" I asked him.
"Be your brokers," he said. "My firm would like to do
your stock business." "I'd like to give it to you," I said, "but
I can't."
"Why not?" he asked.
"I haven't any money," I answered.
"That part is all right," he said with a friendly smile. "I'll
furnish it." He took out a pocket check book, wrote out a
check for twenty-five thousand dollars to my order, and
gave it to me.
"What's this for?" I asked.
