
c09.indd 199

11/2/07 12:45:13 PM

c09.indd 200

11/2/07 12:45:13 PM

10

C H A P T E R

Essential Options, Part 1
K N OWIN G YOUR OPTIONS

E

ven with all of the books and seminars that are available today,
options remain one of the most misunderstood of all investment
strategies in the financial world. Option trading can provide some of
the best ways to leverage your money to make a profit without having
to increase the risk to your portfolio. With that said, you would think
everyone in the world would be an option trader. But the fact is that
a large majority of investors have never even placed a single option
trade. What is one of the reasons for this?
Fear.
Not only are options misunderstood, they are also the most
feared. Human nature tells us to fear the unknown and for good
reason. Imagine if we were to roam about the world without concern
for our own safety. This would be foolish. Any traveler knows that
you just don’t enter into a foreign land without knowing where the
danger areas are. Roaming about in such a manner would eventually
get you into a dangerous situation. Therefore, it is a survival instinct,
to be, at the very least, cautious of our surroundings.
One of the other reasons many people shy away from options is
the misconception that they are extremely risky. As a result, those
who have incorrectly traded options are left with an experience that
was more like speculation or gambling. However, other investors feel
that options are safe and are a great way to hedge a portfolio against
risk similar to an insurance policy. This belief leads to a sense of
security, making those who have traded them successfully feel that
201

c10.indd 201

11/2/07 12:45:52 PM

202

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

option strategies should be part of every investment portfolio. So
how can the same asset cause people to have such opposite opinions? The reason is that options can be risky and speculative while at
the same time be secure and prudent. This all depends on how you
use them.
We see the same opinions in the credit markets. For those of you
who have teenagers in the family, you know that a credit card can be
a dangerous thing in the hands of a young adult who is unfamiliar
with the dangers of going into debt. If you were to give the average college student a credit card in their own name, there is a good
chance that student would run up the limit on that card within a
12-month period. This excessive spending could even wind up with
that student’s having to file bankruptcy to get out of this financial mess. On the other hand, you might have someone who just
uses a credit card to take care of emergencies in the event they are
traveling and run into a problem along the way. This person may
also be inclined to pay off the balance of the credit card each month
to ensure that the debt doesn’t get out of hand.
When looking at this example, would you think credit cards are
good or bad? Just like options, the answer depends on how you plan
on using them. Back in the early 1970s, options were designed to
reduce risk. Traders would use option contracts to hedge existing
positions in a way that some people would use insurance policies.
This, of course, would mean that for every person looking to use
options to reduce risk there would be someone on the other side
of the transaction willing to assume that risk. Using insurance as an
example, you should already know that when you buy an insurance
policy from an insurance company, the insurer is the party who is
willing to assume the risk and you, the insured, in turn, pays that
insurance company a premium to take risk from you. What’s really
interesting about options is that you may have one investor who may
be using options to offset risk in a conservative way while at the same
time you would have another investor who is speculating for profit by
taking the other side of the trade. This relationship may be confusing if you are not familiar with options, and this confusion is another
reason why many investors avoid trading options altogether.
It would be a mistake if you didn’t make at least the smallest
attempt to learn about options. Therefore, we have dedicated this chapter to the basic option concepts. In today’s marketplace, options
are the fastest-growing asset class in the world, and as our economies

c10.indd 202

11/2/07 12:45:53 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

203

expand, you will see many more exchanges around the world offering
options to their investors. As a result of this growth, you will also see
many more trading opportunities open up, as new financial products
come to the market. Options are by far the most important and powerful investment tool available to you, and they allow you to pick and
choose the risks you decide to take or avoid. This is something that
cannot be done with any other financial asset. Once you have finished
this chapter, you might still decide not to trade options, but we must
warn you that once you look beyond the basic ideas outlined in this
chapter, and into the more intermediate to advanced ways of trading these little beauties, you may wind up wondering why you haven’t
been trading them already.
If this is the first time you have ever looked at an option, then
understand you are in good hands. We are passionate about teaching option concepts, and you have come to the right place. Clear
your mind, forget everything you have heard about them in the past,
and let’s start at the very beginning. Chances are, if you have heard
about them through a friend or relative, you may have been misled
in the way options work. It’s amazing to see how even some of the
skeptics have turned their way of thinking around after they have
been to one of our option seminars. Sometimes you just need an
idea or concept presented to you from a different angle for it to
be clear in your mind. We will do our best to take this topic, as we
usually do, in the famous Market Guy tradition of Keeping It Super
Simple. So, with that, let’s get started.

What Is an Option?
There are two types of options: calls and puts. A call option gives the
owner the right, not the obligation, to buy stock at a specific price
over a given period of time. In other words, it gives you the right to
“call” stock away from another person. A put option, conversely, gives
the owner the right, not the obligation, to sell stock at a specific price
through an expiration date. It gives you the right to “put” the stock
back to the owner. Options only convey rights to buy or sell stock. If
you own an option, you do not get any of the benefits that come
with stock, such as dividends or voting privileges. Options are simply
agreements between two people to buy and sell stock.
While options may sound like they would be used only by sophisticated investors, they are quite easy to understand and actually quite

c10.indd 203

11/2/07 12:45:53 PM

204

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

common in everyday life, although they are called by different names.
In fact, we’re sure that everyone reading this has used a call or put
option at one time or another. If you still don’t believe it, then just
keep on reading. We’re going to start with explaining calls first, and
then we will move along to the puts.

Call Options or Pizza Coupons
By now, you are thinking that there is no way you have ever used anything that would even resemble a call option, but think again:

A pizza coupon? Yes, this is actually just like a call option. Remember what we just said: A call gives the owner the right, not the obligation, to buy stock at a specified price. Well, isn’t that what a pizza
coupon does for you? In this case, the pizza coupon gives the holder
the right to buy one large pizza. You wouldn’t have an obligation
to buy the pizza. If you weren’t hungry, you would just hold on to
the coupon for another day. When you finally do feel hungry, then,

c10.indd 204

11/2/07 12:45:54 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

205

of course, you could walk into the restaurant and walk out with the
pizza, as long as you were still holding on to your pizza coupon.
To help you get a better grasp on what a call is, just remember
that the owner of a call has a right to call stock away from someone
and take possession. If you run into difficulty later on when it’s time
for you to actually trade a call, be sure to remember the pizza coupon. Picture yourself making a “call” to your local pizza palace, then
imagine yourself walking into the restaurant to take possession of
the pizza. Finally, see yourself with a big smile on your face as the
new owner of this wonderful, delicious pizza.
Now let’s take a look at how a seller of an option contract would
relate to the buyer of an option contract. Sellers of options don’t
have a right to do anything. In fact, they have an obligation to make
a trade. The seller of call option has an obligation to deliver stock to
you. One example that we could use is that the seller of a call option
is like the pizza store owner who has an obligation to deliver a large
pizza with two toppings should you present him with your pizza coupon. In other words, the pizza store owner is “short” the coupon and
has an obligation to sell you the pizza should you ask him to.
Now, in the real world, the seller of the option receives money
from the buyer of the option in exchange for accepting the obligation to deliver stock. This is not something that you would see with a
pizza coupon because there is no real value attached to the coupon.
Just remember that when you are selling an option, whether it is a
call or a put, you have an obligation to make a trade.

Chatter Box—AJ
Another real-life example of what a call might be is one that we
would see in the real estate market. If you have ever gone to contract to buy a piece of property, you, the future owner, will pay the
seller of the property a sum of money to lock in a sale price. This legal
document that you sign is called a “contract,” and it simply binds two
parties to a sale that takes place at a specified time in the future at an
agreed-upon price. In exchange for the money you have laid out for
the contract, the seller of this contract obligates himself to deliver you

c10.indd 205

11/2/07 12:45:54 PM

206

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

the property on the closing date. This, too, is very similar to an option
contract. I’ve had the opportunity to actually work out deals with real
estate developers where I would buy an option on certain properties
with the intent to close on the sale of these properties many months
out in the future. These transactions have been some of my most profitable investments in real estate, and it was my experience in stock
and commodity options that helped me to land those deals. So even
if you decide not to trade stock options, this information can help you
profit in other areas of investing.
Now let’s get back to the pizza coupon in order to get a better
understanding of the terminology we use as option traders.

In this coupon example, we would say the underlying asset is a pizza.
Notice that we are limited to how many pizzas we can purchase; we
are not able to purchase all the pizza we want. For stocks, the underlying asset for a call or a put represents 100 shares. There are times
when the option contract would represent more than 100 shares for
adjusted options, but for now let’s just stick with 100 shares in our
example. The value of an option, or the price we pay for the option,
is derived from the underlying asset. This is the reason why options
are considered to be one of many classes of derivative instruments.
A derivative instrument is nothing more than a contract whose value
is derived from another asset, whether it be a stock, commodity, bond,
or currency.
If you take a look again at the coupon, you’ll see that it includes
a purchase price for the pizza. The benefit for you is that you have
locked in a price of $7.99. Even if the price of pizzas around the
world went up to $10, $15, $20, or more, you would still be able to
buy your two-topping pizza for $7.99. If this were a call option, this
stated price would be called the strike price. The strike price is the
price at which the trade will be made should the option contract be
exercised. The strike price is also known at the exercise price. The exercise price is determined at the time the option contract is formed.
Also note that the coupon has on it an expiration date. You would be
able to use this coupon, or exercise it, at any time up until the expiration date. After that, the coupon is worthless and no longer valid.
We hope this example simplifies the idea behind call options for
you. Just like a call option, the coupon gives you the right to buy the

c10.indd 206

11/2/07 12:45:55 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

207

pizza, not an obligation to buy a specific amount of the underlying
asset for a fixed price over a given period of time, which is the exact
definition of what a call option is. The main difference between a
real call option and a pizza coupon is that you will have to pay money
for a call option whereas you are given the coupon for free. The
price you pay for the option, whether it is a call or a put, is called
the premium.
All of this talk about pizza is making us hungry, but this coupon
gives us the right to buy only one pizza. In the stock market, call
options give the owner the right to buy a limited amount of stock. For
most options, that amount is equal to 100 shares of the underlying
stock. So, for instance, if you owned a call option on IBM, you would
have the right to buy 100 shares of IBM stock. An important thing to
remember is that option prices are quoted per share, so if you wanted
to calculate what the total cost of that option is to you, you would take
the option quote and multiply that by 100 shares, and that would give
you the amount of money you would have to lay out for the trade.
For instance, if you see that an option is priced at $2 (whether a call
or a put), the total cost to you would be $2 ⫻ 100 shares ⫽ $200 plus
commissions charged by your broker.
If you have ever looked at an option-trading screen, you have
noticed that there are different strike prices listed for each stock
that offers option contracts. This is the point at which most people start to feel the “pain in their brain” because now there are
choices to make. Remember what we said at the beginning of this
chapter about people fearing the things they don’t understand.
Well, if you are starting to feel your brain ache, don’t worry, just
relax and re-read what we have covered so far until you get it. It
will absolutely be worth the time you spend learning this material
because the time you spend trading options could be the most
profitable. The reason options offer so many choices is that it
allows the option trader a wider selection of premiums from which
to pick. Calls and puts, combined with strike prices and premiums
as well as expiration dates—oh, so many choices to pick from. Just
take it one step at a time.
Five Points to Remember
1. Options trade in units called contracts.
2. Each option contract controls 100 shares of stock.

c10.indd 207

11/2/07 12:45:56 PM

208

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

3. To determine the total cost of an option, multiply the option
quote by 100.
4. When you buy or sell an option, you are entering into a binding contract to buy or sell 100 shares of stock.
5. The strike price defines the agreed-upon trade price for the
stock.
Options lock two parties to a particular trade, so what you are
actually entering into is a binding contract. While this may sound
like a tedious and time-consuming process, it’s not. You can buy an
option contract just as quickly as you can buy 100 shares of stock.
Another point to remember about options is that they eventually
expire because each option carries with it an expiration date. Just like in
our pizza example, where you will see on the bottom of the coupon
a date of expiration, the options also expire.
Another beautiful thing about options is that the option trader
can choose from a variety of different expiration months, which
allows you to buy and sell option contracts anytime, right up until the
option expires. If, for example, you decide to buy a January option,
whether a call or a put, the last day you will be able to trade this
option will be on the third Friday of the expiration month that you
are trading. In this case, it is the third Friday in the month of January. Technically, the option expires on the following Saturday, giving
the Options Clearing Corporation (OCC) a chance to match up all
of the buyers and the sellers, but you are most concerned about Expiration Friday. There is a misconception among traders who are new
to the option markets in that they believe that once they have bought
an option long or sold it short, they have to hold this position until
the option expires. That is not correct; in fact, if you buy an option
today, you can easily sell it on the same day.
This does not mean that we are encouraging you to day-trade
options, even though you could. We are making sure you understand
that the contract you get into is one that binds you to the other party
who is making the trade with you, and at anytime you can cancel that
contract by closing out of your option position.
A Sample Option Quote

In Figure 10.1 you will see an example of an option quote screen that
is also known as the option chain.

c10.indd 208

11/2/07 12:45:56 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

209

Figure 10.1 IBM Option Chain

The call options are listed on the left, while the put options are
listed on the right. The column in the middle of the calls and puts
shows the strike price. This is the stated price per share in which IBM
stock may be purchased (for a call) or sold (for a put) by the option
holder upon exercise of the option contract. At the time these quotes
were taken, IBM shares were trading $94.22, and the first strike price
seen at the top of the list on the call side is the January 08 $80 calls.
These are options that will expire on the third Friday in the month
of January 2008.
This option chain reads very much like a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. If you are reading this list from left to right, you will see that
the first column shows the ticker symbol for each option in the
chain, which is what’s used to identify the option contract the way
the ticker symbol would be used to identify the stock of a publicly
traded company. The second column on the left displays the total
volume traded in each option strike price for that particular day.
The next column is the price of the last or most recent trade, followed by the bid and ask columns. Keep in mind that the bid column
displays the price that is posted by buyers who are attempting to buy
that particular option contract. So if you wanted to sell the January
80 calls at the market, then you would be selling to the buyer who
is posting their bid price under the bid column, which in this case is
17.10. If you were looking to buy the January $80 calls at the market,
you would have to buy those contracts at a price that’s posted in the
ask column. The ask price is the price where the sellers are willing to
sell their option contracts.
If you are looking at options for the first time, it’s important
that you follow along in this section by referencing the option chain
after each point is made to ensure that you are digesting this information at a comfortable pace. Otherwise, the information may seem

c10.indd 209

11/2/07 12:45:56 PM

210

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

overwhelming to you, and we don’t want you to wind up in the
group of people who are not trading options because it makes their
brain ache.

Chatter Box—AJ
I’ve found that one of the best ways to learn options is to try and teach
it to someone who wants to learn how to trade them. Keep this chapter open on your lap and make an attempt to describe these ideas
to your new student. Let your student know that you are just starting
out and you’ll need someone to work with. This method of “learning
by teaching” will make you a better student because your student will
ask questions, which forces you to find the answer if you can’t come
up with one right away. If you do not know the correct answer, go
back to your book and look it up. This is a fun way to learn options.
Having a partner helps start a dialogue that keeps you learning.

Strike Prices

In our option chain you will see a column labeled “Strike.” At the top
of this column you will also see 80.00, which represents the agreedupon price at which IBM will be traded should the option be exercised (Figure 10.2). It doesn’t matter where IBM may be trading; the
owner of this call option or “coupon” is locked into an $80 purchase
price. Now this seems like a great deal since the stock is trading for
$94.22, and it appears that if you bought the $80 call, you would be
able to make an immediate profit of $14.22 (stock price of $94.22
minus the strike price of $80 ⫽ $14.22); however, what is the cost of

Figure 10.2 Strike Prices for IBM—Note the $80 Strike

c10.indd 210

11/2/07 12:45:57 PM

Essential Options, Part 1

211

the option? If you look at the ask column, you will see that the option
would cost you $17.30. The big difference between option contracts
and pizza coupons is that option contracts are not free.
Although you may be able to immediately make a profit of
$14.22 as the owner of this call option, it will cost you $17.30 to
buy it. The $14.22 profit built into the cost of this option is called
intrinsic value. The amount over and above the intrinsic value is
called time premium or time value. This is nothing more than the
added premium you would pay for the life of the contract over and
above the intrinsic value. The seller of this call option, who has an
obligation to sell you IBM at $80, collects this time premium from
you as soon as you buy the option contract from him. If we were
looking at the pizza coupon again, you could say that the time premium is equivalent to any delivery charges that might be added to
the cost of the pizza.
Lower Strike Calls Are More Expensive

Take a look at the $85 strike price, which is displayed just below the
$80 strike price, and you will see that the asking price for this option
is $13.20, which is $4 less than the $80 call. Why? Well, there are
many mathematical reasons why, but you now know enough about
options to be able to figure this one out. Imagine that you walked
into a pizza restaurant and found these two coupons lying on the
counter (Figure 10.3). Which one would you choose? Both coupons
offer the same pizza with the same expiration date at the bottom; the
