
72

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Closing prices reflect the opinions of professionals. Look at any chart,
and you’ll see how often the opening and closing ticks are at the opposite ends of a price bar. This is because amateurs and professionals tend
to be on the opposite sides of trades.
Candlesticks and Point and Figure Bar charts are most widely used for
tracking prices, but there are other methods. Candlestick charts became
popular in the West in the 1990s. Each candle represents a day of trading
with a body and two wicks, one above and another below. The body
reflects the spread between the opening and closing prices. The tip of the
upper wick reaches the highest price of the day and the lower wick the
lowest price of the day. Candlestick chartists believe that the relationship
between the opening and closing prices is the most important piece of
daily data. If prices close higher than they opened, the body of the candle is white, but if prices close lower, the body is black.
The height of a candle body and the length of its wicks reflect the battles
between bulls and bears. Those patterns, as well as patterns formed by several neighboring candles, provide useful insights into the power struggle in
the markets and can help us decide whether to go long or short.
The trouble with candles is they are too fat. I can glance at a computer
screen with a bar chart and see five to six months of daily data, without
squeezing the scale. Put a candlestick chart in the same space, and you’ll
be lucky to get two months of data on the screen. Ultimately, a candlestick chart doesn’t reveal anything more than a bar chart. If you draw a
normal bar chart and pay attention to the relationships of opening and
closing prices, augmenting that with several technical indicators, you’ll be
able to read the markets just as well and perhaps better. Candlestick
charts are useful for some but not all traders. If you like them, use them.
If not, focus on your bar charts and don’t worry about missing something
essential.
Point and figure (P&F) charts are based solely on prices, ignoring volume. They differ from bar and candlestick charts by having no horizontal
time scale. When markets become inactive, P&F charts stop drawing
because they add a new column of X’s and O’s only when prices change
beyond a certain trigger point. P&F charts make congestion areas stand
out, helping traders find support and resistance and providing targets for
reversals and profit taking. P&F charts are much older than bar charts.
Professionals in the pits sometimes scribble them on the backs of their
trading decks.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

73

Choosing a chart is a matter of personal choice. Pick the one that feels
most comfortable. I prefer bar charts but know many serious traders who
like P&F charts or candlestick charts.

The Reality of the Chart
Price ticks coalesce into bars, and bars into patterns, as the crowd writes its
emotional diary on the screen. Successful traders learn to recognize a few
patterns and trade them. They wait for a familiar pattern to emerge like fishermen wait for a nibble at a riverbank where they fished many times in the past.
Many amateurs jump from one stock to another, but professionals tend
to trade the same markets for years. They learn their intended catch’s personality, its habits and quirks. When professionals see a short-term bottom
in a familiar stock, they recognize a bargain and buy. Their buying checks
the decline and pushes the stock up. When prices rise, the pros reduce
their buying, but amateurs rush in, sucked in by the good news. When
markets become overvalued, professionals start unloading their inventory.
Their selling checks the rise and pushes the market down. Amateurs
become spooked and start dumping their holdings, accelerating the
decline. Once weak holders have been shaken out, prices slide to the level
where professionals see a bottom, and the cycle repeats.
That cycle is not mathematically perfect, which is why mechanical systems tend not to work. Using technical indicators requires judgment. Before
we review specific chart patterns, let us agree on the basic definitions:
An uptrend is a pattern in which most rallies reach a higher point than the
preceding rally; most declines stop at a higher level than the preceding
decline.
A downtrend is a pattern in which most declines fall to a lower point than
the preceding decline; most rallies rise to a lower level than the preceding rally.
An uptrendline is a line connecting two or more adjacent bottoms, slanting upwards; if we draw a line parallel to it across the tops, we’ll have
a trading channel.
A downtrendline is a line connecting two or more adjacent tops, slanting
down; one can draw a parallel line across the bottoms, marking a trading channel.
Support is marked by a horizontal line connecting two or more adjacent
bottoms. One can often draw a parallel line across the tops, marking a
trading range.

74

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Resistance is marked by a horizontal line connecting two or more adjacent
tops. One can often draw a parallel line below, across the bottoms, to
mark a trading range.
Tops and Bottoms The tops of rallies mark the areas of the maximum
power of bulls. They would love to lift prices even higher and make more
money, but that’s where they get overpowered by bears. The bottoms of
declines, on the other hand, are the areas of maximum power of bears. They
would love to push prices even lower and profit from short positions, but
they get overpowered by bulls.
Use a computer or a ruler to draw a line, connecting nearby tops. If it
slants up, it shows that bulls are becoming stronger, which is a good
thing to know if you plan to trade from the long side. If that line slants
down, it shows that bulls are becoming weaker, and buying is not such a
good idea.
Trendlines applied to market bottoms help visualize changes in the
power of bears. When a line connecting two nearby bottoms slants down,
it shows that bears are growing stronger, and short selling is a good
option. If that line slants up, however, it shows that bears are becoming
weaker.
When the lines connecting the tops and the lines connecting the bottoms
are close to horizontal, the market is locked in a trading range. We can either
wait for a breakout or trade short-term swings within that range.
Uptrendlines and Downtrendlines Prices often appear to travel along
invisible roads. When peaks rise higher at each successive rally, prices are
in an uptrend. When bottoms keep falling lower and lower, prices are in
a downtrend.
We can identify uptrends by drawing trendlines connecting the bottoms
of declines. We use bottoms to identify an uptrend because the peaks of
rallies tend to be expansive, uneven affairs during uptrends. The declines
tend to be more orderly, and when you connect them with a trendline,
you get a truer picture of that uptrend.
We identify downtrends by drawing trendlines across the peaks of rallies. Each new low in a downtrend tends to be lower than the preceding
low, but the panic among weak holders can make bottoms irregularly
sharp. Drawing a downtrendline across the tops of rallies paints a more
correct picture of that downtrend.
The most important feature of a trendline is the direction of its slope.
When it rises, the bulls are in control, and when it declines, the bears are

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

75

in charge. The longer the trendline and the more points of contact it has
with prices, the more valid it is. The angle of a trendline reflects the emotional temperature of the crowd. Quiet, shallow trends can last a long time.
As trends accelerate, trendlines have to be redrawn, making them steeper.
When they rise or fall at 60° or more, their breaks tend to lead to major
reversals. This sometimes happens near the tail ends of runaway moves.

Figure 5.1 Trendlines; Kangaroo Tails
Draw uptrendlines across the bottoms to mark uptrends. Draw downtrendlines across the tops to mark downtrends. Notice that prices can briefly penetrate a trendline without breaking the trend. Observe that prices seem
attached to their trendlines with rubber bands that extend only so far in any
given trend. You want to establish positions in the direction of the slope of a
trendline, entering reasonably close to it. By the time the trend reaches a new
high or low, that swing away from the trendline is getting old—there is not
much life left in the old dog. At the right edge of this chart the trend is down
and the swing has fallen as far below its trendline as any since May. If you
are short, it is time to start thinking of taking profits.
Notice several bars that stick out of the tight weave of prices at the bottoms in May, November, and April, as well as the latest top in May. Those are
kangaroo tails, which tend to mark turning points. The market tests a new
high or a new low with a bar that is much taller than the preceding and following bars, and then recoils from that price extreme. You can recognize a
tail during the bar that follows, and trade against it.

76

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

You can plot these lines using a ruler or a computer. It is better to
draw trendlines as well as support and resistance lines across the edges of
congestion areas instead of price extremes. Congestion areas reflect crowd
behavior, while the extreme points show only the panic among the weakest crowd members.
Tails—The Kangaroo Pattern Trends take a long time to form, but tails
are created in just a few days. They provide valuable insights into market
psychology, mark reversal areas, and point to trading opportunities.
A tail is a one-day spike in the direction of a trend, followed by a reversal.
It takes a minimum of three bars to create a tail—relatively narrow bars in
the beginning and at the end, with an extremely wide bar in the middle.
That middle bar is the tail, but you won’t know for sure until the following day, when a bar has sharply narrowed back at the base, letting the tail
hang out. A tail sticks out from a tight weave of prices—you can’t miss it.
A kangaroo, unlike a horse or a dog, propels itself by pushing with its
tail. You can always tell which way a kangaroo is going to jump—opposite
its tail. When the tail points north, the kangaroo jumps south, and when
the tail points south, it jumps north. Market tails tend to occur at turning
points in the markets, which recoil from them like kangaroos recoil from
their tails. A tail does not forecast the extent of a move, but the first jump
usually lasts a few days, offering a trading opportunity. You can do well by
recognizing tails and trading against them.
Before you trade any pattern, you must understand what it tells you
about the market. Why do markets jump away from their tails?
Exchanges are owned by members who profit from volume rather than
trends. Markets fluctuate, looking for price levels that will bring the highest volume of orders. Members do not know where those levels are, but
they keep probing higher and lower. A tail shows that the market has
tested a certain price level and rejected it.
If a market stabs down and recoils, it shows that lower prices do not
attract volume. The natural thing for the market to do next is rally and test
higher levels to see whether higher prices will bring more volume. If the
market stabs higher and recoils, leaving a tail pointing upward, it shows
that higher prices do not attract volume. The members are likely to sell the
market down in order to find whether lower prices will attract volume. Tails
work because the owners of the market are looking to maximize income.
Whenever you see a very tall bar (several times the average for recent
months) shooting in the direction of the existing trend, be alert to the possibility of a tail. If the following day the market traces a very narrow bar

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

77

at the base of the tall bar, it completes a tail. Be ready to put on a position, trading against that tail, before the close.
When a market hangs down a tail, go long in the vicinity of the base of
that tail. Once long, place a protective stop approximately half-way down
the tail. If the market starts chewing its tail, run without delay. The targets
for profit taking on these long positions are best established by using moving
averages and channels (see “Indicators—Five Bullets to a Clip,” page 84).
When a market puts up a tail, go short in the area of the base of that tail.
Once short, place a protective stop approximately half-way up the tail. If
the market starts rallying up its tail, it is time to run; do not wait for the
entire tail to be chewed up. Establish profit-taking targets using moving
averages and channels.
You can trade against tails in any timeframe. Daily charts are most common, but you can also trade them on intraday or weekly charts. The magnitude of a move depends on its timeframe. A tail on a weekly chart will
generate a much bigger move than a tail on a five-minute chart.
Support, Resistance, and False Breakouts When most traders and
investors buy and sell, they make an emotional as well as a financial commitment to their trade. Their emotions can propel market trends or send
them into reversals.
The longer a market trades at a certain level, the more people buy and
sell. Suppose a stock falls from 80 and trades near 70 for several weeks,
until many believe that it has found support and reached its bottom. What
happens if heavy selling comes in and shoves that stock down to 60? Smart
longs will run fast, banging out at 69 or 68. Others will sit through the
entire painful decline. If losers haven’t given up near 60 and are still alive
when the market trades back towards 70, their pain will prompt them to
jump at a chance to “get out even.” Their selling is likely to cap a rally, at
least temporarily. Their painful memories are the reason why the areas
that served as support on the way down become resistance on the way
up, and vice versa.
Regret is another psychological force behind support and resistance. If
a stock trades at 80 for a while and then rallies to 95, those who did not
buy it near 80 feel as if they missed the train. If that stock sinks back near
80, traders who regret a missed opportunity will return to buy in force.
Support and resistance can remain active for months or even years
because investors have long memories. When prices return to their old
levels, some jump at the opportunity to add to their positions while others
see a chance to get out.

78

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Whenever you work with a chart, draw support and resistance lines across
recent tops and bottoms. Expect a trend to slow down in those areas, and
use them to enter positions or take profits. Keep in mind that support and
resistance are flexible—they are like a ranch wire fence rather than a glass
wall. A glass wall is rigid and shatters when broken, but a herd of bulls can
push against a wire fence, shove their muzzles through it, and it will lean
but stand. Markets have many false breakouts below support and above
resistance, with prices returning into their range after a brief violation.
A false upside breakout occurs when the market rises above resistance
and sucks in buyers before reversing and falling. A false downside breakout occurs when prices fall below support, attracting more bears just before
a rally. False breakouts provide professionals with some of the best trading
opportunities. They are similar to tails, only tails have a single wide bar,
whereas false breakouts can have several bars, none of them especially tall.
What causes false breakouts and how do you trade them? At the end of
a long rise the market hits resistance, stops, and starts churning. The professionals know there are many more buy orders above the resistance
level. Some were placed by traders looking to buy a new breakout, and
others are protective stops placed by those who went short on the way
up. The pros are the first to know where people have stops because they
are the ones holding the orders.
A false breakout occurs when the pros organize a fishing expedition to
run stops. For example, when a stock is slightly below its resistance at 60,
the floor may start loading up on longs near 58.85. As sellers pull back, the
market roars above 60, setting off buy stops. The floor starts selling into that
rush, unloading longs as prices touch 60.50. When they see that public buy
orders are drying up, they sell short and prices tank back below 60. That’s
when your charts show a false breakout above 60.
S&P 500 futures are notorious for false breakouts. Day after day this
market exceeds its previous day’s high or falls below its previous day’s
low by a few ticks (a tick is the minimum price change permitted by
the exchange where an instrument is traded). This is one of the reasons
the S&P is a difficult market to trade, but it attracts beginners like flies. The
floor has a field day slapping them.
Some of the best trading opportunities occur after false breakouts. When
prices fall back into the range after a false upside breakout, you have extra
confidence to trade short. Use the top of the false breakout as your stoploss point. Once prices rally back into their range after a false downside
breakout, you have extra confidence to trade long. Use the bottom of that
false breakout for your stop-loss point.

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

79

Figure 5.2 Support, Resistance, and False Breakouts
In September CIEN reached a peak below 140, then attacked that level in
October and rallied above 150, only to sink below the old peak a few days
later. Some poor guy actually bought above 150—he really needed that stock!
The false upside breakout marked the end of the bull market.
The bear market established a bottom just near 65 in December, but in
January some desperate sellers dumped enough stock to briefly push CIEN
near 60. At the right edge of the chart prices are rallying above the level of
their old bottom. The bear trap has slammed shut, with a 50% rally in just
one month. Such signals are much easier to recognize using technical indicators, to be discussed later.

If you have an open position, defend yourself against false breakouts
by reducing your trading size and placing wider stops. Be ready to reposition if stopped out of your trade.
There are many advantages to risking just a small fraction of your
account on any trade. It allows you to be more flexible with stops. When
the volatility is high, consider protecting a long position by buying a put
or a short position by buying a call. Finally, if you get stopped out on a
false breakout, don’t be shy about getting back into a trade. Beginners
tend to make a single stab at a position and stay out if they are stopped
out. Professionals, on the other hand, will attempt several entries before
nailing down the trade they want.

80

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

C

A

D

B

Figure 5.3 Double Tops and Bottoms; Volume

Double Tops and Bottoms Bulls make money when the market rises.
There are always a few who take profits on the way up, but new bulls
come in and the rally continues. Every rally reaches a point where enough
bulls look at it and say—this is very nice, and it may get even nicer, but
I’d rather have cash. Rallies top out after enough wealthy bulls take their
profits, while the money from new bulls is not enough to replace what
was taken out.
When the market heads down from its peak, savvy bulls, the ones
who’ve cashed out early, are the most relaxed group. Other bulls who are
still long, especially if they came in late, feel trapped. Their profits are
melting away and turning into losses. Should they hold or sell?
If enough moneyed bulls decide the decline is being overdone, they’ll
step in and buy. As the rally resumes, more bulls come in. Now prices
approach the level of their old top, and that’s where you can expect sell
orders to hit the market. Many traders who got caught in the previous
decline swear to get out if the market gives them a second chance.
As the market rises toward its previous peak, the main question is
whether it will it rise to a new high or form a double top and turn down.
Technical indicators can be of great help in answering this question. When
they rise to a new high, they tell you to hold, and when they form bear-

METHOD—TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

81

Callaway Golf (ELY) reached its high of 27.18 in March, at point A, and struggled again near that level, to 26.95 in April, at point B. A few days after it
recoiled from B, the double top became clearly visible. Many indicators
(which we will review later) traced bearish divergences at that time.
In June the stock collapsed, as the aged founder of the company, the inventor of the famous Big Bertha golf club, became ill and died. In a fairly typical
emotional reaction, people dumped their stock without stopping to think
whether the demise of an individual would ruin a large, well-established company. Such declines feed on themselves, as lower prices scare more people
into selling. Notice a fantastic spike of volume, which reflected mass panic.
The low at point C looks like a kangaroo tail, although not in its most classical
form. Prices rallied above 17 at point D in what is called “a dead cat bounce,”
not out of any great bullishness but simply as a reaction to the decline.
At the right edge of the chart ELY is grinding down towards its recent bottom on low volume. If it recoils from that level, it’ll establish a double bottom.
This is a fairly typical pattern—a crash, followed by a dead cat bounce, followed by a slow decline into the second bottom. Once prices rally from the
second low, they are likely to usher in a sustainable rise.

ish divergences (see “Indicators—Five Bullets to a Clip,” page 84), they tell
you to take profits at the second top.
A mirror image of this situation occurs at market bottoms. The market
falls to a new low at which enough smart bears start covering shorts and
the market rallies. Once that rally peters out and prices start sinking again,
all eyes are on the previous low—will it hold? If bears are strong and bulls
skittish, prices will break below the first low, and the downtrend will continue. If bears are weak and bulls are strong, the decline will stop in the
vicinity of the old low, creating a double bottom. Technical indicators help
decipher which of the two is more likely to happen.
Triangles A triangle is a congestion area, a pause when winners take
profits and new trend followers get aboard, while their opponents trade
against the preceding trend. It is like a train station. The train stops to let
passengers off and pick up new ones, but there is always a chance this is
the last stop on the line and it may turn back.
The upper boundary of a triangle shows where sellers overpower buyers and prevent the market from rising. The lower boundary shows where
buyers overpower sellers and prevent the market from falling. As the two
start to converge, you know a breakout is coming. As a general rule, the
