
On Wednesday trade dates, spot currencies are normally trading for a Friday value date. At
5 p.m. ET on Wednesday, the value date changes from Friday to Monday, a weekend
rollover. In rollover calculations, that’s a three-day rollover (Saturday, Sunday, and
Monday), which means the rollover costs/gains are going to be three times as much as any
other day.

The one exception to the two-day spot convention in FX are trades in USD/CAD. And that’s
because the main financial centers in the United States and Canada share the same time zone,
so communications and wire transfers can be made more quickly. USD/CAD trades settle in
one business day. The weekend rollover for USD/CAD takes place on Thursday after the 5
p.m. ET close, when the value date shifts from Friday to Monday. This only applies to
USD/CAD and not to other pairs involving CAD, such as CAD/JPY or EUR/CAD.

Market holidays and value dates
Value dates are based on individual currency pairs to account for banking holidays in
respective countries. Rollover periods can be longer if there is a banking holiday in one of
the countries whose currency is part of the trade. For example, if it’s Wednesday and you’re
trading GBP/USD, the normal spot value date would be Friday. But if there’s a banking
holiday in the United Kingdom on Friday, U.K. banks are not open to settle the trade. So the

value date is shifted to the next valid banking day common to the United Kingdom and the
United States, typically the following Monday. In this case, the weekend rollover would take
place at the close on Tuesday at 5 p.m. ET, when the value date would change from Thursday
to Monday, because of Friday’s holiday. That’s a four-day rollover (Friday, Saturday,
Sunday, and Monday).
So what happens at the change in value date at Wednesday’s 5 p.m. ET close? No rollovers in
GBP/USD, that’s what. Because the value date for trades made on Wednesday is already Monday,
no rollover is needed because trades made on Thursday are also for value on Monday. That’s
called a double value date, meaning two trade dates (Wednesday and Thursday) are settling for
the same value date (Monday).

A few times each year (mostly around Christmas, New Year’s, and Golden Week spring
holidays in Japan) when multiple banking holidays in various countries coincide over several
days, rollover periods can be as long as seven or eight days. So you may earn or pay
rollovers of seven or eight times normal on one day, but then not face any rollovers for the
rest of the holiday period.

Applying rollovers
Rollover transactions are usually carried out automatically by your forex broker if you hold an
open position past the change in value date.
Rollovers are applied to your open position by two offsetting trades that result in the same open
position. Some online forex brokers apply the rollover rates by adjusting the average rate of your
open position. Other forex brokers apply rollover rates by applying the rollover credit or debit
directly to your margin balance. In terms of the math, its six of one, half a dozen of the other.
Here’s an example of how the rollover of an open position would work under each model:
Position: Long 100,000 AUD/JPY at a rate of 90.15 for a value date of January 10
At 5 p.m. ET, the rollover takes place and the following rollover trades hit your account.
(Remember: This is done automatically by most online brokers.)
You sell 100,000 AUD/JPY at 90.22 for a value date of January 10. (This trade closes the
open position for the same value date.)
You buy 100,000 AUD/JPY at 90.206 for a value date of January 11. (This trade reopens the
same position for the new value date.)
The difference in the rates represents the rollover points. (90.22 - 90.206 = 0.014, which is
expressed as 1.4 points.)
If the rollover is applied to your average rate on the open position, your new average rate on

the position is 90.136. (Here’s the math: 90.15 - 0.014 = 90.136.) Because you’re now long
from a lower average price, you earned money on the rollover.
If the rollover is applied directly to you margin balance, the rollover points are multiplied by
the position size (100,000 × 0.014 = JPY 1,400 earned) and converted into USD (JPY 1,400 ÷
116.00 [the USD/JPY rate] = $12.07) and added to your margin balance.

Here’s what you need to remember about rollovers:
Rollovers are interest earned or paid based on the direction of your position.
Rollovers are applied to open positions after the 5 p.m. ET change in value date, or trade
settlement date.
Rollovers are not applied if you don’t carry a position over the change in value date. So if
you’re square at the close of each trading day, you’ll never have to worry about rollovers.
Rollovers reflect the interest rate return or cost of holding an open position.
Rollovers represent the difference in interest rates between the two currencies in your
open position, but they’re applied in currency-rate terms.
Rollovers can earn you money if you’re long the currency with the higher interest rate and
short the currency with the lower interest rate.
Rollovers will cost you money if you’re short the currency with the higher interest rate
and long the currency with the lower interest rates.
Rollovers can have spreads applied to them by some forex brokers, which can reduce any
interest earned by your position.
Rollover costs/credits are based on position size — the larger the position, the larger the
cost or gain to you.
Rollovers should be considered a cost of doing business and rarely influence overall
trading decisions.

Most forex brokers publish daily rollover rates on their websites or directly on the trading
platform. If you can’t find them, ask. If you’re going to be trading a relatively large account
with an online forex broker (say, over $25,000 in margin deposited), you’ll probably be able
to negotiate a tighter rollover spread with your broker. This will enable you to capture more
of the gains if you’re positioned the right way, or to reduce your cost of carry if you’re not.

Understanding Currency Prices
Now you’re getting down to the brass tacks of actually making trades in the forex market. Before
you get ahead of yourself, though, it’s critical to understand exactly how currency prices work and
what they mean to you as a trader. Earlier in this chapter, I show you that buying means “buying
the currency pair” and selling means “selling the currency pair.”
Here, you look at how online brokerages display currency prices and what they mean for trade and
order execution. Keep in mind that different online forex brokers use different formats to display
prices on their trading platforms. A thorough picture of what the prices mean will allow you to
navigate different brokers’ platforms and know what you’re looking at.

Bids and offers
When you’re in front of your screen and looking at an online forex broker’s trading platform,
you’ll see two prices for each currency pair. The price on the left-hand side is called the bid and
the price on the right-hand side is called the offer (some call this the ask). Some brokers display
the prices above and below each other, with the bid on the bottom and the offer on top. The easy
way to tell the difference is that the bid price will always be lower than the offer price.
The price quotation of each bid and offer you see will have two components: the big figure and the
dealing price. The big figure refers to the first three digits of the overall currency rate and is
usually shown in a smaller font size or even in shadow. The dealing price refers to the last three
digits of the overall currency price and is brightly displayed in a larger font size. The two big
numbers are the last whole pips, and the smaller number is the tenth of a pip.
For example, in Figure 4-1 the full EUR/USD price quotation is 1.40225/1.40246. The 1.40 is
called the big figure and is there to show you the full price level at which the market is currently
trading. The 225/246 portion of the price is the bid/offer dealing price in pips.

Figure 4-1:
A dealing box
from the
FOREX.com
trading
platform for
EUR/USD.

Spreads

The spread is the difference between the bid price and the offer price. In one sense, you can look
at the spread as the commission that the online brokers charge for executing your trades. So even if
they say they’re commission free, they may be earning the difference when one trader sells at the
bid price and another trader buys at the offer price. Spreads are standard in all financial market
trading.

Spreads will vary from broker to broker and by currency pairs at each broker as well.
Generally, the more liquid the currency pair, the narrower the spread; the less liquid the
currency pair, the wider the spread. This is especially the case for some of the less-traded
crosses.

Executing a Trade
It’s trigger-pulling time, pardner. In this section, I assume you’ve signed up for a practice account
at an online forex broker and you’re ready to start executing some practice trades. Getting a feel
for executing deals now, before you’re ready to commit any real money to a trade, will be very
helpful. (See Chapters 2 and 10 for more on using a practice account.)

There are two main ways of executing trades in the FX market: live trades and orders. If
you’re an adrenaline junkie, don’t focus only on the “Live dealing” section — the “Orders”
section gives you plenty of juice to keep you going, too.

Trading online
Live dealing is how you access the market to buy or sell at current market rates. Knowing
exactly what you want to do is important, because when you click the buy or sell button, it’s a
done deal. If you make a mistake, you’ll have to make another trade to correct your erroneous
trade, and that is very likely going to cost you real money.
There are a few different avenues to get to the market depending on how your broker is set up. In
the following sections, I cover all the bases.

Click and deal or “Instant Execution”
Most forex brokers provide live streaming prices that you can deal on with a simple click of your
computer mouse. On those platforms, to execute a trade:

1. Specify the amount of the trade you want to make.
2. Click on the Buy or Sell button to execute the trade you want.
The forex trading platform will respond back, usually within a second or two, to let you know
whether the trade went through:
• If the trade went through, you’ll see the trade and your new position appear in your
platform’s list of trades.
• If the trade failed because of a price change, you need to start again from the top.
• If the trade failed because the trade was too large based on your margin, you need to
reduce the size of the trade.
When the trade goes through, you have a position in the market and you’ll see your unrealized
P&L begin updating according to market price fluctuations.

Online platforms usually have a number of shortcuts to enable more rapid trading. Some of
these are for more advanced or active traders, so be sure you know what they are before you
engage them. Following are the parameters that you can usually set up in advance.
Preset trade amounts: These are so you don’t have to specify the amount each time you
make a deal.
Automatic stop-loss orders at a predetermined distance from the trade-entry price:
These automatic stop-loss functions can be turned on or off, and you define the number of
pips away for the stop loss. These functions are good for providing fail-safe stop-loss
protection until you can enter a more detailed order for your trade strategy. Remember:
You never know when a headline will roil the market, and you don’t want to get caught
with your pants down.

Some online brokers advertise narrower trading spreads as a way to attract traders. If your
click-and-deal trade attempts frequently fail, and the platform then asks if you’d like to make
the trade at a worse price, you’re probably being re-quoted. Re-quoting is when brokers
offer you a worse price to make your trade, meaning you end up paying a larger spread than
you bargained for.

Pay attention to the rate you receive when a trade is executed, or your fill rate. Getting the
rate you requested is a more important indicator of a forex platform’s execution ability than
spreads.

Phone dealing

Placing live trades over the phone is available from most online forex brokers. You need to find
out from your broker whether it offers this service and exactly what its procedures are before you
can be ready to use it.

The ability to make trades over the phone is critical if you’re frequently trading while away
from your computer or in cases of technological disruptions. At the minimum, you need to
have the dealing phone number memorized and a reliable phone connection in case something
goes wrong with your computer or Internet connection. If your dog chews through your mouse
cable or your kid spills a sippy cup of juice on your keyboard, you’ll need a fallback plan to
protect your market exposure. (I discuss more such risk considerations in Chapter 13.)
To place a trade over the phone, you’ll need to:
1. Call the telephone number at your broker for placing a trade.
2. When you’re connected to a representative, identify yourself by name and give your
trading account number.
Be ready to provide whatever account password is needed. (Knowing what’s required before
you call to place the trade is a good idea.)
Know what your position is. If you’re not sure, your broker will be able to give you this info,
but be prepared for time delays.
3. Ask what the current price is for the currency pair you’re trading. The broker’s
representative will quote you a two-way bid/offer price, such as “EUR/USD is trading at
1.3213/15.
4. If you don’t want the price, say, “No, thank you.”
5. If you want the price, specify exactly what trade you would like to make.
Don’t just say “Close my position” or “Square me up.” Note the direction (buy or sell), the
amount (don’t use lots — use the real amounts), and the currency pair. For example, “I would
like to sell 140,000 EUR/USD.”
The broker should then say, “Done” or “That’s agreed.”
6. Confirm with your broker exactly what trade you just made.
For example, say, “To confirm, I just sold 140,000 EUR/USD at 1.3213.”
Be sure the broker confirms the trade. You can double-check that the trade was correct by
asking the broker to input the trade and update your position.
7. Get the name of the broker’s representative you just made the trade with in case you
have to call back.

Orders

Currency traders use orders to catch market movements when they’re not in front of their
screens. Remember: The forex market is open from Sunday evening (ET) through Friday
afternoon (ET). A market move is just as likely to happen while you’re asleep or in the
shower as it is while you’re watching your screen. If you’re not a full-time trader, then
you’ve probably got a full-time job that requires your attention when you’re at work — at
least your boss hopes he has your attention. Orders are how you can act in the market without
being there.
Experienced currency traders also routinely use orders to
Implement a trade strategy from entry to exit
Capture sharp, short-term price fluctuations
Limit risk in volatile or uncertain markets
Preserve trading capital from unwanted losses
Maintain trading discipline
Protect profits and minimize losses

I can’t stress enough the importance of using orders in currency trading. Forex markets can
be notoriously volatile and difficult to predict. Using orders will help you capitalize on
short-term market movements, as well as limit the impact of any adverse price moves. A
disciplined use of orders will also help you to quantify the risk you’re taking and, with any
luck, give you peace of mind in your trading. Bottom line: If you don’t use orders, you
probably don’t have a well-thought-out trading strategy — and that’s a recipe for pain.

Types of orders
In this section, I introduce you to all the types of orders available in the forex market. Bear in mind
that not all order types are available at all online brokers. So add order types to your list of
questions to ask your prospective forex broker. (For more in-depth information, I look at tactical
considerations for placing orders in Chapter 13 and offer practical tips for entering orders in
Chapter 14.)
Take-profit orders
Don’t you just love that name? There’s an old market saying that goes, “You can’t go broke taking
profit.” You’ll use take-profit orders to lock in gains when you have an open position in the
market. If you’re short USD/JPY at 90.20, your take-profit order will be to buy back the position
and be placed somewhere below that price, say at 89.80 for instance. If you’re long GBP/USD at

1.5505, your take-profit order will be to sell the position somewhere higher, maybe 1.5570.

Partial take-profit orders are take-profit orders that only close a portion of your open
position. Let’s say you bought 200,000 EUR/USD at 1.2950 expecting it to move higher —
and it does. But to take some money off the table and lock in some gains, you decide to sell
half the position (100,000 EUR/USD) at 1.3000 and to allow the market to see how high it
wants to go with the rest. Or you can place two partial take-profit orders to close the whole
position at two different levels.
Limit orders
Technically speaking, a take-profit order is a type of limit order. The key difference is that takeprofit orders close or reduce open positions, and limit orders open new positions or add to
existing positions in the same direction.

A limit order is any order that triggers a trade at more favorable levels than the current
market price. Think “buy low, sell high.” If the limit order is to buy, it must be entered at a
price below the current market price. If the limit order is to sell, it must be placed at a price
higher than the current market price.
Stop-loss orders
Boo! Sound’s bad doesn’t it? Actually, stop-loss orders are critical to trading survival. The
traditional stop-loss order, or just stop order (I use the terms interchangeably going forward),
does just that: It stops losses by closing out an open position that is losing money. You’ll use stop
orders to limit your losses if the market moves against your position. If you don’t, you’re leaving it
up to the market, and that’s always a dangerous proposition.
Stop orders are on the other side of the current price from take-profit orders, but in the same
direction (in terms of buying or selling). If you’re long, your stop order will be to sell, but at a
lower price than the current market price. If you’re short, your stop order will be to buy, but at a
higher price than the current market.

When stops don’t lose, and take profits don’t profit
Sometimes the roles of take-profit orders and stop-loss orders reverse. This can happen if you
adjust your order levels after you’ve entered a position and the market has already moved away
from your entry price.
With both take-profit orders and stop orders, the important price is not your entry price, but the
current market price. For example, you may be short USD/JPY at 84.00 and the market is trading
higher at 84.30. You originally had your take-profit limit order below to buy back at 83.60, but

now you’re having second thoughts. You decide to raise your take-profit order to 84.15 to try to
close the position on a dip. The order is still a take profit because it is below the current market
price (84.30), even though it will result in a loss if it’s filled.
The same can apply to stop losses. If you bought AUD/USD at 0.9640 and the price has since
moved higher to 0.9670, you may decide to raise your stop-loss sell order from its original level
(0.9610) to lock in some of the gains. So you raise your stop-loss order to 0.9655. If your stop-loss
sell order is triggered, you’ll actually be taking profit.
Trailing stop-loss orders

A trailing stop is a beautiful little tool, especially when you’ve got a winning trade going.
You may have heard that one of the keys to successful trading is to cut losing positions
quickly, and let winning positions run. A trailing stop-loss order allows you to do just that.
The idea is that when you have a winning trade on, you wait for the market to stage a reversal
and take you out, instead of trying to pick the right level to exit on your own.
A trailing stop-loss order is a stop-loss order that you set at a fixed number of pips from your
entry rate. The trailing stop adjusts the order rate as the market price moves, but only in the
direction of your trade. For example, if you’re long EUR/CHF at 1.3750 and you set the trailing
stop at 30 pips, the stop will initially become active at 1.3720 (1.5750 - 30 pips).
If the EUR/CHF price moves higher to 1.3760, the stop adjusts higher, pip for pip, with the price
and will then be active at 1.3730. The trailing stop will continue to adjust higher as long as the
market continues to move higher. When the market puts in a top, your trailing stop will be 30 pips
(or whatever distance you specify) below that top, wherever it may be.
If the market ever goes down by 30 pips, as in this example, your stop will be triggered and your
position closed. So in this case, if you’re long at 1.3750 and you set a 30-pip trailing stop, it will
initially become active at 1.3720. If the market never ticks up and goes straight down, you’ll be
stopped out at 1.5720. If the price first rises to 1.5775 and then declines, your trailing stop will
have risen to 1.5745 (1.5775 - 30 pips), and that’s where you’ll be stopped out.
Pretty cool, huh? The only catch is that not every online trading platform offers trailing stops. If
you find a platform you like and it doesn’t offer trailing stops, you can mimic a trailing stop by
frequently manually changing the rate on your regular stop-loss order. But this is an imperfect
solution, unless you can monitor your position constantly.
One-cancels-the-other orders

A one-cancels-the-other order (more commonly referred to as an OCO order) is a stop-

loss order paired with a take-profit order. It’s the ultimate insurance policy for any open
position. Your position will stay open until one of the order levels is reached by the market
and closes your position. When one order level is reached and triggered, the other order
automatically cancels.
Let’s say you’re short USD/JPY at 90.00. You think if it goes up beyond 91.00, it’s going to keep
going higher, so that’s where you decide to place your stop-loss buying order. At the same time,
you believe that USD/JPY has downside potential to 88.50, so that’s where you set your takeprofit buying order. You now have two orders bracketing the market and your risk is clearly
defined.
As long as the market trades between 88.50 and 91.00, your position will remain open. If 88.50 is
reached first, your take profit will trigger and you’ll buy back at a profit. If 91.00 is hit first, then
your position is stopped out at a loss.
