
06_178089 ch02.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 21

Chapter 2: Getting to Know Candlestick Charts
Figure 2-2 is a great example of bearish and bullish days on a candlestick
chart. Although the two candlesticks are the same size and shape, you can
tell the difference between a bear and a bull:
 The bear: The black filled-in candlestick indicates a bearish performance
by the security because the close is much lower than the opening price.
 The bull: The hollow (white) candlestick indicates a bullish performance,
meaning that the opening is lower than the close.
Chapter 1 covers hollow candlesticks that show a higher close than open and
a filled-in candlestick that shows a lower close than open.
Understanding the ways that prices are trending is very useful information
when making buy-or-sell decisions. The old saying “The trend is your friend”
is a constant reminder that you always want to be on the more dominant side
of price action. By recognizing whether the bulls or bears are the more dominant group, you can be conscious of the trend and better prepared to stay on
the right side of the market.

Figure 2-2:
Bearish
and bullish
days on a
candlestick.

Bearish

High

High

Open

Close

Close

Open

Low

Low

Bullish

21

06_178089 ch02.qxp

22

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 22

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

Bulls and bears
The terms bull and bear have been in the trading
lexicon for many years. Both terms apply to
people and market trends. A bull is a market participant that expects or wants the market to
move higher, but it is also an expression to
explain when the market goes up: bullish market.
A bear, on the other hand, expects the market to
decline (person) and indicates a declining
market. But where did these terms come from?

named Thomas Mortimer, who wrote about the
precursor to the London stock exchange in the
late 1700s. He wrote that a bull bought stocks
without putting any money down with the hope
of selling at a higher price before having to settle
up. And according to Mortimer, a bear sold stock
he didn’t own without putting up any money also
hoping to exit the position at a profit before he
was forced to settle up.

Although there’s some debate over the origins of
the two terms, they may be attributed to a man

Seeing into the future (sort of)
The goal of charting and technical analysis isn’t to see what’s happened
in the past, but to attempt to predict the future. Basically, if you can predict
the future for a majority of the time, you should be able to profit nicely through
wise investing and trading. Because candlestick charts are chock-full of info,
they aid a trader as she works to predict and profit from future price moves.
For example, a trader may study old candlestick charts and notice that when
a security’s closing price is much higher than its opening price, it seems to
open higher the next day — a situation commonly referred to as a gap opening. That trader can buy the security on the close of the day and place an
order to sell the next day, thus making a profit. Figure 2-3 provides a clear
visual example of a gap opening.
Just by studying past price action on old candlestick charts, the trader in this
section’s example is able to predict a small piece of the future and use it to
turn a profit. History does repeat itself in markets and trading, and you can
use this repetition to your advantage by considering past candlestick charts,
which can be a cinch to read. But always keep in mind that as with all aspects
of technical analysis and investing, past results do not ensure future returns.
At the very least, be sure to pay attention to price gaps, because they indicate
an increase in volatility in the price of a security. When there’s an increase in
volatility, there’s an increase in trading opportunity. Many other types of patterns, including those that incorporate candlesticks, reappear and may be
profited from.

06_178089 ch02.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 23

Chapter 2: Getting to Know Candlestick Charts

Open

Profit!!!

Close

Figure 2-3:
Two candles
showing a
classic gap
opening.

Showing price patterns
Recognizing patterns on candlestick charts is easy, and you can combine two
or more candlestick charts to flesh out a reliable pattern that can lead you to
profitable trading. For example, a common price pattern that serves as a
good sell signal is depicted in Figure 2-4.
The pattern is a two-day pattern, and the third day is a common reaction to
the first two days. Here’s the typical progression:
1. The first day is a strong open-to-close day.
The closing price is considerably higher than the opening price. The
first day is a victory for the bulls.
2. The second day reveals very little price action because the close is
very near the open.
The second day is a wash because higher prices entice more bears to
be sellers.

23

06_178089 ch02.qxp

24

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 24

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

Understanding price gaps
Price gaps are very common in the financial
markets, and occur on charts when no overlap
exists between consecutive period highs and
lows. For instance, if XYZ stock’s high is 81 and
its low is 80 on a given day, and then the next
day it opens higher than 81 — let’s say 83 —
and trades in a range between 82 and 84, a gap
with no trading exists between 81 and 82. That
stock gapped higher and never closed the gap.
If the stock had opened much lower — 77 or 78,
for example — and never reached the previous
day’s low, it would’ve gapped lower.
So what causes price gaps? These gaps are
usually the result of news about a certain security being released outside of market hours. It’s
not uncommon: Most companies release their
quarterly earnings or other big news either after
the market closes or before it opens. The market
adjustment to that news causes price gaps.

Also, a gap may occur on specific stocks just
because they’re moving up or down due to a
gap in the overall market. This may occur due to
a release of some economic news before the
market opens or possibly due to a macro event
such as a terrorist attack.
You should remember that gaps always get
filled when the high to low price action of a
future day covers the price range where no
trades occurred. But you can’t always tell when
gaps will be filled. When the dot.com bubble
was building, some Internet stocks had several
price gaps on their way up to stratospheric valuations. These gaps were eventually filled, but
anyone trying to short these stocks for the gap
being filled would’ve ended up in the poorhouse
before any gap filling took place. (Take a look at
the “Selling short, in short” sidebar for more
information on shorting.)

3. After this shift from bullish to neutral price action, the following day
is a down day.
The third day is a winning day for the bears!
Even
Day

Bullish
Day
Figure 2-4:
A common
candlestick
sell pattern.

Bearish
Day

06_178089 ch02.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 25

Chapter 2: Getting to Know Candlestick Charts
Once again, a trader who studies candlestick charts and patterns can easily
spot this change. Such a momentum shift is useful to someone who owns a
security and is considering selling or a trader who has the ability to sell short.
(See the sidebar “Selling short, in short” in this chapter for more information.)

Admitting the Potential Candlestick
Charting Risks
After more than 15 years of using candlestick charts to inform my trading
decisions, I can honestly say that I have a difficult time coming up with any
substantial arguments for using other common types of charts over
candlestick.
In the interest of fairness, however, and to help you realize the truly versatile
and useful nature of candlesticks, I offer a couple of minor potential chinks in
the candlestick chart’s armor:
 They don’t work in the very short term. Candlestick charts are an
excellent display of price action, but for some extremely short-term trading strategies, the patterns that reveal themselves on a daily candlestick
chart may not develop on the much shorter time frame — five minutes
or less, for example.
I like to think of candlestick charts as a visual representation of the battle
between the bulls and bears, which is played out in the price action of
a stock. That battle takes some time to play out, so patterns on a very
short-term chart may not produce signals that can be properly interpreted and traded.
Candlesticks aren’t as useful to intraday “scalping” or day trading strategies where hold periods are generally shorter. This speaks more to the
utility of the chart and the intended behavior of the trader.
 They don’t reflect trade volume outside of regular market hours. The
advent of increased electronic trading means that there can sometimes
be significant volume traded outside of regular market hours. This trading can cause patterns that don’t reflect the full picture to appear on a
candlestick chart.
For example, if a stock officially opens at 9:30 a.m. at a price of $50, but
traded as low as $49 during the pre-market hours (on an electronic trading network), the open may not be a true reflection of where the stock
initially traded on the day. That means that the open recorded on the
candlestick is somewhat inaccurate. Also, if the stock never trades down
to $49 during the day, the low on the chart may not be an accurate
depiction of the day’s price action.

25

06_178089 ch02.qxp

26

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 26

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

Selling short, in short
One of the most well-known trading adages is
“Buy low, sell high” — the simplest way to turn
a profit in a market. But other ways exist, including short selling or shorting a security. This
somewhat counterintuitive process involves
selling a security first and then buying it back
later. Traders who practice this strategy are
known as shorts.
The mechanics of selling short can be fairly
complex, but I’ll try to sum them up:
1. A short borrows a stock from a bank that
holds it for the owners, expecting the price
of the stock to go down.

3. When the stock price drops, he buys the
stock back and returns it to the bank at
the original (higher) price, and pockets the
difference.
Shorts get a bum rap and are often accused of
being responsible when a stock trades lower.
Companies have even sued shorts on claims
that they spread negative rumors to drive down
the company’s stock price. But short sellers are
really just a part of the overall market mechanism, and they can actually help keep companies honest, because they’re constantly on the
lookout for companies with deteriorating fundaments or evidence of suspicious accounting.

2. He then sells the borrowed stock to a buyer.

Comparing Candlestick Charts with
Alternative Charting Methods
Knowing a bit about the options that exist outside of candlestick charts
serves as a point of reference and makes clear the benefits of using candlestick charts when analyzing price data.
Although they’re not as versatile and useful as candlesticks, each of these
alternative charts has its benefits:
 Line charts are simple and straightforward.
 Bar charts are important to understand because they’re still relatively
prevalent.
 Point and figure charts are great for revealing support and resistance
levels.
I’m confident that you’ll be a believer in candlesticks when it’s all said and
done, but understanding the alternatives is certainly worth your time.

06_178089 ch02.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 27

Chapter 2: Getting to Know Candlestick Charts

Line charts
A line chart is a line on a chart that displays security prices over time. A line
chart represents the price — usually the closing price — of a security from
one period to the next.
On a very short-term basis, a line chart is definitely a proper choice for decision making. However, since no other information is displayed, attempting
to formulate any sort of trading strategy from a line chart of price action
wouldn’t be a worthwhile venture.
Figure 2-5 is a line chart of three months of daily closing prices for a stock.

Figure 2-5:
A line chart.

Bar charts
A traditional bar chart contains bars that represent price action from period
to period. Each bar is basically a vertical line that shows the difference
between the high and the low of the period. The top of the bar is the high and
the bottom is the low. The distance between the two is similar to the wick of
a candle on a candlestick chart. (The wick is discussed more in Chapter 1.)
The finishing touch on a bar chart is a little notch on the left of the bar that’s
made to mark where the security closed. Figure 2-6 is a single bar that normally appears on a bar chart.

27

06_178089 ch02.qxp

28

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 28

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
Figure 2-7 is a chart of the same data that appeared in the line chart in the
previous section (Figure 2-5).
Bar charts have been the industry standard for some time, but are quickly
being replaced by candlestick charts. When the Wall Street Journal starts
using a new charting convention (as it has with candlestick charts), the
convention is considered to be the industry standard.

High

Close
Figure 2-6:
A single
bar from a
bar chart. Low

Figure 2-7:
A run-ofthe-mill
bar chart.

06_178089 ch02.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 29

Chapter 2: Getting to Know Candlestick Charts

Point and figure charts
Point and figure charting is another type of stock charting that’s been around
so long it deserves a mention when covering methods of charting. A point and
figure chart is composed of x’s and o’s drawn on a sheet of graph paper. This
chart isn’t constructed using a set time frame but is instead based on reversals
of price. The x’s make up a series of up moves without a certain price reversal,
while the o’s represent a series of down moves without a price reversal.
Figure 2-8 is a point and figure depiction of the same data that composes the
line and bar charts in the two previous sections. The figure values each square
with one point and adds a new column with a change of direction of at least
two points, based on the close. For example, if day one has a closing price of
75 and day two has a closing price of 78, you draw x’s from 75 to 78. If on day
three the closing price is 76 — a 2-point reversal — a new column is added,
and o’s are placed in the 77 and 76 squares. If the price stays in the 76 to 77
range for a few days, no changes are made to the chart.
Point and figure charts are unique because they purely reflect price moves.
Because time isn’t factored in, you don’t need to update the chart if a stock
stays at a certain price for some time. On the other hand, when a price
trades between two prices several times — bouncing between 50 and 55, for
example — a point and figure chart offers a very clear display of those levels,
which are called support levels and resistance levels. In this case, 50 is the
support level and 55 is the resistance level.
If you can properly recognize support and resistance levels, you can potentially
use that knowledge to make a tidy profit. Using the example in the preceding
graph, if you can buy at 50 and sell at 55 several times over, the returns can be
astounding. So why aren’t point and figure charts right up there with candlesticks in terms of usefulness? It’s simple: Support and resistance levels show
up well on candlestick charts too, and candlesticks also contain a variety of
other information.
Although interesting and unique, point and figure charting is really a throwback to a time when stock prices were charted based on the closing prices
found daily in the financial press and were meticulously kept by hand. Its use
has fallen by the wayside with the advent of technology.

29

06_178089 ch02.qxp

30

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 30

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

x
x
x
x

o

x

o

x
x

Figure 2-8:
A point and
figure chart.

x

o

x

o

o

x

o

o

x

o

x

x

x

07_178089 ch03.qxp

2/27/08

9:42 PM

Page 31

Chapter 3

Building a Base of Candlestick
Chart Knowledge
In This Chapter
 Understanding the basic components of candlestick charts
 Working with additional information on candlestick charts

T

o take full advantage of candlestick charts, you must understand how
they’re constructed. From the basic pieces of information used to generate a candlestick to the various additions and extra pieces of data that can be
tacked onto a chart, you need to know just what you’re looking at before you
can make wise trading decisions. You need to be familiar with candlestick
nuts and bolts before delving into their interpretations and uses.
In this chapter, I offer a solid foundation of candlestick know-how. I start with
the data that goes into constructing individual candlesticks. Although candlesticks can represent the action of a security over a wide variety of time periods, the basic information used to build them is the same. I also cover the
other pieces of data that are commonly included on a candlestick chart —
added features that enhance the usefulness and readability of the chart.

Constructing a Candlestick:
A Core of Four
For any security, each day of trading includes four key components in terms
of data: opening price, closing price, highest price traded on the day, and
lowest price traded on the day. These four pieces of data are needed to
construct the individual bars that make up candlestick charts. Several bars,
created by using the data from several days or periods, are generated in
succession to produce a full candlestick chart.

07_178089 ch03.qxp

32

2/27/08

9:42 PM

Page 32

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
Candlestick charts may be applied to the performance of securities over a
variety of time periods. I use them on charts from as short-term as five minutes per bar to as long-term as a week per bar. A five-minute chart may be
applied to a day or two of activity, while the weekly chart would be applied
to a period of several years. Although those are two vastly different time
frames, a candlestick chart is appropriate for both, and candlesticks would
work for many different time periods in between.

Price on the open
The first piece of data used to construct a candlestick is the opening price for
the day. For stocks, in most cases, it’s the official opening price on a specified
primary exchange.

Recording an opening price on a candlestick
On a single candlestick, the thin vertical line is the wick, and the thick part
in the middle is the candle. The opening price on a single candlestick will
always be either the top or bottom of the candle, and it’s created on the chart
using the price scale on the chart’s vertical axis. A hollow (white) candle is
bullish, meaning that the opening price is lower than the closing price. (See
Chapter 2.) If you see a hollow candle, the bottom of the candle is the opening price. Conversely, a filled-in (black) candle is bearish, meaning that the
opening price is higher than the closing price. In that case, the top of the
candle is the opening price.

Dealing with the challenges of pinning down an opening price
Because many securities are now trading on multiple exchanges or electronic
trading networks, pinning down an exact opening price can be difficult, which
makes constructing a candle a difficult endeavor.
For example, I was recently trying to trade a stock on which very significant —
and misinterpreted — news came out before the opening of the trading day.
The stock had closed the day before at $48 per share, but was trading on one
of the electronic communication networks (ECNs) two hours before it was to
open on the New York Stock Exchange at $45 per share. Over the next two
hours, the breaking news was better understood, and the stock started to
trade higher. It actually opened at about $51 per share. Although several
thousand shares traded between $45 and $51 in the two hours leading up to
the opening price, the official open for the day was $51.
For futures contracts on commodities — agreements between two parties to
buy or sell a certain product on a predefined date (see the nearby sidebar,
“Focus on futures” for more details) — attempting to determine the opening
price for a day can be even more difficult. Many futures markets now trade
both electronically and on a trading floor. A perfect example is Japanese Yen.

07_178089 ch03.qxp

2/27/08

9:42 PM

Page 33

Chapter 3: Building a Base of Candlestick Chart Knowledge

What’s the stock market?
When most people think of the stock market,
they picture stock traders in brightly colored
jackets shouting and hand signaling orders in a
giant room. This is actually how the commodity
markets function. The stock market, or at least
the floor of the New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE), is more like a giant bank lobby with
each stock having a particular place or post
where transactions for that stock take place.
The person in charge of manning this post is
known as the specialist, and his job is to facilitate trading of a particular stock between the
multitudes of buyers and sellers in an orderly
manner.
A specialist takes all the buy-and-sell orders
and attempts to match them up. In some cases,
when an abundance of sellers exists but not
enough buyers, the specialist may help with
orderly trading by buying shares from the sellers. When there are several buyers and not
enough sellers, the specialist may act as a
seller to keep the market orderly. Specialists
also assimilate buy-and-sell orders before the
official market opening to determine an opening
price, and they do the same thing on the close.
When I began my career 15 years ago, virtually
all stock trading in the United States was done
either on the floors of the NYSE or the American

Stock Exchange (AMEX), or through a network
of brokers known as the National Association
of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation
System (NASDAQ). If I wanted to buy shares of
IBM, which traded on the NYSE, I called a
broker and gave him an order. He forwarded my
order to someone working on the exchange
floor, or in some cases directly to the specialist.
If I were to purchase shares of Microsoft,
(symbol MSFT), which traded on the NASDAQ,
I called a broker who either traded directly with
me, matched me with a seller, or traded with
another broker through the NASDAQ market.
Today there are multiple venues for those
stocks traded on the listed exchanges and
those on the NASDAQ. The broker I use for my
personal stock trades has an automated feature
that automatically selects the best market for
the order I enter. I never know anymore if my
orders go to the exchange floor, and as time
goes on, fewer and fewer of my orders make it
there. Instead, the orders are traded over an
electronic communication network set up for
trading stocks without using the primary
exchange or the specialist. Brokers and large
institutions use these networks to trade stocks
without sending the orders to the floor of the primary exchange.
