
Range—The high price of the day minus the low price of the day. See
also True Range.

High

_~ Range

Low

Sell Short—A position that seeks to profit if a market drops in value. See
“Selling Short: The Art of Playing Both Sides of The Market” in this Ap-
pendix for more details.

Stop Order—For buys, an order placed above the current stock price that
becomes a market order if the stock trades at or above the order price.
For sells, an order placed below the current price of the stock that be-
comes a market order if the market trades at or below the order price.
Stop orders are normally used to help control risk but can also be used to
enter positions.

Strong Close—The stock closes within the top 25% of its range.

gop 25%

High

Low

217



a
218 Appendix

Trailing Stop—A stop adjusted higher for long positions or lower for
short positions as the market moves in the favor of the trade. Used to
help lock in profits for when the market reverses.

\

Trailing
| — Stop

Protective
Stop

| Buy
| \ stopped
| Out

True Range—Conceived by Welles Wilder and used in the ADX calcula-
tion, the true range is the same as range except that gaps (if they exist)
are used in the calculation.

True range is the largest value (in absolute terms) of:
1. today’s high and today’s low
2. today’s high and yesterday’s close

3. today’s low and yesterday’s close

True _- _~ Range

Range

“Gap



Appendix 219
Uptrend—A series of higher highs and higher lows. See Chapter 3, Trend

Qualifiers for more details.

Higher

Highs NS

| Higher

Lows

Volatility—How much prices fluctuate over time.



a
220 Appendix

I originally published the following article on shorting stocks on TradingMarkets.com in January
1999. To my surprise, it quickly became one of the most popular articles and has since been
re-published by other Internet sites. Special thanks to Larry Connors, CEO of
Trading Markets.com, for allowing me to re-publish this article.

SHORTING STOCKS: THE ART OF PLAYING
BOTH SIDES OF THE MARKET

To the public, selling stocks short can be an intimidating and confusing
undertaking. Unfortunately, by sticking exclusively to the long side of the
market, average traders deny themselves the possibility of improving
their returns.

Professional traders, by contrast, know playing both sides of the market
is a crucial element of long-term stock trading success. We will try to de-
mystify the process by explaining what short selling is and how you can
benefit from incorporating it into your trading plan. We’ll also show you
the rules that regulate short selling, and how to know which stocks to
avoid.

REVERSING THE RULES

When many people think of stock trading they automatically imagine
buying a stock and hoping it goes up. When it does, they envision selling
it and pocketing a profit. For example, suppose XYZ company was trad-
ing at $10 per share. You would buy your shares at $10 (a “long” posi-
tion) and sell them later at $12. Your profit from the trade would be the
difference between your entry and exit prices: $12 — $10, a $2-per-share
profit. Nothing complicated here.

But what about when a market is falling? Short selling is simply a matter
of reversing the process described in the previous paragraph to profit
when a stock drops. For instance, suppose XYZ was trading at $12 but
you thought the stock would drop and you sold instead of bought—that
is, you “shorted” the market. If you later bought your shares back at $10,
you would still have a $2-per-share profit.

Your trade consists of the same transactions (a buy and a sell) and nets
the same profit. The only difference is that in the case of the short sale,
you sell the stock first and buy it back later—hopefully at a lower price
than where you originally sold it.



Appendix

WHY SHORT STOCKS?

The advantage to selling stocks short is simple: Bull markets do not last
forever, and even in the longest bull market there are corrections that last
from as little as a several minutes to as long as several months. Profes-
sional traders seize these downside opportunities and profit by shorting
stocks. Therefore, if you want to make a long-term living trading the
stock market, it is to your advantage to add short selling to your toolbox.

WHAT IT MEANS TO SELL SHORT

In a short selling situation, you enter a position without owing the stock.
How can you sell something you do not own? The answer is, you can’t.
You have to borrow it before you can sell it. For example, suppose you
borrowed what you think is a cheap plate from a neighbor. Now suppose
someone was visiting you and offered you $100 for the plate. You recog-
nize that $100 is much more than this plate is worth, so you sell it to
him. But now you owe your neighbor his plate—you are, in essence,
short one plate. As long as you can replace it for less than $100, you
make a profit.

Many people have a problem with selling before buying-it just seems to
fly in the face of what is “natural.” But the short-selling process is really
no different than when you order something and place a deposit. The
salesman to whom you paid the deposit is “short” the product he owes
you. As long as he can fill your order for less than what you have agreed
to pay for it, he makes a profit. From the salesman’s perspective, the de-
posit ensures you will keep up your end of the bargain.

Short selling stocks is a similar process. If you believe a stock is over-val-
ued, you put up a deposit (to cover potential losses) and instruct your
broker to sell the shares short. To do this, he borrows the shares from an-
other account and sells them in the market. You are now short the stock.
As long as you can buy it back for less than what you sold it, you will
make a profit.

RULES AND REGULATIONS

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has established specific
rules regulating the short sale of stocks. First, you must have a mar-
8in/short account with your broker. Second, the shares for the stock you
wish to short must be available to borrow. Third, you can only sell short

221



a
222 Appendix

on an up tick. Finally, you must have (and maintain) at least 50 percent
(or more, see below) of the stock’s value in your account.

Let's break it down:

1. You must have a margin and short account agreement with your broker.

A “margin” account allows you to use stocks you own as collateral; a
“short” account allows you to short stocks. This agreement also allows
your broker to “borrow” shares from you should other traders wish to
short a stock you own.

2. The stock must be available to borrow.

Your broker must be able to borrow the shares from someone else’s ac-
count. If he cannot, no short sale is allowed. Shorting stocks without first
borrowing the shares is known as “naked shorting” and is illegal.

3. The stock must trade on an up tick.

This means that the stock must tick higher before they will allow you to
.short the stock. If you attempt to short a stock that trades at $50, $49 3/4,
$49 1/2, and $49 5/8, your short trade would not be executed until the
first higher trade in the sequence ($49 5/8). (This rule was instituted to
keep short sellers from manipulating the market.) You also can short sell
on an “equal tick” if the preceding trade was an up tick. For example, if
the stock traded at $50, $49 3/4, $49 1/2, $49 5/8, and again at $49 5/8,
you could short sell on the second trade at 49 5/8-you would not have to
wait for the stock to up tick again to 49 11/16. Note: as of late 2000, this
rule may be repealed.

4. You must maintain at least 50 percent of the stock's value in your
account.

This deposit is required in order to cover potential losses. Just as a sales-
man requires a deposit on something you special order, the brokers (and
the SEC) require that you maintain at least 50 percent of the stock’s value
in your account in case your position turns into a loser. If the stock be-
gins to rise you would have to add more money to your account (or exit
the position). Conversely, if the stock began to drop you could remove
excess cash (or use it for other transactions) as long as you maintained at
least the 50 percent margin in your account.

While 50 percent is the absolute minimum deposit that brokerages will
accept, some brokers may require a larger deposit. Also, because volatile
stocks are riskier, brokerages may require additional margin on these is-
sues for extra insurance.



Appendix 223

SHORT-SELLING STRATEGIES

In general, the majority of patterns that work on the long side of the
market also work (in reverse) on the short side. For instance, just as from
new highs often present good buy opportunities, pullbacks from lows of-
ten present opportunities to sell short.

STOCKS TO AVOID

Just because something appears overvalued does not mean it cannot go
higher. Many traders were devastated by shorting “overvalued” biotech
stocks in the early 1990s and by shorting “overvalued” Internet stocks in
the late 1990s. This is not to say you should avoid hot sectors all to-
gether; it is just a warning to be cautious and realistic about the possibil-
ity of sustained stock rallies.

You should always ask your broker if a particular stock you are inter-
ested in is hard to borrow. Avoid such stocks because you could easily
get caught in what is known as a “short squeeze,” which occurs when a
stock rallies and the short sellers are forced to cover (exit) their positions.
This demand far exceeds the supply and pushes the stock much higher.
If you believe a hard-to-borrow stock is headed lower, you are much
better off buying a put option.

SUMMARY

Shorting stocks allows you to enter the market as a seller and profit
when a stock declines. Your broker “borrows” the stock from someone
else’s margin/short account and sells it in the market for you. As long as
you buy back the shares at a lower price, you will profit.

To short stocks you must first establish a margin/short account with
your broker. The stock you wish to short must be available to borrow
and you must maintain at least 50 percent or more of the stock’s value in
your account. Also, you can sell stock short only on an up tick.

Professional traders sell stocks short because they know markets are
prone to corrections and longer-term declines. Many of the techniques
that work on the long side of the market also work (in reverse) on the
short side. Finally, avoid hard-to-borrow stocks and be cautious about
shorting stocks in a hot sector.

Copyright © TradingMarkets.com 1999, Any reproduction of this article or any information on this site with-
press written permission from TradingMarkets.com is forbidden.



224

Appendix

CAPTURING TRENDS WITH THE ADX

The Average Directional Movement Index (ADX) measures the trend
strength of a market but not its direction. The higher the ADX reading,
the stronger the trend, regardless if it is up or down.

The ADX, which was developed by Welles Wilder, uses calculations
called the positive directional movement index (+DMI) and minus direc-
tional movement index (-DMI) to measure price movement. Although
the entire ADX calculation is somewhat lengthy and complex, under-
standing the basis of the calculation—directional movement—is fairly
straightforward and will help you understand how the indicator works.

Below we will show you how to determine the directional movement
and interpret ADX readings.

UNDERSTANDING DIRECTIONAL MOVEMENT

Directional movement is essentially the part of a price bar that falls out-
side of the prior price bar’s range. In terms of a daily chart, price action
above yesterday's high is positive directional movement (+DM), while
anything below yesterday's low is negative directional movement (-DM).



a
Appendix 225

FIGURE A.1

(b) -.--

— Positive Directional Movemem (+DM)

Yesterday

\

(a)----

() ----

— Negative Directional Movement (-DM)

(@) ----

Directional Movement (DM). Price action above yesterday’s high is +DM while that below yester-
day’s low is -DM.

In Figure A.1, notice the box a-b above yesterday’s price. For today, any-
thing above yesterday’s high (for instance, if the market trades from a to
b is +DM. Conversely, anything trading below yesterday’s low (for in-
stance, if the market trades from c to dis -DM.



226 Appendix

FIGURE A.2

Yesterday ~~

Plus Directional Movement (+DM).

Notice in Figure A.2 that the price bar trades above the prior price bar
(from a to b). This distance is the +DM. Referring to Figure A.3, the range
of the bar that trades below the prior day’s low (from c to d) is the -DM.



Appendix 227

FIGURE A.3

Yesterday

Minus Directional Movement (-DM).

Obviously, not every trading day sets up like Figures A.2 or A.3. There-
fore, we must consider two other possibilities: inside days and outside
days. An inside day occurs when the entire day’s range is “contained”
within the prior day’s high and low. In other words, today’s high is less
than yesterday’s high and today’s low is, greater than yesterdays low. For
example, if XYZ traded yesterday between 50 and 60 and trades today
between 51 and 59, then today is an inside day. In Figure A.4, notice
there is no DM (either + or -) because the range doesn’t trade above (for
a +DM reading) or below (for a -DM reading).



228 Appendix

FIGURE A.4

(a)----

~~ Inside day = Ho DM

() ----

Inside days have no Directional Movement value.

An outside day occurs when today’s high is higher than yesterday's high
and today’s low is lower than yesterday’s low. For instance, if XYZ
traded between 50 and 55 yesterday and between 49 and 56 today, today
is an outside day because today’s range is “outside” yesterday’s. Because
there can only be one directional movement (either + or -) per trading
day, the outside day presents an interesting problem because it contains
both +DM (today’s high greater than yesterday's high) and -DM (today’s
low less than yesterday’s low). Because we are looking to quantify move-
ment in price, on an outside day the largest move—either the difference
between today’s high and yesterday’s high or the difference between yes-
terday’s low and today’s low—is the directional movement. This is illus-
trated in Figure 5. In the rare case that the move above yesterday’s high
is equal to the move below yesterday’s low then there would be no DM
for that day.



Appendix 22¢

FIGURE A.5

Today
C0) ---

-- =f. -(a)----

Yesterday a

 putside day — take the largest

of +DMor -DM

-_— — (c} meme
-- -w@u_._t “on

For outside days, the Directional Movement is the greater of the +DM or the -DM.

DIRECTIONAL MOVEMENT (DM) SUMMARY:

1. Today’s high > yesterday's high (and today’s low > yesterday’s low) =
+DM

2. Today’s low < yesterday’s low (and today’s high < yesterday’s high) =
-DM

3. Inside day (today’s low > yesterday’s low and today’s high < yester-
day’s high) = no DM (either +DM or - DM)

4. For outside days, take the larger of today’s high - yesterday's high or

yesterday’s low - today’s low. If these figures are equal, there is no
DM.

To make the directional movement readings meaningful for all markets,
Wilder divided the DM by the market's true range. This creates a direc-



230 Appendix

FIGURE A.6

tional movement indicator (DMI) in a form of a ratio and allows for mean-
ingful comparisons regardless of various market prices. In other words,
the DMI of a $5 stock can be compared to the DMI of a $100 stock.

Because one day does not a trend make, the DMI is then averaged over a
number of days. The magnitude of the trend reflected by the ADX—lon-
ger-term or shorter-term—depends on the number of days in this calcula-
tion. Wilder’s default, and the number widely used by charting software
packages (and TradingMarkets.com), is 14 days.

The Average Directional Movement Index (ADX) is then calculated by
taking the difference between the smoothed +DMI and -DMI calcula-
tions. It’s obvious the ADX calculation is very complex, but if you under-
stand the directional movement detailed previously, you'll have a good
understanding of how the indicator works and enough background to
use it.

‘ Amazon.com Inc-Daily

‘Amazon.com Inc-Daily 01/08/99 C=160.250 +1.407

‘+180
F140

+100

Amazon.com, daily. +DMI greater than -DMI reflects an uptrending market. Source: Omega Research.



Appendix 231]

The ADX measures trend strength but not direction. The direction of the
market is determined by comparing the +DMI to the -DMI. If the +DMI
is greater than the -DMI the market is in an uptrend; if the ~DMI is
greater than the +DMI the market is in a downtrend. Referring to Figure
A.6, notice that the +DMI is greater than the -DMI signifying and
uptrend. Also, notice that the ADX rose to relatively high levels (above
30) as the trend remained strong and the stock quadrupled in value. On
the downside, in Figure A.7, notice that the -DMI is greater than the
+DMI as the ADX remained above relatively high levels (above 30) as the
stock continued to decline.

FIGURE A.7

DM_B.42 45.29.5154. a ———
i BAZ 45.23 51.84 “OM ADK... 55

ee OR RA PIO 50

Iridium, daily. A downtrend is reflected by a -DMI reading greater than the +DMI reading. Note
that the ADX reading, signifying trend strength, is high. Source: Omega Research.

One word of caution: Many trading books would have you believe you
can simply buy a market when the +DMI crosses above the -DMI and
sell the market when the -DMI crosses below the +DMI. They go on to



232

Appendix

show well-chosen examples where you could have followed this simple
system and made large sums of money. However, nothing could be fur-
ther from the truth. What they fail to show you is how much money you
would lose as the DMIs cross back and forth.

USING THE ADX

High ADX readings reflect a strongly trending market. Conversely, low
ADX numbers reflect non-trending markets. The minimum reading to
determine a “trend” is subject to debate. In general, 14-day ADX read-
ings above 30 suggest a strongly trending market. Those who only wish
to trade the strongest of markets may look for readings of 35 or higher.
The trade-off here is that the stronger the number, the longer the trend
has been in place. Therefore, much of the original move (that caused the
ADxX to rise) is missed. Those who look to catch early trends may look
for markets with an ADX of 25 or higher. Not surprisingly, the trade-off
here is that these markets are more prone to failure because they have yet
to “prove” themselves.

The advantage of the ADX is that it provides a standardized way of mea-
suring trend. This lends itself well to computerized scans for finding
trending markets (i.e., the TradingMarkets.com ADX Search and Filter).
These markets can then be watched for potential entries signals from
breakouts, pullbacks, cup-and-handle patterns, and so forth. Coun-
ter-trend traders, those who tend to fade markets (trade opposite to the
trend) may look to trade markets that are in a trading range or no
trending as measured by a low ADX reading.

SUMMARY

The ADX is based on the directional movement, positive or negative of a
market. The positive directional movement is the portion of today’s
range that is above yesterday’s high. The negative directional movement
is the portion of today’s range that falls below yesterday’s low.

Only one directional movement is calculated for each day. Therefore, if
there are both +DMI and -DMI for a given day (i.e., an outside day) then
the larger of the two becomes the directional movement. If today’s range
does not trade above or below the prior day (i.e, an inside day) then
there is no directional movement for that day.



Appendix 233

The ADX is calculated by taking the difference of the average directional
movement values over a given time period. The ADX measures trend but
not direction. The direction of the market is determined by comparing
the +DMI to the -DMI. If the +DMI is greater than the -DMI the market
is uptrending; if the -DMI is greater than the +DMI the market is
downtrending. High ADX readings suggest a market is in a strong trend.



Other Books from
M. GORDON
PUBLISHING GROUP
www.mgordonpub.com

DAVE LANDRY ON SWING TRADING SOFTWARE ADD-ON MODULE:
FOR OMEGA TRADESTATION AND SUPERCHARTS 4.0 AND 2000i

STUART OKOROFSKY

This software add-on module for TradeStation and SuperCharts users takes advantage
of the ChartScanner (Version 4.0) or Workspace Assistant (Version 2000i) to scan your
database of stocks for setups based on the trading strategies from the Dave Landry on
Swing Trading book. A report is produced listing the name of the stock or commodity,
the symbol, the name of the strategy detecting the setup, the recommended entry price
and the recommended initial protective stop price.

1 - 3.5” DISKETTE AND INSTRUCTIONS $175.00

HIT AND RUN TRADING
The Short-Term Stock Traders’ Bible

JEFF COOPER

Written by professional equities trader, Jeff Cooper, this best-selling manual teaches traders
how to day-trade and short-term trade stocks. Jeff’s strategies identify daily the ideal stocks to
trade and point out the exact entry and protective exit points. Most trades risk 1 point or less
and last from a few hours to a few days.

Among the strategies taught are:

* Stepping In Front Of Size—You will be taught how to identify when a large
institution is desperately attempting to buy or sell a large block of stock. You will
then be taught how to step in front of this institution before the stock explodes or
implodes. This strategy many times leads to gains from 1/4 point to 4 points within
minutes.

* 1-2-3-4s—Rapidly moving stocks tend to pause for a few days before they explode
again. You will be taught the three-day setup that consistently triggers solid gains
within days.

* Expansion Breakouts—Most breakouts are false! You will learn the one breakout
pattern that consistently leads to further gains. This pattern alone is worth the price of
the manual.



* Also, you will learn how to trade market explosions (Boomers), how to trade
secondary offerings, how to trade Slingshots, and you will learn a number of other
profitable strategies that will make you a stronger trader.
