ETFs are basically mutual funds that trade like a stock, but offer transparency, tax efficiency, and lower expanses.
While mutual funds set their prices or net asset value (NAV) once a day,
the prices of ETFs jump and down throughout the day, just like a stock
price. Anything you can do with a stock, you can do with an ETF, such as
selling short and trading options.
ETFs are more tax-friendly than mutual funds because of what happens
under the hood. When market makers need to create or redeem shares, they
round up the underlying stocks and trade them with the provider for new
ETF shares. They do the opposite to redeem ETF shares for the underlying
stocks. No money changes hands because the shares are traded in-kind.
Unlike mutual funds, ETFs are not affected by shareholder redemptions.
If too many investors pull money out of mutual funds, fund managers may
be forced to sell the stocks they hold to raise cash, thereby incurring a taxable event. ETFs keep trading to a minimum, so there are few taxable gains.
ETFs charge management fees of anywhere from 0.10% to 0.95%. That’s
considerably smaller than those of mutual funds, which charge 1.02% on
average.1
However, with a good mutual fund, you’re getting a top-notch manager
who makes investment decisions for you. An ETF requires that you pull the
buy and sell triggers.
Don’t kid yourself that the diversification in an ETF will somehow protect you. Take the SPDR Financial Sector (XLF). In the banking meltdown
in 2008, this ETF plunged 57%.
The SPDR (SPY), which tracks the S&P 500, was the first U.S.-listed
ETF. It started trading on the Amex in 1993. The Nasdaq 100, known today
as PowerShares QQQQ Trust (QQQQ), and the Diamonds Trust (DIA),
which tracks the Dow Jones Industrial Average, were both launched in the
late 1990s.
Today, there are ETFs tracking not only benchmark indexes, but also
bonds, commodities, currencies, derivatives, carbon credits, investment
strategies such as low-P/E stocks, and more. In 2007 and 2008, ETF
launches were what IPOs were to the Internet bubble. Providers floated
ETFs based on esoteric indexes that diced sectors into ridiculous slices such
as Wal-Mart suppliers, spin-offs, companies with patents, those that don’t
do any business with Sudan, and those engaged in “sinful” activities like
gambling, alcohol, and tobacco.
1

Investment Company Fact Book (Investment Company Institute, 2008).

401

402 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
ETFs have changed the way many people trade, although not always for
the better. They offer average investors access to foreign markets such as
India, which limits foreign investors. They also let you trade commodities
and currencies without having to open a separate futures or foreign
exchange trading account. And the advent of inverse ETFs lets those with
accounts that prohibit shorting to put on a short position by buying long.
Since February 2004, ETFs have accounted for from 25% to as much as
44% of the monthly trading volume on the NYSE Arca.
Top-Down Selection

IBD lists the 350 ETFs with the highest 50-day average volume and categorizes them by U.S. Stock Indexes, Sector/Industry, Global, Bonds/Fixed
Income, and Commodities and Currencies. Within each category, they’re
listed by our proprietary Relative Strength rating in descending order.
Ranking ETFs by RS highlights the leaders within each category and helps
you compare them. The tables also list year-to-date return, Accumulation/Distribution rating, dividend yields, the prior day’s closing price, the
price change, and the change in volume versus the daily average.
Aside from reading IBD’s ETF coverage, monitor the “Winners &
Losers” table on the exchange-traded funds page. Every day we list the
leaders and laggards over a given time period, which we rotate daily:
Monday: one-week percentage change
Tuesday: one-month percentage change
Wednesday: three-month percentage change
Thursday: six-month percentage change
Friday: twelve-month percentage change

19

• CHAPTE R •

Improving the Management
of Pension and
Institutional Portfolios

Having managed individual accounts, pension funds, and mutual funds, as well

as having dealt with many top portfolio managers, I have a few observations
about professional money management.
Individual investors need to know as much as they can about institutional money managers. After all, these managers represent the “I” in our
CAN SLIM formula and account for the majority of important price
moves. They also exert far greater influence on prices than specialists, market makers, day traders, or advisory services do. I’ve learned from my grand
share of mistakes in the past . . . and that’s how all of us learn and become
wiser about investing. Maybe my hands-on experience with all sides of the
market through many economic cycles will offer some insights. However,
I’ve never worked a day on Wall Street. That’s probably a big plus.

Institutional Investors: An Overview
The mutual fund you own or the pension fund you participate in is quarterbacked by an institutional money manager. You have a vested interest in
knowing whether those managers are doing a good job, but understanding
how they do their job is also of value.
Today’s markets are dominated by such pros, and most institutional buying
is done with 100% cash rather than by using borrowed money (margin). As a
result, you might have a somewhat sounder foundation for most securities
than you would if speculative margin accounts ruled our stock markets. For
example, in 1929, the public was heavily involved in the market, speculating

403

404 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
with 10% cash and 90% margin. This is one of the reasons why so many people got hurt when the market collapsed . . . they had too much debt.
However, margin debt as a percentage of the market capitalization of
NYSE stocks also reached an extreme level at the end of March 2000.
Banks in 1929 also carried excessive mortgage debt. This time around,
banks had lower-quality mortgage debt. However, this lower-quality debt
was strongly pushed and pursued by our government, something the politicians don’t want to admit as they investigate and try to blame everyone else
rather than take responsibility for their own significant role in creating the
subprime loan financial crisis.
Professional investors usually do not panic as easily as the public can after
prolonged declines. In fact, institutional buying support often comes in
when prices are down. The severe problems the stock market encountered
from 1969 to 1975 had nothing to do with institutional or public investors.
They were the result of economic mistakes and bad policy decisions
made by politicians in Washington, D.C. The stock market is like a giant
mirror that reflects basic conditions, political management (or mismanagement), and the psychology of the country.
Stiff competition among money managers and close scrutiny of their performance records has probably made today’s best institutional investment
managers a little more proficient than they were 40 or 50 years ago.

The First Datagraph Books Evolve into WONDA
One of the first products we developed for institutional investors was the
O’Neil Database Datagraph books, which contain extremely detailed charts
on thousands of publicly traded companies. They were the first of their kind
and represented an innovation in the institutional investment world.
We were able to produce these books at timely weekly intervals, updating
them at the market close every Friday. These comprehensive books were
delivered to institutional money managers over the weekend in time for
Monday’s market open. This quick turnaround (for its time) was achieved
not only because of the equity database we compiled and maintained on a
daily basis, but also because of our high-speed microfilm plotting equipment. When we started out in 1964, this costly computer machinery was so
new no one knew how to get a graph out of it. Once this barrier was cleared,
it was possible to turn out complex, updated graphs through an automated
process, at the rate of one per second.
Today, the technology has advanced so far that we can generate the most
complex stock datagraphs with hardly a second thought, and the O’Neil
Database books have become a mainstay at many of the leading mutual fund

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

organizations around the globe. Initially, each Datagraph displayed price and
volume information, along with a few technical and fundamental data items.
Today, each Datagraph displays 96 fundamental and 26 technical items, and
these are available for more than 8,000 stocks in 197 proprietary industry
groups. This means an analyst or portfolio manager can quickly compare any
company to any other, either in the same industry or in the entire database.
We still offer the O’Neil Database books, with their 600 pages of Datagraphs, to our institutional clients as part of our overall institutional investment business. With the advent of the Internet and highly sophisticated
computer technology, however, these old-technology, hard-copy books are
being replaced by our newest and most innovative flagship service,
WONDA. WONDA stands for William O’Neil Direct Access, and it provides all our institutional clients with a direct interface to the O’Neil Database. The O’Neil Database now contains more than 3,000 technical and
fundamental data items on more than 8,000 U.S. stocks, and WONDA
allows users to screen and monitor the database using any combination of
these data items.
We originally developed WONDA as an in-house system that we could use
to manage our own money. In the 1990s, after years of real-time use, refinement, and upgrading, the service was rolled out as the newest William O’Neil
+ Co. service, available to the professional and institutional community.
Because WONDA was conceived and created by our in-house portfolio
managers and computer programmers, the service was designed with the
serious institutional money manager in mind. Institutional money managers
must frequently make rapid decisions while under fire during the market
day, and WONDA offers a wide range of features that allows instantaneous
access to and monitoring of crucial stock data and related information as the
market is moving.
Some of our institutional clients who use WONDA say they can “practically print money” with the system. These clients run the gamut from very
conservative value-type managers to hedge fund managers. Clearly, no computer system can print money, but that type of comment from some of our
biggest and best institutional clients points out the functionality and effectiveness of WONDA.

Interpreting Dome Petroleum’s Datagraph
One of the secrets that you, as a winning individual investor, should never
forget is that you want to buy a stock before its potential is obvious to others.
When numerous research reports show up, it might actually be time to consider selling. If it’s value is obvious to almost everyone, it’s probably too late.

405

30 Positive Factors on Dome Petroleum in November 1977

406

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

The accompanying Datagraph of Dome Petroleum has been marked up to
highlight a few of the ways we interpret and use this display of fundamanetal
and technical information. We suggested Dome to institutions in November,
1977 at $48. Fund managers didn’t like the idea, so we bought the stock ourselves. Dome became one of our biggest winners at that time. This and the
following case studies are real-life examples of how it’s actually done.

The Pic ’N’ Save Story
In July 1977, we suggested a stock that no institution would touch: Pic ’N’
Save. Most institutional managers felt the company was entirely too small
because it traded only 500 shares a day, so we began purchasing it several
months later. We had the successful historical computer models of Kmart in
1962, when it traded only 1,000 shares a day, and of Jack Eckerd Drug in
April 1967, when it traded 500 shares a day, so we knew that, based on its
excellent fundamentals and historical precedent, Pic ’N’ Save could become
a real winner.
Precedent was on our side. Both Kmart and Eckerd had become big winners in those early days after they were discovered, and average daily trading volume increased steadily as a result. The same thing occurred with Pic
’N’ Save. This little, unknown company, headquartered in Carson, California, turned in a steady and remarkable performance for seven or eight years.
In fact, Pic ’N’ Save’s pretax margins, return on equity, annual earnings
growth rate, and debt-to-equity ratio were at that time superior to those of
the other, more widely accepted institutional growth favorites—such as
Wal-Mart Stores—that we had also recommended.
I’ve always believed in finding an outstanding stock and buying it at every
point on the way up. That’s almost what happened with Pic ’N’ Save. We
bought it almost every point or two on the way up for several years. I liked
the company because it provided a way for families of meager means to buy
most of the necessities of life at exceptionally low prices. All told, we bought
Pic ’N’ Save on 285 different days and held it for 7½ years. When we finally
sold it, while it was still advancing, our sale did not affect the market. Our
early purchases showed more than a 10-fold gain.

Radio Shack’s Charles Tandy
We first uncovered Tandy Corp. in 1967, but we were able to convince only
two institutions to buy the stock. Among the reasons given for not buying it
were that it didn’t pay a dividend and that Charles Tandy was just a promoter.
(Qualcomm was another stock that was considered to be too promotional

407

408 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
from 1996 to 1998. We picked it up straight off the weekly chart at the very
end of 1998. It became the leading winner of 1999, advancing 20-fold.)
When I met Tandy in his office in downtown Fort Worth, Texas, my reaction was very positive. He was a brilliant financial man who also happened to
be an outstanding salesman. He had innovative incentives, departmental
financial statements, and highly detailed daily computer reports on sales of
every item in every store by merchandise type, price, and category. His automated inventory and financial controls were almost unbelievable for that time.
After the stock tripled, Wall Street analysts started to acknowledge its
existence. There were even a few research reports noting Tandy as an
undervalued situation. Isn’t it strange how far some stocks have to go up
before they begin to look cheap to everyone?

The Size Problem in Portfolio Management
Many institutions think their main problem is size. Because they manage
billions of dollars in assets, there never seem to be enough big-capitalization
stocks they can buy or sell easily.
Let’s face it: size is definitely an obstacle. It’s easier to manage $10 million
than $100 million; it’s easier to manage $100 million than $1 billion; and $1
billion is a piece of cake compared to running $10 billion, $20 billion, or $30
billion. The size handicap simply means it’s harder to buy or get rid of a
huge stock holding in a small- or medium-sized company.
However, I believe it’s a mistake for institutions to restrict their investments solely to large-cap companies. In the first place, there definitely
aren’t always enough outstanding ones to invest in at any given time. Why
buy a slow-performing stock just because you can easily acquire a lot of it?
Why buy a big-cap stock with earnings that are growing only 10% to 12% a
year? If institutions limit themselves to large-cap investments, they could
miss out on the truly powerful growth in the stock market.
From 1981 to 1987, during the Reagan years, more than 3,000 dynamic,
up-and-coming companies incorporated or had initial public offerings of
stock. This was a first, and it was due mainly to several reductions in the capital gains tax during the early 1980s. Many of these small- to medium-sized
entrepreneurial concerns became enormous future market leaders and
were responsible for driving the unprecedented technology boom and big
expansion of new jobs in the 1980s and 1990s. Most of these names were
small, unknown companies at the time, but you’ll recognize them now as
some of the biggest names and greatest winning companies of that period.
This is just a partial list of the thousands of ingenious innovators that
reignited growth in America until the March 2000 market top.

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

Adobe Systems, Altera, America Online, American Power Conversion,
Amgen, Charles Schwab, Cisco Systems, Clear Channel Communications,
Compaq Computer, Comverse Technology, Costco, Dell Computer, Digital
Switch, EMC, Emulex, Franklin Resources, Home Depot, International
Game Technology, Linear Technology, Maxim Integrated Products, Micron
Technology, Microsoft, Novell, Novellus Systems, Oracle, PeopleSoft,
PMC-Sierra, Qualcomm, Sun Microsystems, UnitedHealth Group, US
Healthcare, Veritas Computer, Vitesse Semiconductor, Xilinx.
As mentioned earlier, our government should seriously consider lowering
the capital gains tax again and possibly shortening the time period to six
months to help fuel a new cycle of entrepreneurial start-up companies.
Today’s markets are more liquid than markets of the past, with the volume of many medium-sized stocks averaging 500,000 to 5,000,000 shares a
day. In addition, there is significant crossing of blocks between institutions,
which also aids liquidity. The institutional manager who handles billions of
dollars would be best advised to broaden his prospects to the 4,000 or more
innovative companies that are available. This is better than restricting his
activities to the same few hundred large, well-known, or legal-list-type companies. At one point, the research department of one of the nation’s largest
banks followed only 600 companies.
A sizable institution would probably be better off owning 500 companies
of all sizes than 100 large, mature, slow-moving companies. However,
mutual funds that concentrate in small-cap big performers have to be more
careful. If they have only a few hundred million to manage, this strategy
might be quite rewarding.
However, if these same funds, through their own success, grow to several
billion dollars, they can’t continue to concentrate solely in fast-moving, more
speculative smaller names. The reason is that these stocks perform well in one
phase and then later top; some of them never come back or lag in performance for years. Several Janus and Putnam funds ran into this problem during the late 1990s and early 2000s period. Success can breed overconfidence.
Pension funds can address size problems of their own by spreading their
money among several different managers with different investment styles.

Size Is Not the Key Problem
However, size isn’t the number one problem for institutional investors. Frequently, it’s their investment philosophies and methods that keep them from
fully capitalizing on the potential of the market.
Many institutions buy stocks based on their analysts’ opinions about the
supposed value of a company. Others mainly buy stories. Still others follow

409

410 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
economists’ top-down predictions of the broad sectors that ought to do well.
We believe working from the bottom up (concentrating on locating stocks
with winning characteristics) produces better results.
In the past, some institutions used the same standard names for many
years and rarely changed their approved lists. If a list had a hundred widely
accepted names, four or five might be added each year. Many decisions had
to be approved by investment committees. However, market decisions
made by committees are typically poor. To make matters worse, some committees had members who weren’t experienced money managers. This is
questionable investment policy.
Even today, some institutions’ investment flexibility is hamstrung by antiquated rules. Some more conservative institutions, for example, can’t buy
stocks that don’t pay dividends. This seems right out of the Dark Ages, since
many outstanding growth stocks deliberately don’t pay dividends; instead,
they reinvest their profits in the company to continue funding their aboveaverage growth. Other restrictions mandate that half or more of the portfolio be invested in bonds. Most bond portfolios have produced weak results
over the long term. Also, in the past, some bond portfolios have used misleading accounting that did not value the portfolio at current market prices.
In these situations, portfolio results are reported too infrequently and the
true overall performance is unclear. There is too much emphasis on yield
and not enough on the increase or decrease in the market value of the assets
in the portfolio.
The main problem is that most of these antiquated, institutionally
accepted investment decision processes have a deeply rooted legal basis.
They have become, in a word, “institutionalized.” Many institutions are
forced to adhere to legal concepts such as “due diligence” and “fiduciary
responsibility” when they make investment decisions. In most cases, a trust
department can be held liable for poor or derelict investment decisions, but
the standard for determining whether an investment decision is poor or
derelict has nothing to do with the performance of the investment itself!
If an institution can show that the selection of a stock it decided to invest
in was based on the old “prudent man” rule (meaning the institution acted
as a prudent man or woman would be expected to act when dealing with his
or her own money), that it took into account valuation based on a static view
of a company’s fundamental situation, or that it was part of an overall “asset
allocation” model or some other similar reason arrived at by due diligence,
then the institution can show it exercised its fiduciary responsibility properly and thus sidestep any liability.
Years ago, institutions had relatively few fund managers to choose from,
but today there are many outstanding professional money-management

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

teams using a variety of systems. However, many managers can’t buy a
stock that’s not on a preapproved list unless it’s accompanied by a long,
glowing report from one of the institution’s analysts. Since the institutions
already own a substantial number of companies that they insist their analysts continue to follow and update, it might take an analyst more time to
get interesting new names onto an approved list and reports prepared on
these companies.
Superior performance comes from fresh ideas, not from the same old
overused, stale names or last cycle’s favorites. For example, the super tech
leaders of 1998 and 1999 will probably be replaced by many new consumerand defense-sector leaders in the twenty-first century.
