
‘To Father, Stanford was spectacular. Warm, beautiful, laid-back, presti-
gious, he felt more comfortable at Stanford than at Cal or pretty much any~
where else. Upon graduating at twenty, and still insecure but feeling safe at
Stanford, he remained in the then brand-new first class of the Stanford
Graduate School of Business, again secretly underwritten by Aunt Cary.
Father never knew about Cary’ financial largesse on his behalf. Multiple
other family members knew. Cary and my grandfather believed it was bet-
ter if the beneficiary of the largesse thought it came from a father who
earned his savings rather than from a rich aunt who married money.

Stanford didn’t then have an investment class as it does now; but
as Father has described in other writings, there was then a class that
traveled to visit and analyze local businesses. Father had a car and
volunteered to drive the professor, Boris Emmett; so they spent a lot of
time together, which had a profound effect on Father. He felt he learned
more from those car rides with Emmett than from all of his other time
at Stanford combined. He described all that better than I could in his
1980 Financial Analysts Research Foundation (FAB) monograph,
“Developing an Investment Philosophy,” and so I won't tread there. In
his original preface to Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits, he
described his early business years, so I won't tread that turf either.

MIDDLE LIFE

As World War II evolved, Father put his business interests on ice and
enlisted. Too old and too well educated for ideal cannon fodder, he got



Introduction 5

lucky. Long-time mentor Ed Heller enlisted ahead of him and pulled
some strings—somehow Father was made an instant officer and hence
never saw the front line. Instead, he fought the war from behind desks
all over mid-America, doing accounting and finance for the Army Air
Corps. On day one, he was a lieuteriant, which he found awkward. On
reporting for duty, in uniform, lower-ranking personnel would salute
him, yet he didn’t know how to respond. Senior personnel expected
respect and appropriate behavior, which he also didn’t know how to
deliver. It took time to adjust. He hated the military, thought of it as a
terrible time, despite admitting quite readily that he was treated well by
it. He hated the regimentation, the lack of freedom, and being ordered
about. When stationed in Little Rock, Arkansas, he met my mother,
Dorothy Whyte, who was also in service there. My mother came from
Camden, Arkansas, which is very close to where President Bill Clinton
was later raised. Father flipped head over heels for my mother instantly
and asked her to marry him only weeks into their relationship; she
immediately agreed. In 1944 my eldest brother, Arthur, was born—
mother having been sent ahead to San Francisco to be with my grand-
father for his medical supervision prior to and after birth. She remained
there until Father’s discharge, whereupon he returned home and renewed
his business interests as described in his monograph. Donald was born in
1947 and I in 1950. In between the birth of Donald and me, a daughter
died in childbirth.

Shortly after I was born, they bought a house on the site where they
now live in San Mateo, California, twenty minutes south of San Francis-
co. But they came to hate the house while loving the acre on which the
house sat. They loved the views, the trees, and the landscape. Father ripped
the house down and built the house in which I was raised and where he
and my mother resided ever after. We rented a house a block away during
construction. When complete, the house was big, all white, clean, and aus-
tere. In my father’s house, everything must be neat to a fault. Possessions
in all forms were sparse and exactly in their places or they drove him nuts.
He loved the yard. Until very late in life, he spent almost a complete day
each weekend in the bottom of the yard, which was almost wild but with
spectacular oak trees and wildflowers. He would weed and tend to his
wild-like garden and worry about all the things he fretted about, whether
the stock market, politics, family matters, or whatever; and to him that
time was a marvel, curative for everything annoying him. It was only as
his dementia started, causing him to fall often, that he gave up the garden.


6 Introduction

The late 1950's and the 1960’s were the high point of Father's life,
in my view. In 1958, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits was pub-
lished, making him an instant, national star. Locally, it made him sort of
the dean of the San Francisco investment community. I doubt anyone
had before received so much’ instant stature from an investment book.
Certainly, tied to its cra, Benjamin Graham’s Security Analysis took much
longer to become prominent. Local names that held sway in 1960
included Dean Witter, who founded and headed that great and locally-
based brokerage firm. But to Dean Witter, New York was the mecca.
And the public already fathomed that a broker was not a money man-
ager. The then famous Gerald Loeb, also of San Francisco Jewish origin
and also a broker, may have been bigger nationally, but he had long gone
on to New York and lost the local link. Simply put, in San Francisco by
1960, there was no investment advisory name as noted as Father’s. Dif-
ferent than today, all Northern California investing activities were geo-
graphically centralized in a few blocks around Montgomery and Bush
Streets in San Francisco. In that realm Father held prestige of which he
could have only fantasized in his insecure childhood.

There was a provision then in California state law, which still exists,
allowing an advisor who maintained fewer than fifteen clients and did
not hold himself out to the public as an investment advisor both to
avoid Securities and Exchange Commission registration and to main-
tain contracts for compensation for a percent of profits that were oth-
erwise made illegal in 1940, a point most investors don’t appreciate
today. Before then, scam artists would seek clients, tell half to do one
thing, tell the other half to do the reverse, charge 20 percent of the
profit on whatever happened, and pick up 10 percent of the spread no
matter what happened. Hence percentage-of-profit contracts were illegal
for all investment advisors for more than forty years unless the person
had fewer than fifteen clients and did not advertise as an investment
advisor. And it was in this way that Father structured his business on his
return from military service. With the fame from Common Stocks and
Uncommon Profits, he could easily maintain as clients a few very wealthy
local families who paid him well and yet required no real organization
to support him. That allowed him to feel superior to others who
required a more public clientele and to remain a very private person,
which fit well with his social awkwardness and insecurity. Despite his
fame and notoriety, he always felt uncomfortable in the public spotlight
and avoided it.


Introduction 7

Flashback to 1945, Herbert Dougall was hired by Stanford and started
the Graduate School of Business’s first dedicated investment course. In
all of history, only three people ever taught that course. Dougall
taught it from 1946 to 1968, twenty-two years in all, except for a two-
year sabbatical in 1961 and 1962 when Father taught the course on a
part-time, temporary basis. Among Father’s students was Jack McDonald,
who was hired by Stanford in 1968 and who has taught the course ever
since. When Dougall was away, it was largely on my father’s reputation
deriving from Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits and from his alum-
nus status that caused him to be picked. Father loved it. It revived his
youthful love affair with Stanford. Had Dougall not returned, I could
envision my father doing that course, part time, forever. But Dougall did
return, and Jack McDonald took over in 1968. By Jack’s testimony, it
was Father who got him interested in markets. Before that, Jack had
been a young Hewlett-Packard engineer who changed the course of his
life’s work at the junction when he met Father. Jack has since said that
Father's major contribution, as seen through Common Stocks and Uncommon
Profits, is to be the first person to link the models of sustainable growth
with the concept of competitive advantage. Today, that is a pretty standard
package, but not then. In some ways Jack sees Father more as a seminal
strategist than as a stock market innovator or operator.

Anyway, for the many students and business folks who hold Stan-
ford in awe and respect its MBAs highly and who think those who took
its graduate investment course advantaged, note: For a very long time,
that course was taught either by the author of the book you hold in
your hand (for two years) or by his disciple, and by only one man before,
ever, What a testament to Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits—one
few readers appreciate or know. For a very long time, until after I came
to temporarily own the book’s rights and then, subsequently, got into a
dumb fight with Jack McDonald (which was my fault), Jack always used
Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits as a formal or informal Stanford
textbook for the course. Over the years—not every year, but for many
years—Father drove down to Stanford at Jack’s request to deliver an
annual lecture and answer questions in Jack’s class. In May 2000, after
many years of absence and with Father well into dementia, Jack asked
him to return and lecture. I was scared to death Father would embarrass
himself because I knew he wasn’t at all the man he used to be. But Father
tose to the occasion and had one of his best days in a long time, deliver-
ing a rousing lecture and answering all questions from all comers. The


8 Introduction

whole thing, including Jack’s warm introduction of Father, was reprinted
verbatim in volume XV, number 7, of the Outstanding Investor Digest.

As Father’s dementia overtook him, he slowly lost more of the
memories of past businesspeople he had known. For the most part, the
earlier he knew them, the loriger he remembered them, and the most
recent acquaintances faded first from memory. For example, he remem-
bered many people from the 1950's, whereas he had forgotten pretty
much everyone he had known from the 19705. Dementia is like that. But
more emotional memories are embedded deeper in the mind; and Jack
McDonald, whom Father met in 1961, thirty-three years into a seventy-
two-year career, was one of the very last business personas to fade from
his recollection, demonstrating how much McDonald meant to him.

‘As the 1960’s passed, Father became ever less interested in his pub-
lic image and more interested in being quiet. He fancied himself'a great
judge of businesspeople and largely was, but he knew that was a private
activity. He responded to few local requests for appearances but declined
ever more of them, and he wouldn’t travel to appear in public ever
again. In 1970, at sixty-three, he still didn’t have a gray hair on his head.
‘That same year, my oldest brother, Arthur, an ecclesiastical historian by
training and a very good one, went to work to join him.’fwo years later,
1 joined. Father’s vision was that we would work for a few years and
then slowly take over his business. That could never happen. It took me
only about a year to realize why. Father was such a stickler for detail and
so focused and so socially awkward and insecure that he was absolutely
incapable of delegating in any way. So, Arthur and I could never really
evolve into any meaningful contributors. I was inherently high energy,
rebellious, and emotionally pretty brutal to people; and as soon as I real-
ized Father could never delegate, | knew I had to distance myself from
him for both our sakes. Otherwise, there was no opportunity for me,
and cither he would hurt me or I would hurt him or both. It took
Arthur four more years to leave, and initially he left to join me. But it is
tough for an older brother to join his younger brother as a junior partner,
and that wasn’t meant to be. So, Arthur left the industry and I remained,
but separate, interacting but distanced from Father. These years were the
first real disappointments since Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits
appeared. They included both the brutal 1973-1974 bear market and
the beginning of Father's body starting to slow a bit. In 1977, he was
seventy; and while he would never admit it and while still exceptionally
energetic for a man that age, he wasn’t as buoyant as he had been and



Introduction 9

for the first time began to show the early signs of aging. His hair was
thinning and partially gray now. In the afternoon train rides down the
peninsula, he started falling asleep regularly. Sometimes in the after-
noon, he fell asleep at his desk. He was due, but he couldn’t quit.
During these years, he determined that he would improve the quality
of his holdings by weeding out the weakest among the few he owned to
own even fewer of higher quality. In retrospect, and without him fathom-
ing it, what he was doing was cutting down the universe requiring his
attention to match diminishing energy. Early in his career, he might have
owned thirty stocks: a few big established ones, some mid-sized ones he
had bought as smaller companies and still held and would for decades,
some small ones for which he had high and long hopes, and a handful of
private-placement, venture cap-type holdings in tiny amounts that he
thought of as icing rather than cake. In the mid-1970's, he steadily and
slowly sold the ones he thought less of and concentrated on his favorite
holdings, so that by about 1990 he held six stocks and by 2000 he held
three. None of it went well. My advice to all investors is to stop making
imvestment decisions of any kind when you get old, whatever “old” means
to you. Stop before you get old. I’ve watched great investors age, and there
are no old, great investors. There are old men who were great; but the
process of investing is too vital to allow for old age and future greatness
together, and aging becomes more powerful than the prior greatness,
which eventually implodes foolishly. In medicine, “aged fragility” is a great
frontier as a future, new recognized, disease but now it stops all old great
investors. There simply arc no great octogenarian investors. In his later
years, Father could talk well and think well, but he didn’t have the clarity
for great decisions and his sales were poorly timed, consistently. Late in life,
he would say things like he was looking for stocks he could hold for thirty
years, which sounded silly for an eighty-fitve-year-old. People often
thought it was charming, which was also pretty silly. I think a lot of other
people knew he was doing this because he loved it and couldn’t quit, even
if it wasn’t good for him financially. But he was indulged by everyone,
including me. What did I care? If it made him happy, it was fine by me. But
some could see that he was a bit like a man hanging around the ballpark
with bat and glove when too old to play. His few late-in-life purchases were
not successful. He would have been much better off financially if he had
Just quit doing anything at the age of eighty or even seventy. It wouldn’t
have mattered if he sold and went into index finds or just held what he
owned until he died. As it was, his decisions detracted value steadily.


10 Introduction

His long-held prescription for investors had been to buy great com-
panies and pretty much hold them forever. And he had owned great
companies. Had he followed his own prescription late in life and not
attempted to fiddle and fix past his prime, he could have held what he
owned until death and done far better than he did. I don’t recall every-
thing he ever owned, but I recall the main holdings. In 1973, at the market's
peak, he owned among then-big firms in big amounts Dow Chemical,
FMC Corporation, Motorola, and Texas Instruments. Among medium-
sized companies in big amounts, he owned Raychem and Reynolds and
Reynolds. Those six stocks then constituted two-thirds of his net worth.
The biggest positions were Motorola, Texas Instruments, and Raychem;
and had he held them all until now, despite the ravaging of the
2000-2002 bear market, he would have done very well. But with the
exception of Motorola, they were all sold and the timing was terrible in
every case, something he wouldn’t have done if he was younger. Among
smaller firms, he owned many, all selected between 1968 and 1973—and
few did well for him after 1973. The most spectacular by far was a ven-
ture capital holding in Manufacturing Data Systems, which went pub-
lic and then was acquired in the 1980's and in which he made a hun-
dred times his money. The earliest of them, Rogers Corporation, he still
owns. Motorola he still owns. Late in life, he tended to sell the ones that
were long beat up, and often just before they came back to life with
spectacular bounces. He did that particularly with FMC and Texas
Instruments in the 1980's and Raychem in the 1990s.

Also in the 1970’s somcthing happened in his mind that I don’t
understand. His father had practiced medicine until very shortly before
he died in 1959. In just a few years, my grandfather got what today
would probably be diagnosed as Alzheimer’s or some form of dementia.
He quickly deteriorated, falling apart and then passing away. But Father's
analysis was different. He thought his father fell apart because he
stopped working; and he concluded that if he stopped working, he, too,
would fall apart and die. And so he concluded he had to drive himself
on. For the rest of his life, work was life itself. Slowly, he resigned him-
self to being able to do less, but he pushed himself to do as much as he
could and did a remarkable job of it. He saw life as like a muscle—if you
worked it hard, it kept working for you; but if you let it relax, it would
weaken (and in his mind it would lead to decay and death). Even when,
eventually, his dementia forced him to quit working completely, he
resented it terribly and believed it would cause his death rather than


Introduction 11

seeing it the other way around—that his dementia was taking him down
whether he worked or not. Even after the dementia was diagnosed, he
kept working, with monthly visits to the neurologist to appraise the sta-
tus of his condition. In 1999, with dementia impairing but not stopping
him, I moved his office into his homie, into my old bedroom, including
everything that remained in his former office. He told his few remain-
ing clients about his condition and they remained with him; but he
could hold back the failing-memory march for only about eighteen
months longer. In 2000, he gave up completely. For the next year, he
talked to me steadily, asking about writing another book, how to get
back into business, whether he could travel around to universities to
lecture like he did to Stanford. He cven made a stab at writing another
book, which he envisioned as What I’ve Learned in the Past Twenty-Five
Years. But he only got seven pages actually dictated. The energy was
draining from him almost monthly, and his mental capability steadily
diminished. As the disease will do, he talked about plans one morning
and forgot them by afternoon. When his career was over after seventy two
years, he initially became tremendously depressed because his self-image
was so linked to his career functioning. As my deceased mother-in-law
used to say, “Old age isn’t for sissies.”

WHAT KIND OF MAN?

Father was sparse, Spartan, scrious with a weird sense of humor linked
to plays on words. He loved puns and referred to anyone else’s pun as,
“two-thirds of a pun, or PU!” When I was a child, ny friends were all
scared to death of him because he had an unintentional cold stare that
pierced right through you. If you didn’t know him well, he scared you
to death—dark hair, dark complexion, not big (in fact, almost gaunt),
but scary looking, and often dressed in dark clothes. Had he been
twenty years younger and seventy-five years earlier, he would have
looked a bit like the archetypal image of the thin, dark-haired, dark-
dressed, bad-guy gunslinger in westerns. You could fantasize him saying,
“Just one move and I'll plug you.” But he didn’t “plug” anyone. He
wasn’t mean. He just looked mean. He didn’t have to say a word. Still,
children tip-toed around him and scooted fast to avoid him. Again, he
wasn’t mean, but he wasn’t warm and fuzzy either; and he never, ever
praised anyone except my oldest brother, whom he adored from birth,


12 Introduction

Fact is, I've always known my father held me in high regard, maybe
higher regard than almost anyone he ever interacted with, even if he
displayed it in strange ways and often not at all. Often not at all. For
example, except once when I was sixteen that I recall very, very dis-
tinctly, he never, ever praised me directly about anything at all until
I was well into my forties. It bothered me when I was young, but I
came to accept it. "That was who he was. He just wasn’t the praising
kind. He would tell others how proud he was of me, almost bragging,
and I'd hear it from them: but he could never tell me. He later told me
he regretted that but hadn’t known how to deal with it. This type of
communication was difficult for my father.

Let me help you put that in perspective by describing a part of his
career, Decades before a world of computer screening, he had a
methodology he employed for finding new ideas for new stocks. He let
it be known that any young investment man could set an appointinent
to meet him just once and talk investments. Usually he would never see
the man again. But if he thought the person unusually capable, he would
sce him repeatedly and offer to swap ideas over time. He let the other
guy know what he was interested in and vice versa; and then over time
if they saw something of interest, they would swap ideas. These folks
passed on many ideas to father over the decades. Yet he was so clear in
what he wanted, relative to the fifteen points, and so focused to do
nothing else, that in his entire career he essentially only followed any
one man into a stock once. Other ideas from that same person he
brushed off because they were never quite good cnough in his mind—
not quite right.

He followed the thinking of two particular individuals twice. One
of the two had ideas that were money losers both times. The only
person he ever followed three times was me. He adopted three of my
stock ideas fully across his client base and for him and my mother and
made more than a thousand percent on each of them. That was the most
ideas he ever adopted from any one person, ever, and he did well with
all of them; mine all came in the mid-to-later-1970%s, late in his career,
which, as I’ve already told you, was a time when his successes were thin-
ning and should have been, therefore, doubly precious.
