
- 19 -

John Grisham

The Broker

many good reasons the warden didn't circulate. He wasn't running for office,
nor was he concerned with motivating the troops. With him were three other
suits, all earnest-looking men who'd been chatting for some time. Though
smoking was strictly prohibited in offices owned by the US. government, an
ashtray was full and a thick fog hung close to the ceiling.
With absolutely no introduction, the warden said, "Sit over there, Mr.
Backman."
"A pleasure to meet you," Backman said as he looked at the other men in the
room. "Why, exactly, am I here?"
"We'll discuss that."
''Could you please remove these handcuffs? I promise not to kill anyone."
The warden snapped at the nearest guard, who quickly found a key and freed
Backman. The guard then scrambled out of the room, slamming the door
behind him, much to the displeasure of the warden, a very nervous man.
He pointed and said, "This is Special Agent Adair of the FBI. This is Mr.
Knabe from the Justice Department. And this is Mr. Size- more, also from
Washington."
None of the three moved in the direction of Mr. Backman, who was still
standing and looking quite perplexed. He nodded at them, in a halfhearted
effort to be polite. His efforts were not returned.
"Please sit," the warden said, and Backman finally took a chair. "Thank you.
As you know, Mr. Backman, a new president is about to be sworn in.
President Morgan is on the way out. Right now he is in the Oval Office
wrestling with the decision of whether to grant you a full pardon."
Backman was suddenly seized with a violent cough, one brought on in part
by the near arctic temperature in his cell and in part by the shock of the word
"pardon."
Mr. Knabe from Justice handed him a bottle of water, which he gulped and
splashed down his chin and finally managed to stifle the cough. "A pardon?"
he mumbled.
"A full pardon, with some strings attached."
"But why?"
"I don't know why, Mr. Backman, nor is it my business to understand what's
happening. I'm just the messenger."

- 20 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Mr. Sizemore, introduced simply as "from Washington," but without the
baggage of title or affiliation, said, "It's a deal, Mr. Back- man. In return for
a full pardon, you must agree to leave the country, never return, and live
with a new identity in a place where no one can find you."
No problem there, thought Backman. He didn't want to be found.
"But why?" he mumbled again. The bottle of water in his left hand could
actually be seen shaking.
As Mr. Sizemore from Washington watched it shake, he studied Joel
Backman, from his closely cropped gray hair to his battered dime- store
running shoes, with his black prison-issue socks, and couldn't help but recall
the image of the man in his prior life. A magazine cover came to mind. A
fancy photo of Joel Backman in a black Italian suit, impeccably tailored and
detailed and groomed and looking at the camera with as much smugness as
humanly possible. The hair was longer and darker, the handsome face was
fleshy and wrinkle free, the waistline was thick and spoke of many power
lunches and four-hour dinners. He loved wine and women and sports cars.
He had a jet, a yacht, a place in Vail, all of which he'd been quite eager to
talk about. The bold caption above his head read: the broker-is this the
second
MOST POWERFUL MAN IN WASHINGTON?
The magazine was in Mr. Sizemore's briefcase, along with a thick file on
Joel Backman. He'd scoured it on the flight from Washington to Tulsa.
According to the magazine article, the broker's income at the time was
reported to be in excess of $10 million a year, though he'd been coy with the
reporter. The law firm he founded had two hundred lawyers, small by
Washington standards, but without a doubt the most powerful in political
circles. It was a lobbying machine, not a place where real lawyers practiced
their craft. More like a bordello for rich companies and foreign governments.
Oh, how the mighty have fallen, Mr. Sizemore thought to himself as he
watched the bottle shake.
"I don't understand," Backman managed to whisper.
"And we don't have time to explain," Mr. Sizemore said. "It's a quick deal,
Mr. Backman. Unfortunately, you don't have time to contemplate things. A
snap decision is required. Yes or no. You want to

- 21 -

John Grisham

The Broker

stay here, or you want to live with another name on the other side of the
world?"
"Where?"
"We don't know where, but we'll figure it out."
"Will I be safe?"
"Only you can answer that question, Mr. Backman."
As Mr. Backman pondered his own question, he shook even more.
"When will I leave?" he asked slowly. His voice was regaining strength for
the moment, but another violent cough was always waiting.
"Immediately," said Mr. Sizemore, who had seized control of the meeting
and relegated the warden, the FBI, and the Justice Department to being
spectators.
"You mean, like, right now?"
"You will not return to your cell."
"Oh darn," Backman said, and the others couldn't help but smile.
"There's a guard waiting by your cell," the warden said. "He'll bring
whatever you want."
"There's always a guard waiting by my cell," Backman snapped at the
warden. "If it's that sadistic little bastard Sloan, tell him to take my razor
blades and slash his own wrists."
Everyone swrallowed hard and waited for the words to escape through the
heating vents. Instead, they cut through the polluted air and rattled around
the room for a moment.
Mr. Sizemore cleared his throat, reshuffled his weight from the left buttock
to the right, and said, "There are some gentlemen waiting in the Oval Office,
Mr. Backman. Are you going to accept the deal?"
"The President is waiting on me?"
"You could say that."
"He owes me. I put him there."
"This really is not the time to debate such matters, Mr. Backman," Mr.
Sizemore said calmly.
"Is he returning the favor?"
"I'm not privy to the President's thoughts."
"You're assuming he has the ability to think."
'Til just call and tell them the answer is no."
"Wait."

- 22 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Backman drained the bottle of water and asked for another. He wiped his
mouth with a sleeve, then said, "Is it like a witness protection program,
something like that?"
"It's not an official program, Mr. Backman. But, from time to time, we find
it necessary to hide people."
"How often do you lose one?'
"Not too often."
"Not too often? So there's no guarantee I'll be safe."
"Nothing is guaranteed. But your odds are good."
Backman looked at the warden and said, "How many years do I have left
here, Lester?"
Lester was jolted back into the conversation. No one called him Lester, a
name he hated and avoided. The nameplate on his desk declared him to be L.
Howard Cass. "Fourteen years, and you can address me as Warden Cass.'
"Cass my ass. Odds are I'll be dead in three. A combination of malnutrition,
hypothermia, and negligent health care should do it. Lester here runs a really
tight ship, boys."
"Can we move along?" Mr. Sizemore said.
"Of course I'll take the deal," Backman said. "What fool wouldn't?"
Mr. Knabe from Justice finally moved. He opened a briefcase and said,
"Here's the paperwork."
"Who do you work for?" Backman asked Mr. Sizemore.
"The President of the United States."
"Well, tell him I didn't vote for him because I was locked away. But I
certainly would have, if given the chance. And tell him I said thanks, okay?"
"Sure."
Hoby poured another cup of green tea, decaffeinated now because it was
almost midnight, and handed it to Teddy, who was wrapped in a blanket and
staring at the traffic behind them. They were on Constitution Avenue,
leaving downtown, almost to the Roosevelt Bridge. The old man took a sip
and said, "Morgan is too stupid to be selling pardons. Critz, however,
worries me."
"There's a new account on the island of Nevis," Hoby said. "It

- 23 -

John Grisham

The Broker

popped up two weeks ago, opened by an obscure company owned by Floyd
Dunlap."
"And who's he?"
"One of Morgan's fundraisers."
"Why Nevis?"
"It's the current hot spot for offshore activity."
"And we're covering it?"
"We're all over it. Any transfers should take place in the next forty-eight
hours."
Teddy nodded slightly and glanced to his left for a partial look at the
Kennedy Center. "Where's Backman?"
"He's leaving prison."
Teddy smiled and sipped his tea. They crossed the bridge in silence, and
when the Potomac was behind them, he finally said, "Who'll get him?"
"Does it really matter?"
"No, it doesn't. But it will be quite enjoyable watching the contest."
Wearing a well-worn but starched and pressed khaki military uniform, with
all the patches and badges removed, and shiny black combat boots and a
heavy navy parka with a hood that he pulled snugly around his head, Joel
Backman strutted out of the Rudley Federal Correctional Facility at five
minutes after midnight, fourteen years ahead of schedule. He had been there,
in solitary confinement, for six years, and upon leaving he carried with him a
small canvas bag with a few books and some photos. He did not look back.
He was fifty-two years old, divorced, broke, thoroughly estranged from two
of his three children and thoroughly forgotten by every friend he'd ever
made. Not a single one had bothered to maintain a correspondence beyond
the first year of his confinement. An old girlfriend, one of the countless
secretaries he'd chased around his plush offices, had written for ten months,
until it was reported in The Washington Post that the FBI had decided it was
unlikely that Joel Backman had looted his firm and his clients of the millions
that had first been rumored. Who wants to be pen pals with a broke lawyer
in prison? A wealthy one, maybe.

- 24 -

John Grisham

The Broker

His mother wrote him occasionally, but she was ninety-one years old and
living in a low-rent nursing home near Oakland, and with each letter he got
the impression it would be her last. He wrote her once a week, but doubted if
she was able to read anything, and he was almost certain that no one on staff
had the time or interest to read to her. She always said, "Thanks for the
letter," but never mentioned anything he'd said. He sent her cards on special
occasions. In one of her letters she had confessed that no one else
remembered her birthday.
The boots were very heavy. As he plodded along the sidewalk he realized
that he'd spent most of the past six years in his socks, no shoes. Funny the
things you think about when you get sprung with no warning. When was the
last time he'd worn boots? And how soon could he shuck the damn things?
He stopped for a second and looked toward the sky. For one hour each day,
he'd been allowed to roam a small patch of grass outside his prison wing.
Always alone, always watched by a guard, as if he, Joel Backman, a former
lawyer who'd never fired a gun in anger, might suddenly become dangerous
and maim someone. The "garden" was lined with ten feet of chain-link
topped with razor wire. Beyond it was an empty drainage canal, and beyond
that was an endless, treeless prairie that stretched to Texas, he presumed.
Mr. Sizemore and Agent Adair were his escorts. They led him to a dark
green sport-utility vehicle that, though unmarked, practically screamed
"government issue" to anyone looking. Joel crawled into the backseat, alone,
and began praying. He closed his eyes tightly, gritted his teeth, and asked
God to please allow the engine to start, the wheels to move, the gates to
open, the paperwork to be sufficient; please, God, no cruel jokes. This is not
a dream, God, please!
Twenty minutes later, Sizemore spoke first. "Say, Mr. Backman, are you
hungry?"
Mr. Backman had ceased praying and had begun crying. The vehicle had
been moving steadily, though he had not opened his eyes. He was lying on
the rear seat, fighting his emotions and losing badly.
"Sure," he managed to say. He sat up and looked outside. They were on an
interstate highway, a green sign flew by-Perry Exit. They stopped in the
parking lot of a pancake house, less than a quarter of a mile from the
interstate. Big trucks were in the distance, their diesel

- 25 -

John Grisham

The Broker

engines grinding along. Joel watched them for a second, and listened. He
glanced upward again and saw a half-moon.
"Are we in a hurry?" he asked Sizemore as they entered the restaurant.
"We're on schedule," came the reply.
They sat at a table near the front window, with Joel looking out. He ordered
french toast and fruit, nothing heavy because he was afraid his system was
too accustomed to the gruel he'd been living on. Conversation was stiff; the
two government boys were programmed to say little and were thoroughly
incapable of small talk. Not that Joel wanted to hear anything they had to
say.
He tried not to smile. Sizemore would report later that Backman glanced
occasionally at the door and seemed to keep a close eye on the other
customers. He did not appear to be frightened; quite the contrary. As the
minutes dragged on and the shock wore off, he seemed to adjust quickly and
became somewhat animated. He devoured two orders of french toast and had
four cups of black coffee.
A few minutes after 4:00 a.m. they entered the gates of Fort Summit, near
Brinkley, Texas. Backman was taken to the base hospital and examined by
two physicians. Except for a head cold and the cough, and general
gauntness, he wasnt in bad shape. He was then taken to a hangar where he
met a Colonel Gantner, who instantly became his best friend. At Gantner's
instructions, and under his close supervision, Joel changed into a green army
jumpsuit with the name herzog stenciled above the right pocket. "Is that
me?" Joel asked, looking at the name.
"It is for the next forty-eight hours," Gantner said.
"And my rank?'
"Major."
"Not bad."
At some point during this quick briefing, Mr. Sizemore from Washington
and Agent Adair slipped away, never to be seen again by Joel Backman.
With the first hint of sunlight, Joel stepped through the rear hatch of a C-130
cargo plane and followed Gantner to the upper level, to a small bunk room
where six other soldiers were preparing for a long flight.

- 26 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Take that bunk," Gantner said, pointing to one close to the floor.
"Can I ask where we're going?" Joel whispered.
"You can ask, but I can't answer."
"Just curious."
"I'll brief you before we land."
"And when might that be?"
"In about fourteen hours."
With no windows to distract him, Joel situated himself on his bunk, pulled a
blanket over his head, and was snoring by takeoff.

- 27 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Critz slept a few hours, then left home long before the
inauguration mess began. Just after dawn, he and his wife were whisked off
to London on one of his new employer's many private jets. He was to spend
two weeks there, then return to the grind of the Beltway as a new lobbyist
playing a very old game. He hated the idea. For years he'd watched the
losers cross the street and start new careers twisting the arms of their former
colleagues, selling their souls to anyone with enough money to buy whatever
influence they advertised. It was such a rotten business. He was sick of the
political life, but, sadly, he knew nothing else.
He'd make some speeches, maybe write a book, hang on for a few years
hoping someone remembered him. But Critz knew how quickly the once
powerful are forgotten in Washington.
President Morgan and Director Maynard had agreed to sit on the Backman
story for twenty-four hours, until well after the inauguration. Morgan didn't
care; he'd be in Barbados. Critz, however, did not feel bound by any
agreement, especially one made with the likes of Teddy Maynard. After a
long dinner with lots of wine, sometime around 2:00 a.m. in London, he
called a White House correspondent for CBS and whispered the basics of the
Backman pardon. As he pre

- 28 -

John Grisham

The Broker

dieted, CBS broke the story during its early-morning gossip hour, and before
8:00 a.m. the news was roaring around D.C.
Joel Backman had been given a full and unconditional pardon at the eleventh
hour!
There were no details of his release. When last heard from, he'd been tucked
away in a maximum-security facility in Oklahoma.
In a very nervous city, the day began with the pardon storming onto center
stage and competing with a new President and his first full day in office.
The bankrupt law firm of Pratt & Boiling now found itself on Massachusetts
Avenue, four blocks north of Dupont Circle; not a bad location, but not
nearly as classy as the old place on New York Avenue. A few years earlier,
when Joel Backman was in charge-it was Backman, Pratt &. Boiling then-he
had insisted on paying the highest rent in town so he could stand at the vast
windows of his vast office on the eighth floor and look down at the White
House.
Now the White House was nowhere in sight; there were no power offices
with grand vistas; the building had three floors, not eight. And the firm had
shrunk from two hundred highly paid lawyers to about thirty struggling
ones. The first bankruptcy-commonly referred to within the offices as
Backman I-had decimated the firm, but it had also miraculously kept its
partners out of prison. Backman II had been caused by three years of vicious
infighting and suing among the survivors. The firm's competitors were fond
of saying that Pratt &. Boiling spent more time suing itself than those it was
hired to sue.
Early that morning, though, the competitors were quiet. Joel Backman was a
free man. The broker was loose. Would he make a comeback? Was he
returning to Washington? Was it all true? Surely not.
Kim Boiling was currently locked away in alcohol rehab, and from there he
would be sent straight to a private mental facility for many years. The
unbearable strain of the last six years had driven him over the edge, to a
point of no return. The task of dealing with the latest nightmare from Joel
Backman fell into the rather large lap of Carl Pratt.

- 29 -

John Grisham

The Broker

It had been Pratt who had uttered the fateful "I do" twenty-two years earlier
when Backman had proposed a marriage of their two small firms. It had
been Pratt who had labored strenuously for sixteen years to clean up behind
Backman as the firm expanded and the fees poured in and all ethical
boundaries were blurred beyond recognition. It had been Pratt who'd fought
weekly with his partner, but who, over time, had come to enjoy the fruits of
their enormous success.
And it had been Carl Pratt who'd come so close to a federal prosecution
himself, just before Joel Backman heroically took the fall for everyone.
Backman's plea agreement, and the agreement that exculpated the firms
other partners, required a fine of $10 million, thus leading directly to the first
bankruptcy-Backman I.
But bankruptcy was better than jail, Pratt reminded himself almost daily. He
lumbered around his sparse office early that morning, mumbling to himself
and trying desperately to believe that the news was simply not true. He stood
at his small window and gazed at the gray brick building next door, and
asked himself how it could happen. How could a broke, disbarred, disgraced
former lawyer/lobbyist convince a lame-duck president to grant a lastminute pardon?
By the time Joel Backman went to prison, he was probably the most famous
white-collar criminal in America. Everybody wanted to see him hang from
the gallows.
But, Pratt conceded to himself, if anyone in the world could pull off such a
miracle, it was Joel Backman.
Pratt worked the phones for a few minutes, tapping into his extensive
network of Washington gossipmongers and know-it-alls. An old friend
who'd somehow managed to survive in the Executive Department under four
presidents-two from each party-finally confirmed the truth.
"Where is he?" Pratt asked urgently, as if Backman might resurrect himself
in D.C. at any moment.
"No one knows," came the reply.
Pratt locked his door and fought the urge to open the office bottle of vodka.
He had been forty-nine years old when his partner was sent to prison for
twenty years with no parole, and he often wondered what he would do when
he was sixty-nine and Backman got out.
At that moment, Pratt felt as though he'd been cheated out of fourteen years.

- 30 -

John Grisham

The Broker

The courtroom had been so crowded that the judge postponed the hearing for
two hours until the demand for seating could be organized and somewhat
prioritized. Every prominent news organization in the country was
screaming for a place to sit or stand. Big shots from Justice, the FBI, the
Pentagon, the CIA, the NSA, the White House, and Capitol Hill were
pressing for seats, all claiming that their best interests would be served if
they could be present to watch the lynching of Joel Backman. When the
defendant finally appeared in the tense courtroom, the crowd suddenly froze
and the only sound was that of the court reporter prepping his steno
machine.
Backman was led to the defense table, where his small army of lawyers
packed tightly around him as if bullets were expected from the mob in the
gallery. Gunfire would not have been a surprise, though the security rivaled
that of a presidential visit. In the first row directly behind the defense table
sat Carl Pratt and a dozen or so other partners, or soon-to-be-former
partners, of Mr. Backman. They had been searched most aggressively, and
for good reason. Though they seethed with hatred for the man, they were
also pulling for him. If his plea agreement fell through because of a lastsecond hitch or disagreement, then they would be fair game again, with
nasty trials just around the corner.
At least they were sitting on the front row, out with the spectators, and not at
the defense table where the crooks were kept. At least they were alive. Eight
days earlier, Jacy Hubbard, one of their trophy partners, had been found
dead in Arlington National Cemetery, in a contrived suicide that few people
believed. Hubbard had been a former senator from Texas who had given up
his seat after twenty-four years for the sole, though unannounced, purpose of
offering his significant influence to the highest bidder. Of course Joel
Backman would never allow such a big fish to escape his net, so he and the
rest of Backman, Pratt 8c Boiling had hired Hubbard for a million bucks a
year because good ol' Jacy could get himself into the Oval Office anytime he
wanted.
Hubbard his death had worked wonders in helping Joel Backman to see the
government's point of view. The logjam that had delayed the plea
negotiations was suddenly broken. Not only would Backman ac

- 31 -

John Grisham

The Broker

cept twenty years, he wanted to do it quickly. He was anxious for protective
custody!
The government his lawyer that day was a high-ranking career prosecutor
from Justice, and with such a big and prestigious crowd he could not help
but grandstand. He simply couldn't use one word when three would suffice;
there were too many people out there. He was onstage, a rare moment in a
long dull career, when the nation happened to be watching. With a savage
blandness he launched into a reading of the indictment, and it was quickly
apparent that he possessed almost no talent at theatrics, virtually no flair for
drama, though he tried mightily. After eight minutes of stultifying
monologue, the judge, peering sleepily over reading glasses, said, "Would
you speed it up, sir, and lower your voice at the same time."
There were eighteen counts, alleging crimes ranging from espionage to
treason. When they were all read, Joel Backman was so thoroughly vilified
that he belonged in the same league with Hitler. His lawyer immediately
reminded the court, and everyone else present, that nothing in the indictment
had been proven, that it was in fact just a recitation of one side of the case,
the government's heavily slanted view of things. He explained that his client
would be pleading guilty to only four of the eighteen counts-unauthorized
possession of military documents. The judge then read the lengthy plea
agreement, and for twenty minutes nothing was said. The artists on the front
row sketched the scene with a fury, their images bearing almost no likeness
to reality.
Hiding on the back row, seated with strangers, was Neal Backman, Joel's
oldest son. He was, at that moment, still an associate with Backman, Pratt 8c
Boiling, but that was about to change. He watched the proceedings in a state
of shock, unable to believe that his once powerful father was pleading guilty
and about to be buried in the federal penal system.
The defendant was eventually herded to the bench, where he looked up as
proudly as possible and faced the judge. With lawyers whispering in both
ears, he pled guilty to his four counts, then was led back to his seat. He
managed to avoid eye contact with everyone.
A sentencing date was set for the following month. As Backman was
handcuffed and taken away, it became obvious to those present that he
would not be forced to divulge his secrets, that he would in
