
WIZARD LESSONS?

WIZARD LESSONS

52. Hope Is a Four-Letter Word

Walton said: "By cleaning out my portfolio and reinvesting in solid
stocks, I made back much more money than I would have if I had kept
[these] stocks and waited for a dead cat bounce."

comes back," get out or reduce your size.

48. You Don't Have to Make AU-or-Nothing Trading Decisions

53. The Argument Against Diversification

As an illustration of this advice offered by Minervini, if you can't decide
whether to take profits on a position, there's nothing wrong with taking
profits on part of it.

The willingness of management or the company to buy its own stock may
not be a sufficient condition to buy a stock, but it does provide strong
confirmation that the stock is a good investment. A number of traders
cited insider buying as a critical element in their stock selection process:
Lauer, Okumus, and Watson, to name a few.
Okumus stresses that insider buying statistics need to be viewed in
relative terms. "I compare the amount of stock someone buys with his
net worth and salary. For example, if the amount he buys is more than his
annual salary, I consider that significant." Okumus also points out the
necessity of making sure that insider buying actually represents the purchase of new shares, not the exercise of options.

Diversification is often extolled as a virtue because it is an instrumental
tool in reducing risk. This argument is valid insofar as it is generally
unwise to risk all your assets on one or two equities, as opposed to
spreading the investment across a broader number of diversified stocks.
Beyond a certain minimum level, however, diversification may sometimes have negative consequences.
Lauer makes two arguments against diversification. First, if carried
far enough, it will guarantee indexlike performance. Therefore, if a
trader's goal is to significantly surpass index performance, then diversification should be limited. Second, Lauer points out that in order to be
able to make money in both up and down markets, it is necessary for a
trader to decouple his performance from the index, which again means
limiting the number of stocks held. Okumus, another antidiversification
proponent, explains as follows why he limits his portfolio to approximately ten holdings: "Simple logic: My top ten ideas will always perform
better than my top hundred."
The foregoing is not intended as an argument against diversification.
Indeed, some minimal diversification is almost always desirable. The
point is that although some diversification is beneficial, more diversification may sometimes be detrimental. Each trader needs to consider the
appropriate level of diversification as an individual decision.

51. Monitor Major Fund Holdings

54. Caution Against Data Mining

49. Pay Attention to How a Stock Responds to News
Walton looks for stocks that move higher on good news but don't give
much ground on negative news. If a stock responds poorly to negative
news, then in Walton's words "[it] hasn't been blessed [by the market]."

50. Insider Buying Is an Important Confirming Condition

Lauer explained that the major funds hold such large positions that it will
often take months for them to liquidate or significantly reduce the portfolio allocation to a specific stock. Moreover, he points out that there is a
substantial overlap in the largest holdings of major mutual funds. These
considerations suggest that if fund-holding statistics show that the major
funds are beginning to reduce their exposure in a particular stock, it
should be viewed as a clue that the given stock is likely to underperform
in coming months.

Cook advises that if you ever find yourself saying, "I hope this position

If enough data is tested, patterns will arise simply by chance—even in
random data. Data mining—letting the computer cycle through data,
testing thousands or millions of input combinations in search of profitable patterns—will tend to generate trading models (systems) that look
great but have no predictive power. Such hindsight analysis can entice
the researcher to trade a worthless system. Shaw avoids this trap by first

developing a hypothesis of market behavior to be tested rather than
blindly searching the data for patterns.

WIZARD LESSONS

55. Synergy and Marginal Indicators
Shaw mentioned that although the individual market inefficiencies his
firm has identified cannot be traded profitably on their own, they can be
combined to identify profit opportunities. The general implication is that
it is possible for technical or fundamental indicators that are marginal on
their own to provide the basis for a much more reliable indicator when
combined.

56. Past Superior Performance Is Only Relevant If the Same Conditions Are
Expected to Prevail
It is important to understand why an investment (stock or fund) outperformed in the past. For example, as Lauer pointed out, in the late 1990s
a number of the better performing funds owed their superior results to a
strategy of buying the most highly capitalized stocks. As a result, the
high-cap stocks were bid up to extremely high price/earnings ratios relative to the rest of the market. A new investor expecting these funds to
continue to outperform in the future would, in effect, be making an
investment bet that was dependent on high-cap stocks becoming even
more overpriced relative to the rest of the market.
As commentator George J. Church once wrote, "Every generation has
its characteristic folly, but the basic cause is the same: people persist in
believing that what has happened in the recent past will go on happening
into the indefinite future, even while the ground is shifting under their
feet."

57. Popularity Can Destroy a Sound Approach
A classic example of this principle was provided by the 1980s experience
with portfolio insurance (the systematic sale of stock index futures as the
value of a stock portfolio declines in order to reduce risk exposure). In
the early years of its implementation, portfolio insurance provided a reasonable strategy for investors to limit losses in the event of market
declines. As the strategy became more popular, however, it set the stage
for its own destruction. By the time of the October 1987 crash, portfolio
insurance was in wide usage, which contributed to the domino effect of
price declines triggering portfolio insurance selling, which pushed prices
still lower, causing more portfolio selling, and so on. It can even be

WIZARD LESSONS

argued that the mere knowledge of the existence of large portfolio insurance sell orders below the market was one of the reasons for the enormous magnitude of the October 19, 1987, decline.
Index funds may well provide a current example of this principle. As
Lauer explained, index funds originally made a lot of sense for the
investor, providing the opportunity to own a representative piece of the
market, with presumably lower risk due to the index's diversification, and
a low cost structure and favorable tax treatment (due to low turnover). As
index funds outperformed the majority of actively managed funds, however, they attracted steadily expanding investment flows. This investment
shift, in turn, created more buying for the stocks in the index at the
expense of the rest of the market, which helped the index funds outperform the vast majority of individual stocks, attracting still more assets,
and so on. As a result of this process, what started out as a conservative
investment has evolved into an investment concentrated in issues trading
at high valuations and therefore embedding above-average risk.
Of course, it is impossible to know whether this situation will correct
itself by the time this book is published. But if index stocks are still trading at historically high price/earnings ratios relative to the rest of the market at that time, then the same cautionary message would apply.

58. Like a Coin, the Market Has Two Sides—but the Coin Is Unfair
Just as you can bet heads or tails on a coin, you can go long or short a
stock. Unlike a normal coin, however, the odds for each side are not
equal: The long-term uptrend in stock prices results in a strong negative
bias in short-selling trades. As Lescarbeau says, "Shorting stocks is dumb
because the odds are stacked against you. The stock market has been rising by over 10 percent a year for many decades. Why would you want to
go against that trend?" (Actually, there is a good reason why, which we will
get to shortly.)
Another disadvantage to the short side is that the upside is capped.
Whereas a well-chosen buy could result in hundreds or even thousands
of percent profit on the trade, the most perfect short position is limited to
a profit of 100 percent (if the stock goes to zero). Conversely, whereas a
long position can't lose more than 100 percent (assuming no use of margin), the loss on a short position is theoretically unlimited.

WIZARD LESSONS

Finally, with the exception of index products, the system is stacked
against short selling. The short seller has to borrow the stock to sell it,
an action that introduces the risk of the borrowed stock being called in
at a future date, forcing the trader to cover (buy in) the position. Frequently, deliberate attempts to force shorts to cover their positions
(short squeezes) can cause overvalued, and even worthless, stocks to
rally sharply before collapsing. Thus, the short seller faces the real risk
of being right on the trade and still losing money because of an artificially forced liquidation. Another obstacle faced by shorts is that positions can be implemented only on an uptick (when the stock trades up
from its last sale price)—a rule that can cause a trade to be executed at
a much worse price that the prevailing market price when the order was
entered.

59. The Why of Short Selling
With all the disadvantages of short selling, it would appear reasonable to
conclude that it is foolhardy to ever go short. Reasonable, but wrong. As
proof, consider this amazing fact: thirteen of the fourteen traders interviewed in this book incorporate short selling! (The only exception is
Lescarbeau.) Obviously, there must be some very compelling reason for
short selling.
The key to understanding the raison d'etre for short selling is to view
these trades within the context of the total portfolio rather than as standalone transactions. With all their inherent disadvantages, short positions
have one powerful attribute: they are inversely correlated to the rest of
the portfolio (they will tend to make money when long holdings are losing and vice versa). This property makes short selling one of the most
useful tools for reducing risk.
To understand how short selling can reduce risk, we will compare two
hypothetical portfolios. Portfolio A holds only long positions and makes
20 percent for the year. Portfolio B makes all the same trades as Portfolio
A, but also adds a smaller component of short trades. To keep the example simple, assume the short positions in Portfolio B exactly break even
for the year. Based on the stated assumptions, Portfolio B will also make
20 percent for the year. There is, however, one critical difference: the

WIZARD LESSONS

magnitude of equity declines will tend to be smaller in Portfolio B. Why?
Because the short positions in the portfolio will tend to do best when the
rest of the portfolio is declining.

In our example, we assumed short positions broke even. If a trader
can make a net profit on short positions, then short selling offers the
opportunity to both reduce risk and increase return. Actually, short selling offers the opportunity to increase returns without increasing risk,
even if the short positions themselves only break even. * How? By trading
long positions with greater leverage (using margin if the trader is fully
invested)—a step that can be taken without increasing risk because the
short positions are a hedge against the rest of the portfolio.
It should now be clear why so many of the traders interviewed supplement their long positions with short trades: It allows them to increase
their return/risk levels (lower risk, or higher return, or some combination
of the two).
If short selling can help reduce portfolio risk, why is it so often
considered to be exactly the opposite: a high-risk endeavor? Two reasons. First, short trades are often naively viewed as independent transactions rather than seen in the context of the total portfolio. Second,
the open-ended loss exposure of short positions can indeed lead to
enormous risk. Fortunately, however, this risk can be controlled, which
brings us to our next point.

60. The One Indispensable Rule for Short Selling
Although short selling will tend to reduce portfolio risk, any individual
short position is subject to losses far beyond the original capital commitment. A few examples:
>• A $10,000 short position in Amazon in June 1998 would have lost
$120,000 in seven months.
*• A $10,000 short position in Ebay in October 1998 would have lost
$230,000 in seven months.
*• A $ 10,000 short position in Yahoo in January 1997 would have lost
$680,000 in two years.
*To be precise, this statement would be true even for small net losses in the short component of the portfolio, but an adequate explanation is beyond the scope of this book.

W1ZAW L E S S O N S

As these examples make clear, it takes only one bad mistake to wipe
out an account on the short side. Because of the theoretically unlimited
risk in short positions, the one essential rule for short selling is: Define a
specific plan for limiting losses and rigorously adhere to it.
The following are some of the risk-control methods for short positions
mentioned by the interviewed traders:
> A short position is liquidated when it reaches a predetermined
maximum loss point, even if the trader's bearish analysis is completely
unchanged. As Watson says, "I will cover even if I am convinced
that the company will ultimately go bankrupt. . . . I'm not going to
let [a one-percent short in the portfolio] turn into a 5 percent loss."
> A short position is limited to a specific maximum percentage of the
portfolio. Therefore, as the price of a short position rises, the size of
the position would have to be reduced to keep its percentage share of
the portfolio from increasing.
>• Short positions are treated as short-term trades, often tied to a specific catalyst, such as an earnings report. Win or lose, the trade is
liquidated within weeks or even days. For example, Lauer will typically hold long positions for six to twelve months, or even longer,
but he will usually be out of short positions within a couple of
weeks or less.

61. Identifying Short-Selling Candidates (or Stocks to Avoid for Long-Only
Traders)
Galante, whose total focus is on short selling, looks for the following red
flags in finding potential shorts:
> high receivables (large outstanding billings for goods and services);
> change in accountants;
> high turnover in chief financial officers;
>• a company blaming short sellers for their stock's decline;
*• a company completely changing their core business to take advantage of a prevailing hot trend.
The stocks flagged must meet three additional conditions to qualify
for an actual short sale:

WIZARD LESSONS

>• very high P/E ratio;

> a catalyst that will make the stock vulnerable over the near term;
> an uptrend that has stalled or reversed.
Watson's ideal short-selling candidate is a high-priced, one product
company. He looks for companies whose future sales will be vulnerable
because their single or primary product does not live up to promotional
claims or because there is no barrier to entry for competitors.

62. Use Options to Express Specific Price Expectations
Prevailing option prices will reflect the assumption that price movements
are random. If you have specific expectations about the relative probabilities of a stock's future price movements, then it will frequently be possible to define option trades that offer a higher profit potential (at an
equivalent risk level) than buying the stock.

63. Sell Out-of-the-Money Puts in Stocks You Want to Buy
This is a technique used by Okumus that could be very useful to many
investors but is probably utilized by very few. The idea is for an investor
to sell puts at a strike price at which he would want to buy the stock anyway. This strategy will assure making some profit if the stock fails to
decline to the intended buying point and will reduce the cost for the
stock by the option premium received if it does reach the intended purchase price.
For example, let's say XYZ Corporation is trading at $24 and you want
to buy the stock at $20. Typically, to achieve this investment goal, you
would place a buy order for the stock at a price limit of $20. The alternative Okumus suggests is selling $20 puts in the stock. In this way, if the
stock fails to decline to your buy price, you will at least make some
money from the sale of the $20 puts, which by definition will expire
worthless. If, on the other hand, the stock declines to under $20, put
buyers will exercise their option and you will end up long the stock at
$20, which is the price that you wanted to buy it at anyway. Moreover, in
this latter event, your purchase price will be reduced by the premium
collected from the sale of the options.

W I Z A R D LESSONS'

64. Wall Street Research Reports Will Tend to Be Biased
A number of traders mentioned the tendency for Wall Street research

reports to be biased. Watson suggests the bias is a result of investment
banking relationships—analysts will typically feel implicit pressure to
issue buy ratings on companies that are clients of the firm, even if they
don't particularly like the stock. Lauer, who was himself an analyst for
many years, pointed out the pressure on analysts to issue recommendations that are easily saleable (popular, ultra liquid stocks), not necessarily
those with the best return/risk prospects.

APPENDIX

Options—Understanding
the Basics

65. The Universality of Success
This chapter was intended to summarize the elements of successful trading and investing. I believe, however, that the same traits that lead to success in trading are also instrumental to success in any field. Virtually all
the items listed, with the exception of those that are exclusively market
specific, would be pertinent as a blueprint for success in any endeavor.

There are two basic types of options: calls and puts. The purchase of a call
option provides the buyer with the right—but not the obligation—to purchase the underlying stock (or other financial instrument) at a specified
price, called the strike price or exercise price, at any time up to and
including the expiration date. A put option provides the buyer with the
right—but not the obligation—to sell the underlying stock at the strike
price at any time prior to expiration. (Note, therefore, that buying a put is
a bearish trade, whereas selling a put is a bullish trade.) The price of an
option is called premium. As an example of an option, an IBM April 130
call gives the purchaser the right to buy 100 shares of IBM at $130 per
share at any time during the life of the option.
The buyer of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated price rise by
locking in a specified purchase price. The call buyer's maximum possible
loss will be equal to the dollar amount of the premium paid for the
option. This maximum loss would occur on an option held until expiration if the strike price were above the prevailing market price. For example, if IBM were trading at $ 125 when the 130 option expired, the option
would expire worthless. If at expiration the price of the underlying market was above the strike price, the option would have some value and
would hence be exercised. However, if the differenct between the market price and the strike price was less than the premium paid for the
option, the net result of the trade would still be a loss. In order for a call
buyer to realize a net profit, the difference between the market price and
Adapted from Jack D. Schwager, A Complete Guide to the Futures Market (New York:
John Wiley, 1984). Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
327

APPENDIX

the strike price would have to exceed the premium paid when the call
was purchased (after adjusting tor commission cost). The higher the
market price, the greater the resulting profit.
The buyer of a put seeks to profit from an anticipated price decline by
locking in a sales price. Like the call buyer, his maximum possible loss is
limited to the dollar amount of the premium paid for the option. In the
case of a put held until expiration, the trade would show a net profit if
the strike price exceeded the market price by an amount greater than the
premium of the put at purchase (after adjusting for commission cost).
Whereas the buyer of a call or put has limited risk and unlimited potential gain, the reverse is true for the seller. The option seller (often called the
writer) receives the dollar value of the premium in return for undertaking
the obligation to assume an opposite position at the strike price if an option
is exercised. For example, if a call is exercised, the seller must assume a
short position in the underlying market at the strike price (because, by
exercising the call, the buyer assumes a long position at that price).
The seller of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated sideways to
modestly declining market. In such a situation, the premium earned by
selling a call provides the most attractive trading opportunity. However, if
the trader expected a large price decline, he would be usually better off
going short the underlying market or buying a put—trades with openended profit potential. In a similar fashion, the seller of a put seeks to
profit from an anticipated sideways to modestly rising market.
Some novices have trouble understanding why a trader would not
always prefer the buy side of the option (call or put, depending on market
opinion), since such a trade has unlimited potential and limited risk.
Such confusion reflects the failure to take probability into account.
Although the option seller's theoretical risk is unlimited, the price levels
that have the greatest probability of occurrence, (i.e., prices in the vicinity of the market price when the option trade occurs) would result in a
net gain to the option seller. Roughly speaking, the option buyer accepts
a large probability of a small loss in return for a small probability of a
large gain, whereas the option seller accepts a small probability of a large
loss in exchange for a large probability of a small gain. In an efficient
market, neither the consistent option buyer nor the consistent option
seller should have any significant advantage over the long run.
