
The Proving Grounds—A Comprehensive Test
From a longer-term perspective, the experience of these reports of the prior decade resulted
in a definitive substantiation of the Harmonic Trading techniques as an effective technical
approach to analyze price action. As I mentioned previously, the rules within the Harmonic
Trading methodology were relatively new at this time. My ability to navigate through the difficult
trading environment during that period was put to the test. In the end, I believe that my overall
advisory record and detailed reports prove that Harmonic Trading techniques passed the test
and substantiated the validity of this approach. I say this because these reports represent one
of the most accurate long-term case studies that have been compiled for this approach.
In each of these markets, I correctly determined the major market trend changes of the time
and identified the critical long-term price levels in each instance. The ability to accurately
quantify critical price levels was a direct result of applying the Harmonic Trading measurement
techniques. The various reports consistently identified the most important levels of support and
resistance, utilizing Fibonacci ratios exclusively to project long-term technical areas as critical
price targets. Furthermore, the price action at these projected harmonic levels frequently
provided early warning signs, as the primary trend remained strong—especially in both bear
markets—and indicated that the larger historic price targets were to be tested before a major
trend change could occur.
When analyzed within this context and in accordance to the basic rules of harmonic pattern
recognition, these reports were capable of anticipating the overall changes in the financial
markets and successfully pinpointing the precise levels where these changes would occur.
Although this analysis required immense consideration and attention to the daily market action,
the ability of these techniques to interpret the overall direction proved increasingly reliable

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

15

throughout those early years. In the time since, the advancement of the Harmonic Trading
methodology, in particular the new strategies outlined in this book, has improved the overall
effectiveness and serves to provide a more comprehensive perspective on the basic pattern
recognition approach.
Frankly, I was challenged by the market environment during those first few months
of reports. Beginning with the extreme multiyear rally of the 1990s and followed by a
near-liquidation of the entire market, the remarkable volatility created one of the most difficult
market environments of the past 100 years. From a harmonic pattern perspective, the bull
market of the late ’90s possessed many bearish patterns that were continually violated. The
strong price action overwhelmed many of these setups. Conversely, the bear market from
2000-2003 annihilated what seemed to be once-in-a-lifetime buying opportunities. I learned a
great deal during this time. In the long run, this was an important evolutionary process for the
entire Harmonic Trading methodology. The lessons learned during this time made me focus on
price action in the completion area of harmonic patterns more than the patterns themselves,
which led to a more accurate and unbiased analysis of the overall direction of the markets.
This opened my eyes and spawned a more flexible interpretation of harmonic price action. In
addition, the change in thinking led to a greater integration of applying these patterns within the
constraints of the overall trend, especially when related to other standard technical measures.
Although this advancement required many years to develop, the time and research invested
has yielded significantly improved the strategies and substantially enhanced the already potent
capabilities of the Harmonic Trading approach.

Market Positions
As a part of my advisory service for HarmonicTrader.com, I wrote market reports for the three
primary U.S. indices—the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the Standard & Poor’s 500, and the
NASDAQ Composite. The following synopsis of these reports represents an accurate research
study on the effectiveness of these techniques in real-time situations. Throughout this time
period, my reasons for particular market positions and specific price targets were clearly stated
and presented well in advance. From a general perspective, my advisory service official
positions for each of the three major U.S. indices were as follows:
• 1998–September 2000: Bullish
• September 2000–April 2003: Bearish
• April 2003–November 2003: Neutral
• November 2003: Bullish
I will explain the various pattern developments of the times and my reasons for the analysis
presented. The recommendations of the advisory service were exclusively based on Harmonic
Trading measurement techniques. It is important to be mindful of the progression of pattern
analysis and the associated price action, as various harmonic scenarios unfolded. The most
important point is that distinct harmonic measurement techniques provided consistently reliable
technical information throughout this entire time period. The end result was an extremely

16

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

accurate collection of monthly reports that defined critical technical price levels and the major
changes in the overall market direction during a rather volatile long-term market environment.

Standard & Poor’s 500 Review
Of the three major U.S. indices, the Standard & Poor’s 500 was a leading index that frequently
formed distinct harmonic patterns and responded well to critical long-term Fibonacci levels of
support and resistance. In fact, the S&P 500 was my baseline index for the entire market.
In essence, the price action on the S&P 500 and the validity of the various harmonic setups
effectively indicated the probable future price action for the markets in general. For example,
it was common for the markets to form different harmonic patterns within each index
simultaneously. The S&P 500 was typically forming the most distinct patterns with price action
that provided clues of the impending direction before the other two indices. Therefore, a failure
in a pattern in the S&P 500 would typically translate into a failure of another pattern in one of
the other two indices.

Bearish Gartley Marks the Beginning of the Bear
In my S&P 500 analysis, I identified some significant harmonic developments that pointed to a
major reversal at hand. After the bull market of the 1990s ended with the decade, the index
quickly violated some critical technical levels that suggested a greater correction was in the
works. In fact, the index formed a Bearish Gartley on the weekly chart in August 2000 that
marked a significant failure of the prior all-time high. This pattern turned out to be the structure
that initiated the multiyear bear market.
The reversal from the Bearish Gartley was the first significant failure of a prior high within
the established bullish trend in nearly five years. The price action from 1995–2000 was among
the strongest bull markets in history. Although I maintained a bullish position from 1998 until
September 2000, this pattern was clearly signaling trouble for the S&P 500 on a long-term
basis. The reversal from its completion was one of the primary reasons for my bearish position.

Standard & Poor’s 500 (^SPX): Weekly Bearish Gartley
It all started with this weekly Bearish Gartley just above the 1500 area (see Figure 1.1).
Although the CD leg was a bit extended, the structure possessed a precise alignment of
harmonic ratios to validate the pattern. The interesting aspect of the price action was the
decisive downside continuation following the completion of the pattern. I outlined this setup as
early as June 2000, stating in the monthly report:

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

“The S&P 500 has held the lows set in the past two months.…
Despite this strength, there is a nice shorting opportunity at the
78.6% retracement from the high that would complete a Bearish
Gartley pattern. There are three harmonic numbers just above 1500
that define the potential reversal zone:

• AB=CD at 1505
• 1.27BC at 1515
• .786XA at 1510
I would focus closely on the 1510 area where the .786XA
completes. Although the index may exceed this area slightly, if the
bearish pattern is valid, the index should not rally too far above this
zone.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/
harmonic/markets/spx0600.htm)

Figure 1.1

17

18

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

The decisive downside continuation following the completion of this pattern clearly indicated
the change in trend that was occurring. In fact, in my September 2000 market report three
months later, I outlined this breakdown:
“As we enter the historically ominous September-October period, it
is essential to consider such bearish possibilities.… The most
critical levels to examine in the next few weeks are the short-term
.618 and .786 retracements from the July low to the August high.. I
would become extremely bearish if the index sold off sharply
through these support levels. In that event, I would look for the
index to sell off well below the 1400 level. For now, stay on the
sides and watch these levels closely.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/
harmonic/markets/spx0900.htm)

The index declined steadily in the months that followed and triggered the next set of
harmonic levels at the 1300 level.

Two More Failed Harmonic Scenarios—1300 and 1150
Despite the bearish downtrend, the index still possessed critical support levels that continued to
maintain the long-term bullish trend. The next set of long-term harmonic support was wellbelow the prior Bearish Gartley at 1500. Although the index possessed a Bullish AB=CD on the
weekly chart at the 1300 level, the price action failed this area decidedly. Within a few months
later, the price action was clearly headed for the 1150 area, where the next set of long-term
harmonic retracements converged. I outlined this scenario in my December 2000 market report,
stating:
“The test of 1150 will be one of the most critical market events of
the New Year. The 1150 area represents a convergence of
significant Fibonacci projections or retracements for each of the
past six years. From each of the previous years’ low to this year’s
high, these retracements converge in the mid-1100 area:

•
•
•
•
•

1999 1.27 @ 1145
1998 .618 @ 1165
1997 .5 @ 1145
1996 .382 @ 1190
1994/95 .382 @ 1135 (general area)

A convergence of numbers like this will most likely act as a magnet
and pull the index down to test all of the numbers in this area. A
capitulation sell-off could happen quickly and signal the end of the
bear trend. But, the index must hold this price level. Therefore, the
picture for the S&P is clear: A violation of the 1300 lows will cause
a decisive move to 1150.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/spx1200.htm)

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

19

The Road to 800
It didn’t take long for the index to fail the 1300 level and test 1100. In fact, three months after
the December 2000 report, the index reached this area. Although the price action bounced on
the initial test, there was little upside continuation, and the index quickly stalled in the following
months. As the daily price action stalled, I became increasingly concerned and issued this
warning in November 2001:
“The S&P is stuck in this sharp bear trend. Although there are a
few Bullish AB=CD patterns beginning to form, these patterns
complete at much lower levels—around 800. In the next few weeks,
the index will most likely encounter resistance as it tests the upper
range of the channel. A violation of the 1075 level would trigger a
retest of the September lows. Therefore, I remain bearish on the
index.”
(Harmonic Trader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/spx1101.htm)

Although the 800 area was starting to shape up, it is important to note that this was nearly
a blasphemous statement at the time. Despite already losing one-third of its value, it was
apparent that the index clearly was heading toward the completion of the multiple AB=CD
patterns at the 800 level.

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

20

Standard & Poor’s 500 (^SPX): Weekly
Bullish AB=CD Patterns
A decline to 800 was going to represent a 50% “hair cut” in the index, which would eventually
result in one of the most significant bear market declines in history (see Figure 1.2). Despite
such a bold prediction, I did not waver, as these patterns converged with a few long-term
retracements to clearly define the 800 level as critical harmonic and historic support. This
scenario was clearly coming together, signaling its fruition nearly 18 months prior to its eventual
completion. Although this scenario required some time before being realized, the harmonic
factors of the long-term downtrend were clearly dictating the direction of the price action.
Furthermore, it became apparent that the market direction was still down because the
overwhelming harmonic setup that completed at the 800 level represented such a fantastic
buying opportunity.

A

0.50
C
a
c

B

2.0 b
D

Figure 1.2

d

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

21

After the first test of this projected support zone, I reiterated the 800 target a year later in my
November 2002 Standard & Poor’s market report, stating:
“It is important to note that the S&P 500 possesses the most
harmonic scenario of all of the indices. The historic retracements
and the distinct bullish AB=CD patterns defined the 800 area as a
major potential bottom. The critical element to validate this longterm Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) is time. If the index can hold
these levels and move higher, the stronger the support at 800 will
become… the index still needs more time to resolve the larger
bearish trend. The index is close to challenging the three-year
downtrend and decisively changing its course. But, it must provide
more constructive bullish action before ending the downtrend. For
these reasons, the official position remains bearish.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/
dow/harmonic/markets/spx1102.htm)

The Historic Low at 800
After the S&P 500 bounced sharply on the initial test of the long-term Bullish AB=CD pattern
convergence, the index formed a distinct Bullish Bat in this significant Potential Reversal Zone
(PRZ). The completion of this smaller pattern within the larger PRZ was the defining harmonic
signal that confirmed the entire 800 area as historic support. In my March 2003 Standard &
Poor’s 500 market report, I outlined my argument for the completion of the bear market:
“Without question, the next two weeks will be a historically
defining time period for the markets. The Standard & Poor’s 500 has
been the Harmonic bellwether for all of the indices. The index has
consolidated for the past nine months in a considerable Harmonic
support zone at the 800 level.… It is amazing to consider the
significance of the 800 area and the price action of the S&P 500 for
the past 9 months. The clear Bullish AB=CD patterns and the
longer-term trend line support are defining this area as a historic
point for the index.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/
dow/harmonic/markets/spx0303.htm)

22

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

Standard & Poor’s 500 (^SPX): Weekly
Bullish Bat Completing Within the Bullish
AB=CD(ab=cd) Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ) @ 800
Although the ultimate bear market low reversed at 770—slightly beyond the weekly PRZ, the
Bullish Bat pinpointed the precise area within this long-term support zone that marked the
beginning of the new bull market. In fact, in my April 2003 S&P 500 market report, I wrote:
“The ‘tea leaves’ of the entire Harmonic convergence at 800 says
that the bottom has completed for the index. The impending
breakout of the bear market channel will be significant, and it will
confirm this 800 as a historic low. For these reasons, the official
position is now NEUTRAL with a bias to the upside. Although the
index still needs to take out some resistance levels—namely a
strong move above the 950 area—the index has resolved this longawaited Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/spx0403.htm)

Figure 1.3 shows the distinct Bullish Bat that developed within the larger PRZ in the
800 area.

Figure 1.3

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

23

Standard & Poor’s 500 Conclusion
My experience in writing these market reports for the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index in the early
days was one of the most educational endeavors of my life. The harmonic measurement
strategies proved incredibly reliable, as distinct patterns and Fibonacci ratios effectively defined
the critical turning points in the index for a period of many years. It is important to emphasize
that these techniques were new during the time that I offered my advisory service (1998–2004).
However, I knew that this new approach effectively analyzed price action on all time frames.
Therefore, I knew that if I properly applied these measurement strategies to the daily and
the weekly time frames as I did for intra-day trading, I would be able to accurately decipher
the long-term price action. The history of these reports clearly shows how the harmonic
measurement techniques consistently predicted the overall market direction and defined those
critical areas where the trend would potentially change.

NASDAQ Composite Review
In much the same manner as the S&P 500, the NASDAQ Composite Index possessed many
harmonic patterns and responded well to long-term Fibonacci ratios. Although the price action
was much more volatile in the NASDAQ, the predominant trend throughout this time was
dictated by several distinct “harmonic events” that accurately defined the future price action in
each case.
One notable aspect of the bear market in the NASDAQ Composite was the overwhelming
failure of many significant long-term patterns. The violation of many of these setups seriously
questioned the integrity of the entire Harmonic Trading approach. Although the overwhelming
failure of most bullish patterns during this time might have presented a frustrating environment
for the bulls, the technical phenomenon of these pattern violations was signaling a severe
decline at hand. I address these situations a bit later in this section, but there was as much to
learn about failed harmonic price action on the upside as well as the downside.

The Parabolic Rally to 5000
It was amazing. Incredible. Simply stated, the rally from August 1999 to the top in March 2000
was the greatest bullish price action that I have ever witnessed. This was an era of insanely
priced tech stocks that frequently traded 10–20 point price swings every day. Stocks such as
Dell, Microsoft, Qualcomm, Yahoo!, and others were among the greatest bull markets of all
time—right up there with the Tulip Bulb and 1929 manias!

24

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

NASDAQ Composite ($COMPQ): Daily
The Rally to 5000
Despite the unprecedented rally, the price action continued higher. Figure 1.4 shows the
incredibly bullish price action from early 1999 to the top in March 2000. I discussed the
significance of the violated 3.14 extension in my January 2000 NASDAQ Composite market
report.

B

3.14
X

A

Figure 1.4

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

25

“This latest NASDAQ rally has been incredible. The volatile action
in some of the biggest NASDAQ stocks, such as Qualcomm and
Yahoo, has left many wondering if this is truly a “blow-off” top. And
that is the big question! In the past few weeks, the index has rallied
above the extreme 3.14 projection from the August correction.
Although the NASDAQ did sell off after exceeding this level, it has
found support in this area. One note of caution: With such sharp
action, the index could rally to the 1.618 of the XA leg, which would
put it at 4500! Believe it or not, I think this is possible. Stay
cautiously long but watch the first area potential resistance area at
4300.”
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/nasdaqjan00.htm)

The Inevitable Decline
It was coming. You could feel it. Tired and drunk on 30% year-over-year gains, the NASDAQ
Composite was sitting like Humpty Dumpty on the wall, and he was ready to fall! The index
tested the 5000 area briefly and started to stall. The one question on everyone’s mind was: “Is
this sustainable?” Clearly, it was not. Although making an arbitrary decision that the 5000 level
is critical psychological resistance does not represent the most cogent argument for a top, the
inability of the index to rally significantly above this area was the first sign of trouble. The index
started to roll over shortly after testing 5000, as it completed the all-time peak of the bull
market. Although the 5000 level had the ominous feeling of a historic top, the price action still
needed to exhibit technical behavior of the breakdown at hand. In my opinion, the top could not
be confirmed until the price action actually started to break down and begin to exhibit bearish
behavior. As a side note, I have spoken to many market technicians in past conversations
regarding the top in the NASDAQ at 5000. Many of these analysts made accurate predictions,
calling for a peak in the 5000 area. Intuitively, this seemed the right call. However, the price
action still needed to begin to manifest such behavior. From a Harmonic Trading perspective,
the NASDAQ Composite offered several distinct signals that confirmed the top at 5000. The first
was a distinct Bearish Bat that was forming on the retest of the initial peak above 5000. In my
NASDAQ Composite March 2000 market report, I outlined this setup:
“The NASDAQ formed another clear pattern, as the bearish Gartley
that completed recently has yielded a nice reversal. The pattern
was projected to complete around 5000—just past the .786 off the
high.”
(Author’s Note: I had not released the Bat yet, and I was calling this
a Gartley.)
(HarmonicTrader.com http://www.harmonictrader.com/members/dow/
harmonic/markets/nasd0300.htm)
