
~ON~LUSION

Whether you are converting a collar trade into a ratio spread or you are
selling options, your success is not because of how smart or clever you
are; it is based on how well you follow the rhythms of the market. If the
rhythm of the market dictates you can switch your original position or you
can add onto your position, then do so without hesitation. If the rhythm of
the market dictates that you exit a trade, then you must exit without hesitation. The worst actions that can be taken are to force a trade to become
something it is not or to give up too early.
This chapter was designed to highlight just a few of the different types
of conversions that are possible as you blend advanced and basic strategies together. In no way is this a comprehensive list of all of the different
scenarios and possibilities. I could write an entire new book devoted just
to that. This chapter is designed to highlight the fact that as you become
comfortable with calculating your profit and loss potentials ahead of time,
you give yourself the ability to trade in such a way that you can prepare for
multiple opportunities while you are in the same trade.

ell \ .. 'I'I·;R I:>

Analyzing Charts
and Strategies

s

o much information has been given throughout this book that it might
be overwhelming to get started. This chapter is meant to help you
settle in and get used to playing around with the concepts of risk
management. This cannot replace real world trading, but it can supplement
your education.
The next several examples take a look at the five markets that we have
been consistently reviewing. There are two charts for each example. The
before chart has no teclmical analysis indicators and is representative of
the trade setup. The after chart is overlaid with technical analysis information and shows where the market ended up. This setup encourages you to
think critically about how you could have approached the markets using
anyone of the fifteen strategies in the book. I suggest that you photocopy
and enlarge the charts so you can write on them.
The only rules that are associated with each of these charts is that you
write up your risk/reward scenario based on particular capital constraints
and the option prices presented to you. There aren't right or wrong answers. I then discuss how I would have approached the market, based on
the same information.
Every trade you execute should undergo the same type of scrutiny.
By taking the time to analyze the market, even if you are an active trader,
you can create a myriad of possibilities for yourself. This type of critical
approach prevents your capital from being unnecessarily lost. It also sets
the stage for a more cerebral approach to the markets. Since our emotions
of fear and greed tend to wreak havoc on our trading decisions, the more
ways we have to cope with them the better off we are.
Let's begin.

243

244

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

S&P 500
There are two S&P 500 futures contracts. There is the full-size contract
with a margin that can exceed $20,000 on any given day, depending on the
volatility, and there is the Emini S&P 500 with a margin that hovers around
$4,000. The Emini S&P 500 is therefore about one-fifth the size of a full-size
contract. If you had a small account valued at $15,000, how would you interact with the following scenario? Would you use an option? How many?
What if you wanted to trade the full-size contract-would a synthetic futures contract make sense?

Before
In Figure 15.1 it's obvious that the market has topped out. For those classical chartists, we have either a triple top or a head and shoulders pattern
forming. How would you approach the market if you were assuming that
the market was headed for some weakness?
Considering the option values in Tables 15.1 and 15.2, would it be
worthwhile to put on a collar, a synthetic, or a bear put spread?

- 1540.0
1530,0,

' .. 1S2!t.O
;: : \510.0
1500.0

10490.0 !
1480.0
"

-

i

470.0

H5O.0

1430.0,

I

1420.0

i

! TrJd=;~I;';"·tC9l·"'!!!,.m-;;;"""""~""'oomm
=~''''''"';;;;-----;;
'''
0=
<i27/Ol-''''D5I; ; ;i1;;;;~,r--'''''''
=
''''''''-'-'''''''''''''
'm;;-----;;;;
Il<rnIV7
=---;;;;
'm"",CI<l,,,,_-J 141 0.0
~:§!IOBttfore

FIGURE 15. t

S&P 500 Index Before

Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved .

24-

Analyzing Charts and Strategies
TABLE 15.1

Full Size Option Table
Type

Strike

Cost

Amount

SPN8
SPN8
SPN8

Call
Call
Put

1600
1575
1525

$9.00
$13.80
$5.00

$2 ,25 0
$3,45 0
$1 ,250

TABLE 15.2

Emini Option Table

ESN8
ESN8

Type

Strike

Cost

Amount

Call
Call

1600
1575

$18.50
$20.50

$925
$1,025

We can't determine by looking at the chart whether the market will
flip around and go back up, nor do we have a lot of fundamental data that
helps us make sense of the activity at the time. Nevertheless, two things
are staring us in the face: the market seems to be at a top, and there is a
double line of support around the 1525 price area.
If we were to execute a trade by shorting at 1575 and it reached the
1525 level, how much could be made? On a full-sized contract we make
$12,500, and on a mini-contract we make one-fifth that or $2,500. Would
this be a worthwhile risk?

After
In Figure 15.2, not only did the S&P drop, it broke through the 1525 level
and kept going, causing new lows as far down as 1400 and 1425. In hindsight a synthetic option would have been the perfect vehicle; there would
have been no capping of profits.
At the same time you have to ask yourself what if it had not kept going
down? Would you be prepared to give the gains you made? Would a collar
have worked just as well to cap off the risk of the market turning back
on you?
In trading there is the constant second-guessing of both your decisionmaking process and your methodology. I would steer well clear of anyone
who trades as if they are invincible. There will always be better ways you
could have tackled a trade. The only thought you have to keep in your mind
is that you acted 100 percent right based on the information you had at the

246

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

SP.o67: S&P 500 Indox (pit) Cadj liq (Dally bars)
8olllnoer Lower Band (C.20,2) SOllinger Upper sari<! (C,20,2) MovinOAvg (C,50) 0812412007.1509,2 (+11.2)
'","0

161XUI

1S1S.0

t

- IL_- ~I'lllll' w'll
.'",/-------i . . _---

t" ,.",.;o;~.. · . ......................

"", '1/"'-'

H2S.0

• ..... 14000

t.
t· ..
~7

W19101

OSllJ3lO7

sap 500 After

FIGURE 15.2 S&P 500 Index After
Source: TradeNavigator,com © 2007, All rights reserved.

time you made the decision, Does that mean you can't change your mind
later? Of course not! With new information can come new decisions and
actions, but, as with most things, you can only do the best that you can
when you do it.

EURO
The euro currency trades in so many forms that it should actually have its
own exchange, There is the euro cash market, for those with a lot of money,
There is the euro spot market, for those who want to trade as if they have
a lot of money. There is the euro futures market, for those who think they
have a lot of money, There is the euro ETF, for those who believe they are
nothing like the rest of the euro traders. Finally there is the euro options
market, for those who wish they had a lot of money. And then there are
the cross-currency euro contracts that have no relationship to the dollar:
euro/yen, GBP/euro, euro/aud, etc.
The reality is that all these traders, no matter their market or exchange,
are affected the exact same way, by the exact same charts, by the exact
same news. While each one gains profits at varying levels and rates, and

Analyzing Charts and Strategies

247

pay different types of commissions or spreads, at the end of the day long is
long and short is short.
The artificial boundaries set between these various sectors of euro
trading, and on a larger scale forex trading altogether, is fluidly traversed by
professional traders looking for arbitrage opportunities. The imperfect system of having so many different products coming to bear on one currency
exposes the absurdity of the situation. Nimble minds and nimble fingers
are able to exploit these razor-thin discrepancies or at the very least apply their skill across the myriad of exchanges that are all trading the same
instrument.
The following example is from the futures euro trading screen. It could
have just as well been the forex euro screen, the cash euro screen, or the
Emini euro screen.

Before
In Figure 15.3 we see the spot currency traded euro. It has recently gapped
up and seems to be poised for a pullback. As a spot trader you are caught
on a 24-hour timetable, so regardless of what the trend is, you typically find
yourself forced to exit the market when faced with this kind of volatility.

FIGURE 15.3 Eu ro Before

Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserve d .

248

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

What do you do to hold on to this trade? Do you believe this is the beginning
of a much larger rally, or do you look to first catch any pullback in price?
There are a few choices available. A spot forex trader could decide to
use an option as a hedge technique. For the most part, the trend seems to be
long, but there is the possibility that a counter-trend is forming a possible
short. There is also the possibility of creating a synthetic call option by
purchasing a put at-the-money and riding the spot long.

After
In Figure 15.4 it can easily be seen that the gap up was the beginning of

unprecedented price levels in the euro.
With the right tools in place, there was a tremendous profit opportunity. The success of a trader comes from his ability to take his nose off the
canvas and look at the big picture. Since the euro's inception it has been a
powerhouse of value in one direction-up. From its humble origins of being valued at less than a dollar to reaching parity to eventually outstripping
the dollar for years.
This meteoric rise cannot last forever. Therefore, a systematic approach should be in place to manage both upside and downside risk for
years to corne. A sudden drop in price could start with an innocently small

FIGURE 15.4 Euro After

Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

249

Analyzing Charts and Strategies

gap down, before it comes crashing down. Strategies that go beyond one
marketplace or one exchange are a necessary component for anyone who
hopes to succeed in the long run with forex trading.

GOLD
The use of gold as a storehouse of value has been around since ancient
times and most likely will still be around when the book you hold in your
hands crumbles to dust. That being the case, approaching gold investing
intelligently is paramount to any trader's success. Failing to recognize the
winds of change will most assuredly have you holding the bag when gold
is no longer fashionable and missing out when it is.

Before
In Figure 15.5 we see gold attempting to reclaim territory by trying to break
through resistance at former highs.
Can gold do it? The candlestick makes it appear as if gold may actually
tum around. From an inverted hammer at the top, to a spinning top, to a
GC:oej~~Goki COillfx\PIij't;adJ LlqK1PliOY bali)

"';"-~---'--

Tr.deH.v· Ilor.com
1tl21l06~

GoId_

1211J1tU6

12i21!W

'OfJW1V7

01124107

02.101107

FIGURE.5.5 Gold Before
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

250

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

hammer, the candlesticks are reflecting the market's volatility. Couple that
with the collapse of the last rally, and the slow steady pace gold has had to
get back, there is the possibility of a breakout to new highs. With so much
uncertainty, would a straddle at 730 be wise? What about a strangle? Buy
a call at 740 and buy a put at 720, just outside range, but well within the
market's average true range CATR). Would it make sense to sell a naked
put and collect the premium under these circumstances?
In making a decision there are two potentials. If the market moves up,
the next point of resistance is in the 800s and there is the potential to make
$7,000; if the market drops, it apparently has support at 685 that would net
you $4,200. So no matter which way it goes, you should not be risking more
than $2, 100 to $3,000. An outright futures co~tract may not make the most
sense.

After
In Figure 15.6 gold drops like a lead balloon. It drops through the 50-day MA
and falls back down to the 685 level of support and begins to tum around.
A strangle, in two ofthe money options, would have probably been the best
bet based on the risk/reward profile.

GC..oeFGold comex(PH) Cadll.lq (Dally baR)

l u.u
01126$7

02I09I07

02.l'2Ml1

03(12107

03l26J01

/W1CWl

(W14J07

0-5I06I07

Gold After

FIGURE.5.6

Gold After

Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

n5I22IOl

2~1

Analyzing Charts and Strategies

CORN
The dual life of corn has had a deep impact on the United States. (lII
thought to be a major commodity cash crop, corn has slowly evolwd in'
an alternative fuel and not everyone is happy about that. From farm eI '
consumers, anyone involved with corn is beginning to feel the impact that
this shift in consumption has created. Once it was an inexpensive COIllmodity that could be purchased for a few dollars. All that changed at tht'
beginning of the twenty-first century. Corn took the lead in one of the mo;aggressive grain rallies ever, actually doubling in price with the expectation
that it could go even higher.

Before
In Figure 15.7 we see corn sitting on a sideways support at $4.10 after collapsing from a rally that reached $5.15.
The sideways support makes the trade perfect for an option as a hare!
stop. If it rallies back up from the current price of $4.36 to $5.15, there is a

C"()67: Com ceT (Pit) CadJ llq (Dally b.ra)

""'12<)0'-""""'"

jl ::
"...
.....

1::.....

FIGURE 15.7 Corn Before
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

252

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

profit potential of 79 cents or $3,950. A stop loss can be placed at whatever
money management target you may have.
A synthetic call could also work, or a ratio spread could be used to
advantage of this trade for almost free. Whatever the case, it is important
to make sure that a trade like this is not overlooked. Markets that move
sideways for any significant period of time will be explosive, regardless
of the direction. It is best to have all the necessary bases, long and short,
covered in order to corne out on top.

After
It appears this market did a little bit of both: In Figure 15.8 the market exploded to the upside, reaching as high as $4.80, then collapsed in a beautiful
fashion.
The com drop took only four days before it was firmly below the
50-day MA, giving it a bearish trend. Depending on how nimble you are,
you may be out of your primary position with a profit. The most likely outcome, based on the speed of the move, is that any long positions would
have been breakeven, at best. The short position would have had to make

C..()67: Com CBTjPlt)cadj Uc(rt)a1lY bars,

FIGURE 15.8 Corn After
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

Analyzing Charts and Strategies

253

up all of the work, which in this case would not have been too bad since
the com market dropped to $3. 78lbushel.

OIL
Black gold. The twentieth and twenty-first centuries have seen people die,
kill, and lie to possess this commodity. While it has been the back of modernizing society, for the most part it has successfully helped ruin our environment and our intercontinental relationships. In spite of all that, one
good thing definitely comes from the discovery of oil-the end ofthe killing
of whales for their fat.

Before
Figure 15.9 shows with oil what classic chartists call a triangle formation,
possibly even a pennant or flag.
This formation portends the potential for the market to explode upward. This would be one of the few times that using just a stop loss may

FIGURE 15.9 Oil Before
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

254

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

be appropriate Or you could use an option as a hedge, or use this setup
to sell puts and collect the premium. If your account can't handle the high
margins that oil requires, then you could create a synthetic futures position
of two options with a third option for protection.

After
In Figure 15.10 we see the flag proved itself and the oil market shot
straight up.
This is a prime example of why paper trading or demo trading can
be frustrating. According to the money management rules in Winning the
Trading Game you would need $30,000 to t~ade one oil contract. There is
always the possibility of trading the mini-oil contract, but it lacks a little
of the same impact. When faced with a margin or capital intensive market like this and the trade setup looks just right, consider the ways you
can reduce your margin expense. Whether you use a crack spread or put
on a calendar spread to take advantage of contango or backwardation.
Do not give up on figuring out an inexpensive way to participate in the
trade.

CL-067: Crude 011 NY (PKj Cad) Uq IDal1y baraj
6oUiOOf;f"lower 8IIInd (C,2(l,2) Bollinger Upper Band IC,ZO,2) MOYiooA"iI iC,~) 01111;2001_ 69,90 {oi.n ( ": n.oo

6$.00

"'.00

"'.00

/"'"."'

--"'----'"

. ,,- -_ ......

,

,

,/

}rtdetilvigAtor,CDm

.......... .......
~
.. ~- ~'-:;"--""
---""
-- --';
'-;';;
-" 7
' ..-............ .............. ___ ..

G4I11J01

04f2SlO7

05I0Wl)7

05l23IG7

0Mt7107

FIGURE 15.10 Oil After
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

ot!l21107

07I06I07

Analyzing Charts and Strategies

255

CONCLUSION
By analyzing charts, whether in a paper format like this or in an online
demo account, you have the ability to test your ideas and theories in depth.
They say that practice makes perfect, but it is perfect practice that makes
perfect. As long as you properly apply the principles and ideas you have
learned throughout the book properly in your practice trading, then your
actual trading will become more effective. This puts you leaps and bounds
ahead of the majority of retail traders and that much closer to becoming a
professional trader.

(; II \ .- '.' ••; It • (j

Applying These
Strategies
with Stocks

hroughout this book we have looked at futures and forex transactions
consistently. Yet every strategy, beginner or advanced, can be applied
to the stock market as well. Technical analysis is the same no matter
the market. Unfortunately, many stock investors look at futures and forex
trading and assun1e that there is some magical force working behind the
scenes that makes trading more difficult than stock investing. The truth is
a lot less magnanimous.
The misuse of leverage is the magical force that is misunderstood. The
majority of stock traders believe that they have to use the 20-to-1Ieverage
of futures or the 500-to-1Ieverage of forex in order to trade them, and that
is not the case. Futures and forex can be traded just like stocks. The face
value of a euro contract, U.S. $152,000, as ofthis writing, can be invested in
euros and an investor can make or lose money in a EURIUS contract with
a lot less volatility. The same can be said of a gold futures contract. The
face value of a gold contract is $92,000. An investor can put up the entire
$92,000, eliminating his leverage risk, and just gain or lose on the true value
of gold going up or down.
Because leverage is the key factor that separates futures and forex
trading from stock investing, it stands to reason that the majority of the
other factors will remain the same, such as the daisy-chain effect and the
strategies to exploit it. There are stocks, CFDs, single stock futures, and
options, each one designed to protect the other. If you are holding on to a
long stock position, like 97 percent of all stock traders, then you can protect yourself from a downturn in the stock with a CFD or a single stock
futures position. If you are in a CFD or a single stock futures position, you

T

257

258

ADVANC ED ST RATEGIES

could use either of these instruments to protect each other or use a stock
option to protect the CFD, single stock future, or stock position. The mechanics are identical to the futures and forex market.
In this chapter we take a quick glimpse of a few popular stocks and
how you can apply some of the strategies in the book to them. This chapter in no means is meant to be a complete tutorial on stocks. There are a
number of great books out there that will give you an in-depth breakdown
on analyzing a company's value. The goal here is to show you that once
you have come to a decision to be long a stock there are ways to protect
yourself. There is no need to watch your entire net worth evaporate while
you helplessly stand on the sidelines, when there are actual tools that have
been designed to help protect you.
When the dot-com bubble burst, over $Ttrillion of wealth evaporated.
The majority of investors could not afford to take such a loss. Anyone
of the strategies presented in this book could have either diminished their
losses or eliminated their losses altogether, if they had just known they
could do it. Trading is a zero sum game. Someone somewhere collected
the $7 trillion, whether it was the corporations and their venture capitalists
or sophisticated traders on Wall Street utilizing strategies to pick up the
low-hanging fruit. It's time that you learned how to do the same.

STOCKS
Stocks represent ownership in a corporation. The history of stock ownership has been dated as far back as ancient Mesopotamia. Today, the trading
of shares in corporations occurs in various parts around the world. From
the famous New York Stock Exchange to the ever-popular Japanese Nikkei
Stock Exchange, stock markets operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
in some form or fashion.
While stocks are well-known, there is little about them that is truly
understood. This leaves retail traders vulnerable to many of the stock market's inherent flaws. First and foremost, stocks are biased by nature. There
are no stock companies that list their shares to raise capital that want to
see the value of their shares drop. This leads to an overall market bias that
encourages stocks be bought but not sold.
There are limitations on shorting stocks; brokers insist on clients' buying shares even when the value of the stocks are decreasing, and any bit
of positive news has the ability to rally a stock. This overall tone has lulled
stock investors into a false sense of security, to the point where companies
like Enron and Worldcom can repeatedly tell their employees and shareholders to buy shares while they unload shares out the back door.
