
208

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

I think that these economists overstate their case for co‑movements
between dividends and prices. The wiggles in stock prices do not in fact
correspond very closely to wiggles in dividends. Recall that between the stock
market peak in September 1929 and the bottom in June 1932, when the
stock market fell 81% as measured by the real S&P Index, real dividends fell
only 11%. Between the stock market peak in January 1973 and the bottom in
December 1974, when the stock market fell 54% as measured by the real S&P
Index, real dividends fell only 6%. And there are many other such examples.
It is also likely that part of the reason for the observed co‑movement
between real prices and real dividends is the response of dividends to the
same factors—possibly including speculative bubbles—that irrationally influence prices. Managers set dividends, and in so doing, they may vary over time
the dividend‑earnings ratio, that is, the payout rate. The managers are part of
the same culture as the investing public, and are therefore probably influenced
often enough by the same varying sense of optimism and pessimism that
infects the public; they may allow this feeling to influence their decisions on
how much of a dividend to pay out. Thus, the mere fact that prices and dividends show some substantial similarity is not inconsistent with the possibility
that they are both influenced by fashions and fads.
In sum, stock prices clearly have a life of their own; they are not simply
responding to earnings or dividends. Nor does it appear that they are determined only by information about future earnings or dividends. In seeking
explanations of stock price movements, we must look elsewhere.

Excess Volatility and the Big Picture
There is indeed a good deal of evidence about market efficiency in academic finance journals, but it is hard to say that it is evidence for efficiency
rather than against it. A great many anomalies have been discovered over
the years within the efficient markets theory. These anomalies include the
January effect (stock prices tend to go up between December and January),
the small‑firm effect (small firms’ stocks tend to have higher returns), the
day‑of‑the‑week effect (the stock market tends to do poorly on Mondays),
and others. How then can we summarize this literature as supporting market efficiency?
One way of arguing that the literature nevertheless supports market efficiency is to claim that many of these have been small effects, not the stuff
of bull or bear markets. Another way is to note that many of these effects
diminished after they were discovered, as indeed the January effect weakened after 1995 and the small‑firm effect disappeared during the Millennium
Boom.24 This makes it tricky to summarize the literature. On the one hand,
the fact that these anomalies persisted for a long time shows that markets

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

209

are inefficient. On the other hand, the fact that many of them have weakened
suggests that there is a basic truth to the theory.25
Merton Miller, who was a leading advocate of efficient markets theory, recognized that there are indeed many little anomalies, but he argued that they
are inconsequential: “That we abstract from all these stories in building our
models is not because the stories are uninteresting but because they may be
too interesting and thereby distract us from the pervasive market forces that
should be our principal concern.”26 But he did not explain his presumption
that the pervasive market forces are rational ones.
Abstracting (as Miller urged us to do) from the little details about
day‑of‑the‑week effects and the like, what is the basic evidence that stock
markets are efficient in the big‑picture sense? Do large changes in stock
prices over the years really reflect information about important changes in
the underlying companies?
The evidence that there is not much short‑run momentum or inertia—that
there is not much predictability of day‑to‑day or month‑to‑month changes
in stock price indices—does not tell us anything about efficiency in the
big‑picture sense. We already know from simple economic reasoning that
day‑to‑day changes in stock prices cannot be very forecastable, since such
forecastability would be too good a profit opportunity to be true; it would be
too easy to get rich.
One method for judging whether there is evidence in support of the basic
validity of the efficient markets theory, which I published in an article in
the American Economic Review in 1981 (at the same time as a similar paper
by Stephen LeRoy and Richard Porter appeared), is to see whether the very
volatility of speculative prices, such as stock prices, can be justified by the
variability of dividends over long intervals of time. If the stock price movements are to be justified in terms of the future dividends that firms pay out,
as the basic version of the efficient markets theory would imply, then under
efficient markets we cannot have volatile prices without subsequently volatile
dividends.27
In fact, my article concluded, no movement of U.S. aggregate stock prices
beyond the trend growth of prices has ever been subsequently justified by
dividend movements, as the dividend present value with constant discount
rate has shown an extraordinarily smooth growth path. This conclusion,
coming at a time when the finance profession was much more attached
to the efficient markets theory than it is now, produced a strong reaction.
I received more attacks on this work than I could hope to answer. No one
questioned the observation that stock prices have been more volatile than
the dividend present value—only whether the difference between the two
was statistically significant or whether my interpretation of this difference
was on target.

210

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

5000

Price

Actual stock price (P)

Present value (P*)

500

50
1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

2040

Figure 11.2
Stock Prices and Dividend Present Values, 1871–2013
Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index, 1871–2013 (heavy irregular curve), and
present values, 1871–2013, of subsequent real dividends calculated using a constant
discount rate (dashed smooth curve). Source: Author’s calculations using data from
sources given in Figure 1.1 and described in Chapter 1, note 3. See text and note
28 of this chapter for a description of the calculations. The vertical axis uses a log
scale, in contrast to earlier figures in this book, and also shows only January of each
year; hence the real stock price curve, which is otherwise the same as in Figure 1.1,
looks different here.

Included in my article was a figure showing the real (inflation‑corrected)
S&P Composite Stock Price Index for 1871–1979 and, on the same figure, the
dividend present value, the present value for each year of real dividends paid
subsequent to that year on the shares making up the index, computed by making an assumption about dividends after the last year. An updated version
of that figure, showing both the stock price and the dividend present value
through 2003, is shown in Figure 11.2.28
The dividend present value is not known with certainty in the year to
which it corresponds, since it is determined entirely by dividends after the
year, which have yet to be paid. According to the efficient markets model, the
dividend present value subsequent to any given year is the (as yet unknown)
true fundamental value of the stock market in that year. The actual level of
the real stock market in that same year, the stock price shown in Figure 11.2,

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

211

is supposed to be the optimal prediction, using information available in that
year, of one of the dividend present values shown for the same year.
Looking at this figure, we can get a sense of the extent of big‑picture, important evidence for the efficiency of the aggregate stock market in the United
States. If the dividend present value moved up and down massively over time,
and if the actual stock price appeared to move with these movements as if
it were successfully forecasting the changes in the dividend present value,
then we could say that there was evidence that stock prices were behaving
in accordance with the tenets of the efficient markets theory. But we see that
the present-value series has not been more volatile than the price series itself.
Moreover, there is little tendency of the stock prices to forecast the dividend
present values.29
The dividend present value is extremely steady and trend-like, partly
because the calculations for present value use data over a range far into the
future and partly because dividends have not moved very dramatically. Now
that one sees present value plotted over a long range of time, it seems obvious
from what some of us (who have thought about it and have good intuitive
grasp of quantities) have always known at gut level: the big stock market
movements in history were not in fact justified by what actually happened to
the businesses of the various companies later. One might try to argue that a
little over a century is not a long enough time period to be confident that one
would expect to see such justification, but the fact still remains that there has
been no such justification.
The point I made in 1981 was that stock prices appear to be too volatile to
be considered in accord with efficient markets. Assuming that stock prices are
supposed to be an optimal predictor of the dividend present value, then they
should not jump around erratically if the true fundamental value is growing
along a smooth trend. Only if the public could predict the future perfectly
should the price be as volatile as the present value, and in that case it should
match up perfectly with the present value. If the public cannot predict well,
then the forecast should move around a lot less than the present value. But
that’s not what we see in Figure 11.2.
We learn by considering Figure 11.2 that the common interpretation given
in the media for stock market fluctuations in terms of the outlook for the
short‑run business cycle is generally misguided. The prospect that a temporary recession is on the horizon that will lower future dividends should have
virtually no impact on stock prices, if the efficient markets theory is correct.
Recessions have just been too short and too small historically to justify the
stock price movements that are associated with them. Fluctuations in stock
prices, if they are to be interpretable in terms of the efficient markets theory,
must instead be due to new information about the longer‑run outlook for real

212

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

dividends. Yet in the entire history of the U.S. stock market, we have never
seen such longer-run fluctuations, since dividends have closely followed a
steady growth path.
As I argued in my 1981 paper, the only way to reconcile the volatility of stock
prices with the efficient markets model without relying on ad hoc assumptions
about changing stock market discount rates is to suppose that, one way or the
other, the historical fluctuations of dividends around their growth path are not
representative of the potential fluctuations. That is, one would have to say that
the fluctuations observed in market prices were the result of people’s legitimate
concerns with possible major and lasting dividend movements that just did not
chance to happen in the century of data we observe. For example, people might
have been concerned about a big, rare event, such as a complete nationali­zation
and confiscation of the stock market by the government, or an enormous technological breakthrough that would make existing companies able to pay many
times more dividends. They could also be concerned, in pricing stocks, with the
movements of future interest rates or of movements in the aggregate economy,
possibilities that are considered in the Nobel Lecture in the appendix.30
As noted earlier, my work invited the attention of an army of critics. Most
notable among them was Robert C. Merton, a brilliant financial theorist
who also was to suffer a major financial loss as a principal in the Long Term
Capital Management hedge fund. Merton, with Terry Marsh, wrote an article
in the American Economic Review in 1986 that argued against my results and
concluded, ironically, that speculative markets were not too volatile.31
John Campbell and I wrote a number of papers attempting to put these
claims of excess volatility on a more secure footing, and we developed statistical models to study the issue and deal with some of the problems emphasized
by the critics.32 We felt that we had established in a fairly convincing way that
stock markets do violate the efficient markets model.
Our research has not completely settled the matter, however. There are just
too many possible statistical issues that can be raised, and the sample provided
by only a little over a century of data cannot prove anything conclusively.
It should also be noted that some substantial fraction of the volatility in
financial markets is justified by news about future dividends or earnings. The
very trend-like behavior of U.S. corporate dividends over the past century
was probably partly due to luck, not a law saying that dividends must hug
a trend. Taking account of uncertainty about the trend, Campbell and I, in
interpreting the results of one of our statistical studies, estimated that 27% of
the annual return volatility of the U.S. stock market might be justified in terms
of genuine information about future dividends.33 Campbell and John Ammer,
using similar methodology and a more recent (postwar) data set, found that
15% of the variability in monthly returns in the U.S. stock market could be
attributed to genuine information about future dividends.34

EFFIC I E N T M A R K E TS , RAN D O M WAL KS , AN D BUBBLES

213

There appears to be less evidence of excess volatility in long‑term interest
rates and little evidence of excess volatility in the spread between stock price
indices.35 Individual stocks, for which the present value of future dividends
is much more volatile than with the aggregate market, show less excess
volatility than the market as a whole.36 Excess volatility due to speculative
bubbles is probably just one of the factors that drive speculative markets, and
the prominence of this factor varies across markets and over time. We are not
always in an excess volatility situation.
But we are in such a situation, or recently have been, in many of our stock
markets, housing markets, and even commodity markets. Defenders of the
recent high price levels of these markets have had a difficult time making
an inspiring case that the sudden increases we have seen in these markets
can be interpreted as the rational efficient-markets response to genuine new
information.
Some of the defenders have therefore moved to a very different explanation
of the sudden price increases. To justify the sudden upswings in the market,
these defenders abandon the idea that markets have always been efficient.
Instead, they say that the markets are only just now becoming efficient. They
say that people have suddenly learned the truth, after lifetimes of ignorance.
This argument is in sharp contradiction to the theory that markets are intrinsically efficient—and yet we cannot dismiss this argument out of hand, given
the large number of people who have been advancing it. We turn to an evaluation of this argument in the next chapter.

Twelve

Investor Learning—and Unlearning

A

t times of apparent speculative over­
pricing, such as the time of this writing, a rationalization for the exuberance in the stock market, as well as other
speculative markets, is that the public at large has learned that the long‑term
value of the market is really greater than they had thought it was and is greater
than conventional indicators would have suggested it should be. According
to this rationalization, the price-earnings ratio in the stock market is higher
today than the historical average because the public has now learned some
simple facts, facts about historical returns and diversification or about the
world situation. This argument differs from the efficient markets argument
in supposing that the market was previously priced too low because of public
ignorance. The argument is essentially: “The stock market was not efficient
for most of its history; it was too low; but (maybe) it is efficient now.”
It is potentially plausible, at least at first look, that society may have learned
that the market is much more valuable than it once was thought to be. Society
as a whole does learn, and the cumulative effect of such learning is the reason
that modern society has made such progress when compared with former centuries. But the question remains whether society has really learned something
important about the stock market: Is this really true? If so, what have we learned?

“Learning” about Risk
It is commonly said that people have recently learned that the stock market is
much less risky than they once thought it was, and that the stock market
214

I NVE S T O R L E A R N I N G —AN D UN L E ARN IN G

215

has always outperformed other investments. Their “learning” is allegedly
the result of widespread media coverage over recent years of the historical
superiority of stocks as investments. For example, there was the publication
in 1994 of the first edition of Jeremy Siegel’s book Stocks for the Long Run.
According to this view, people have realized that, in light of historical statistics, they have been too fearful of stocks. Armed with this new knowledge,
investors have now bid stock prices up to a higher level, to their rational or
true level, where the stocks would have been all along had there not been
excessive fear of them. Stocks, selling now at a higher price, will pay a correspondingly lower yield—but that is all right with investors, since they now
know that stocks are not all that risky. In other words, the equity premium, the
extra return that people require to be compensated for the risk of investing
in the stock market, has gone down, because investors have suddenly come
to appreciate the historical record of stock market risk.1
It is true that the public at times does not appear to perceive much risk
in the stock market. In Chapter 5, we saw survey results that showed that,
while popular support for the notion that “if there is another stock market
crash like October 19, 1987, the market will surely be back up within a couple
of years or so” has faded substantially since the peak of the stock market
in 2000, most people still believe this. So it is clear that the possibility of
major stock market declines does not worry most people very much. But is
this because people have acquired some genuinely new knowledge? Or are
the new public opinions caused by something altogether different—and
ephemeral?
A problem with this “new learning” theory is that the historical fact that
investors have supposedly learned is not a new revelation. The observation
that the stock market has largely outperformed other investments was made
as long ago as 1924 by a best‑selling book by Edgar Lawrence Smith. This book
made a number of historical comparisons of investments in stocks versus
bonds and found that stocks always came out ahead over long holding periods,
in both periods of rising general prices (inflation) and periods of declining
general prices (deflation).2 Smith emphasized—as did another author at the
time, Kenneth Van Strum—that investing in bonds was risky, too, because,
even though the nominal values of bond payments are fixed, their real value
fluctuates with the general price level.3
According to Professor Irving Fisher, writing in 1929, “These writings threw
a bombshell into the investing world.” Fisher thought that the bull market of
the 1920s had occurred because the public had learned from these books: “It
was only as the public came to realize, largely through the writing of Edgar
Lawrence Smith, that stocks were to be preferred to bonds during a period
of dollar depreciation, that the bull market began in good earnest to cause a
proper valuation of common shares.”4

216

ATTE MP TS TO R AT IONALIZE EXUBER ANC E

Others shared Fisher’s belief about public learning. Charles Amos Dice
wrote in 1929 that “the old prejudice against security markets and the fear
of them have been largely dispelled by public education regarding stocks
and bonds.”5 A writer for the New York Herald Tribune asserted in 1929: “It
is gratifying to observe the growth of business. . . . But there is a much
larger significance in the growth of understanding among the people who
make the growth of business possible. . . . There is nothing to retard the
progress of any sound industry when an increasing number of people
believe in it, become part owners in the business, and are regularly and
reliably informed.”6
If people did learn during the 1920s that stocks dominated bonds at 1920s
prices, they seem to have forgotten the information later, or at least changed
their feelings about it. The question before us now is this: Observing the
recent stock market, have they really “learned” this time that stocks always
outperform bonds, and will they continue to “know” this in the future?
The “fact” that Jeremy Siegel pointed out in his book Stocks for the Long
Run in 1994, is that in the United States there has been no thirty‑year period
over which bonds have outperformed stocks. The supposed fact is not really
true, since, as Jeremy Siegel himself pointed out in his book, stocks under­
performed bonds in the period 1831–61.7 That may seem like a long time
ago until one realizes that there have not been that many non-overlapping
thirty‑year periods in U.S. stock market history: only five such periods since
1861. There have been many overlapping thirty‑year periods, but of course
these are not independent pieces of evidence. Given the relatively short
history of thirty‑year periods of stock market returns, we must recognize
that there is little evidence that stocks cannot underperform in the future.
Siegel himself acknowledges this in the 2014 fifth edition of Stocks for the
Long Run, published after the post-2000 correction, which brought more
thirty-year intervals of U.S. stock market underperformance. The Moody’s
Aaa Corporate Bond Total Return Index outperformed the S&P 500 Total
Return Index in thirty-year periods ending in 2010 and 2011.
I have identified in this book three major peaks of the price‑earnings ratio
before the 2000 height: peaks in June 1901, September 1929, and January 1966.
Note that we are again up around the levels of the price-earnings ratio of
the 1966 market. In each of the ten‑year periods following the 1929 and 1966
peaks, the stock market return underperformed short‑term interest rates.8
If we take twenty‑year periods as our standard, then it is true that, of these
three time periods, only in the 1901–21 period did stocks really underperform
short‑term interest rates.9 But in each of the twenty‑year periods following
these peaks, the stock market did badly in real (inflation‑corrected) terms.
The (geometric) average real return on the S&P Composite Index was –0.2%
