
Overbury's chamber, and found him in infinite torment, with contention between the
strength of nature and the working of the poison; and it being very like that nature had
gotten the better in this contention, by the thrusting out of boils, blotches, and blains,
they, fearing it might come to light by the judgment of physicians, the foul play that had
been offered him, consented to stifle him with the bedclothes, which accordingly was
performed; and so ended his miserable life, with the assurance of the conspirators that he
died by the poison; none thinking otherwise than these two murderers."
The sudden death -- the indecent haste of the funeral, and the non-holding of an inquest
upon the body, strengthened the suspicions that were afloat. Rumour, instead of
whispering, began to speak out; and the relatives of the deceased openly expressed their
belief that their kinsman had been murdered. But Rochester was still all powerful at
court, and no one dared to utter a word to his discredit. Shortly afterwards, his marriage
with the Countess of Essex was celebrated with the utmost splendour, the King himself
being present at the ceremony.
It would seem that Overbury's knowledge of James's character was deeper than Rochester
had given him credit for, and that he had been a true prophet when he predicted that his
marriage would eventually estrange James from his minion. At this time, however,
Rochester stood higher than ever in the royal favour; but it did not last long - conscience,
that busy monitor, was at work. The tongue of rumour was never still; and Rochester,
who had long been a guilty, became at last a wretched man. His cheeks lost their colour -his eyes grew dim; and he became moody, careless, and melancholy. The King seeing
him thus, took at length no pleasure in his society, and began to look about for another
favourite. George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, was the man to his mind; quick-witted,
handsome, and unscrupulous. The two latter qualities alone were sufficient to recommend
him to James I. In proportion as the influence of Rochester declined, that of Buckingham
increased. A falling favourite has no friends; and Rumour wagged her tongue against
Rochester louder and more pertinaciously than ever. A new favourite, too, generally
endeavours to hasten by a kick the fall of the old one; and Buckingham, anxious to work
the complete ruin of his forerunner in the King's good graces, encouraged the relatives of
Sir Thomas Overbury to prosecute their inquiries into the strange death of their kinsman.
James was rigorous enough in the punishment of offences when he was not himself
involved. He piqued himself, moreover, on his dexterity in unravelling mysteries. The
affair of Sir Thomas Overbury found him congenial occupation. He set to work by
ordering the arrest of Sir Jervis Elwes. James, at this early stage of the proceedings, does
not seem to have been aware that Rochester was so deeply implicated. Struck with horror
at the atrocious system of slow poisoning, the King sent for all the Judges. According to
Sir Anthony Weldon, he knelt down in the midst of them, and said, "My Lords the
Judges, it is lately come to my hearing that you have now in examination a business of
poisoning. Lord! in what a miserable condition shall this kingdom be (the only famous
nation for hospitality in the world) if our tables should become such a snare, as that none
could eat without danger of life, and that Italian custom should be introduced among us!
Therefore, my Lords, I charge you, as you will answer it at that great and dreadful day of
judgment, that you examine it strictly, without layout, affection, or partiality. And if you

shall spare any guilty of this crime, God's curse light on you and your posterity! and if I
spare any that are guilty, God's curse light on me and my posterity for ever!"
The imprecation fell but too surely upon the devoted house of Stuart. The solemn oath
was broken, and God's curse did light upon him and his posterity!
The next person arrested after Sir Jervis Elwes, was Weston, the under-keeper; then
Franklin and Mrs. Turner; and, lastly, the Earl and Countess of Somerset, to which
dignity Rochester had been advanced since the death of Overbury.
Weston was first brought to trial. Public curiosity was on the stretch. Nothing else was
talked of, and the court on the day of trial was crowded to suffocation. The "State Trials"
report, that Lord Chief Justice Coke "laid open to the jury the baseness and cowardliness
of poisoners, who attempt that secretly against which there is no means of preservation or
defence for a man's life; and how rare it was to hear of any poisoning in England, so
detestable it was to our nation. But the devil had taught divers to be cunning in it, so that
they can poison in what distance of space they please, by consuming the nativum
calidum, or humidum radicale, in one month, two or three, or more, as they list, which
they four manner of ways do execute; viz. haustu, gustu, odore, and contactu."
When the indictment was read over, Weston made no other reply than, "Lord have mercy
upon me! Lord have mercy upon me!" On being asked how he would be tried, he refused
to throw himself upon a jury of his country, and declared, that he would be tried by God
alone. In this he persisted for some time. The fear of the dreadful punishment for
contumacy induced him, at length, to plead "Not guilty," and take his trial in due course
of law.
[The punishment for the contumacious was expressed by the words onere, frigore, et
fame. By the first was meant that the culprit should be extended on his back on the
ground, and weights placed over his body, gradually increased, until he expired.
Sometimes the punishment was not extended to this length, and the victim, being allowed
to recover, underwent the second portion, the frigore, which consisted in his standing
naked in the open air, for a certain space, in the sight of all the people. The third, or fame,
was more dreadful, the statute saying, "That he was to be preserved with the coarsest
bread that could be got, and water out of the next sink or puddle, to the place of
execution; and that day he had water he should have no bread, and that day he had bread,
he should have no water;" and in this torment he was to linger as long as nature would
hold out.]
All the circumstances against him were fully proved, and he was found guilty and
executed at Tyburn. Mrs. Turner, Franklin, and Sir Jervis Elwes were also brought to
trial, found guilty, and executed between the 19th of October and the 4th of December
1615; but the grand trial of the Earl and Countess of Somerset did not take place till the
month of May following.

On the trial of Sir Jervis Elwes, circumstances had transpired, showing a guilty
knowledge of the poisoning on the part of the Earl of Northampton the uncle of Lady
Somerset, and the chief falconer Sir Thomas Monson. The former was dead; but Sir
Thomas Monson was arrested, and brought to trial. It appeared, however, that he was too
dangerous a man to be brought to the scaffold. He knew too many of the odious secrets of
James I, and his dying speech might contain disclosures which would compromise the
King. To conceal old guilt it was necessary to incur new: the trial of Sir Thomas Monson
was brought to an abrupt conclusion, and himself set at liberty!
Already James had broken his oath. He now began to fear that he had been rash in
engaging so zealously to bring the poisoners to punishment. That Somerset would be
declared guilty there was no doubt, and that he looked for pardon and impunity was
equally evident to the King. Somerset, while in the Tower, asserted confidently, that
James would not dare to bring him to trial. In this he was mistaken; but James was in an
agony. What the secret was between them will now never be known with certainty; but it
may be surmised. Some have imagined it to be the vice to which the King was addicted;
while others have asserted, that it related to the death of Prince Henry, a virtuous young
man, who had held Somerset in especial abhorrence. The Prince died early, unlamented
by his father, and, as public opinion whispered at the time, poisoned by Somerset.
Probably, some crime or other lay heavy upon the soul of the King; and Somerset, his
accomplice, could not be brought to public execution with safety. Hence the dreadful
tortures of James, when he discovered that his favourite was so deeply implicated in the
murder of Overbury. Every means was taken by the agonized King to bring the prisoner
into what was called a safe frame of mind. He was secretly advised to plead guilty, and
trust to the clemency of the King. The same advice was conveyed to the Countess. Bacon
was instructed by the King to draw up a paper of all the points of "mercy and favour" to
Somerset which might result from the evidence; and Somerset was again recommended
to plead guilty, and promised that no evil should ensue to him.
The Countess was first tried. She trembled and shed tears during the reading of the
indictment, and, in a low voice, pleaded guilty. On being asked why sentence of death
should not be passed against her, she replied meekly, "I can much aggravate, but nothing
extenuate my fault. I desire mercy, and that the lords will intercede for me with the
King." Sentence of death was passed upon her.
Next day the Earl was brought to trial. He appears to have mistrusted the promises of
James, and he pleaded not guilty. With a self-possession and confidence, which he felt,
probably, from his knowledge of the King's character, he rigorously cross-examined the
witnesses, and made a stubborn defence. After a trial which lasted eleven hours, he was
found guilty, and condemned to the felon's death.
Whatever may have been the secrets between the criminal and the King, the latter,
notwithstanding his terrific oath, was afraid to sign the death-warrant. It might,
perchance, have been his own. The Earl and Countess were committed to the Tower,
where they remained for nearly five years. At the end of this period, to the surprise and
scandal of the community, and the disgrace of its chief magistrate, they both received the

royal pardon, but were ordered to reside at a distance from the court. Having been found
guilty of felony, the estates of the Earl had become forfeited; but James granted him out
of their revenues an income of 4,000 pounds per annum! Shamelessness could go no
further.
Of the after life of these criminals nothing is known, except that the love they had
formerly borne each other was changed into aversion, and that they lived under the same
roof for months together without the interchange of a word.
The exposure of their atrocities did not put a stop to the practice of poisoning. On the
contrary, as we shall see hereafter, it engendered that insane imitation which is so strange
a feature of the human character. James himself is supposed, with great probability, to
have fallen a victim to it. In the notes to "Harris's Life and Writings of James I," there is a
good deal of information on the subject. The guilt of Buckingham, although not fully
established, rests upon circumstances of suspicion stronger than have been sufficient to
lead hundreds to the scaffold. His motives for committing the crime are stated to have
been a desire of revenge for the coldness with which the King, in the latter years of his
reign, began to regard him; his fear that James intended to degrade him; and his hope that
the great influence he possessed over the mind of the heir-apparent would last through a
new reign, if the old one were brought to a close.
In the second volume of the "Harleian Miscellany," there is a tract, entitled the
"Forerunner of Revenge," written by George Eglisham, doctor of medicine, and one of
the physicians to King James. Harris, in quoting it, says that it is full of rancour and
prejudice. It is evidently exaggerated; but forms, nevertheless, a link in the chain of
evidence. Eglisham says: -- "The King being sick of an ague, the Duke took this
opportunity, when all the King's doctors of physic were at dinner, and offered to him a
white powder to take, the which he a long time refused; but, overcome with his flattering
importunity, he took it in wine, and immediately became worse and worse, falling into
many swoonings and pains, and violent fluxes of the belly, so tormented, that his Majesty
cried out aloud of this white powder, 'Would to God I had never taken it?" He then tells
us "Of the Countess of Buckingham (the Duke's mother) applying the plaister to the
King's heart and breast, whereupon he grew faint and short-breathed, and in agony. That
the physicians exclaimed, that the King was poisoned; that Buckingham commanded
them out of the room, and committed one of them close prisoner to his own chamber, and
another to be removed from court; and that, after his Majesty's death, his body and head
swelled above measure; his hair, with the skin of his head, stuck to his pillow, and his
nails became loose on his fingers and toes." Clarendon, who, by the way, was a partisan
of the Duke's, gives a totally different account of James's death. He says, "It was
occasioned by an ague (after a short indisposition by the gout)which, meeting many
humours in a fat unwieldy body of fifty-eight years old, in four or five fits carried him out
of the world. After whose death many scandalous and libellous discourses were raised,
without the least colour or ground; as appeared upon the strictest and most malicious
examination that could be made, long after, in a time of licence, when nobody was afraid
of offending majesty, and when prosecuting the highest reproaches and contumelies
against the royal family was held very meritorious." Notwithstanding this confident

declaration, the world will hardly be persuaded that there was not some truth in the
rumours that were abroad. The inquiries which were instituted were not strict, as he
asserts, and all the unconstitutional influence of the powerful favourite was exerted to
defeat them. In the celebrated accusations brought against Buckingham by the Earl of
Bristol, the poisoning of King James was placed last on the list, and the pages of history
bear evidence of the summary mode in which they were, for the time, got rid of.
The man from whom Buckingham is said to have procured his poisons was one Dr.
Lamb, a conjuror and empiric, who, besides dealing in poisons, pretended to be a fortuneteller. The popular fury, which broke with comparative harmlessness against his patron,
was directed against this man, until he could not appear with safety in the streets of
London. His fate was melancholy. Walking one day in Cheapside, disguised, as he
thought, from all observers, he was recognized by some idle boys, who began to hoot and
pelt him with rubbish, calling out, "The poisoner! the poisoner! Down with the wizard!
down with him!" A mob very soon collected, and the Doctor took to his heels and ran for
his life. He was pursued and seized in Wood Street, and from thence dragged by the hair
through the mire to St. Paul's Cross; the mob beating him with sticks and stones, and
calling out, "Kill the wizard! kill the poisoner!"
Charles I, on hearing of the riot, rode from Whitehall to quell it; but he arrived too late to
save the victim. Every bone in his body was broken, and he was quite dead. Charles was
excessively indignant, and fined the city six hundred pounds for its inability to deliver up
the ringleaders to justice.
But it was in Italy that poisoning was most prevalent. From a very early period, it seems
to have been looked upon in that country as a perfectly justifiable means of getting rid of
an enemy. The Italians of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries poisoned their
opponents with as little compunction as an Englishman of the present day brings an
action at law against any one who has done him an injury. The writings of contemporary
authors inform us that, when La Spara and La Tophania carried on their infernal trade,
ladies put poisonbottles on their dressing-tables as openly, and used them with as little
scruple upon others, as modern dames use Eau de Cologne or lavender-water upon
themselves. So powerful is the influence of fashion, it can even cause murder to be
regarded as a venial peccadillo.
In the memoirs of the last Duke of Guise, who made a Quixotic attempt, in 1648, to seize
upon the government of Naples, we find some curious particulars relative to the popular
feeling with regard to poisoning. A man, named Gennaro Annese, who, after the short
and extraordinary career of Masaniello the fisherman, had established himself as a sort of
captain-general of the populace, rendered himself so obnoxious to the Duke of Guise that
the adherents of the latter determined to murder him. The captain of the guard, as the
Duke himself very coolly informs us, was requested to undertake this office. It was
suggested to him that the poniard would be the most effectual instrument, but the man
turned up his eyes with pious horror at the proposition. He was ready to poison Gennaro
Annese whenever he might be called upon to do so; but to poniard him, he said, would be
disgraceful, and unbecoming an officer of the guards! At last poison was agreed upon,

and Augustino Molla, an attorney in the Duke's confidence, brought the bottle containing
the liquid to show it to his master. The following is the Duke's own account:-"Augustino came to me at night, and told me: 'I have brought you something which will
free you from Gennaro. He deserves death, and it is no great matter after what fashion
justice is done upon him. Look at this vial, full of clear and beautiful water: in four days'
time, it will punish all his treasons. The captain of the guard has undertaken to give it
him; and as it has no taste at all, Gennaro will suspect nothing.'"
The Duke further informs us that the dose was duly administered; but that Gennaro,
fortunately for himself, ate nothing for dinner that day but cabbage dressed with oil,
which acting as an antidote, caused him to vomit profusely, and saved his life. He was
exceedingly ill for five days, but never suspected that he had been poisoned.
In process of time, poison vending became a profitable trade. Eleven years after this
period, it was carried on at Rome to such an extent that the sluggish government was
roused to interference. Beckmann, in his "History of Inventions," and Lebret, in his
"Magazin zum Gebrauche der Staaten Kirche Geschichte," or Magazine of Materials for a
History of a State Church, relates that, in the year 1659, it was made known to Pope
Alexander VII. that great numbers of young women had avowed in the confessional that
they had poisoned their husbands with slow poisons. The Catholic clergy, who in general
hold the secrets of the confessional so sacred, were shocked and alarmed at the
extraordinary prevalence of the crime. Although they refrained from revealing the names
of the penitents, they conceived themselves bound to apprise the head of the church of the
enormities that were practised. It was also the subject of general conversation in Rome
that young widows were unusually abundant. It was remarked, too, that if any couple
lived unhappily together, the husband soon took ill and died. The papal authorities, when
once they began to inquire, soon learned that a society of young wives had been formed,
and met nightly, for some mysterious purpose, at the house of an old woman named
Hieronyma Spara. This hag was a reputed witch and fortune-teller, and acted as president
of the young viragos, several of whom, it was afterwards ascertained, belonged to the
first families of Rome.
In order to have positive evidence of the practices of this female conclave, a lady was
employed by the Government to seek an interview with them. She dressed herself out in
the most magnificent style; and having been amply provided with money, she found but
little difficulty, when she had stated her object, of procuring an audience of La Spara and
her sisterhood. She pretended to be in extreme distress of mind on account of the
infidelities and ill-treatment of her husband, and implored La Spara to furnish her with a
few drops of the wonderful elixir, the efficacy of which in sending cruel husbands to
"their last long sleep" was so much vaunted by the ladies of Rome. La Spara fell into the
snare, and sold her some of her "drops," at a price commensurate with the supposed
wealth of the purchaser.
The liquor thus obtained was subjected to an analysis, and found to be, as was suspected,
a slow poison - clear, tasteless, and limpid, like that spoken of by the Duke of Guise.

Upon this evidence the house was surrounded by the police, and La Spara and her
companions taken into custody. La Spara, who is described as having been a little, ugly,
old woman, was put to the torture, but obstinately refused to confess her guilt. Another of
the women, named La Gratiosa, had less firmness, and laid bare all the secrets of the
infernal sisterhood. Taking a confession, extorted by anguish on the rack, at its true value
(nothing at all), there is still sufficient evidence to warrant posterity in the belief of their
guilt. They were found guilty, and condemned, according to their degrees of culpability,
to various punishments. La Spara, Gratiosa, and three young women, who had poisoned
their husbands, were hanged together at Rome. Upwards of thirty women were whipped
publicly through the streets; and several, whose high rank screened them from more
degrading punishment, were banished from the country, and mulcted in heavy fines. In a
few months afterwards, nine women more were hanged for poisoning; and another bevy,
including many young and beautiful girls, were whipped half naked through the streets of
Rome.
This severity did not put a stop to the practice, and jealous women and avaricious men,
anxious to step into the inheritance of fathers, uncles, or brothers, resorted to poison. As
it was quite free from taste, colour, and smell, it was administered without exciting
suspicion. The skilful vendors compounded it of different degrees of strength, so that the
poisoners had only to say whether they wanted their victims to die in a week, a month, or
six months, and they were suited with corresponding doses. The vendors were chiefly
women, of whom the most celebrated was a hag, named Tophania, who was in this way
accessory to the death of upwards of six hundred persons. This woman appears to have
been a dealer in poisons from her girlhood, and resided first at Palermo and then at
Naples. That entertaining traveller, Father Lebat, has given, in his Letters from Italy,
many curious particulars relating to her. When he was at Civita Vecchia, in 1719, the
Viceroy of Naples discovered that poison was extensively sold in the latter city, and that
it went by the name of aqueta, or little-water. On making further inquiry, he ascertained
that Tophania (who was by this time near seventy years of age, and who seems to have
begun her evil courses very soon after the execution of La Spara) sent large quantities of
it to all parts of Italy in small vials, with the inscription "Manna of St. Nicholas of Barri."
The tomb of St. Nicholas of Barri was celebrated throughout Italy. A miraculous oil was
said to ooze from it, which cured nearly all the maladies that flesh is heir to, provided the
recipient made use of it with the due degree of faith. La Tophania artfully gave this name
to her poison to elude the vigilance of the custom-house officers, who, in common with
everybody else, had a pious respect for St. Nicholas de Barri and his wonderful oil.
The poison was similar to that manufactured by La Spara. Hahnemann the physician, and
father of the homoepathic doctrine, writing upon this subject, says it was compounded of
arsenical neutral salts, occasioning in the victim a gradual loss of appetite, faintness,
gnawing pains in the stomach, loss of strength, and wasting of the lungs. The Abbe
Gagliardi says that a few drops of it were generally poured into tea, chocolate, or soup,
and its effects were slow, and almost imperceptible. Garelli, physician to the Emperor of
Austria, in a letter to Hoffmann, says it was crystallized arsenic, dissolved in a large
quantity of water by decoction, with the addition (for some unexplained purpose) of the
