
N=

Sum

Mean

StDev

AvgWin

AvgLoss

Win%

p=

A
B
C
D
All

29
17
16
6
68

2.9X
13.5X
6.7X
0.1X
23.2X

0.1X
0.8X
0.4X
0.0X
0.3X

0.8X
0.8X
0.7X
0.6X
0.8X

0.8X
1.2X
0.7X
0.6X
0.9X

−0.5X
−0.3X
−0.8X
−0.3X
−0.4X

44.8%
70.6%
81.3%
33.3%
58.8%

0.249
0.001
0.013
0.463
0.000

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Becoming a Trader

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

393

FIGURE 12.3 Trade-by-Trade %R P&L

returned an average of 0.4 times initial risk against a standard deviation of 0.7. Based on
this analysis, A-class and D-class trades should be carefully examined, as it appears there
may not be an edge.
Compare Figure 12.3, which shows the individual trade results as %R, to Figure 12.2.
At first glance they appear to be similar, showing the same runs of wins and losses, but
look again. Notice especially that the two large losses that stood out in the middle of
Figure 12.2 are normal, insignificant losses when expressed as %R. Is it possible that
the trader increased risk on those two trades, taking outsized risks and losses? If so,
could those losses have unbalanced him psychologically and led to the series of losing
trades? This cannot be answered from a numerical analysis, but these are the kinds
of questions that must be asked. Note that, in general, Figure 12.3 is much more
consistent—though the trader may have made poor decisions about his position sizing on
each trade, it appears that he was working within and respecting his risk limits very well.
This analysis can and should be extended to more detailed investigations of the different classes of trades and different asset classes, if applicable. For now, let’s leave
this example with one more step. It is possible to generate a pro forma P&L, which assumes that the trader had risked a consistent percentage of account equity on each trade.
Figure 12.4 shows this pro forma equity curve, assuming 1 percent fixed fractional risk,
against the actual P&L. Note that you cannot simply add the %R results in Table 12.2
to get ending P&L under a fixed fractional scheme because the amount risked is always
changing with each trade. In this case, the trader would have ended with $22,935 had he

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

394

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

FIGURE 12.4 Cumulative Actual and Pro Forma P&L

simply used 1 percent fixed fractional risk, a stunning gain over his actual $3,158. The
path of this pro forma P&L provides another, visual confirmation of what we have seen
clearly in the %R analysis—the trader actually did have an edge, but did not apply it very
well. The lessons, in this case, are probably simple: perhaps eliminate one or two of the
trading systems and consider applying the rest with a fixed fractional risk approach in
the next period.

Control Charts
Control charts are tools used in manufacturing to monitor physical processes for early
signs of degradation or failure, and are an important quality control tool in diverse fields
such as metalworking, electronics, and pharmaceutical manufacturing, among others.
They are especially powerful in physical processes that can be tightly controlled, especially with large sample sizes. For instance, an automobile part produced on an assembly
line might have tolerances measured in a fraction of a human hair; some variation, within
tightly defined limits, is acceptable, but the production line needs a warning when products stray outside these bounds. The same concepts can be applied to trading, with the
caveat that trading results are far more variable than manufacturing applications.
There are several different kinds of control charts used in manufacturing applications, but I am going to propose a simplified version that traders may find more immediately applicable. Many of the assumptions of distributions made in classic control charts
do not hold in trading situations. For instance, one commonly used chart in manufacturing plots variations on both sides of an average, expecting that the variation should
wander more or less freely above and below that average. The quality control manager

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Becoming a Trader

Printer: Hamilton Printing

395

takes note when four or five data points appear on one side of the average, and considers
this to be an early warning that the process is potentially moving out of the control zone.
This degree of control is very unlikely in trading, so the purpose of these charts is slightly
different: to present trading results in a graphical format that displays the individual data
points, a moving average, and some measure of variation. The first of these charts is the
Standard Deviation Control Chart, and is produced by the following procedure:

r First, decide what the evaluation period is going to be. Many traders will find weekly
analysis to be most applicable, but day traders should do this work on each trading
day. (It is also possible to do a trade-by-trade analysis rather than a chronological
grouping.)
r Collect a time series of individual (not cumulative) P&Ls for each period.
r Choose a look-back period. The example that follows is done on daily data produced
by a day trader, so a look-back period of 20 trading days, which is approximately
equal to one trailing calendar month, was chosen. In practice, look-back periods of
10 to 50 are probably most useful.
r For each data point, calculate a moving average of the look-back period as well as the
standard deviation. Offset these by one day, so that today you are using yesterday’s
average and standard deviation. This is important because a large value today will
influence the average and standard deviation and, particularly for short look-back
periods, will give an understated view of the variation.
r For each data point, plot the raw data point as a bar, the moving average, and bands
+/−N times the standard deviation. Remember, it is very unlikely that this data will
be normally distributed, so the usual rules of thumb for standard deviation do not
apply. Rather, the standard deviation bands are used as a visual representation of
the degree of variation in the process. The example that follows uses 2.5 for N, but
values of 1.5 to 3.0 may be useful.
Figure 12.5 shows an example of this Standard Deviation Control Chart, based on
190 trading days of a model developing day trader’s P&L. Though there is much to be
gleaned from this analysis, here are some important points to consider:
A: The trader’s variation has been steadily increasing, evidenced by the expanding
upper and lower bands. Note that the average (the dark black line in the middle)

FIGURE 12.5 A Standard Deviation Control Chart

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

396

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

has been consistently above zero, suggesting that the trader is consistently making money. In addition, winning days are much larger than losing days. This is
all good.
B: Something happens here. The average takes a turn down, and even crosses to the
other side of zero. The trader would have been losing money during this period,
but the variation also decreases. It is important to ask the right questions to understand why this happened. What caused the change in the average? Are there
behavioral factors at work? Did something shift in the market? Was a new trading system implemented? Perhaps the trader was aware that he was not doing
well and reduced trading size. The answers are not on this chart, but the chart
can provoke the correct questions.
C: The average recovers after a series of winning days, but there may still be problems. The average is not as consistent, as it turns back down shortly after C, and
there are not as many winning days above $500 as at the beginning of the chart.
D: Finally, the trader’s P&L seems to be back under control, and the last part of the
chart looks very much like the beginning, though the degree of variation (spread
of the bands) is higher.
This chart will serve the needs of most traders, but another possibility to consider is
the Range Control Chart. This chart, shown in Figure 12.6, can be a useful complement
to other P&L analyses. The procedure for creating this chart is simple:

r For each period being evaluated (day, week, or trade), plot the raw data as a bar.
r Choose a look-back period (20 days was used in Figure 12.6), and also plot the high
and low for the look-back period.
Consider the lessons of this chart in conjunction with the previous example:
A: Variation is increasing, but it is increasing because of more large winning days.
This is good because it suggests that even though the trader’s returns may be
becoming more volatile, the variation is positive rather than being equally spread
around zero.
B: The high/low bands contract, highlighting the reduction of variation already seen
on the previous chart.

FIGURE 12.6 Range Control Chart

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Becoming a Trader

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

397

FIGURE 12.7 Three Control Charts

C: Variation is once again increasing, but now more symmetrically. This may temper
our optimism at the end of the previous analysis a bit. The trader is making
money, but why is more of the volatility to the downside in this period compared
to the first part of the chart? Where have the large winning days gone?
One more chart that some traders find useful is a Win Ratio Control Chart, which
is calculated by plotting a moving average of the win ratio over a look-back period.
Though too much attention on win ratio is counterproductive, a shift in win ratio can
be a harbinger of trouble to come, and it may be possible to identify problems before
they become expensive. Figure 12.7 reproduces the first two charts, with the addition of
a Win Ratio Control Chart also using a 20-day look-back period. Consider what information a careful analysis of these three together can give the trader. Note that there are two
large declines in win ratio, all of which may point to some potential issues with trading
performance. Again, the answers to most trading problems are not on these charts, but
in many cases, the right questions are.

SUMMARY
Trading is difficult. Markets are highly random and nearly unpredictable, diverse and unforeseeable risks crop up at every turn, and traders themselves are vulnerable to many

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c12

398

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:16

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

psychological errors and weaknesses. In addition, the process of developing trading skill
is a long one, fraught with hardship and obstacles. Many traders fail because they do
not have realistic assumptions about the length and challenges of that process, or because they lack some essential requirements for success. This chapter addresses many
of those problems, and gives valuable perspective and a much-needed reality check. A
trader armed with these, and with the tools and techniques from elsewhere in this book,
can develop a plan of attack and move along the path to trading mastery.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

APPENDIX A

Trading Primer

t first glance, the process of making a trade seems to be simple. Someone wanting
to buy an item meets with a potential seller, they agree on a price, and money is
exchanged in return for the item. Even the most complex trading ideas begin with
this concept. The mechanics may be much more complicated—perhaps the buyer and
seller negotiate through a sophisticated electronic medium. Perhaps the item is actually
a sophisticated financial instrument or set of instruments. Perhaps there are complications such as currency adjustments or financing costs to be considered, or perhaps the
transaction is merely arranged to occur at a future point in time. Regardless, this basic
meeting of buyer and seller—weighing of value against value— is the very essence and
the root of all market activity.
Many books begin by saying that a trade occurs when a buyer and a seller agree on
value, but this is not entirely correct. If this were so, if the parties truly agreed that the
price represented the fair value of the asset, that one was equal to the other, wouldn’t
they each be willing to immediately unwind the trade and even to take the other side?
This is almost never the case. In simple buying or selling transactions (excluding spreading and hedging, which we will get to in a minute) the buyer is willing to part with the
money because he believes the asset will offer him more value in the future than the
money he gave up. The seller has made a decision that the utility value of the money she
will receive exceeds the value she would get from continuing to own the asset, so each
participant has made an assessment of value that might be unique to his or her particular
situation at that point in time. Rather than an agreement, each and every trade that occurs in the market represents a disagreement over the value of the money and the assets
being exchanged.

A

399

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

400

May 11, 2012

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

APPENDIX A: TRADING PRIMER

THE SPREAD
We often hear language like “The stock of company XYZ is at $50,” but even here we have
an issue, for there is rarely only one price to consider; usually there are at least three. In
active, liquid markets, there is a bid price at which buyers are willing to buy an asset, an
offer (or ask, from asking price) at which sellers are offering to sell, and usually a last
print (or simply, last) price where a trade was made. In a typical market, bids will be
lined up below the market (more buyers are willing to buy at lower prices), and offers
will be stacked at higher prices. The inside market refers to the highest bid price and the
lowest offer, representing the best available price at any time, and the distance between
those two prices is often referred to as the spread.
In the hypothetical case of XYZ that just traded at $50, we might find that the best
available bid is $49.95 and the lowest offered price is $50.05. A trader would verbalize
this situation as “49.95 bid, offered at 50.05,” which is usually shortened in practice to
“49.95 at 50.05.” If the trader is reasonably sure the person he is speaking to knows the
approximate price, he may drop the handle (the whole number) part of the price and
just give the decimal pricing. As prices change rapidly, this can lead to a dialogue like
“95 at 05 [meaning .95 and .05], at 7, at 9, 98 bid, now at 06.” Though the last trade may
have been at $50, there is a reasonable chance that we could not execute at that price in
this situation with the market “95 at 05.” In fact, it is even possible that the last print was
50.00, and now the market may have moved to 50.50 at 50.60. A buyer, in this case, has
little hope of executing at any price under 50.50; the spread is often a better reflection of
actual value than the last print.
Some traders glean a lot of information from the spread. For instance, the size of
the spread is often a measure of the uncertainty in the market; when prices are changing
rapidly, market participants often react by widening the spread. Buyers are not aggressive in paying high prices because they know the market could move against them in
the next instant, so bids tend to drop lower. At the same time, sellers also react by lifting their offers to higher prices. There is other information in the spread: how rapidly it
moves, exactly how it moves (do sellers lift offers higher or do buyers aggressively bid
higher?), how much size is displayed, and many other subtleties.
If this seems like a lot of time spent on something very basic, you’re right; it is, and
it is also very important. The spread represents a very real cost of trading. Imagine that
a buyer pays the offer, and then immediately realizes he has made a mistake and wants
to get out of the trade. This can be done only by turning around and selling to the buyers
on the bid, so the spread is a source of risk and a cost of trading in every transaction. It
is also usually the best estimation of the actual market value of an asset. In the case of a
very active stock that prints a trade every few seconds, the inside market is rarely very
far from the last print, so the last trade is a very good approximation of value. (This kind
of stock will usually tend to have a relatively tight spread as well.)
However, there are some instruments that may go days without trading (some
stocks, options, distant months of futures contracts, for instance). In these cases, the last

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

Appendix A: Trading Primer

May 11, 2012

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

401

price may be completely irrelevant because it happened so long ago that the market has
moved. To further complicate matters, very inactive, illiquid instruments will often have
extremely wide spreads. If stock XYZ last printed 50.00 three weeks ago, but is now bid at
30.00 and offered at 49.00, what is it actually worth? Researchers studying price patterns
need to be careful because printed price records in illiquid markets can be very misleading. As an interesting aside, a major factor in the 2007–2008 financial crisis was the importance of many financial instruments representing very significant financial commitments
that did not have liquid markets. Spreads were wide, or in some cases, nonexistent, so
it was impossible to derive a market value for many of these assets. In the absence of a
market price, traders resorted to building complex models with many moving parts (if
that sounds a lot like guessing, you’re not wrong), and many of these models gave very
misleading values for these instruments. This complete breakdown in understanding the
value and risk of these instruments was one of the major contributors to the crisis.
Liquidity is a misused and often imprecisely defined term, but it usually means the
availability of willing buyers and sellers. Liquid instruments tend to have tighter spreads
and deeper books, meaning that there are many buyers and sellers at price levels beyond
the inside market. Going back to XYZ, which is now 49.95 at 50.05, we might find there
are 1,000 shares on the bid at 49.95, and many thousands at 49.94, 49.93, and so on for
many pennies below the market. Imagine a very large sell order comes into the market.
These buyers would easily be able to absorb that order, meaning that XYZ would trade on
the bid at 49.95, then maybe 49.94 and 49.93—all in all, very little price change. However,
imagine a second scenario where there are again 1,000 shares on the bid at 49.95, but
now a few hundred at 49.91, a few more at 49.87, and so on. If a large sell order hits this
market, it will “clear the bids” and the price will drop much lower.
Market makers are a specific group of traders whose job is basically to provide liquidity. A market maker will usually have both a bid and an offer in the market, though
they are free to adjust those levels as needed. For instance, if market makers are getting
hit on the bid so that they are accumulating large long positions, they may choose to
still bid for the stock, but to drop their bid to lower levels. If they keep their offer price
on the inside market (meaning that they adjust their offer so that it is the lowest offer),
eventually they will be able to sell some of their inventory, and in this way manage their
exposure. Floor traders in open-outcry markets were the original market markers. Early
electronic markets had designated market makers, but this role has now passed to many
firms who run computer programs (algos) that function as market makers.
Market makers incur significant risks at times because they will always be on the
wrong side of big moves driven by informed traders. If a group of traders comes into
the market with many buy orders, the market maker will be forced to short to take the
other side of that trade. In extreme cases (e.g., the crash of 1987), market makers could
be forced out of business by adverse price moves. Market makers are typically offered
various incentives to compensate them for these risks; otherwise, no one would take this
job! (As of this writing, in 2011, liquidity rebates, which pay the firm a very small fee for
executing via limit orders, are one of the primary forms of compensation for most traders
functioning as market makers.)

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

402

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

APPENDIX A: TRADING PRIMER

TWO TYPES OF ORDERS
Traders wishing to buy this market have, broadly speaking, two options. A buyer who is
not really in any hurry might focus on getting the best (lowest) price he can get, so he
can bid for the stock. (In this case, bid is used as a verb meaning “to place an order lower
than current prices.”) Consider the case of XYZ with the market bid at 49.95 and offered
at 50.05; a buyer could join the bid and put his order at 49.95. Of course, the buyer can
also place orders lower, but they will be filled only if the market moves down to the level
where he is bidding. If the buyer is feeling a little more urgency, he can step in front
of the bid and put his order at 49.96 or 49.97. Note that in this case, the inside market
would now be 49.97 (still offered at 50.05). This is a natural force that tends to compress
spreads as buyers bid slightly higher and sellers offer lower in competition for fills, and is
one of the main reasons why active, liquid markets tend to have tight spreads. However,
if the buyer is really motivated and must have stock XYZ now, he may choose to pay the
offer (other common language is take the offer, and the reverse is to hit the bid). Though
much simplified, these are the two options available to traders and they correspond to
the two most commonly used order types.
Limit orders are orders where buyers try to buy at a cheaper price than the offer
and sellers offer to sell at prices above the bid. A trader wanting to buy XYZ with a limit
order might say, “Bid for it” or “Join the bid,” as in “We’re in no hurry here—just bid for
it.” A seller might say, “Okay, fine, offer it out. Put it up on the offer.” Market orders are
orders that will execute immediately. Buyers will pay the offer and sellers will end up
hitting the bid. These orders usually reflect some degree of urgency—the order must be
done immediately and a better price (trade location) is sacrificed for speed of execution.
Though the buyer bidding with a limit order will get a better price if filled, the trade-off
is that the order may never be filled if the market moves higher.
Now we have arrived at something subtle and very important. Imagine XYZ is again
49.95 at 50.05, and then it trades at 50.05. What just happened? A buyer wanted to buy
