
Trend Analysis and Trendlines

The price patterns in Figure 11.7 show trendlines drawn as part of
those patterns. Trendline analysis on intraday charts is the same
as that applied to bar charts. Up trendlines are drawn under suc-
cessive lows and down trendlines are drawn over successive peaks.
This is not true of the simplified point and figure chart, which
we're going to study next. It utilizes 45 degree lines and plots
them differently.

3 BOX REVERSAL POINT AND
FIGURE CHARTING

In 1947, a book on point and figure was written by A.W. Cohen
entitled, Stock Market Timing. The following year, when the
Chartcraft Weekly Service was started, the book’s name was
changed to The Chartcraft Method of Point & Figure Trading. Several
revised editions have been published since then to include com-
modities and options. In 1990, Michael Burke wrote The All New
Guide to the Three-Point Reversal Method of Point & Figure
Construction and Formations (Chartcraft, New Rochelle, NY).

The original 1 box reversal method of plotting markets
required intraday prices. The 3 box reversal was a condensation of
the 1 box and was meant for intermediate trend analysis. Cohen
reasoned that because so few 3 box reversals occurred in stocks
during the day that it was not necessary to use intraday prices to


278 Chapter 11

construct the 3 box reversal chart. Hence the decision to use only
the high and low prices, which were readily available in most
financial newspapers. This modified technique, which is the basis
of the Chartcraft service, greatly simplified point and figure chart-
ing and made it accessible to the average trader.

CONSTRUCTION OF THE 3 POINT
REVERSAL CHART

The construction of the chart is relatively simple. First, the chart
must be scaled in the same way as the intraday chart. A value
must be assigned to each box. These tasks are performed for sub-
scribers to the Chartcraft service because the charts are already
constructed and the box values assigned. The chart shows a series
of alternating columns with x’s representing rising prices and the
o columns showing falling prices. (See Figure 11.8.)

The actual] plotting of the x’s and o’s requires only the high
and low prices for the day. If the last column is an x column
(showing rising prices), then look at the high price for the day. If
the daily high permits the filling in of 1 or more x’s, then fill in
those boxes and stop. That's all you do for that day. Remember
that the entire value of the box must be filled. Fractions or partial
filling of the box don’t count. Repeat the same process the next
day, looking only at the high price. As long as prices continue to
rise, permitting the plotting of at least one x, continue to fill in
the boxes with x’s, ignoring the low price.

The day finally comes when the daily high price is not
high enough to fill the next x box. At that point, look at the low
price to determine if a 3 box reversal has occurred in the other
direction. If so, move one column to the right, move down one
box, and fill the next 3 boxes with o’s to signify a new down col-
umn. Because you are now in a down column, the next day con-
sult the low price to see if that column of o’s can be continued. If
one or more o’s can be filled in, then do so. Only when the daily
low does not permit the filling in of any more o’s do you look at
the daily high to see if a 3 box reversal has occurred to the upside.
If so, move 1 column to the right and begin a new x column.


Point and Figure Charting

279

EXPLANATION of CHARTS

+t

tt

Hit

ot

suy/COVER SHORT as

ttt

Hr

BUY/COVER SHORT

TH

SELL/GO SHORT —Mtt

SELL/GO SHORT.

BUY/COVER SHORT

QUY/COVER SHORT

SELL/GO SHORT.

SELUL/GO SHORT

Ht

MONTH

INITIAL BUY,

SCALE

BUY SIGNAL = Occur when o column of Xs rises ane box higher
thon the highest X of the pilor X column, Since this point
con be onticipoted, © stop order to enter the patition con be
placed ot the buy point.

SELL SIGNAL - Occurs whan 0 column of Os declines one box be-
low the lowest © on the prior O column.

COVER POINT FOR A SHORT - Excetly the some point a the buy
signal, Since this point con be determined in odvane
stop-lots ofder to cover should be in the morket.

CLOSEOUT OF A LONG = Exoctly the some paint on the sell signal,

ORDERS = Since ell entry ond stop-lots paints can be determined
prior Yo the oceutrence, entry and cloteout stop orders can
be ploced beforehend in the market. But remember, these
Aignel paints chonge ond ali orders should be periodically
reviewed and adjusted.

TRADITIONAL ENTRY SIGNALS - The fint buy signal following
‘one of more sell-short signals ond the fiat sell-short signal
follawing one of more buy signol

SULLISH ~ Hf the most recent signal was @ buy signal, the position
is bullish ond remeins bullish until © sell-thort signal occur.

BEARISH - IF the most recent signe! wes o vell-short signel, the
position is beorish and ramoins beorish until @ buy signed

occur.

PULLBACKS - Rather than toking an immediate entry on o ti

POINT & FIGURE TECHNIQUES

if a revenal is onticipoted ofter a signal, 0 strategy involvi
less risk is to take the position ofter the signal but ot «
clover te the stop.

DAILY CHART UPDATING

If THE CURRENT COLUMN IS AN X COLUMN - Look fint ot the

dolly high, Uf the daily high permits the drawing of one oF
mote X's, drow them ond ignore the doily low. If, and only
Uf, ne new Xs con be drawn, look ot the daily tow and deter=
mine whether 0 reversal hot occurred. If 0 reversal has not
occurred, make no entries of all.

If THE CURRENT COLUMN IS AN © COLUMN - Look fint ot the

dolly low. If the daily low permits the drawing of one oF mare
On, draw them and ignore the daily high. If, and only if, no
naw Os con ba dtcan, look ot the daily high to determine
whather @ reversal has eccorred. Ifa revenol hes occurred
drow the opproprieta number of Xs, If o reversal hos sot
occurred, moke no entries ot

There con never be X1 end Or drawn on the some day. One
daily besis there is either @ continuation ef the current column,
2 reversal, oF no new entries ore made.

Figure 11.8 Source: Courtesy of Chartcraft, Inc., New Rochelle, NY.


280 Chapter 11

Chart Patterns

Figure 11.9 shows 16 price patterns most common to this type of
point and figure chart—8 buy signals and 8 sell signals.

Let’s take a look at the patterns. Since column 2, showing
signals S-1 through S-8, is just a mirror image of column 1, we'll
concentrate on the buy side. The first 2 signals, B-1 and B-2, are
simple formations. All that is required for the simple bullish buy
signal is 3 columns, with the second column of x’s moving 1 box
above the previous column of x’s. B-2 is similar to B-1 with one
minor difference—there are now 4 columns, with the bottom of
the second column of o’s higher than the first. B-1 shows a sim-
ple breakout through resistance. B-2 shows the same bullish
breakout but with the added bullish feature of rising bottoms. B-
2 is a slightly stronger pattern than B-1 for that reason.

The third pattern (B-3), breakout of a triple top, begins the
complex formations. Notice that the simple bullish buy signal is
a part of each complex formation. Also, as we move down the
page, these formations become increasingly stronger. The triple
top breakout is stronger because there are 5 columns involved
and 2 columns of x’s have been penetrated. Remember that the
wider the base, the greater the upside potential. The next pat-
tern (B-4), ascending triple top, is stronger than B-3 because the
tops and bottoms are both ascending. The spread triple top (B-5)
is even stronger because there are 7 columns involved, and 3
columns of x’s are exceeded.

The upside breakout above a bullish triangle (B-6) combines
two signals. First, a simple buy signal must be present. Then the
upper trendline must be cleared. (We’ll cover the drawing of
trendlines on these charts in the next section). Signal B-7, upside
breakout above a bullish resistance line, is self-explanatory. Again,
two things must be present. A buy signal must have already been
given; and the upper channel line must be completely cleared.
The final pattern, the upside breakout above a bearish resistance line
(B-8), also requires two elements. A simple buy signal must be
combined with a clearing of the down trendline. Of course, every-
thing we've said regarding patterns B-1 through B-8 applies equal-
ly to patterns S-1 through S-8 except that, in the latter case, prices
are headed down instead of up.


Point and Figure Charting 281

BUY SIGNALS SELL (SHORT SALE) SIGNALS
E Simple Formations Heer eet] FE Start ar aue terete ea sHeEiee
6-1 SIMPLE BULLISH BUY SIGNAL page tit a arm et
crt : ——_coesst rw rit aoeawuseawl
Het ise Eaumaueees sSeueseset ene HH Pe Pat
+t a &2 SIMPLE SELL SIGNAL WITH
t = DECLINING TOP.
io. al t
soos ore

= For
ot

a

Pp]

Figure 11.9 Source: K.C. Zieg, Jr., and P.J. Kaufman, Point and Figure
Commodity Trading Techniques (New Rochelle, NY: Investors Intelligence)
p. 73.


282 Chapter 11

There is a difference between how these patterns are applied to
commodity markets as opposed to common stocks. In general, all 16
signals can be used in stock market trading. However, because of
the rapid movement so characteristic of the futures markets, the
complex patterns are not as common in the commodity markets.
Much greater emphasis is therefore placed on the simple signals.
Many futures traders utilize the simple signals alone. If the trader
chooses to wait for the more complex and stronger patterns,
many profitable trading opportunities will be missed.

THE DRAWING OF TRENDLINES

In our discussion of intraday charts, it was pointed out that trend-
lines were drawn in the conventional way. This is not the case on
these 3 point reversal charts. Trendlines on these charts are drawn
at 45 degree angles. Also, trendlines do not necessarily have to
connect previous tops or bottoms.

The Basic Bullish Support Line and Bearish
Resistance Line

These are your basic up and down trendlines. Because of the
severe condensation on these charts, it would be impractical to
try to connect rally tops or reaction lows. The 45 degree line is,
therefore, used. In an uptrend, the bullish support line is drawn at
a 45 degree angle upward to the right from under the lowest col-
umn of o’s. As long as prices remain above that line, the major
trend is considered to be bullish. In a downtrend, the bearish
resistance line is drawn at a 45 degree angle downward to the
tight from the top of the highest column of x’s. As long as prices
remain below that down trendline, the trend is bearish. (See
Figures 11.10-11.12.)

At times, those lines may have to be adjusted. For example,
sometimes a correction in an uptrend breaks below the rising sup-
port line after which the uptrend resumes. In such cases, a new
support line must be drawn at a 45 degree angle from the bottom
of that reaction low. Sometimes a trend is so strong that the orig-


Point and Figure Charting 283

ttt
eat
+

+
Hh
ice
Ht

$F

EAT

fr

- a

AS OF sartTNe

Figure 11.10 Examples of the Chartcraft three point reversal stock
charts. Notice that the trendlines are drawn at 45 degree angles. (Source:
Courtesy of Chartcraft, New Rochelle, NY.)



284 ; Chapter 11

ott

Tet

aa

stace

HH
eet

41D.
= fttiooo i

Figure 11.11. Two more examples of the Chartcraft 3 point reversal
method of point and figure charting. Trendlines on these charts are drawn at
45 degree angles. (Source: Courtesy of Chartcraft, New Rochelle, NY.)


Point and Figure Charting 285

z
§
5

t

ieee
raeat

Ht

8
+

i
t i

Figure 11.12 The box to the bottom left shows a horizontal target to 92
in British Telecomm PLC arrived at by tripling the base and adding to 50. To
the right, a vertical target to 102 is arrived at by tripling the x column and
adding to 63. (Source: Courtesy of Chartcraft, New Rochelle, NY. )


286 Chapter 11

inal up trendline is simply too far away from the price action. In
that case, a tighter trendline should be drawn in an attempt to
arrive at a “best fitting” support line.

MEASURING TECHNIQUES

Three point reversal charts allow the use of two different measur-
ing techniques—the horizontal and the vertical. For the horizontal,
count the number of columns in a bottom or topping pattern.
That number of columns must then be multiplied by the value of
the reversal or the number of boxes needed for a reversal. For
example, let’s assign a $1.00 box value to a chart with a 3 box
reversal. We count the number of boxes across a base and come
up with 10. Because we're using a 3 box reversal, the value of that
reversal is $3.00 (3x$1.00). Multiply the 10 columns across the
base by $3 for a total of $30. That number is then added to the
bottom of the basing pattern or subtracted from the top of a top-
ping pattern to arrive at the price objective.

The vertical count is a bit simpler. Measure the number of
boxes in the first column of the new trend. In an uptrend, mea-
sure the first up column of x’s. In a downtrend, measure the first
down column of o’s. Multiply that value by 3 and add that total
to the bottom or subtract it from the top of the column. What
you're doing in effect with a 3 box reversal chart is tripling the
size of the first leg. If a double top or bottom occurs on the chart,
use the second column of 0’s or x’s for the vertical count. (See
Figure 11.12.)

TRADING TACTICS

Let’s look at the various ways that these point and figure charts
can be used to determine specific entry and exit points.
1. A simple buy signal can be used for the covering of old
shorts and/or the initiation of new longs.

2. A simple sell signal can be used for the liquidation of old
longs and/or the initiation of new shorts.


Point and Figure Charting 287

3. The simple signal can be used only for liquidation purpos-
es with a complex formation needed for a new commit-
ment.

4. The trendline can be used as a filter. Long positions are
taken above the trendline and short positions below the
trendline.

5. For stop protection, always risk below the last column of
o’s in an uptrend and over the last column of x’s in a
downtrend.

6. The actual entry point can be varied as follows:
a. Buy the actual breakout in an uptrend.

b. Buy a 3 box reversal after the breakout occurs to obtain
a lower entry point.

c. Buy a 3 box reversal in the direction of the original
breakout after a correction occurs. Not only does this
require the added confirmation of a positive reversal in
the right direction, but a closer stop point can now be
used under the latest column of 0's.

d. Buy a second breakout in the same direction as the orig-
inal breakout signal.

As you can readily see from the list, there are many dif-
ferent ways that the point and figure chart can be used. Once
the basic technique is understood, there is almost unlimited
flexibility as to how to best enter and exit a market using this
approach.

Adjusting Stops

The actual buy or sell signal occurs on the first signal. However, as
the move continues, several other signals appear on the chart.
These repeat buy or sell signals can be used for additional posi-
tions. Whether or not this is done, the protective stop point can
be raised to just below the latest o column in an uptrend and low-
ered to just over the latest x column in a downtrend. This use of
a trailing stop allows the trader to stay with the position and pro-
tect accumulated profits at the same time.


286 Chapter 11

inal up trendline is simply too far away from the price action. In
that case, a tighter trendline should be drawn in an attempt to
arrive at a “best fitting” support line.

MEASURING TECHNIQUES

Three point reversal charts allow the use of two different measur-
ing techniques—the horizontal and the vertical. For the horizontal,
count the number of columns in a bottom or topping pattern.
That number of columns must then be multiplied by the value of
the reversal or the number of boxes needed for a reversal. For
example, let’s assign a $1.00 box value to a chart with a 3 box
reversal. We count the number of boxes across a base and come
up with 10. Because we’re using a 3 box reversal, the value of that
reversal is $3.00 (3x$1.00). Multiply the 10 columns across the
base by $3 for a total of $30. That number is then added to the
bottom of the basing pattern or subtracted from the top of a top-
ping pattern to arrive at the price objective.

The vertical count is a bit simpler. Measure the number of
boxes in the first column of the new trend. In an uptrend, mea-
sure the first up column of x’s. In a downtrend, measure the first
down column of o's. Multiply that value by 3 and add that total
to the bottom or subtract it from the top of the column. What
you're doing in effect with a 3 box reversal chart is tripling the
size of the first leg. If a double top or bottom occurs on the chart,
use the second column of o’s or x’s for the vertical count. (See
Figure 11.12.)

TRADING TACTICS

Let’s look at the various ways that these point and figure charts
can be used to determine specific entry and exit points.
1. A simple buy signal can be used for the covering of old
shorts and/or the initiation of new longs.

2. A simple sell signal can be used for the liquidation of old
longs and/or the initiation of new shorts.


Point and Figure Charting 287

3. The simple signal can be used only for liquidation purpos-
es with a complex formation needed for a new commit-
ment.

4. The trendline can be used as a filter. Long positions are
taken above the trendline and short positions below the
trendline.

5. For stop protection, always risk below the last column of
o’s in an uptrend and over the last column of x’s in a
downtrend.

6. The actual entry point can be varied as follows:
a. Buy the actual breakout in an uptrend.

b. Buy a 3 box reversal after the breakout occurs to obtain
a lower entry point.

c. Buy a 3 box reversal in the direction of the original
breakout after a correction occurs. Not only does this
require the added confirmation of a positive reversal in
the right direction, but a closer stop point can now be
used under the latest column of 0’s.

d. Buy a second breakout in the same direction as the orig-
inal breakout signal.

As you can readily see from the list, there are many dif-
ferent ways that the point and figure chart can be used. Once
the basic technique is understood, there is almost unlimited
flexibility as to how to best enter and exit a market using this
approach.

Adjusting Stops

The actual buy or sell signal occurs on the first signal. However, as
the move continues, several other signals appear on the chart.
These repeat buy or sell signals can be used for additional posi-
tions. Whether or not this is done, the protective stop point can
be raised to just below the latest o column in an uptrend and low-
ered to just over the latest x column in a downtrend. This use of
a trailing stop allows the trader to stay with the position and pro-
tect accumulated profits at the same time.


288 Chapter 11

What to Do After a Prolonged Move

Intermittent corrections against the trend allow the trader to
adjust stops once the trend has resumed. How is this accom-
plished, however, if no 3 box reversals occur during the trend?
The trader is then faced with a long column of x’s in an uptrend
or o’s in a downtrend. This type of market situation creates what
is called a pole, that is, a long column of x’s and o’s without a cor-
rection. The trader wants to stay with the trend but also wants
some technique to protect profits. There is at least one way to
accomplish this. After an uninterrupted move of 10 or more
boxes, place a protective stop at the point where a 3 box reversal
would occur. If the position does get stopped out, reentry can be
done on another 3 box reversal in the direction of the original
trend. In that case, an added advantage is the placement of the
new stop under the most recent column of o’s in an uptrend or
over the latest column of x’s in a downtrend.

ADVANTAGES OF POINT AND
FIGURE CHARTS

Let’s briefly recap some of the advantages of point and figure
charting.

1. By varying the box and reversal sizes, these charts can be
adapted to almost any need. There are also many different
ways these charts can be used for entry and exit points.

2. Trading signals are more precise on point and figure charts
than on bar charts.

3. By following these specific point and figure signals, better
trading discipline can be achieved. (See Figures 11.13-
11.18.)


06/06/95. (TR1600) Treasury Bonds 1600 03/12/88
Point & Figure Chart (.5x3) 4

12078
12064
Oh yre20
117408
1182
1002
1126
1108

10012

10008

(20 "a07 1028 “1210 1906 "2729 "327 "S00 GN 71 1008 1208 1907 anB 7/91 “oS 1078 1908

Figure 11.13 = This chart of Treasury Bond futures prices covers more
than two years. The arrows mark the buy and sell signals. Most of the sig-
nals captured the market trend very well. Even when a bad signal is given,
the chart quickly corrects itself.

08/13/93 (UD1599) U.S. Dollar Index Cash 03/12/98

Point & Figure Chart (6x3)

100710042 an? 12e7 1905 eto "i907 "@08 "Bt 7 1908

Figure 11.14 The early 1994 sell signal (first down arrow) lasted all the
way through 1994. The buy signal at the start of 1995 (first up arrow) last-
ed for two years until 1997. A sell signal in mid-1997 turned into a buy at
the start of 1998.


09/03/93 (UD1599) U.S. Dollar index Cash 03/12/98

Point & Figure Chart (1x3) 100

1003, 11904 "10134998 ‘525 920, "1906 097 eT "i

Figure 11.18 This chart condenses the previous dollar chart by doubling
the box size. Only two signals are given on this less sensitive version. The
last signal was a buy (see up arrow) in mid-1995 near 85, which has lasted
for almost three years.

(8/04/93 (GC1600) Goid 1600 03/12/98
Point & Figure Chart (5x3)

Es
3

88 6 8 @ $ 8 # 8

1985 "1904 121 a8, eat 1294995 "1996, "1987. "10723

Figure 11.16 = This point and figure chart of gold gave a sell signal (see
down arrow) near $380 during 1996. Gold prices fell another $100 over the
next two years.


p9/03/93 {UD1599) U.S. Dollar Index Cash 03/12/08

Point & Figure Chart (1x3) 100

1983 1006 "03. "1095; 906 1907 wa7 "996

Figure 11.15 = This chart condenses the previous dollar chart by doubling
the box size. Only two signals are given on this less sensitive version. The
last signal was a buy (see up arrow) in mid-1995 near 85, which has lasted
for almost three years.
