
319

AU3772_book.fm Page 320 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

320

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

chiefly because they tend to short-circuit judgment, to see the impossible by
a purely mechanical approach to what is far from a purely mechanical
problem. The methods of chart analysis that have been presented are those
which have proved most useful, because they are relatively simple and, for
the most part, easily rationalized; because they stick closely to first principles;
because they are of a nature that does not lead us to expect too much of
them; because they supplement each other and work well together.
Let us review these methods briefly. They fall roughly into four categories.
1. The Area Patterns or formations of price fluctuation which, with their
concomitant volume, indicate an important change in the supply–demand balance. They can signify Consolidation, a recuperation or
gathering of strength for renewed drive in the same direction as the
trend which preceded them. Or they can indicate Reversal, the playing out of the force formerly prevailing, and the victory of the opposing force, resulting in a new drive in the reverse direction. In either
case, they may be described as periods during which energy is
brewed or pressure built up to propel prices in a move (up or down)
which can be turned to profit. Some of them provide an indication
as to how far their pressure will push prices. These chart formations,
together with volume, furnish the technician with most of his “get
in” and many of his “get out” signals.
Volume, which has not been discussed in this book as a feature
apart from price action, and which cannot, in fact, be utilized as a
technical guide by itself, deserves some further comment. Remember
that it is relative, that it tends to naturally run higher near the top of
a Bull Market than near the bottom of a Bear Market. Volume “follows
the trend,” i.e., it increases on rallies and decreases on reactions in
an overall uptrend, and vice versa. But use this rule judiciously; do
not place too much dependence on the showing of a few days, and
bear in mind that even in a Bear Market (except during Panic Moves),
there is always a slight tendency for activity to pick up on rises.
(“Prices can fall of their own weight, but it takes buying to put them
up.”)
A notable increase in activity, as compared with previous days or
weeks, may signify either the beginning (breakout) or the end (climax) of a move, temporary or final. (More rarely, it may signify a
“shakeout.”) Its meaning, in any given case, can be determined by
its relation to the price pattern.
2. Trend and trendline studies supplement Area Patterns as a means of
determining the general direction in which prices are moving and of
detecting changes in direction. Although lacking, in many cases, the
nice definition of Area Formations, they may frequently be used for
“get in” and “get out” purposes in short-term trading, and they
provide a defense against premature relinquishment of profitable
long-term positions.

SM

MARCH
APRIL
JULY
MAY
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY
JUNE
6 13 20 27 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 29 6 13 20 27 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 1 8 15 22 29

1946–1947

SPIEGEL , INCORPORATED

FIGURE 198. Spiegel’s Bear Market started in April 1946 from a Symmetrical Triangle which changed into a
Descending Triangle. Note the Pullback in June, and two Flags. This history is carried on in Figure 199.

Sales
100’s
125
100
75
50
25

14

15

20
19
18
17
16

22

24

26

G

Chapter seventeen:

28

30

38
36
34
32

AU3772_book.fm Page 321 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

A Summary and Some Concluding Comments
321

8

G

G

JULY
AUGUST SEPTEMBER
OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY
JUNE
MARCH
MAY
APRIL
5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 7 14 21 28 4 11 18 25 1 8 15 22 1 8 15 22 29 5 12 19 26 3 10 17 24 31 7 14 21 28 5 12 19 26 2 9 16 23 30 6 13 20

1946–1947

FIGURE 199. Overlapping Figure 198, this chart shows the move which ensued from the wide Descending Triangle
of early 1947, culminating in a Reversal Day on May 19. Note various Minor and Intermediate Resistance Levels.

125
100
75
50
25

Sales
100’s

SPIEGEL, INC. SM

322

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

20
19
18
17

AU3772_book.fm Page 322 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

AU3772_book.fm Page 323 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter seventeen:

A Summary and Some Concluding Comments

323

3. Support and Resistance Levels are created by the previous trading
and investment commitments of others. They may serve to indicate
where it should pay to take a position, but their more important
technical function is to show where a move is likely to slow down
or end, and at what level it should encounter a sudden and important
increase in supply or demand.
Before entering a trade, look both to the pattern of origin for an
indication of the power behind the move, and to the history of Support–Resistance for an indication as to whether it can proceed without difficulty for a profitable distance. Support–Resistance studies
are especially useful in providing “cash-in” or “switch” signals.
4. Broad market background, including the Dow Theory, should not be
scorned. This time-tested device designates the (presumed) prevailing Major Trend of the market. Its signals are “late,” but, with all its
faults (and one of these is the greatly augmented following it has
acquired in recent years, resulting in a considerable artificial stimulation of activity at certain periods), it is still an invaluable adjunct
to the technical trader’s Toolkit.
The general characteristics of the various stages in the stock market’s
great Primary Bull and Bear cycles, which were discussed in our Dow Theory
chapters, should never be lost to view. This brings us back to the idea of
perspective, which we emphasized as essential to successful technical analysis
at the beginning of our summary. That stock which does not, to some degree,
follow the Major Trend of the market as a whole is an extraordinary exception. More money has been lost by buying perfectly good stocks in the later
and most exciting phases of a Bull Market, and then selling them, perhaps
from necessity, in the discouraging conditions prevailing in a Bear Market,
than from all other causes combined!
So keep your perspective on the broad market picture. The basic economic tide is one of the most important elements in the supply–demand
equation for each individual stock. It may pay to buck “the public,” but it
does not ever pay to buck the real underlying trend.
Major Bull and Bear Markets have recurred in fairly regular patterns
throughout all recorded economic history, and there is no reason to suppose
that they will not continue to recur for as long as our present system exists.
It is well to keep in mind that caution is in order whenever stock prices are
at historically high levels, and that purchases will usually work out well
eventually when they are at historically low levels.
If you make known your interest in your charts, you will be told that
the chart analyst (like the Dow theorist) is always late — that he buys after
prices have already started up, maybe not until long after the “smart money”
has completed its accumulation, and that he sells after the trend has unmistakably turned down. Partly true, as you have no doubt already discovered
for yourself. But the secret of success lies not in buying at the very lowest
possible price and selling at the absolute top. It is in the avoidance of large

AU3772_book.fm Page 324 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

324

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

losses. (Small losses you will have to take, and as quickly as possible as
warranted by the situation.)
One of the most successful “operators” Wall Street has ever seen, a
multimillionaire and a nationally respected citizen today, is reputed to have
said that never in his entire career had he succeeded in buying within
5 points of the bottom or selling within 5 points of the top! EN: Bernard
Baruch, if I am not mistaken. And for perspective, the 5 points mentioned constituted
roughly 10% of the market at that time.
Before we leave this treatise on theory and proceed to the more practical
matters of application and market tactics which are the province of the
second part of this book, the reader will, we hope, forgive one more admonition. There is nothing in the science of technical analysis that requires one
always to have a position in the market. There is nothing that dictates that
something must happen every day. There are periods — sometimes long
months — when the conservative trader’s best policy is to stay out entirely.
And there is nothing in technical analysis to compel the market to go ahead
and complete (in a few days) a move that the charts have foretold; it will
take its own good time. Patience is as much a virtue in stock trading as in
any other human activity.

AU3772_book.fm Page 325 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter 17.1

Technical Analysis and Technology
in the 21st Century:
The Computer and the Internet,
Tools of the Investment/
Information Revolution
The purpose of this chapter is to put computer and information technology
into proper context and perspective for chart-oriented technical analysts.
In John Magee’s time, in his office in Springfield, MA, there was a chart
room — a room filled with all-age chartists from teenagers to senior citizens.
These people spent all their time keeping charts and assisting Magee in
interpretation. These were wonderful and intelligent people who developed
marvelous insights into the stocks they charted. They created the manual
charts which adorn this book.
Today that room and all those technicians have been replaced by a beige
(sometimes lime) box which sits crowded on our desktops and which is often
worshipped as a fount of insight and wisdom: “Computer, analyze my
stocks.”
Unfortunately the computer does not have the discrimination and pattern recognition ability of the people in that chart room. Undeterred by this
weakness in computer technology, traders and investors have poured incalculable money and effort into computer-aided research attempting to discover the keys to market success. More money has been spent in this effort
than was ever put into the search for the philosopher’s stone. Much of it
was wasted, but it has not all been spent in vain. In some areas it has been
quite productive. But no fail-safe algorithm has, in spite of all this effort,
been found for investment success, and certainly not for stock trading. The
research has demonstrated that even the algorithm of “buy low sell high”
has fatal flaws in it.
In order to fully understand the importance of the computer, the reader
should appreciate some basic differences in participants’ approach to the
markets. Or, we might say, schools of analysts/investors. We will not bother
with fundamental analysts here, as they are of a different religious persuasion. Chart analysts, or we could say, Magee-type technical analysts, pretty
325

AU3772_book.fm Page 326 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

326

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

much confine their analysis of the market to the interpretation of bar charts.
(This does not mean that their minds must be closed to other inputs. On the
contrary — anything which works.) Another chart analyst school uses point
and figure charts, and another candlestick charts. Another breed of technical
analysts takes basic market data, price and volume, and uses them as the
input to statistical routines which calculate everything from moving averages to mystically designated indicators like %R or Bollinger Bands
(cf. Appendix C). These are called statistical or number-driven technical
analysts. All these analysts, or what have you, attempt to invest or trade
stocks and other financial instruments (not including options) using some
form of what is called technical analysis — that is they all take, as input to
their analysis, hard data, data which people cannot lie about, misrepresent,
and manipulate, unlike the data which are input to fundamental analysis
(earnings, cash flow, sales, etc.).
Using number-driven or, if you will, statistical technical analysis, these
latter schools attempt, just as chart analysts do, to predict market trends and
trading opportunities. This can be more than a little difficult since the stock
and bond markets are behavioral markets. That is, the stock markets are
driven by human emotion, as perhaps the most important of many variables
influencing price. And human emotion and behavior, its manic and its
depressive elements, have not yet been quantified. But some chart analysts
believe that they can recognize it when they see it on the charts.
In another area, the computer has yielded much more dramatic and
profitable results. But that is in a model-driven market, namely the options
markets. Quantitative analysts, those who investigate and trade the options
markets, are a breed apart from technical analysts. In an interesting irony,
emotion-driven markets, the stock markets, are used as the basis for derivatives, or options whose price is determined largely by the operation of
algorithms called models. Quantitative analysts believe, as does this editor,
that the options markets can be successfully gamed through quantitative
analysis. Results of skilled practitioners indicate this belief is accurate.
Alas, life is not so simple for the simple stock trader. Stock prices having
nothing to do with mathematics, except for being expressed as natural numbers, are not susceptible to easy prediction as to their future direction. Not
even with Magee chart analysis or any other form of analysis — technical,
fundamental, or psychic. (From a theoretical point of view each trade made
based on a chart analysis should be looked at as an experiment made to
confirm a probability. The experiment is ended quickly if the trend does not
develop.) The fact that chart analysis is not mechanizable is important. It is
one reason chart analysis continues to be effective in the hands of a skilled
practitioner. Not being susceptible to mechanization, counter-strategies cannot be brought against it, except in situations whose meaning is obvious to
everyone, for instance, a large important Support or Resistance Level or a
glaringly obvious chart formation. These days everyone looks at charts to
trade even if they don’t believe in their use. In these obvious cases some
market participants will attempt to push prices through these levels in order

AU3772_book.fm Page 327 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.1:

Technical Analysis and Technology in the 21st Century

327

to profit from volatility and confusion. Indeed, human nature has not
changed much since Jay Gould and Big Jim Fisk.
When these manipulations of price occur, they create false signals —
bull and bear traps. Interestingly, the failure of these signals may constitute
a reliable signal in itself — but in the direction opposite to the original signal.

The Importance of Computer Technology
Of what use and importance then is this marvelous tool — the most interesting tool man (homo) has acquired since papyrus? (Numerous computer
software packages are available which are capable of executing the functions
described in the following discussion.) If the computer can’t definitively
identify profitable opportunities, what good is it?
Probably the most important function the computer has for the Magee
Analyst is the automation of rote detail work. Data can be gathered by
downloading from database servers. Charts can be called up in an instant.
Portfolio accounting and maintenance and tax preparation can be disposed
of with one hand while drinking coffee with the other. All in all this might
make it sound as though the computer is a great tool, but with a pretty dull
edge. Not strictly true. There is at least one great leap forward for Magee
Analysts with this tool, leaving aside the rote drudgery it saves. This great
advantage is portfolio analysis. In Resources (Appendix D), a complex portfolio
analysis of the kind used by professional traders (Blair Hull and Options
Research Inc.) is illustrated. Even simpler portfolios of the average investor
can benefit from the facilities afforded by most portfolio programs, either on
the net or in commercial software packages (locations and software identified
in Resources).
Another advantage is the ability to see basic data displayed in many
different forms: point and figure charts, candlestick charts, close-only
charts — these are prepared in the flick of an eyelash, and may indeed
contribute to understanding the particular situation under the magnifying
glass. The effortless quantification of some aspects of analysis may be
useful — volume studies, for instance, and given the popularity of moving
averages, seeing the 50- and 200-day moving averages can be interesting.
These moving averages are considered significant by many market participants — even fundamental analysts. The analysis of any of these should be
considered in relation to the current state of the market as understood by
the careful chart analyst.
But what about (the strangely named) stochastics, Bollinger Bands, %R,
MACD, Moving Averages (plain vanilla, exponential, crossover, etc.),
price/volume divergence, RSI (plain vanilla and Wilder), VP Trend, TCI,
OBV, Upper/Lower Trading Bands, ESA Trading Bands, and AcmDis? Well,
there is a certain whiff of alchemy to some of them, and some have some
usefulness sometimes. And, all systems work beautifully at least twice in
their lives: in research, and in huge monumental Bull Markets. These number
driven indicators are also the times when trading genius is most likely to be

AU3772_book.fm Page 328 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

328

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

discovered. These are briefly explored by a former editor in Appendix C.
EN9: It is also true, as I have said, that you can drive a nail with a screwdriver.
And the inventor of a tool may be fabulously successful with it while its adopters
lose their assets.
It is also possible that the excess of technical information created by these
indicators may be like the excess of fundamental information — another
shell to hide the pea under, another magician’s trick to keep the investor
from seeing what is truly important, and what is necessary and sufficient to
know to trade well. Perhaps the investor would be better off with a behavioral model, since the markets are behavioral. Number-driven technical analysis can do many things, some like Dr. Johnson’s dog which walked on its
hind legs, but they cannot put the market in perspective. Only the human
mind can do that. Number-driven models after all do not consider skirt
lengths, moon cycles, sun spots, the length of the economic cycle, the bullish
or bearish state of the market (if Bear Markets still exist) EN9: A wry ironical
comment written before the market crash of the 2000s. In the end, the human
brain is still the only organ capable of synthesizing all this quantitative and
qualitative information and assessing those elements which cannot be
reduced to ones and zeros. The educated mind is still the best discriminator
of patterns and their contexts.

Summary 1
The computer is a tool, a powerful tool, but a tool nonetheless. It is not an
intelligent problem solver or decision maker. We use a mechanical ditch
digger to dig a ditch, but not to figure out where the ditch should be.
The multitude of indicators and systems should be viewed with a skeptical eye and evaluated within the context of informed chart analysis. Sometimes an indicator or technique will work for one user or its inventor but
strangely mislead the chart analyst who tries to use it — or buys it, even
based on a verified track record.
So the experienced investor keeps his methods and analysis simple until
he has definitive knowledge of any technique, method, or indicator he would
like to add to his repertoire. And, most of all, he depends on his own
observations and experience to evaluate his own and others trading techniques.

Other Technological Developments of Importance
to the Technical Magee Analyst and All Investors
The computer is not the only technological development of interest to the
technical investor. A number of information revolution technologies need to
be put in perspective. These are, in broad categories, the Internet and all its
facilities, developments in electronic markets, and advances in finance and
investment theory and practice. This last is treated in Chapter 17.2.

AU3772_book.fm Page 329 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter 17.1:

Technical Analysis and Technology in the 21st Century

329

Due to the enormous body of material on these subjects, no attempt will
be made to explore these subjects exhaustively, but the general investor will
be given the information he needs to know to put these subjects in their
proper perspective. Resources will point the analyst to avenues for further
investigation if the need is felt.
But first of all, are there any technological developments of whatever
sort which have made charting obsolete? No. Are there any developments
which have made trading a guaranteed success? No. The only sure thing is
that some huckster will claim to have a sure thing. Those who believe such
claims are the victims of their own naivete.

The Internet — the Eighth Wonder of the Modern World
(EN9: Resources Appendix for the 9th Edition has been
enormously expanded and is of paramount importance to
modern investors.)
The Internet has been called the most complex project ever built by man.
And that is probably true. Complex, sprawling, idiosyncratic, it has something for everyone, especially the investor. Every form of investment creature
known to man has set up a site on the Internet, and waits like the hungry
arachnid for the casual surfer. Brokers. Advisors — technical and fundamental. Newspapers. News magazines. Newsgroups. Touts. Mutual funds.
Mutual fund advisories. Critics and evaluators of all the above. Database
vendors. Chat rooms. Electronic marketplaces and exchanges. ECNs. The
only unfilled niche that seems to exist is investment pornography. Perhaps
naked options will be able to satisfy this need.
This is a bewildering array of resources. How does one sort them out?
The implications of all this for the electronic or cyberinvestor may be further
expanded to indicate the services and facilities available: quotes and data;
portfolio management and accounting; online interactive charting; automatic
alerts to PBDAs (personal body digital assistants or gizmos carried on the
body, e.g., cell phone and handheld computer, etc.); analysis and advice;
electronic boardrooms; electronic exchanges where trading takes place without intermediaries. Resources (Appendix D) supplies specifics on these categories. This chapter supplies perspective. It is one thing to contemplate this
cornucopia of facilities and another thing to appreciate the importance and
priority of its elements. What good are real time quotes if you are only
interested in reviewing your portfolio once a week, except for special occasions? What good are satellite alerts and virtual reality glasses to a long-term
investor? It is easy for the investor with no philosophy or method to be
drawn into the maelstrom of electronic wonders and stagger out of it little
wiser and much poorer.
Observe then the goods and services of all this which are of importance
to the level-headed investor with his feet on the ground and his head out of
