
Volume as Confirmation in Price Patterns

During our treatment of price patterns in Chapters 5 and 6, volume
was mentioned several times as an important confirming indicator.
One of the first signs of a head and shoulders top occurred when
prices moved into new highs during the formation of the head on
light volume with heavier activity on the subsequent decline to the
neckline. The double and triple tops saw lighter volume on each suc-
cessive peak followed by heavier downside activity. Continuation


164 Chapter 7

patterns, like the triangle, should be accompanied by a gradual drop
off in volume. As a rule, the resolution of all price patterns (the
breakout point) should be accompanied by heavier trading activity
if the signal given by that breakout is real. (See Figure 7.5.)

In a downtrend, the volume should be heavier during
down moves and lighter on bounces. As long as that pattern con-
tinues, the selling pressure is greater than buying pressure and the
downtrend should continue. It’s only when that pattern begins to
change that the chartist starts looking for signs of a bottom.

Volume Precedes Price

By monitoring the price and volume together, we're actually
using two different tools to measure the same thing—pressure. By

06/27/97 (CPQ) Compaq Computer Corp 12131197

Daily Bar Chart (rt slate "

(fl

A
f

My lye
si Ih pt

Volume / =
il wd ba lull

Figure 7.5 The first half of this chart shows a positive trend with heavier
volume on up days. The box at the top shows a sudden downturn on heavy
volume—a negative sign. Notice the increase in trading as the continuation
triangle is broken on the downside.



Volume and Open Interest 165

the mere fact that prices are trending higher, we can see that there
is more buying than selling pressure. It stands to reason then that
the greater volume should take place in the same direction as the
prevailing trend. Technicians believe that volume precedes price,
meaning that the loss of upside pressure in an uptrend or down-
side pressure in a downtrend actually shows up in the volume fig-
ures before it is manifested in a reversal of the price trend.

On Balance Volume

Technicians have experimented with many volume indicators to
help quantify buying or selling pressure. Trying to “eyeball” the
vertical volume bars along the bottom of the chart is not always
precise enough to detect significant shifts in the volume flow.
The simplest and best known of these volume indicators is on
balance volume or OBV. Developed and popularized by Joseph
Granville in his 1963 book, Granville’s New Key to Stock Market
Profits, OBV actually produces a curving line on the price chart.
This line can be used either to confirm the quality of the current
price trend or warn of an impending reversal by diverging from
the price action.

Figure 7.6 shows the price chart with the OBV line along
the bottom of the chart instead of the volume bars. Notice how
much easier it is to follow the volume trend with the OBV line.

The construction of the OBV line is simplicity itself. The
total volume for each day is assigned a plus or minus value
depending on whether prices close higher or lower for that day. A
higher close causes the volume for that day to be given a plus
value, while a lower close counts for negative volume. A running
cumulative total is then maintained by adding or subtracting each
day’s volume based on the direction of the market close.

It is the direction of the OBV line (its trend) that is impor-
tant and not the actual numbers themselves. The actual OBV val-
ues will differ depending on how far back you are charting. Let
the computer handle the calculations. Concentrate on the direc-
tion of the OBV line.

The on balance volume line should follow in the same direc-
tion as the price trend. If prices show a series of higher peaks and


166 Chapter 7

5/19/97 (CPQ) Compaq Computer Corp 12/31/97

Daily Bar Chart ila \ 1

I he In hy im
Hl

‘| i Hh | th A he
ht " |
th

I
aft dy
a Mt

On Balance Volume

Du

‘hap Tog Sep a hoe Bee
‘WATT Sern Priried using Yradebinion © Omage Resaerch, hie. TOO?

Figure 7.6 The line along the bottom shows on balance volume (OBV)
for the same Compag chart. Notice how much easier it was to spot the
downturn in October 1997.

troughs (an uptrend), the OBV line should do the same. If prices
are trending lower, so should the OBV line. It’s when the volume
line fails to move in the same direction as prices that a divergence
exists and warns of a possible trend reversal.

Alternatives to OBV

The on balance volume line does its job reasonably well, but it has
some shortcomings. For one thing, it assigns an entire day’s vol-
ume a plus or minus value. Suppose a market closes up on the day
by some minimal amount such as one or two tics. Is it reasonable
to assign all of that day’s activity a positive value? Or consider a
situation where the market spends most of the day on the upside,
but then closes slightly lower. Should all of that day’s volume be


Volume and Open interest 167

given a negative value? To resolve these questions, technicians
have experimented with many variations of OBV in an attempt to
discover the true upside and downside volume.

One variation is to give greater weight to those days
where the trend is the strongest. On an up day, for example, the
volume is multiplied by the amount of the price gain. This
technique stili assigns positive and negative values, but gives
greater weight to those days with greater price movement and
reduces the impact of those days where the actual price change
is minimal.

There are more sophisticated formulas that blend volume
(and open interest) with price action. James Sibbet’s Demand
Index, for example, combines price and volume into a leading
market indicator. The Herrick Payoff Index uses open interest to
measure money flow. (See Appendix A for an explanation of both
indicators.)

It should be noted that volume reporting in the stock mar-
ket is much more useful than in the futures markets. Stock trad-
ing volume is reported immediately, while it is reported a day late
for futures. Levels of upside and downside volume are also avail-
able for stocks, but not in futures. The availability of volume data
for stocks on each price change during the day has facilitated an
even more advanced indicator called Money Flow, developed by
Laszlo Birinyi, Jr. This real-time version of OBV tracks the level of
volume on each price change in order to determine if money is
flowing into or out of a stock. This sophisticated calculation, how-
ever, requires a lot of computer power and isn’t readily available
to most traders.

These more sophisticated variations of OBV have basical-
ly the same intent—to determine whether the heavier volume is
taking place on the upside (bullish) or the downside (bearish).
Even with its simplicity, the OBV line still does a pretty good job
of tracking the volume flow in a market—either in futures or
stocks. And OBV is readily available on most charting software.
Most charting packages even allow you to plot the OBV line right
over the price data for even easier comparison. (See Figures 7.7
and 7.8.)


168 Chapter 7

01/24/97 (INTC) Intel Corp 12/22/97

Daily Bar Chart '
(

" '
Naat Wk

On Balance Volume Bearish Divergence

re7n4

Figure 7.7 An excellent example of how a bearish divergence between the
on balance volume line (bottom) and the price of Intel correctly warned of a
major downturn.

Other Volume Limitations in Futures

We've already mentioned the problem of the one day lag in
reporting futures volume. There is also the relatively awkward
practice of using total volume numbers to analyze individual con-
tracts instead of each contract’s actual volume. There are good
reasons for using total volume. But how does one deal with situa-
tions when some contracts close higher and others lower in the
same futures market on the same day? Limit days produce other
problems. Days when markets are locked limit up usually produce
very light volume. This is a sign of strength as the numbers of
buyers so overwhelm the sellers that prices reach the maximum
trading limit and cease trading. According to the traditional rules
of interpretation, light volume on a rally is bearish. The light vol-
ume on limit days is a violation of that principle and can distort
OBV numbers.


Volume and Open Interest 169

03/31/97 (MCD) Mcdonalds Corp 02/26/98
Hs

\ th
Hy i He
‘ N , i

iN
/ i "4

50

| I

AWN

i HM .
| V if /

Sar rae 7

Figure 7.8 Overlaying the OBV (solid line) right over the price bars
makes for easier comparison between price and volume. This chart of
McDonalds shows the OBV line leading the price higher and waming in
advance of the bullish breakout.

Even with these limitations, however, volume analysis can
still be used in the futures markets, and the technical trader would
be well advised to keep a watchful eye on volume indications.

INTERPRETATION OF OPEN
INTEREST IN FUTURES

The rules for interpreting open interest changes are similar to
those for volume, but require additional explanation.

1. With prices advancing in an uptrend and total open inter-
est increasing, new money is flowing into the market reflecting
aggressive new buying, and is considered bullish. (See Figure
7.9.)


170 Chapter 7

11/11/97 (AMO0398) Silver 03/98 02/20/98
Daily F 720
aily Futures | iat

{oe

+ | head

and r 4, wl en

1 I pal e

My it 1 Ine

va Leh on
h

1 1500,

300

Rising Open Interest 260

220

Dee % amt

Figure 7.9 The uptrend in silver prices was confirmed by a similar rise in
the open interest line. The boxes to the right show some normal liquidation
of outstanding contracts as prices start to correct downward.

2. If, however, prices are rising and open interest declines, the
rally is being caused primarily by short covering (holders of los-
ing short positions being forced to cover those positions).
Money is leaving rather than entering the market. This action is
considered bearish because the uptrend will probably run
out of steam once the necessary short covering has been
completed. (See Figure 7.10.)

3. With prices in a downtrend and open interest rising, the
technician knows that new money is flowing into the market,
reflecting aggressive new short selling. This action increases
the odds that the downtrend will continue and is consid-
ered bearish. (See Figure 7.11.)

4. If, however, total open interest is declining along with
declining prices, the price decline is being caused by discour-


Volume and Open Interest 171

2142/97

(GC0498) Gold 04/98 02/20/98

Daily Futures

Open Interest

15

2 yr 2 26. ¥ o

Figure 7.10 An example of a weak price rebound in gold futures. The
price rise is accompanied by falling open interest, while the price decline
shows rising open interest. A strong trend would see open interest trending
with price, not against it.

awh

aged or losing longs being forced to liquidate their positions.
This action is believed to indicate a strengthening technical
situation because the downtrend will probably end once
open interest has declined sufficiently to show that most
losing longs have completed their selling.

Let’s summarize these four points:

Rising open interest in an uptrend is bullish.
Declining open interest in an uptrend is bearish.
Rising open interest in a downtrend is bearish.

. Declining open interest in a downtrend is bullish.


172 Chapter 7

3/26/97 (GR0398) Copper High Grade 03/98 02/25/98
Daily Futures "0
105
it 100,
vay Falling Prices
15
+eO,
pas
180
7S
Open Interest 70000
180000
Rising Open Interest 60000
A W M1 1 A’ fs’ 6 Ww b eo. ¥
‘Sr i ata Pitas wag Vredebiaton © Ortega Rewserch, Fic 10a?

Figure 7.11 | The downturn in copper during the summer of 1997 and the
subsequent price decline was accompanied by rising open interest. Rising
open interest during a price decline is bearish because it reflects aggressive
short selling.

Other Situations Where Open Interest
Is Important

In addition to the preceding tendencies, there are other market
situations where a study of open interest can prove useful.

1. Toward the end of major market moves, where open
interest has been increasing throughout the price trend, a leveling
off or decline in open interest is often an early warning of a change in
trend.

2. A high open interest figure at market tops can be considered
bearish if the price drop is very sudden. This means that all of the
new longs established near the end of the uptrend now have los-
ing positions. Their forced liquidation will keep prices under pres-
sure until the open interest has declined sufficiently. As an exam-


Volume and Open Interest 173

ple, let’s assume that an uptrend has been in effect for some time.
Over the past month, open interest has increased noticeably.
Remember that every new open interest contract has one new
long and one new short. Suddenly, prices begin to drop sharply
and fall below the lowest price set over the past month. Every sin-
gle new long established during that month now has a loss.

The forced liquidation of those longs keeps prices under
pressure until they have all been liquidated. Worse still, their forced
selling often begins to feed on itself and, as prices are pushed even
lower, causes additional margin selling by other longs and intensi-
fies the new price decline. As a corollary to the preceding point, an
unusually high open interest in a bull market is a danger signal.

3. If open interest builds up noticeably during a sideways con-
solidation or a horizontal trading range, the ensuing price move inten-
sifies once the breakout occurs. This only stands to reason. The mar-
ket is in a period of indecision. No one is sure which direction the
trend breakout will take. The increase in open interest, however,
tells us that a lot of traders are taking positions in anticipation of
the breakout. Once that breakout does occur, a lot of traders are
going to be caught on the wrong side of the market.

Let’s assume we've had a three month trading range and
that the open interest has jumped by 10,000 contracts. This
means that 10,000 new long positions and 10,000 new short posi-
tions have been taken. Prices then break out on the upside and
new three month highs are established. Because prices are trading
at the highest point in three months, every single short position
(all 10,000 of them) initiated during the previous three months
now shows a loss. The scramble to cover those losing shorts nat-
urally causes additional upside pressure on prices, producing even
more panic. Prices remain strong until all or most of those 10,000
short positions have been offset by buying into the market
strength. If the breakout had been to the downside, then it would
have been the longs doing the scrambling.

The early stage of any new trend immediately following a
breakout is usually fueled by forced liquidation by those caught
on the wrong side of the market. The more traders caught on the
wrong side (manifested in the high open interest), the more
severe the response to a sudden adverse market move. On a more


174 Chapter 7

positive note, the new trend is further aided by those on the right
side of the market whose judgment has been vindicated, and who
are now using accumulated paper profits to finance additional
positions. It can be seen why the greater the increase in open interest
during a trading range (or any price formation for that matter), the
greater the potential for the subsequent price move.

4. Increasing open interest at the completion of a price pattern
is viewed as added confirmation of a reliable trend signal. The break-
ing of the neckline, for example, of a head and shoulders bottom is
more convincing if the breakout occurs on increasing open inter-
est along with the heavier volume. The analyst has to be careful
here. Because the impetus following the initial trend signal is
often caused by those on the wrong side of the market, sometimes
the open interest dips slightly at the beginning of a new trend. This ini-
tial dip in the open interest can mislead the unwary chart reader,
and argues against focusing too much attention on the open
interest changes over the very short term.

SUMMARY OF VOLUME AND OPEN
INTEREST RULES

Let’s summarize some of the more important elements of price,
volume, and open interest.

1. Volume is used in all markets; open interest mainly in
futures.

2. Only the total volume and open interest are used for futures.

3. Increasing volume (and open interest) indicate that the
current price trend will probably continue.

4. Declining volume (and open interest) suggest that the
price trend may be changing.

5. Volume precedes price. Changes in buying or selling pres-
sure are often detected in volume before price.

6. On balance volume (OBV), or some variation thereof, can
be used to more accurately measure the direction of vol-
ume pressure.


Volume and Open interest 175

7. Within an uptrend, a sudden leveling off or decline in
open interest often warns of a change in trend. (This
applies only to futures.)

8. Very high open interest at market tops is dangerous and
can intensify downside pressure. (This applies only to
futures.)

9. A buildup in open interest during consolidation periods
intensifies the ensuing breakout. (This applies only to
futures.)

10. Increases in volume (and open interest) help confirm the
resolution of price patterns or any other significant chart
developments that signal the beginning of a new trend.

BLOWOFEFS AND
SELLING CLIMAXES

One final situation not covered so far that deserves mention is the
type of dramatic market action that often takes place at tops and
bottoms—blowoffs and selling climaxes. Blowoffs occur at major
market tops and selling climaxes at bottoms. In futures, blowoffs
are often accompanied by a drop in open interest during the final
rally. In the case of a blowoff at market tops, prices suddenly
begin to rally sharply after a long advance, accompanied by a
large jump in trading activity and then peak abruptly. (See Figure
7.12.) In a selling climax bottom, prices suddenly drop sharply on
heavy trading activity and rebound as quickly. (Refer back to
Figure 4.22c.)

COMMITMENTS OF
TRADERS REPORT

Our treatment of open interest would not be complete without
mentioning the Commitments of Traders (COT) Report, and how it
is used by futures technicians as a forecasting tool. The report is
released by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
twice a month—a mid-month report and one at month’s end. The


176 Chapter 7

(10/08/93 (CC1600) Coffee 1600 02/27/98
+320
Coffee Blowoffs 300

4

DDN n can al

aa

iil

Figure 7.12 A couple of blowoff tops in coffee futures. In both cases,
prices rallied sharply on heavy volume. The negative warnings came from the
decline in open interest (solid line) during both rallies (see arrows).

report breaks down the open interest numbers into three cate-
gories—large hedgers, large speculators, and small traders. The
large hedgers, also called commercials, use the futures markets
primarily for hedging purposes. Large speculators include the
large commodity funds, who rely primarily on mechanical trend-
following systems. The final category of small traders includes the
general public, who trade in much smaller amounts.

WATCH THE COMMERCIALS

The guiding principle in analyzing the Commitments Report is
the belief that the large commercial hedgers are usually right,
while the traders are usually wrong. That being the case, the idea
is to place yourself in the same positions as the hedgers and in the
opposite positions of the two categories of traders. For example, a


Volume and Open Interest 177

bullish signal at a market bottom would occur when the com-
mercials are heavily net long while the large and small traders are
heavily net short. In a rising market, a warning signal of a possi-
ble top would take place when the large and small traders become
heavily net long at the same time that the commercials are
becoming heavily net short.

NET TRADER POSITIONS

It is possible to chart the trends of the three market groups, and to
use those trends to spot extremes in their positions. One way to do
that is to study the net trader positions published in Futures Charts
(Published by Commodity Trend Service, PO Box 32309, Palm
Beach Gardens, FL 33420). That charting service plots three lines
that show the net trader positions for all three groups on a weekly
price chart for each market going back four years. By providing
four years of data, historical comparisons are easily done. Nick Van
Nice, the publisher of that chart service, looks for situations where
the commercials are at one extreme, and the two categories of
traders at the other, to find buying and selling opportunities (as
shown in Figures 7.13 and 7.14). Even if you don’t use the COT
Report as a primary input in your trading decisions, it’s not a bad
idea to keep an eye on what those three groups are doing.

OPEN INTEREST IN OPTIONS

Our coverage of open interest has concentrated on the futures
markets. Open interest plays an important role in options trading
as well. Open interest figures are published each day for put and
call options on futures markets, stock averages, industry indexes,
and individual stocks. While open interest in options may not be
interpreted in exactly the same way as in futures, it tells us essen-
tially the same thing—where the interest is and the liquidity.
Some option traders compare call open interest (bulls) to put open
interest (bears) in order to measure market sentiment. Others use
option volume.


178 Chapter 7

T =

S&P 500 - WEEKLY

‘Copymgn (987 C18:

| a
cree ‘Nearest Futurse Contract as of Friday's Close. ee a
= ; ot

4 i

Large Net Long
Commercial Positions

Figure 7.13 This weekly chart of S&P 500 futures shows three buy sig-
nals (see arrows). The lines along the bottom show the commercials (solid
line) heavily net long and the large speculators (dashed line) heavily net
short at each buy signal.

PUT/CALL RATIOS

Volume figures for the options markets are used essentially the
same way as in futures and stocks—that is, they tell us the degree
of buying or selling pressure in a given market. Volume figures in
options are broken down into call volume (bullish) and put volume
(bearish). By monitoring the volume in calls versus puts, we are
able to determine the degree of bullishness or bearishness in a mar-
ket. One of the primary uses of volume data in options trading is
the construction of put/call volume ratios. When options traders
are bullish, call volume exceeds put volume and the put/call ratio
falls. A bearish attitude is reflected in heavier put volume and a
higher put/call ratio. The put/call ratio is usually viewed as a con-
trary indicator. A very high ratio signals an oversold market. A very
low ratio is a negative warning of an overbought market.

