
FIGURE 5.7 Consolidation Outside the Prebreakout Range Is Usually Constructive

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

133

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

sellers are able to force a breakout below an important support level and hold the market
in a consolidation below that level. If they give up or fail, buyers will step in aggressively
and bid the market back above support, which will show on price charts as a few large
bars with good momentum breaking out of the top of the smaller consolidation. This
is not what we should have seen if the sellers had enough strength to push the market
lower. The presence of sharp momentum against the direction of the pullback is a reality
that all market participants will be forced to acknowledge, and can often lead to a sizable
move back below the breakout level.
Failure Pullback If sharp momentum emerges against the breakout, confirming the
breakout failure, the first pullback is probably tradable against the direction of the breakout. As this pattern describes what comes after the best failure patterns, it is not actually
useful in making decisions at the time of the breakout. However, if you find yourself holding a position against this pattern as it develops, a large loss is probably looming around
the corner. If you have no position, this pattern may offer a reasonable spot for a scalp
or a short-term trade against the breakout, but it certainly should be a warning to get out
of Dodge if you are holding on to a losing breakout trade.
This may be slightly confusing, so see Figure 5.8 for clarification. Point A shows
a typical breakout, and at point B the market is consolidating in a standard breakout
pullback. At this point, you would be fully justified in holding a long position as long as
the lower time frame price action is judged to be favorable. However, C marks a classic
breakout pullback failure, as sharp downside momentum breaks out of the bottom of the
pullback. Now, think back to trading pullback trades—one of the strongest conditions
setting up good pullback trades is that they are preceded by good momentum. In this
case, the move following point C is on very strong downward momentum (against the
direction of the breakout), and the ensuing trend leg is longer and steeper than previous
downtrends. Shorting into the pullback at D is a good trade based just on that criterion,
but, in this case, it is further motivated by the failure of the breakout level at A. When
price turns down after this pullback at D, there may be some panic as the last trapped
longs scramble for the exits.

B

C

A

D

FIGURE 5.8 The Pullback Marked D Often Oﬀers an Excellent Trade Following a Breakout Pullback
Failure at C

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

134

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

Consider what this pattern would look like on the higher time frame—it would probably simply show strong momentum away from the breakout level, or price rejection at
the breakout level. Even though there are many potential variations, the fundamental
price patterns are relatively simple and consistent.

TREND TO TRADING RANGE
Structurally, trends that terminate into a trading range will always do so through a failed
pullback, but this may not be extremely useful information in real time. To some extent,
this labeling system is mostly a semantic argument, saying little more than if a trend fails
to continue then it will go into a trading range, which, by definition, is a price area that
does not continue in either direction, up or down. The value comes from three factors:
understanding the patterns that can precede a failure of trend continuation, differentiating between those failures that are likely to lead to a dramatic reversal and those that
are more likely to transition into a sideways range, and finding specific risk management
points for trades that set up around these patterns.
We have already examined the patterns associated with failed pullbacks in some detail in Chapter 3, and we will look at further refinements in Chapter 6, but, in most cases,
failed pullbacks are preceded by some form of a momentum divergence. This momentum
divergence, by itself, is not sufficient reason to take a position against the trend, but it is
an initial warning that the trend is losing some conviction. Once this condition appears,
countertrend positions are justified if supported by other factors, the most important of
which are lower time frame price action and the emerging market structure on the trading time frame. Other common conditions preceding failed pullbacks are extremely high
volatility, indicating possible climax or exhaustion, and/or the presence of multiple trend
legs in the same direction. After many directional pushes (more than three), it is likely
that the market needs further consolidation before continuing the trend; the probability
of pullback failure becomes higher with each subsequent trend leg.
For both with-trend and countertrend traders, the key moment to watch in pullbacks
is the inflection point where the pullback begins to move back in the direction of the
trend. It is important to be alert here and on guard for some sort of a failure as the market attempts to begin a new trend leg. Trends always end with some form of a failed
pullback pattern, which takes one of three broad forms: First, pullbacks may fail by transitioning directly into a trading range, as in Figure 5.9. There is simply no move out of the
pullback as prices stabilize around a price level in the pullback itself. The initial range is
likely to be small, and may be expanded through a series of excursions above and below
the confines of the range, each of which could tempt unwitting traders into attempting
breakout trades at these spots. Buyers and sellers have reached equilibrium, and there is
no imbalance to propel to trend higher—there is also usually no reason to be trading in
these formations.
Pullbacks may also fail on a test of the pivot that defines the previous trend extreme.
There is not much difference between tests that are precisely at the level, those that
fall short, or those that slightly penetrate the old trend extreme, though the last case may

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

135

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

A

FIGURE 5.9 Trends May Terminate into Trading Ranges When Pullbacks Become Ranges

lead to sharper countertrend momentum due to trapped traders who entered on the false
breakout. Again, the common thread tying these scenarios together is that there is a lack
of conviction beyond the previous trend extreme, the market finds equilibrium as supply
and demand balance, and a period of sideways trading activity follows. Figure 5.10 shows
an example of a failure test at the previous high in an uptrend that ended the trend.
Last, pullbacks may fail via the failure pullback sequence: sharp countertrend momentum; a small pullback, which often sets up a good trade; and then another strong
counter (the original trend) thrust. In this case, the move out of the failure pullback often
exhausts itself somewhere close to the measured move objective (MMO), thus defining
the initial extreme of the new trading range. Figure 5.11 shows a road map for this type
of action. The swing marked A is the confirmation that the trend had decisively ended, at
least for the time being.
The common pattern tying all of these transitions from trend to trading range is a
failed pullback, and this point is important: trends fail when pullbacks fail. This is why
it is so critical for all technical traders, whether they trade with the trend, countertrend,
in ranges, or on breakouts of those ranges, to be familiar with the patterns associated
with pullbacks and their failure. The point of a trading methodology is not to predict
the future, but to understand the forces at work in the market at any time, their relative balance, and the most likely resolution of emerging price structures. When something changes, and this happens frequently, a good trading methodology will embrace

A

FIGURE 5.10 A Failure Test at the Previous Pivot Extreme May Be a Catalyst for the Market to
Transition to a Trading Range

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

136

MARKET STRUCTURE

A

FIGURE 5.11 Sharp Countertrend Momentum May Exhaust into a Trading Range

this change and make adjustments to trades. Exactly how you choose to implement this
will depend on your personality and your chosen methodology, but the key is that you understand the ebb and flow of market dynamics. Managing trades in this fluid environment
is the next challenge to consider.

Trade Management Issues
Beginning traders assume that catching the end of a trend is a profitable trade because
the market will reverse into a trend in the opposite direction. This is the classic “buy the
low or sell the high,” which, though emotionally gratifying when it works out, can be very
challenging to execute. First, this outcome is fairly rare; many trends end by transitioning into trading ranges. As the market chops sideways in the ensuing range, there are no
outsized profits, and aggressive traders may even find themselves taking multiple small
losses as they continue to try to position for the major trend change that never comes. In
addition, most of these ranges, especially if they are able to hold and consolidate somewhere in the neighborhood of the previous trend extreme, are more likely to be trend
continuation than reversal patterns on the higher time frame. It certainly is possible to
trade these trend terminations into trading ranges profitably, but doing so demands lower
expectations; sometimes small trades within the range may be all the market offers.
Once a position has been established in a suspected trend termination, the first
thing to look for is confirmation that the trend has indeed terminated. Usually, this is not
difficult: if an uptrend terminates, the market will stop going up, and vice versa for a
downtrend. However, this somewhat tongue-in-cheek observation ignores the cases
where the trend extreme is retested or perhaps even slightly exceeded in the developing
trading range. It is important to monitor price action in order to separate trend continuation from these brief tests of trading ranges; in general, failure patterns such as springs
and upthrusts mark the tests in successful trend terminations. The presence of strong
momentum beyond the previous trend extreme is an undeniable sign that the trend is
continuing.
Once the trend termination has been successfully identified, it is important to take
higher time frame market structure into consideration. The trading time frame trading
range will eventually terminate, but is an exit from one direction more likely than the
other? On the trading time frame and lower time frames, the range will probably be

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

137

volatile, noisy, and more or less random—extremely difficult to read. On a higher time
frame, structures like this usually resolve into either continuation or reversal patterns in
that higher time frame trend, so it is sometimes possible to tilt the odds in favor of one
resolution or the other. For instance, imagine that a trading time frame trend terminates
into a trading range, the higher time frame has shown multiple trend legs in the same
direction, and the higher time frame is now overextended and is showing a momentum
divergence. These higher time frame factors would suggest that the trading time frame
range is more likely to be a reversal pattern, and this has obvious implications for how a
trade in should be managed.
However, a trend on the trading time frame may terminate into a range that is a
simple with-trend consolidation on the higher time frame. Pressing trades against that
higher time frame trend is usually a bad idea, as that trend is very likely to reassert itself
and at least make an attempt at another trend leg. A very common pattern here is to
see the trading time frame range create a complex, two-legged pullback on the higher
time frame. For instance, if the higher time frame is in an uptrend and the trading time
frame rolls over into a range that holds near the extreme of that trend, shorting below
the bottom of such a range is exactly the wrong trade on the higher time frame. The only
reasonable trade is buying the bottom of the complex pullback, whether establishing
longs or covering countertrend shorts. If a successful short in this range is not covered
at the lows in an attempt to allow for more market volatility in a potential breakdown,
this is fine, but once the market turns higher and the higher time frame trend seems to be
regaining control, any remaining profits must be protected aggressively. There is nothing
worse than correctly identifying a trend termination, correctly executing countertrend
trades at exactly the right time, watching them grow to nice profits, and then aggressively
adding to those positions at the point you should be taking profits. Errors like this can
make the difference between a successful and a failed trading career.

TREND TO OPPOSITE TREND (TREND REVERSAL)
The most likely outcome following a trend termination is a trading range, but there is another possibility: a dramatic transition from a trend in one direction to a trend in the other
direction without an intervening range. The reason this scenario is uncommon is that an
established trend is a powerful force, and it usually takes a lot of work, a lot of time, and
a lot of contrary pressure to end that trend. Without these factors and the accompanying
price action, the best bet at any point is for trend continuation. Having said that, there are
two specific scenarios in which a sudden reversal is somewhat more likely than usual:
following a parabolic climax or on a “last gasp” test of a previous trend extreme.

Parabolic Blow-Off into Climax
Trends end in one of two ways. The most common is for the trend to simply run out of
steam and roll over, as momentum divergences develop against the trend and the market

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

138

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

