This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to
the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of
1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble,
reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use
of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply
with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS
MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor
its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of
cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall
McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive,
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any
of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply
to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

To Dad, who taught me how to write,
and to Mom, who made me believe I could
—CB

To Eric and Grace, you are the future
—JT

Burniske 00.indd 5

9/11/17 11:29 AM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 00.indd 6

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Contents

Authors’ Note

xi

Foreword by Brian Kelly

xiii

Acknowledgments

xvii

Introduction

xxi

Part I

WHAT

Chapter 1

Bitcoin and the Financial Crisis of 2008

3

Chapter 2

The Basics of Bitcoin and Blockchain Technology

11

Chapter 3

“Blockchain, Not Bitcoin?”

21

Chapter 4

The Taxonomy of Cryptoassets

31

Chapter 5

Cryptocommodities and Cryptotokens

51

vii

Burniske 00.indd 7

9/11/17 11:29 AM

viii Contents

Part II

WHY

Chapter 6

The Importance of Portfolio Management and Alternative Assets

69

Chapter 7

The Most Compelling Alternative Asset
of the Twenty-First Century

83

Chapter 8

Defining Cryptoassets as a New Asset Class

107

Chapter 9

The Evolution of Cryptoasset Market Behavior

121

Chapter 10

The Speculation of Crowds and “This Time
Is Different” Thinking

137

Chapter 11

“It’s Just a Ponzi Scheme, Isn’t It?”

Part III

155

HOW

Chapter 12

Fundamental Analysis and a Valuation Framework
for Cryptoassets

171

Chapter 13

Operating Health of Cryptoasset Networks
and Technical Analysis

185

Chapter 14

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets:
Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

211

Chapter 15

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

Burniske 00.indd 8

231

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Contents

ix

Chapter 16

The Wild World of ICOs

247

Chapter 17

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

263

Chapter 18

Burniske 00.indd 9

The Future of Investing Is Here

279

Chris and Jack’s Go-to Crypto Resources

285

Notes

289

Index

309

9/11/17 11:29 AM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 00.indd 10

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Authors’ Note

W

hen we started writing this book in December 2016, bitcoin was in
the $700s, ether was in the $7s, and the aggregate network value of
cryptoassets was just north of $10 billion. Over the ensuing months
of writing we watched bitcoin push past $4,000, while ether crossed $400, and
the aggregate network value of cryptoassets punched through $100 billion.
Cryptoassets went from being esoteric dark web material to mainstream topics
of conversation and enthusiasm.
When embarking on our literary journey, we recognized the difficulty in
documenting arguably the world’s fastest moving markets. These markets can
change as much in a day—up or down—as the stock market changes in a year.
Nonetheless, we were continually asked the same question: “What should I
read to get the full picture of what’s going on in these markets?” The frequency
of this question grew to a clamor as the markets rose through the first half of
2017, and yet information channels remained stubbornly fragmented among
Reddit, Twitter, Telegram, Slack, Medium, news sites, and more.
While we recognize the difficulty in covering the full picture of the evermoving cryptoasset markets, we believe that this book provides a comprehensive view of the history, technology, and marketplace dynamics of bitcoin and
beyond. We have crafted the book to be as evergreen as possible with regard
to the background and methodologies laid forth, so that even as the markets
change, the book retains its value. We recognize that by the time you read
this, some asset prices may seem like the distant past, and some teams may be
xi

Burniske 00.indd 11

9/11/17 11:29 AM

xii Authors’ Note

indignant that we didn’t cover their story. We couldn’t possibly have covered
every price change and every story, or we would never have published the
book.
Our hope is to serve as a starting point and means to understanding, so that
we can all study and experience this space together. It is a history that is still in
its earliest stages of being written.

Burniske 00.indd 12

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Foreword

W

hen I first learned about bitcoin, I was convinced it would fail. Based
on a few articles and two decades of experience as a skeptical trader,
I loudly—and now regrettably—declared on CNBC’s Fast Money
that bitcoin would not survive. How could it? It was not backed by any entity;
it did not have a central bank; it was not accepted for taxes; and it did not have
an army to enforce its use. What’s more, it was extremely volatile and had a
bad reputation—all of which would contribute surely to its premature demise.
I have never been more incorrect in my entire career.
Somewhere in the CNBC archives exists an awkward video of me railing
against this “magic Internet money.” If you’re reading this and have access to
the video, treat it with the respect it deserves and destroy it! Since those unenlightened days, I have come to understand that bitcoin—and the blockchain
beneath it—is a technological advancement that has the potential to revolutionize financial services the same way email did to the post office.
Once I realized that blockchain technology was a disruptive force, I sought
out people who shared my view. I met Chris Burniske at the very first Wall
Street Blockchain Alliance holiday party, and we immediately found common interest in the potential for blockchain-based assets, or cryptoassets, to
become a new asset class for investors. At the time, very few people saw bitcoin’s potential, but Chris did, and it was clear to me that he possessed rare
leadership and vision.

xiii

Burniske 00.indd 13

9/11/17 11:29 AM

xiv Foreword

Jack Tatar is an expert in retirement planning who has spent over two
decades in the financial industry and brings a much-needed perspective of
finance and investment knowledge to the cryptoasset world. New technology
can be confusing and intimidating, but through his engaging writing, Jack
possesses the unique ability to distill a complex subject into an easily digestible
serving. As a result of their combined perspectives, Cryptoassets is a book that
will satisfy the most curious minds and engage those approaching the subject
for the first time.
Readers will benefit not only from Chris and Jack’s vision but also their
deep knowledge of the topic. As the manager of a hedge fund that invests in
digital assets, I am constantly researching this asset class’s investment potential, and when I get stumped, my first call is to Chris Burniske. While I am
thrilled that Chris is sharing his unique insights in this book, I am selfishly
reluctant to lose my secret go-to resource. Layer on Jack’s experience as one of
the first financial journalists to write about bitcoin, and you have a powerful
combination. Let them be your resource as well.
The beauty of this book is that it takes the reader on a journey from bitcoin’s
inception in the ashes of the Great Financial Crisis to its role as a diversifier
in a traditional investment portfolio. Those who want to look under the hood
of blockchain technology will be thrilled with the skillful description of the
elegant architecture that powers this technology, and financial historians, like
myself, will find the discussion of investment bubbles instructive. Chris and
Jack artfully apply financial history lessons to the cryptoasset investment world.
Spoiler alert: even though blockchain technology is disrupting traditional
financial market structures, fear and greed remain uniquely human traits that
can and will find a place in cryptoassets. Thankfully, Chris and Jack give readers
the tools and knowledge to know what to look out for when bubbles do occur.
Armed with this knowledge, the reader can then use the valuation framework laid out in Chapters 12 and 13 to find the most promising cryptoassets.
Valuing cryptoassets is done unlike traditional investments; they typically
do not have revenue or cash flows and thus present a conundrum for those
evaluating their merits. Here, Chris and Jack present groundbreaking work
on how to properly value an asset based on the network effect and teams of
decentralized developers. Everyone who is even thinking about investing in
cryptoassets needs to read these chapters.
One of the most fascinating outcomes of the blockchain revolution is how
cryptoassets are disrupting the disruptors. As Chris and Jack explain, the venture capital business model is being turned on its head by crowdfunding efforts

Burniske 00.indd 14

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Foreword

xv

that include initial cryptoasset offerings, or ICOs. Cryptoassets are made of
code, and because they easily track and convey ownership, they can be used
as fund-raising tools for startups. In the last two years, there has been a wave
of entrepreneurs that bypassed venture capitalists and instead chose to raise
startup capital via these methods.
As with any new model, there are questions about legality and sustainability, but the Silicon Valley ethos of “break things first, then ask for forgiveness”
has found its way to Wall Street. Professionals who are involved in all aspects
of fund-raising—from venture capital to capital markets—will find the discussion of these new methods of raising capital riveting, maybe even a little
frightening.
The final chapter of my book The Bitcoin Big Bang was titled “Everything
You Know About Business Is Wrong,” and it previews what Chris and Jack
have identified as a game-changing development in the way capital is raised
and distributed. Self-funded, decentralized organizations are a new species in
the global economy that are changing everything we know about business. A
cryptoasset as the fuel for a decentralized organization not only changes the
organizational chart, it also rearranges incentive structures.
These new organizations are altering the way software is developed.
Cryptoassets have inverted the value creation structure that worked so well
during the development of the Internet. These so-called fat protocols are selffunding development platforms that create and gain value as applications are
built on top. This is an entirely new paradigm for open-source projects that
incentivizes developers to build socially useful projects.
When I started working on Wall Street, the Internet was something on a
computer at the end of the trading desk. Amazon, eBay, and Google did not
exist—but within five years, these companies had changed the world. As a
greenhorn trader, I was too young and inexperienced to recognize that the
Internet was a once-in-a-generation investment opportunity. I was convinced
that I would not see another exponential investment opportunity for the rest
of my career—until I discovered blockchain technology. Blockchain technology is one of the most important innovations in the history of finance. It is
changing the way we transact, distribute capital, and organize our companies.
If you’re like me and missed investing in the Internet, read this book so you
can take advantage of the biggest investment opportunity since the Internet.
—BRIAN KELLY, CNBC Contributor and
Manager of the BKCM Digital Asset Fund

Burniske 00.indd 15

9/11/17 11:29 AM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 00.indd 16

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Acknowledgments

T

hanks first and foremost to the best literary partner one could have—
the great Karen Lacey. This truly was a three-person production, and we
thank you for helping us define, refine, and execute on our vision. Not
only did you hone our thinking, but you dove deep down the cryptoasset rabbit hole too! Anyone looking to work with a gifted and patient literary partner
can find Karen at www.theuncommonoctopus.com.
Thanks to our wonderful editor at McGraw-Hill, Casey Ebro, and our literary agent, Marilyn Allen.
Special thanks to all of those in the cryptoasset and financial community
who provided ideas, advice, and commentary, especially the awesome trio of
Alex Sunnarborg, Patrick Archambeau, and Pieter Gorsira, as well as Charles
Bovaird, Balaji Srinivasan, Arthur Laffer, Michael Casey, Alex Tapscott, Ric
Edelman, Campbell Harvey, George Gilder, Jeremy Allaire, Vinny Lingham,
Laura Shin, Christian Catalini, Sandra Ro, Spencer Bogart, David Kinitsky,
John McAfee, Ryan Selkis, Adam White, Jesse Walden, William Mougayer,
Michael Terpin, Jennifer Zhu Scott, Pat Bolland, Greg Rosen, Luis Cuende,
Travis Scher, Peter Kirby, Stephen McKeon, Paul Veradittakit, Ari Paul, Charlie
Hayter, Demian Brener, Ron Quaranta, Jared Harwayne-Gidansky, Ned Scott,
Alessio Saretto, Tron Black, Douglas Goldstein, Matthew Goetz, Tom Szaky,
Fred Pye, Ryan Lancelot, Cristina Dolan, Ryan Strauss, Jack Hough, and of
course to Brian Kelly for his support, friendship, and assistance. We appreciate the support of the worldwide cryptoasset community and if we forgot to
xvii

Burniske 00.indd 17

9/11/17 11:29 AM

xviii Acknowledgments

list anyone who was there for us during this journey, please forgive us—it’s
because of the crypto-community that this book exists!
—CB and JT
Thanks to Dad, who was a writer himself, and from a young age had me journaling, writing summer book reports, and submitting essays to justify the purchase of gadgets. He taught me the importance of never having a TV in the
house, that all creativity comes at the cost of maintenance, and that excellence
should never be compromised.
Thanks to Mom, who has been a fountain of belief and support through the
good and the bad. While she may not know much about blockchains (yet), she
loves them because I love them. She is the most positive person I know and the
one who has taught me how to find silver linings in the clouds. Thanks to my
brother, Justin, who resisted the urge to strangle me when Mom was away, and
taught me that power doesn’t always have to corrupt.
Thank you to Cathie Wood, who plucked me from a fishmongership and
taught me that not all finance is bad. In a few years, Cathie taught me more
about economics, the markets, and how the world works than I learned in my
time at Stanford. In a world where mentors are increasingly rare, Cathie’s guidance has been pivotal in my life. Thank you to Rob Wood, the friendly giant
who introduced us.
Thanks to Brett Winton, who has taught me how to approach the most complex of problems and that maybe I’m not as dense as I fear. To Joel Monegro,
who has been my thematic torchbearer in the world of crypto, thank you.
There’s no one I look forward to brainstorming with more than you. Thanks to
James Wang, who taught me to love Twitter, and that valuation matters.
Last but not least, thanks to Jack, who has been the driving force behind this
book. If not for a fateful lunch at Consensus and Jack’s relentless enthusiasm,
this book never would have happened.
—CB
Thanks to the great Harry Markowitz for his advice and insight. One of the
wonderful results of this book has been my ability to gain the friendship of this
wonderful man. Thanks, Harry! I’m humbled by your assistance.
Special thanks to my bubbie, Stu Sharoff, for taking the dive into this wacky
world, his advice on the cover, and for being a brother to me for so many years.

Burniske 00.indd 18

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Acknowledgments

xix

Thanks to Stu Rosenberg for also taking the dive and providing such great support and friendship over the years.
Special thanks for my angel investing partner and dear friend, Ron
Kochman, for his honest insight into the book and for making this journey so
much more entertaining. Also to Steve Katz, who we miss every day.
Thanks to the great John Gioia for his advice and insight throughout the
entire process of creating this book. Thanks to Irene Cibas for just being herself and putting up with John and me for so many years. Thanks also to Bill
Bonomo, John Barbera, and David Fink for their help and support during the
years when I needed it. Of course, thanks to the legendary Sam Kirk for his
assistance throughout this process.
To my Mom and Dad, who may not be here physically, but inspire and
direct me each and every day.
Most of all, thanks to my family, who put up with me during this process.
I couldn’t have done any of it without you. To my children, Eric and Grace, I
could never fully articulate how important and valuable your advice and support has been to me. You’re my inspiration for everything.
Finally, to the reason for my being and the love of my life, my Maudee Ann.
No one knows better than you what crazy schemes and ideas I’ve had in my
life, and you’ve endured them and supported me throughout. I thank God for
allowing me the opportunity to live my life with you, and I thank you for, well,
everything. I love you more than words can tell . . . always!
And of course, to my terrific coauthor, Chris, who brings intellect, humor,
compassion, and honesty to everything he does. The best part of this book was
making your friendship.
—JT

Burniske 00.indd 19

9/11/17 11:29 AM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 00.indd 20

9/11/17 11:29 AM

Introduction

B

ooks, TV shows, and movies have been making futuristic predictions
for decades, many of which were originally considered absurd. Star
Trek featured several that proved to be not so outlandish: the indispensable handheld communicators have become today’s smartphones, the
personal access display device is now our tablet, and a universal translator
exists, of which there are several apps to choose. Edward Bellamy’s enigmatically titled 1887 book Looking Backward predicted debit and credit cards, and
2001: A Space Odyssey imagined forms of social media, though nothing on the
scale that we currently have. Alvin Toffler’s Future Shock gripped readers in the
1970s as it predicted the exponential change destined to shake our society, and
issued a warning: “In the three short decades between now and the twentyfirst century, millions of ordinary, psychologically normal people will face an
abrupt collision with the future.” This future would create “the shattering stress
and disorientation that we induce in individuals by subjecting them to too
much change in too short a time.”
Exponential change has now become a buzzword, but the power of an exponential curve is rarely considered. Each year will entail greater change than the
year before. Such a concept differs drastically from a linear rate of change,
where the future will change just as quickly as the past did (see Figure I.1.) The
two may appear similar in the early days of change, but when the exponential
curve starts to inflect it quickly, and at times violently, it distinguishes itself.

xxi

Burniske 00.indd 21

9/11/17 11:29 AM

xxii Introduction

Exponential (2x)

Linear (2x)
140
120

Output

100
80
60
40
20
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Period

Figure I.1 n Exponential versus linear rates of change

While year 1 exhibits the exact same value for linear and exponential change
in Figure I.1, as does year 2, by year 7 an exponential rate has progressed nearly
tenfold more than the corresponding seventh period of linear change. We often
operate with the rough assumption that the rate of change over the next year or
two will be roughly equal to that over the prior years, which is a linear world
view. That works for the early stage of change, but not when the exponential
curve starts to bend like a hockey stick. Unfortunately, most investment portfolios are being managed with a linear world view, with indices that are pegged to
the past guiding our future investments. Nothing could be more shortsighted
or potentially dangerous in a time of exponential change.
The Internet has irrevocably changed the world, and it continues to do so as
developers build on the platform of connection it creates. Thus far, the World
Wide Web has been the greatest meta-application to leverage the underlying
fiber of the Internet. The indexed web contains at least 4.73 billion pages, nearing the point where there will be one page for every human.1
The beginning of the Internet is commonly associated with the 1990s,
with Tim Berners-Lee stumbling upon the idea of the World Wide Web
while trying to create an information management system for CERN, and
Marc Andreessen developing the first widely used web browser, which ultimately became Netscape. Although the accomplishments of Berners-Lee and
Andreessen were linchpins to mainstream adoption, the web and the ability
to browse it were the first killer apps built on top of the Internet, not to be
conflated with the creation of the Internet itself. We are likely still in the early
