
Download at www.wowebook.com

385

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

protection stop at the first day’s low. If the buy is near the previous day’s low, then lower the stop
to give some room for the pattern to develop. The reverse set of signals is valid on the sell side at
a top. The exit is to sell on the close, or if the close on the action day is within 10% to 15% of the
high sell on the next day opening.
Narrow-Range Bar (NR)
Wide-range bars indicate high volatility; narrow-range bars indicate low volatility (see Figure
17.16). Determining narrow-range bars is useful because the low volatility will eventually switch
to high volatility. As with the wide-range bar, the criteria for determining a narrow-range bar are
not precise.

NR4
Range on Bar 4
Less Than Bar 1–3

Buy

Sell

1

2

3

4

FIGURE 17.16 Narrow-range bar

Download at www.wowebook.com

386

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Tony Crabel designed one method of defining and using narrow-range days. In his method,
he determines whether the current day has a narrower range than the previous day and if so, over
how many past days. For example, if the current day has a narrower range than the past three
days, it is called an NR4 day (to include the current day and the past three days); in other words,
the current day represents the narrowest trading range of the four days. The common narrow
days of this type are the NR4 and NR7 day. Their entry signal is a breakout from the most recent
narrow-range day. Thus, if today is an NR7 day, we place a buy and sell entry stop on either side
to be acted upon tomorrow or the next day.
Linda Bradford Raschke (www.lbrgroup.com) is one of the leading proponents of using
narrow-range days to determine low-volatility setups. Raschke adds another constraint to Crabel’s method. She calculates the historic volatility of the vehicle over 6 days and over 100 days.
If the 6-day historic volatility is 50% less than the 100-day, the conditions are right for either an
NR4 day or inside day signal, provided today meets the criteria for each of these types of days.
The buy and sell entry stops are placed at the high and low of the qualified NR4 or inside day. If
the entry stop is executed, an additional exit stop is placed where the opposite entry stop currently exists. Exit the position at the close of the day if not already stopped out.
VIX
In our discussion of sentiment indicators in Chapter 7, “Sentiment,” we introduced the VIX, a
measure of implied volatility in the S&P 500 options. Remember that the VIX is a reflection of
anxiousness in the market. Traders and investors become anxious when the market declines and
become complacent when the market advances. Thus, VIX becomes a sentiment indicator. Generally, when the market is bottoming, VIX is high, because of the investor anxiousness. When the
market is topping, VIX is generally low, indicating the complacency among investors.
Larry Connors (1998) introduced a number of short-term price patterns that were based on
the behavior of the VIX. The principle behind these patterns was to watch for changes in VIX, as
a measure of sentiment, at extremes, as for example, either after X number of days or combining
with an oscillator formula to determine when VIX is overbought or oversold. A more general
strategy for the VIX was to look at the deviation from a moving average (Connors, 2004). VIX
has changed levels over the past decade, but a moving average dampens those changes. Connors
used a 5% deviation from a 10-day simple moving average. If the VIX is below the SMA by 5%
and the market is above its 200-day moving average, the odds favor a continuing upward trend
but not necessarily a good time to buy except on throwbacks. When the ratio is above 5%, and
even more so when it is above 10% of the SMA, the time is usually excellent to buy. Thus, the
VIX in this instance gives general zones of when action in certain directions can be contemplated. The opposite relationship is valid when the market is below its 200-day moving average.
Generally, bottoms are more reliably signaled by the VIX than tops.

Intraday Patterns
The opening range is the range of a daily bar that forms in the first few minutes or hour of the
trading day (see Figure 17.17). It can be defined as either the high and low after a certain time,

Download at www.wowebook.com

387

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

such as the high and low price that occur during the first 15 minutes of trading, or it can be a predetermined range about the opening price. A horizontal line is drawn at the opening range high
and low on the intraday bar chart as a reference for the rest of the day. Other lines from the opening price, the close yesterday, the range yesterday, and so forth may also be drawn. These lines
often become support or resistance levels during the day.

First 15-Minute High and
Low= 15-Minute
Opening Range

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

5-Minute Bars

FIGURE 17.17 Opening range

Download at www.wowebook.com

388

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

The opening range breakout (ORB) is a popular method of entering a position once a setup
has been established from a previous short-term pattern. As reported in Stocks & Commodities
Magazine, Tony Crabel experimented with NR days as setups and used an ORB defined by a
specified, predetermined amount above or below the opening range. He compared these results
with using a wide-range day setup. He found, first, that the wide-range day setup over both four
and seven days vastly underperformed the NR days over the same period, thus confirming that
more profit can be obtained from an expansion in volatility than contraction. Second, he found
that once the price had moved away from the open in one direction after a NR2, it normally did
not return to the opening.
In a series of articles for Stocks & Commodities Magazine, Crabel describes methods of
trading from an ORB in considerable detail. In the first article, he described how he calculates
the specified amount, called the “stretch,” above and below the opening that establishes the ORB.
Crabel uses the ten-day average of the past differences between the open for each day and its
closest extreme to the open for that day. Analysts use a number of other methods for calculating
stretch, including specifying a number of ticks or calculating a range based on the ATR over
some past period.
Crabel found that the use of ORBs worked well with NR4, NR7, inside days, and hook
days. He found that the earlier in the day the ORB was penetrated, the better the chance for success. Even without the previously mentioned setups, trading on the ORB within the first five to
ten minutes would also work, but after that short interval, if the prices have not penetrated out of
the range, all orders should be canceled because the day will likely revert to a listless trading day
rather than a trending day.
By analyzing the action around opening range levels, a good trader can find ways to take
advantage of the tendency for these levels to act as support and resistance. One method of
accomplishing this is called the “ACD method,” developed by Mark Fisher (2002). This somewhat complicated method uses the opening range determined over the initial minutes of trading,
an additional filter that is added to the upper bound of the range, and another subtracted from the
lower edge, as shown in Figure 17.18. Entry signals occur when the outer bounds are broken during the day, and exit signals occur when the range bounds are broken. Fisher’s method is not
quite this simple because he uses numerous other rules and confirmations. However, Fisher, who
reportedly has a trading room of over 75 day traders using this method to make their daily bread,
has appeared to be very successful.

Download at www.wowebook.com

389

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

Added Upper Boundary

Open 15-Minute
Range

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

15-Minute Bars

FIGURE 17.18 The ACD method of determining opening range

SUMMARY OF SHORT-TERM PATTERNS
Although there appears to be value in short-term patterns, they are not immediate sources of
wealth without study, experience, and trial-and-error testing. We have only touched the edge of
methods being used. Others include performance around national holidays, days of the week,
time during the day, and even the new moon. There seems to be no limit. The point in this exercise, however, is to demonstrate the many ways that prices are analyzed over the short term. If
interested, you can continue to experiment on your own.

Download at www.wowebook.com

390

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

CANDLESTICK PATTERNS
In Chapter 11, “History and Construction of Charts,” we learned how to construct a candlestick
chart. As you will recall, the raw data used in the candlestick chart is the same as the raw data
used in the bar chart: open, close, high, and low price per specific period.
The candlestick chart has become popular because it represents price action in a more
striking way, and furthermore, the patterns that result have interesting and novel names. One
advantage of the candlestick chart is that it can still use the Western methods of analysis—patterns, trend lines, support, and resistance—yet it has a set of unique patterns of its own. These
patterns are mostly short term of only one to five bars, and by themselves have not tested very
well. Many patterns have their Western equivalents that we have seen before. They are generally
reversal patterns and can reveal price reversals early in overbought or oversold conditions, at
trend lines, or at support or resistance levels. However, they are tools, not a system. Their disadvantage is that one must wait for the close before a pattern can be recognized, and they are useless in markets that do not accurately report the opening prices. The best resource on candlesticks
is Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques by Steve Nison (2001), the person who introduced
this ancient method to the West.
The principal analytical difference between candlestick patterns and Western bar patterns
is the emphasis on the opening and close. Western traders have recognized the importance of the
opening and close, but bar charts treat them without special weighting. In candlestick charts, the
“real body” is the wider area between the open and close. The “shadow” is the vertical line from
the real body up to the price high and down to the price low. A long shadow indicates the inability for prices to maintain their highs or lows and is, thus, a warning of trouble. The real body is a
heavy color, such as black, when the close is lower than the open, and usually white when the
close is higher than the open. A black body denotes, therefore, a “down” day, and a white body
indicates an “up” day. (This definition is different than in the West, where a down day is a day in
which the close is lower than the previous close.) A large body (in relative terms) indicates
strength in the direction of the trend, and a small body indicates indecision and a potential reversal, especially after a meaningful prior trend.
Patterns are made by the relative position of the body and the shadow, the location of the
candlestick in relation to its neighbors, and the confirmation the next day. Because candlestick
patterns usually are defined as top or bottom patterns, the analyst must be sure that the preceding
price action is in a trend, either up or down. A single pattern may or may not be meaningful
depending on the direction of the previous trend. Similar to Western short-term patterns, a candlestick pattern cannot predict the extent of the subsequent move or the significance of the pattern—that is, whether it occurs at a major or minor reversal. Thus, the pattern should always be
used with other evidence before action is taken. Being more often a reversal pattern, however,
candlestick patterns are often useful in determining support and resistance levels on their own. At
first, the analysis of these patterns seems to be filled with an endless set of rules and names, but
as you become more familiar with the nomenclature, you will see that the basis of these patterns
is not much different from the basis for Western short-term patterns.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

391

There have been few tests on the effectiveness of candlestick patterns. This is odd because
the patterns are easily computerized. As with tests of other short-term patterns, many of the existing studies are flawed in that the signal outcomes are often assumed to last longer than they
should. Measuring the effectiveness of patterns over weeks or months is useless because these
patterns are only useful in short-term situations. However, even over shorter periods, the patterns
do not test well. Their profit factors are relatively low, and their drawdowns are high and in all
cases greater than net profits. Some of the variables in each pattern can be tweaked to improve
performance, but the basic patterns, by themselves, are not outstandingly profitable.
Two relatively recent studies with short-term results are by Caginalp and Laurent (1998)
and by Schwager (1996). The Caginalp and Laurent tests included eight three-day patterns in
S&P 500 stocks from 1992 to 1996. Their purpose was to demonstrate that the patterns had value
above what could be expected from a random walk; however, drawdowns were not considered.
Schwager tested six major patterns in ten commodities from 1990 to 1994 and included a
momentum filter to account for trend, an important factor in candlestick pattern analysis. A criticism, however, is that Schwager estimated commissions and slippage to be $100 per trade, considerably higher than what can be achieved now. Both studies suffer from the type of exit method
in that they depend on a holding period that is arbitrary and not based on the behavior of prices.
The results could be considerably improved with testing of each pattern in combination with others and the use of protective stops. At least stops and other exit signals would reduce the
extremely large drawdowns. In our presentation of the patterns covered by Schwager, we average
the results from the ten commodities for each pattern and give the relative ranking rather than the
raw percentages. This avoids, to some extent, the problem of commissions and slippage.
Following are some examples of the more common candlestick patterns.

One- and Two-Bar Candlestick Patterns
Candlestick patterns are short-term patterns. In fact, a number of candlestick patterns are formed
by only one or two bars. Thus, on a candlestick chart of daily data, only one or two days’ worth
of data would be necessary to form the pattern.
Doji
A doji pattern is formed when the open and close are identical, or nearly identical. This creates a
candlestick with a real body that is simply a horizontal line, as shown in Figure 17.19. It suggests
that the market is in equilibrium and affected by indecision. In some respects, it is like an inside
bar in its meaning because in a trend it shows a point at which the enthusiasm of the trend has
stalled. It is, thus, often a warning of a reversal, but not necessarily a reversal pattern by itself. It
can also occur about anywhere during a trend or within a trading range and is, thus, difficult to
assess. As a result, its performance statistics were low (Schwager, 1996). It ranked at the bottom
of our scale based on net profit, average trade, maximum drawdown, and percent winners.

Download at www.wowebook.com

392

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Doji

FIGURE 17.19 Doji candlestick

Windows
Windows are simply the gaps that we discussed earlier in this chapter. Nison believes they are the
most reliable formations, and evidence from short-term bar patterns tends to confirm his opinion.
Because the interpretation of candlestick windows is the same as for Western gaps, we will not
spend time discussing them.
Harami
A harami pattern is a two-day pattern consisting of a large body of either color followed by a
small body of either color that is completely within the boundaries of the large body. The harami
pattern is pictured in Figure 17.20. The second candlestick pictured in the harami pattern in Figure 17.20 is called a spinning top. This second candlestick can also be a doji (resulting in a
harami cross pattern), a hammer, a hanging man, or a shooting star; the only requirement is that
the second candlestick body is within the first candlestick body.
The harami pattern is very similar to the inside bar pattern; however, with the harami, the
range, or wick, of the second bar does not have to be within the range of the first bar. The real

Download at www.wowebook.com

393

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

body of the second candle must be within the real body of the first candle. Thus, the open and
close range, rather than the range, determines whether the harami criterion is met.
We know that the inside day demonstrates a contraction in volatility, and the same can be
said for the harami pattern. We also know from studies of short-term bar patterns that low volatility turns into high volatility and often begins a new trend. Thus, a harami pattern can be a powerful way of signaling either the reversal of a trend or an increase in velocity of the current trend,
depending on which direction prices break.

Top

Bottom

Spinning Top Can Be
Black or White

FIGURE 17.20 Harami candlestick pattern

Hammer and Hanging Man
Both the hammer and the hanging man are candlesticks in which the real body is located at the
upper end of the trading range, as pictured in Figure 17.21. For these formations, the lower wick
is at least twice to three times as long as the body, and the upper wick is small or nonexistent. In
other words, the open and close both occur within approximately the top one-third of the bar’s
trading range, and either the open or close is, or nearly is, the highest price of the bar. The color
of the body is irrelevant.
If this formation occurs at a peak, it is called a “hanging man.” A variation is called the
“kasakasa” or “paper umbrella” when the body is shorter than the shadow. When the same formation occurs at a trough, it is called a “hammer.” These formations ranked best in our scale and
were close to a tie with morning and evening stars.

Download at www.wowebook.com

394

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Hanging Man

Hammer

Top

Bottom

Either Can Be Black
or White

FIGURE 17.21 Hanging man and hammer

Shooting Star and Inverted Hammer
The shooting star and the inverted hammer can be thought of as an upside down hanging man or
hammer. For these formations, the real body occurs in the lower end of the trading range. A
shooting star occurs at peaks, and the inverted hammer occurs at bottoms. Both have long shadows above their bodies and very short or nonexistent shadows below their bodies, as shown in
Figure 17.22. Again, the color of the body is irrelevant. In our ranking of patterns, they fell into
the middle, nowhere near the best-performing hammer and hanging man to which they are
related.
Engulfing
An engulfing pattern is a two-bar pattern in which the second body engulfs the first body (see
Figure 17.23). This pattern is similar to an outside day reversal in bar patterns. Because this pattern is designed to recognize a trend reversal, there must be a clear trend preceding the engulfing
pattern. In a market uptrend, a bearish engulfing pattern would indicate a market top. The bearish engulfing pattern consists of a small white-bodied candle followed by a black body that
engulfs the white body. The bullish engulfing pattern would indicate that a downward trend is

Download at www.wowebook.com

395

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

reversing. This bullish engulfing pattern consists of a candle with a small dark body on one bar
followed by a candle with a larger white body that engulfs the dark body. For both the bearish
and bullish engulfing pattern, the signal is much stronger when the first body is very small and
the second body is very large. However, performance of engulfing patterns is near the bottom of
the six pattern types tested by Schwager. They had the worst net profits and the largest maximum
drawdowns.
Shooting Star

Inverted Hammer

Top

Bottom

Either Can Be Black
or White

FIGURE 17.22 Shooting star and inverted hammer

Dark Cloud Cover and Piercing Line
A dark cloud cover is a two-body pattern at a top. The first body is large and white, and the second body is large and dark. The second open should be above the upper shadow of the first bar,
an opening gap upward, and the close well within the first bar’s white body, preferably below the
50% level. The pattern resembles the Oops! pattern in bar charts. Performance of this pattern is
supposedly enhanced by a deeper penetration of the white body. (A complete penetration would
be an engulfing pattern.)

Download at www.wowebook.com

396

Part IV Chart Pattern Analysis

Top

Bottom

FIGURE 17.23 Candle engulfing pattern

The opposite pattern, a piercing line pattern, would indicate market bottom. The piercing
line follows the same rules as the dark cloud pattern, only in reverse. Both the dark cloud cover
and piercing line formations are pictured in Figure 17.24. These patterns ranked in the lower half
of the six types followed. They had the second to least drawdown, lowest average profit per
trade, and the lowest winning percentage.

Multiple Bar Patterns
Multiple bar candlestick patterns develop over a time period of more than two bars. A quick
glance at names such as “three black crows,” “three white soldiers,” and “three outside up”
reveals that many of the multiple bar patterns are three bar patterns.

Download at www.wowebook.com

397

Chapter 17 Short-Term Patterns

Dark Cloud Cover

Piercing Line

Top

Bottom

FIGURE 17.24 Dark cloud cover and piercing line

Morning and Evening Star
The evening star is a three-bar candlestick pattern that occurs at market tops, and the morning
star is a three-bar, market bottom pattern. In each of these patterns, the second bar, or middle candlestick, is known as a star. A star is a candlestick that has a small body that lies outside of the
range of the body before it. It implies an opening gap, as does a dark cloud and piercing line pattern, but it can later cover part of the previous bar’s shadow. The important point is that its body
does not overlap the previous bar’s body at all. It is similar to a doji in that it represents a sudden
halt in a trend and some indecision between buyers and sellers. Indeed, a doji can be a star, called
a doji star, if the doji body occurs outside the body of the previous bar’s body.
The evening star pattern, pictured in Figure 17.25, starts with a long white body followed
by a star of either color. If the third bar forms a large black body that closes well within the body
of the first bar, the pattern is confirmed. Ideally, the third body should not touch the star’s body,
but this rarely occurs, and it is not a necessary condition for the pattern. The amount of penetration into the first white body is more important. The evening star is similar to the island reversal
bar pattern without the necessary second gap.
