BONDS
Washington Public Power Supply System
Back in 1983, Buffett decided to invest in some bonds of the Washington Public Power Supply System (WPPSS). The transaction is a clear
example of Buffett’s thinking in terms of the possible gains from buying the bonds compared with those if he bought the entire company.
On July 25, 1983, WPPSS (pronounced, with macabre humor,
“Whoops”) announced that it was in default of $2.25 billion in municipal bonds used to finance the uncompleted construction of two nuclear
reactors, known as Projects 4 and 5. The state ruled that the local power
authorities were not obligated to pay WPPSS for power they had previously promised to buy but ultimately did not require. That decision led
to the largest municipal bond default in U.S. history. The size of the
default and the debacle that followed depressed the market for public
power bonds for several years. Investors moved quickly to sell their utility bonds, forcing prices lower and current yields higher.
The cloud over WPPSS Projects 4 and 5 cast a shadow over Projects
1, 2, and 3. But Buffett perceived significant differences between the
terms and obligations of Projects 4 and 5 on the one hand and those of
Projects 1, 2, and 3 on the other. The first three were operational utilities that were also direct obligations of Bonneville Power Administration,

144

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

a government agency. However, the problems of Projects 4 and 5 were
so severe that some were predicting they could weaken the credit position of Bonneville Power.
Buffett evaluated the risks of owning municipal bonds of WPPSS
Projects 1, 2, and 3. Certainly there was a risk that these bonds could
default and a risk that the interest payments could be suspended for a
prolonged period. Still another factor was the upside ceiling on what
these bonds could ever be worth. Even though he could purchase these
bonds at a discount to their par value, at the time of maturity they
could only be worth one hundred cents on the dollar.
Shortly after Projects 4 and 5 defaulted, Standard & Poor’s suspended
its ratings on Projects 1, 2, and 3. The lowest coupon bonds of Projects 1,
2, and 3 sank to forty cents on the dollar and produced a current yield of
15 to 17 percent tax-free. The highest coupon bonds fell to eighty cents
on the dollar and generated a similar yield. Undismayed, from October
1983 through June the following year, Buffett aggressively purchased
bonds issued by WPPSS for Projects 1, 2, and 3. By the end of June
1984, Berkshire Hathaway owned $139 million of WPPSS Project 1, 2,
and 3 bonds ( both low-coupon and high-coupon) with a face value of
$205 million.
With WPPSS, explains Buffett, Berkshire acquired a $139 million
business that could expect to earn $22.7 million annually after tax (the
cumulative value of WPPSS annual coupons) and would pay those earnings to Berkshire in cash. Buffett points out there were few businesses
available for purchase during this time that were selling at a discount to
book value and earning 16.3 percent after tax on unleveraged capital.
Buffett figured that if he set out to purchase an unleveraged operating
company earning $22.7 million after tax ($45 million pretax), it would
have cost Berkshire between $250 and $300 million—assuming he could
find one. Given a strong business that he understands and likes, Buffett
would have happily paid that amount. But, he points out, Berkshire paid
half that price for WPPSS bonds to realize the same amount of earnings.
Furthermore, Berkshire purchased the business (the bonds) at a 32 percent discount to book value.
Looking back, Buffett admits that the purchase of WPPSS bonds
turned out better than he expected. Indeed, the bonds outperformed
most business acquisitions made in 1983. Buffett has since sold the
WPPSS low-coupon bonds. These bonds, which he purchased at a

Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

145

significant discount to par value, doubled in price while annually paying Berkshire a return of 15 to 17 percent tax-free. “Our WPPSS experience, though pleasant, does nothing to alter our negative opinion
about long-term bonds,” said Buffett. “It only makes us hope that we
run into some other large stigmatized issue, whose troubles have caused
it to be significantly misappraised by the market.”2

RJR Nabisco
Later in the 1980s, a new investment vehicle was introduced to the financial markets. The formal name is high-yield bond, but most investors, then and now, call them junk bonds.
In Buffett’s view, these new high-yield bonds were different from
their predecessor “fallen angels”—Buffett’s term for investment-grade
bonds that, having fallen on bad times, were downgraded by ratings
agencies. The WPPSS bonds were fallen angels. He described the new
high-yield bonds as a bastardized form of the fallen angels and, he said,
were junk before they were issued.
Wall Street’s securities salespeople were able to promote the legitimacy of junk bond investing by quoting earlier research that indicated
higher interest rates compensated investors for the risk of default. Buffett argued that earlier default statistics were meaningless since they
were based on a group of bonds that differed significantly from the junk
bonds currently being issued. It was illogical, he said, to assume that
junk bonds were identical to the fallen angels. “That was an error similar to checking the historical death rate from Kool-Aid before drinking the version served at Jonestown.”3
As the 1980s unfolded, high-yield bonds became junkier as new offerings f looded the market. “Mountains of junk bonds,” noted Buffett,
“were sold by those who didn’t care to those that didn’t think and there
was no shortage of either.”4 At the height of this debt mania, Buffett
predicted that certain capital enterprises were guaranteed to fail when it
became apparent that debt-laden companies were struggling to meet
their interest payments. In 1989, Southmark Corporation and Integrated Resources both defaulted on their bonds. Even Campeau Corporation, a U.S. retailing empire created with junk bonds, announced it
was having difficulty meeting its debt obligations. Then on October 13,
1989, UAL Corporation, the target of a $6.8 billion management-union

146

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

led buyout that was to be financed with high-yield bonds, announced
that it was unable to obtain financing. Arbitrageurs sold their UAL common stock position, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 190
points in one day.
The disappointment over the UAL deal, coupled with the losses in
Southmark and Integrated Resources, led many investors to question
the value of high-yield bonds. Portfolio managers began dumping
their junk bond positions. Without any buyers, the price for highyield bonds plummeted. After beginning the year with outstanding
gains, Merrill Lynch’s index of high-yield bonds returned a paltry 4.2
percent compared with the 14.2 percent returns of investment-grade
bonds. By the end of 1989, junk bonds were deeply out of favor with
the market.
A year earlier, Kohlberg Kravis & Roberts had succeeded in purchasing RJR Nabisco for $25 billion financed principally with bank
debt and junk bonds. Although RJR Nabisco was meeting its financial
obligations, when the junk bond market unraveled, RJR bonds declined along with other junk bonds. In 1989 and 1990, during the junk
bond bear market, Buffett began purchasing RJR bonds.
Most junk bonds continued to look unattractive during this time, but
Buffett figured RJR Nabisco was unjustly punished. The company’s stable products were generating enough cash f low to cover its debt payments. Additionally, RJR Nabisco had been successful in selling portions
of its business at very attractive prices, thereby reducing its debt-toequity ratio. Buffett analyzed the risks of investing in RJR and concluded
that the company’s credit was higher than perceived by other investors
who were selling their bonds. RJR bonds were yielding 14.4 percent (a
businesslike return), and the depressed price offered the potential for capital gains.
So, between 1989 and 1990, Buffett acquired $440 million in discounted RJR bonds. In the spring of 1991, RJR Nabisco announced it
was retiring most of its junk bonds by redeeming them at face value. The
RJR bonds rose 34 percent, producing a $150 million capital gain for
Berkshire Hathaway.

Level 3 Communications
In 2002, Buffett bought up large bundles of other high-yield corporate
bonds, increasing his holdings in these securities sixfold to $8.3 billion.

Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

147

Of the total, 65 percent were in the energy industry and about $7 billion were bought through Berkshire insurance companies.
Describing his thinking in the 2002 letter to shareholders, Buffett
wrote, “The Berkshire management does not believe the credit risks associated with the issuers of these instruments has correspondingly declined.” And this comes from a man who does not take unaccounted-for
(read: unpriced) risks. To that point, he added, “Charlie and I detest taking even small risks unless we feel we are being adequately compensated
for doing so. About as far as we will go down that path is to occasionally
eat cottage cheese a day after the expiration date on the carton.”5
In addition to pricing his risk, he also typically bought the securities at far less than what they were worth, even at distressed prices, and
waited until the asset value was realized.
What is particularly intriguing about these bond purchases is that, in
all likelihood, Buffett would not have bought equity in many of these
companies. By the end of 2003, however, his high-yield investments paid
off to the tune of about $1.3 billion, while net income for the company
that year was a total of $8.3 billion. As the high-yield market skyrocketed, some of the bonds were called or sold. Buffett’s comment at the
time was simply, “Yesterday’s weeds are being priced as today’s f lowers.”
In July 2002, three companies invested a total of $500 million in
Broomfield, Colorado-based Level 3 Communications’ ten-year convertible bonds, with a coupon of 9 percent and a conversion price of
$3.41, to help the company make acquisitions and to enhance the company’s capital position. The three were Berkshire Hathaway ($100 million), Legg Mason ($100 million) and Longleaf Partners ($300 million).
Technology-intensive companies are not Buffett’s normal acquisition
fare; he candidly admits he does not know of a way to properly value
technology companies. This was an expensive deal for Level 3 but it gave
them the cash and credibility when they needed it. For his part, Buffett
obtained a lucrative (9 percent) investment with an equity position. At
the time, Buffett was quoted as saying that investors should expect 7 to 8
percent returns from the stock market annually, so at 9 percent, he was
ahead of the game.
There is another aspect to this story that is typical of Buffett—a
strong component of managerial integrity and personal relationships.
Level 3 Communications was a spin-off from an Omaha-based construction company, Peter Kiewit Sons; Buffett’s friend Walter Scott Jr.,
is both chairman emeritus of Kiewit and chairman of Level 3. Often

148

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

called Omaha’s first citizen, Scott was the driving force behind the
city’s zoo, its art museum, the engineering institute, and the Nebraska
Game and Parks Foundation. Scott and Buffett have close personal and
professional connections: Scott sits on Berkshire’s board, and the two
men are only f loors away from each other at Kiewit Plaza.
Even though Buffett knew Scott well and held him in high regard,
he wanted the investment to be fair and transparent, with no question
that the relationship between the two men unduly inf luenced the deal.
So Buffett suggested that O. Mason Hawkins, chairman and chief executive of Southeastern Asset Management, which advises Longleaf
Partners, set up the deal and negotiate the terms.
By mid-June 2003, a year later, Buffett, Legg Mason, and Longleaf
Partners exchanged $500 million for a total of 174 million Level 3 common shares (including an extra 27 million shares as an incentive to convert). (Longleaf had already converted $43 million earlier in the year
and then converted the rest, $457 million, in June.)
Buffett received 36.7 million shares. In June, he sold 16.8 million for
$117.6 million, and in November sold an additional 18.3 million shares
for $92.4 million. Sure enough, Level 3 made good on its debt payments,
and by the end of 2003, Buffett had doubled his money in 16 months.
On top of that, his bonds had earned $45 million of interest, and he still
held on to 1,644,900 of Level 3’s shares.

Qwest
In the summer of 2002, Berkshire purchased hundreds of millions of dollars of bonds issued by Qwest Communications, a struggling telecommunications company based in Denver formerly known as US West, and its
regulatory operating subsidiary, Qwest Corporation. At the time, Qwest
had $26 billion in debt and was in the midst of restating its 1999, 2000,
and 2001 financial statements. Bankruptcy rumors were f lying. Qwest
corporate bonds were trading at thirty-five to forty cents on the dollar
and the bonds of its operating company at eighty cents to the dollar.
Some of the bonds were yielding 12.5 percent and were backed with specific assets; other, riskier bonds were not. Buffett bought both.
Most analysts at the time said that Qwest’s assets had enough value
for Buffett to more than recover his investment given the current trading price. And, if it had not been for the interest payments, Qwest

Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

149

would have had a healthy cash f low. The company’s most valuable asset
was the 14-state local phone service franchise, but Buffett had faith that
with former Ameritech CEO, Dick Notebaert, at the helm, the company would solve its problems.

Amazon.com
In July 2002, only one week after Buffett wrote CEO Jeff Bezos a letter praising him for his decision to account for stock options as an expense, Buffett bought $98.3 million of Amazon’s high-yield bonds.
Buffett clearly appreciates managers who exhibit integrity and
strong values, and he has long advocated for expensing stock options,
but he certainly was not on a goodwill mission when he bought the
Amazon.com bonds. The Government Employees Insurance Company,
the auto insurance unit of Berkshire, stood to make $16.4 million profit
on the investment in high-yield bonds, a 17 percent return in nine
months if Amazon repurchased the $264 million in 10 percent senior
notes that were issued in 1998. Later that summer, Buffett bought an
additional $60.1 million of Amazon’s 67⁄8 percent convertible bonds.
Assuming a price of $60.00 per $1,000 bond, the yield would have been
a healthy 11.46 percent and the yield to maturity would have been even
higher once interest payments were calculated in.
It is well known that Buffett sticks with things he understands and
shies away from technology. His involvement with the Internet is limited
to three online activities: He buys books, reads the Wall Street Journal,
and plays bridge. Buffett even made fun of his own technology avoidance
in his 2000 letter to shareholders: “We have embraced the 21st century
by entering such cutting-edge industries as brick, carpet and paint. Try
to control your excitement.”6
So why was he attracted to Amazon’s bonds? First, he said, they
were “extraordinarily cheap.” Second, he had faith that the company
would thrive. Buffett may also have observed that Amazon.com had a
similar profile to many of his other investments in retail companies.
Amazon.com generates its revenue through huge amounts of sales for
low prices and although it has low margins, the company is efficient
and profitable. Buffett admires the way Bezos has created a megabrand and the way he has pulled the company through some very difficult times.

150

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

ARBITRAGE
Arbitrage, in its simplest form, involves purchasing a security in one
market and simultaneously selling the same security in another market.
The object is to profit from price discrepancies. For example, if stock in
a company was quoted as $20 per share in the London market and $20.01
in the Tokyo market, an arbitrageur could profit from simultaneously
purchasing shares of the company in London and selling the same shares
in Tokyo. In this case, there is no capital risk. The arbitrageur is merely
profiting from the inefficiencies that occur between markets. Because
this transaction involves no risk, it is appropriately called riskless arbitrage. Risk arbitrage, on the other hand, is the sale or purchase of a security in hopes of profiting from some announced value.
The most common type of risk arbitrage involves the purchase of a
stock at a discount to some future value. This future value is usually
based on a corporate merger, liquidation, tender offer, or reorganization.
The risk an arbitrageur confronts is that the future announced price of
the stock may not be realized.
To evaluate risk arbitrage opportunities, explains Buffett, you must
answer four basic questions. “How likely is it that the promised event
will indeed occur? How long will your money be tied up? What chance
is there that something better will transpire—a competing takeover
bid, for example? What will happen if the event does not take place because of antitrust action, financing glitches, etc.?”7
Confronted with more cash than investable ideas, Buffett has often
turned to arbitrage as a useful way to employ his extra cash. The Arkata
Corporation transaction in 1981, where he bought over 600,000 shares
as the company was going through a leveraged buyout, was a good example. However, whereas most arbitrageurs might participate in fifty or
more deals annually, Buffett sought out only a few, financially large
transactions. He limited his participation to deals that were announced
and friendly, and he refused to speculate about potential takeovers or the
prospects for greenmail.
Although he never calculated his arbitrage performance over the
years, Buffett estimated that Berkshire has averaged an annual return of
about 25 percent pretax. Because arbitrage is often a substitute for
short-term Treasury bills, Buffett’s appetite for deals f luctuated with
Berkshire’s cash level.

Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

151

Nowadays, however, he does not engage in arbitrage on a large
scale but rather keeps his excess cash in Treasuries and other short-term
liquid investments. Sometimes Buffett holds medium-term, tax-exempt
bonds as cash alternatives. He realizes that by substituting mediumterm bonds for short-term Treasury bills, he runs the risk of principal
loss if he is forced to sell at disadvantageous time. But because these taxfree bonds offer higher aftertax returns than Treasury bills, Buffett figures that the potential loss is offset by the gain in income.
With Berkshire’s historical success in arbitrage, shareholders might
wonder why Buffett strayed from this strategy. Admittedly, Buffett’s investment returns were better than he imagined, but by 1989 the arbitrage landscape started changing. The financial excesses brought about by
the leveraged buyout market were creating an environment of unbridled
enthusiasm. Buffett was not sure when lenders and buyers would come to
their senses, but he has always acted cautiously when others are giddy.
Even before the collapse of the UAL buyout in October 1989, Buffett
was pulling back from arbitrage transactions. Another reason may be that
deals of a size that would really make a difference to Buffett’s very large
portfolio simply do not exist.
In any case, Berkshire’s withdrawal from arbitrage was made easier
with the advent of convertible preferred stocks.

C O N V E RT I B L E P R E F E R R E D S T O C K S
A convertible preferred stock is a hybrid security that possesses characteristics of both stocks and bonds. Generally, these stocks provide investors with higher current income than common stocks. This higher
yield offers protection from downside price risk. If the common stock
declines, the higher yield of the convertible preferred stock prevents it
from falling as low as the common shares. In theory, the convertible
stock will fall in price until its current yield approximates the value of a
nonconvertible bond with a similar yield, credit, and maturity.
A convertible preferred stock also provides the investor with the opportunity to participate in the upside potential of the common shares.
Since it is convertible into common shares, when the common rises, the
convertible stock will rise as well. However, because the convertible
stock provides high income and has the potential for capital gains, it is

152

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

priced at a premium to the common stock. This premium is ref lected in
the rate at which the preferred is convertible into common shares. Typically, the conversion premium may be 20 percent to 30 percent. This
means that the common must rise in price 20 to 30 percent before
the convertible stock can be converted into common shares without losing value.
In the same way that he invested in high-yield bonds, Buffett invested in convertible preferred stocks whenever the opportunity presented itself as better than other investments. In the late 1980s and
1990s, Buffett made several investments in convertible preferred stocks,
including Salomon Brothers, Gillette, USAir, Champion International,
and American Express.
Takeover groups were challenging several of these companies, and
Buffett became known as a “white knight,” rescuing companies from
hostile invaders. Buffett, however, certainly did not perceive himself as a
pro bono savior. He simply saw these purchases as good investments
with a high potential for profit. At the time, the preferred stocks of these
companies offered him a higher return than he could find elsewhere.
Some of the companies issuing the convertible preferred securities
were familiar to Buffett, but in other cases he had no special insight about
the business nor could he predict with any confidence what its future cash
f lows would be. This unpredictability, Buffett explains, is the precise reason Berkshire’s investment was a convertible preferred issue rather than
common stock. Despite the conversion potential, the real value of the preferred stock, in his eye, was its fixed-income characteristics.
There is one exception: MidAmerican. This is a multifaceted transaction involving convertible preferred and common stock as well as debt.
Here, Buffett values the convertible preferred for its fixed-income return as well as for its future equity stake.
