
Fig 10.21 Coffee Futures - 80 Tick Chart
The session for the Coffee contract as shown in Fig 10.21 opened with a weak move higher before rolling over
and sliding lower, but as you can see, with very little selling pressure at this stage.
The market is moving lower, but the volume is falling so this is not a market that is going far.
Then we see the large operators moving into the market. Volume spikes higher and continues to rise with the
market which marches North in nice, even wide spread candles. However, on the 9th volume bar, we see our
first sign of weakness, ultra high volume and no price action to match. The candle spread is wide, but judged
against the candles and price action that has just pre-ceded it, the reaction from the market should have been
much stronger. This signals weakness and the large operators are starting to struggle, although there is only a
small upper wick on the candle at this point.
The market then goes into consolidation with above average volume and narrow spread up candles with wicks
to the upper body, confirming the initial weakness first seen in the trend higher. The market then rolls over and
sells off on high volume, and the attempt to recover, is marked with rising prices and falling volumes, a further
sign of weakness. This is duly confirmed again with the price action at this level marked with a shooting star
candle, the catalyst for the price waterfall which followed.
It is interesting to note, even though I did not add this example for this particular reason, but the recovery from
the price waterfall appears to have occurred with little evidence of buying volume or stopping volume. This in
itself is suspicious. After all, this is a significant fall, and despite being a fast intraday chart, we would still expect
to see high volumes at the bottom. Therefore could this action be a further extended trap up move higher on low
volume? Not quite and this is where we always have to be careful.
The volumes in the move up were so extreme they tended to distort the volumes elsewhere during the session,
and in fact scrolling forward, the volumes at the bottom of the price waterfall were well above average, but
distorted by the volumes in the bullish trend. Nevertheless, this coffee future did sell off the following day and
never moved higher during this session. Therefore, this is always a point worth remembering. Whatever the
instrument we are trading, we must try to have an idea of what is considered to be high, low and average
volume. So that when these extremes of volume do appear, they do not distort our view of what follows in the
remainder of the trading session.
Finally, to round off this chapter I would like to examine one of the most widely followed indices around the
world, and that is the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The Dow 30 is considered to be, by the media, who know
very little if anything about the financial markets, a leading benchmark of the US economy. It is not, but never
mind, and it simply gives me a topic for another book!
I wanted to end this chapter with this index, as it really makes the powerful point, that VPA works in all time
frames for all instruments and for all markets. Here in Fig 10.22 we have the weekly chart for the DJIA and really

for those investors amongst you reading this book, this is precisely the sort of time horizon you would be
considering for longer term investing in stocks, of which the primary indices will be key.

Fig 10.22 DJ30 - Weekly Chart
Even just a quick cursory glance at this chart tells us where the major buying occurred. It is so obvious, and
proves the point about VPA. Your eye should be drawn instantly to those anomalies, of either extreme highs,
extreme lows, or concentration of volumes in certain areas. From there, you then dig deeper and take a more
forensic view at the macro level. This is a classic chart with the market rising, then rolling over a little, before
rising further, then rolling over again with the classic rounded tops.
The market makers came into the market strongly over an eleven week period (the yellow box), and then
continued to stock up over the next six to eight weeks at this level, so the market was consolidating in this
region for 4 - 5 months. This is the length of time that accumulation may take, and no move will be made until
they are ready.
The question everyone is now asking, is how much further can this market go, and the answer is to look at the
volume. Since the accumulation phase, the index has climbed steadily on average volume with no particular
extremes one way or the other. For a major reversal to occur, we need to see signs of a selling climax in this
time frame, and this is certainly NOT the case at the moment.
If and when this does appear, then as VPA traders we will see it instantly, whether on the monthly, weekly or
daily chart. Volume CANNOT be hidden from view, and no matter how hard the market makers try, and they do
have tricks to hide large block orders, most of the daily trading volumes are free for all to see. They may be
clever, but have yet to work out a way to hide volume from view!
Now in the next chapter I want to highlight some of the price patterns, that I believe help to give us additional
pointers and guidance in our analysis of price action and the associated volume.

Chapter Eleven
Putting It All Together
The market does not run on chance or luck. Like the battlefield, it runs on probabilities and odds.
David Dreman (1936-)
As we come towards the end of this book on volume and price, I wanted to pass on some thoughts,
observations, advice and comments based on my sixteen years of experience, using volume as my
predominant indicator. As I have said before, I was lucky to start my trading education and journey with volume.
It saved me a huge amount of wasted time and has made me substantial sums over the years from both trading
and investing. Many aspiring traders spend years trying systems and methods which never work, and result in
them losing confidence, to say nothing of their financial losses. Most then simply give up.
Eventually some of these traders and investors stumble upon volume. Some buy into the methodology instantly,
just as I did. Others do not, and if you are in this latter group, I hope that I have at least made the case for VPA in
this book. However, if you decide VPA is not for you, then you have lost nothing, other than the few dollars this
book has cost you. If you do decide that VPA is logical and makes perfect sense, then I am delighted, as a
lifetime of trading and investing success awaits. Provided you follow the principles I have explained here.
Now, let me introduce some further analytical techniques that I use in my own trading, which when combined
with the basics of VPA, will help to develop your trading skills, with volume as the foundation.
The first technique I would like to explain is price pattern recognition, which we covered when we considered
the importance of price congestion. However, I want to revisit it here, and look at some actual market examples.
At the same time I would also like to include other key patterns that play an important role in breakouts and
reversals, all of which ties into Volume Price Analysis.
The reason for revisiting price pattern recognition is that in the previous chapter I was very conscious of keeping
the focus on the volume price relationship, and less so on the broader price behaviour on the chart. My rationale
throughout the book has been to explain VPA in stages, and this is another layer that we can now add to our
knowledge of VPA.
The market chart examples in this chapter will focus entirely on market congestion and subsequent reversals
and breakouts, which I hope will cement this aspect of price behaviour firmly in your mind.
The first is a lovely example from the forex market and is from the 15 minute chart for cable (GBP\USD).

Fig 11.10 GBP/USD – 15m Chart
The chart in Fig 11.10 really explains all we need to know about price congestion and how it relates to the

volume breakout when it arrives. As we can see the chart covers an extensive period with 70 candles in this
phase.
The initial entry into the congestion phase is marked by a pivot low which gives us the floor of our price
congestion, and two bars later a pivot high is posted with above average volume. The GBP/USD is weak and
not ready to move higher with the pair then falling on declining volume, so weakness, but not a trend that will be
sustained. And the reason should now be obvious - falling prices and falling volumes. Volumes then decline in
general moving between buying and selling, and as the market moves sideways in the congestion phase, we
see two further pivot highs posted, followed by a pivot low.
These are followed by a whole series of pivots, both at the ceiling and the floor of the congestion, and as I
explained earlier when we were examining this concept, you do have to think of these levels as rubber bands
and not as rods of steel.
We can see in this example that the pivot points (the little yellow arrows), are not all in a straight line. The
market is not linear and technical analysis is an art and NOT a science, which is why volume software that
attempts to predict changes in trend can be unreliable. This analysis has to be done manually.
At this stage, as the price continues to trade within the congestion, we are waiting for the catalyst, which will be
the signal for any breakout. And on this occasion was provided by an item of economic data in the UK. From
memory I believe it was the RPI release. However, the actual release is unimportant. What is important is the
reaction on the price chart.
First, we have a breakout which moves firmly through our ceiling of resistance, which has now become......
support. And if you remember what I said in the chapter on breakouts – we MUST wait for a clear close well
above the congestion phase, and the first candle here delivered this for us. A nice wide spread up candle.
Second, we have to check that this is a valid move, and the good news is the breakout has been validated by
the volume.
As this has been an extensive area of price congestion, any break away will require substantial effort which is
what we have here with buyers taking the market firmly higher. Can we join the move here? This is what we
have been waiting for. We have a market that has been in congestion, waiting, and gathering itself, when finally
the catalyst arrives and the market moves on high volume.
Furthermore, we now have a deep area of natural price protection in place below, and our stop loss would be
below the level of the last pivot low. Time has also played its part here, with cause and effect coming into play.
Remember, this is a 15 minute chart, so an extended phase of consolidation and congestion, and therefore any
consequent effect should reflect the time taken in building the cause. In other words, the trend, when it breaks,
should last for some time. We just have to be patient, and wait!
Finally, there is one further aspect to the breakout, which again I mentioned in an earlier chapter and it is this –
the volume has validated the news. The market makers have confirmed that the data is good news for the UK
pound, and the market has responded. Volumes pick up once again as the market moves higher and away from
the congestion phase, and to return to my salmon analogy, another trend has been spawned.
This is the power of the congestion phase – it is the spawning ground of trends and reversals. In this case the
ceiling was breached, but it could equally have been the floor. The direction is irrelevant. All we wait for is
confirmation of the breakout, validated with volume, and then trade accordingly.
The second example in Fig 11.11 is once again taken from the GBP/USD. This time we are looking at the
hourly chart over a period of approximately 4 days in total.

Fig 11.11 GBP/USD – 1 Hour Chart
Once again here let me explain the highlights and key points. As we can see the pair has been rising, but the
market moves lower as shown by a wide spread down candle. This is followed by a narrow spread down
candle with above average volume, and signalling possible buying on this reversal lower. The market pushes
higher on the next candle, a wide spread up bar, and posts a pivot low as shown with the small yellow arrow.
We are now looking for a possible pivot high which will start to define a potential period of congestion.
This duly arrives two bars later, and the pivot high is now in place. Now we are watching for a potential
congestion phase, and further pivots to define the trading range. However, on this occasion, the next candle
breaks higher and moves firmly away from this area. The potential congestion phase we were expecting has
not materialised, so we know this was simply a minor pause in the trend higher, as the pair move up on good
volume.
Two candles later, another pivot high is formed, and once again we are now looking for our pivot low to form
and define our levels of any congestion phase. In this example the pair do indeed move into congestion, with
low volume, and on each rally a pivot high is posted which gives us a nicely defined ceiling. However, there are
no pivots defining the floor. Does this matter?
And this is the reason I wanted to highlight this example to make the point, that in fact it doesn't.
A pivot is a unique combination of three candles which then create the pivot, and this helps to define the region
for us visually. Pivots also help to give us our 'roadmap' signals of where we are in the price journey. But,
sometimes one or other does not arrive, and we have to rely on our eyes to define these levels. After all, a pivot
is simply an indicator to make it easier for us to see these signals. In this case the pivot high forms, but there is
no corresponding pivot low, so we are looking for a 'floor' to form.
After four candles, the market moves higher again and posts a second pivot high, so we have our ceiling well
defined, and this is now resistance. The next phase lower made up of three candles then stops at the same
price level, before reversing higher again. We know this pair is not going to fall far anyway, as we have a falling
market and falling volume. Our floor of support is now well defined by the price action, and it is clear from the
associated volume, that we are in a congestion phase at this level. And, my point is this.
When using any analytical method in technical analysis, we always have to apply a degree of leeway and
common sense. Whenever a market moves into a region of price congestion, it will not always develop the
perfect combinations of pivot highs and pivot lows, and we then have to apply common sense as here,
bolstered, of course, by our volume. At the start of this congestion phase, we have a very good idea that we are
entering a congestion phase, simply from an assessment of the volume. The volume is all well below average

(the white dotted line) therefore we already know that we are in a congestion phase, and the pivots are merely
aids, to help define the price region for us.
Therefore whilst pivots are very important it is the volume which will also help to define the start of a congestion
phase, and the pivot highs and lows are there to help to define the floors and ceilings of the trading range. If one
or other is missing, then we simply revert to using our eyes and common sense.
The analogy I use here is when sailing. When we are sailing our boat, we have two forms of navigation. A GPS
plotter which does all the work for us which is nice and easy, and the old fashioned way using a map, compass,
time, tides and way points. In order to pass the exams and charter a yacht, you have to learn both. And the
reason for this is very simple. If there is a loss of power on board, then you have to be able to navigate using a
paper based chart. The same principle applies here.
We can define where we are by using volume and price visually from the price action on the chart. The pivots
are simply there as a quick visual guide, to help identify these price combinations quickly and easily.
Returning to our example in Fig 11.11, we now have the floor defined by our price action and the ceiling defined
by our pivot highs. We are now waiting for a signal, and it duly arrives in the form of a hanging man, one of the
candles we have not seen in earlier examples, and suddenly the volume has jumped higher and is well above
average. The market breaks lower and through the floor of our congestion phase with a wide spread down
candle. We now know that, on this occasion, the price congestion phase has been developing into a trend
reversal, and is not a continuation of the existing trend.
It is here that we would be looking to take a short position. The market pauses and reverses higher but the
volume is falling, and in addition we see a second hanging man candle, suggesting more weakness in the
market. We also have the comfort of knowing that above us we have one of our invisible barriers of price
congestion.
What was the floor of support, has now become the ceiling of price resistance as the market attempts to recover,
and this is why congestion zones are so significant to us as traders. Not only do they spawn the trend reversals
and breakouts, but they also give us our natural barriers of protection which have been created by the market.
Where better to place any stop loss than on the opposite side of a congestion region.
The resistance region holds, and the market sells off sharply with a beautiful price waterfall. However, as the
bearish trend develops, so the volumes are falling away, and we know as VPA traders that this trend is not
going too far. And sure enough, after seven hours of downwards movement, it bottoms out and moves
into….......another congestion phase at a different price level.
Ironically, here too, we have a phase which is once again marked by pivot highs, but no pivot lows. However,
the volume and price action tell us exactly where we are in the price journey. We simply wait for the next phase
to start, which it does, several hours later. Again, how do we know? Volume gives us the answer. The breakout
has been associated with above average volume, which is what we expect to see, and off we go again.
I hope that from this example, which spans a period of four days or so, you can begin to see how everything
comes together. I did not particularly select this example, but it does highlight several key points that I hope will
reinforce and cement the concepts outlined in earlier chapters.
Reading a chart in this way is not difficult. Every market moves in this way. They trend for a little, then
consolidate in a congestion phase, then continue the trend or reverse completely. If you understand the power
of VPA and combine it with a knowledge of price congestion, then you are 90% of the way there. The rest is
practice, practice and more practice, and it will come.
Furthermore, you will then realise the power this gives you in your own trading and how it can deliver financial
independence to you and your family. It does takes a little effort, but the rewards are high, and if you are
prepared to study and learn, then you will enjoy the thrill of being able to forecast market price action, before it
happens, and profit accordingly.
I would now like to revisit a very important concept, that I touched on earlier in the book. It is a cornerstone of my
approach to trading. Again, it is not unique and can be applied to any market and any instrument. Neither is it
unique to VPA. What this concept does do, is give you that three dimensional view of price behaviour, as

opposed to the more conventional one dimensional approach that most traders take. The principle advantage of
this concept is that it allows us to assess and quantify the risk on a trade.
This concept involves using multiple time frames to analyse price and volume. It allows us to qualify and
quantify the risk of any trade, and assess the relative strength or weakness of any trade, and so its likely
duration. In other words, multiple time frames will reveal the dominant trend and primary bias of the instrument
under consideration.
Fig 11.12 represents our three time frames. Despite its size we can see both price and volume and this method
of analysis is something I teach in my online and offline seminars.

Fig 11.12 GBP/USD – Multiple Time Frames
What we have in Fig 11.12 are three charts for cable (GBP/USD). The chart at the top of the image is the 30
minute and is what I often refer to as our ‘benchmark’ chart. In this trio it is this chart which gives us our bias,
and is the one against which we relate the other two. Bottom right is the 15 minute, and the chart at bottom left is
the 5 minute. All the charts are taken from one of my favourite platforms for spot forex, namely MT4.
The candle I have highlighted on the 30 minute chart is a shooting star, with ultra high volume, sending a clear
signal of weakness at this level. The shooting star was pre-ceded by a narrow spread candle also with ultra
high volume, and which gave us our initial signal. But how does this appear on our faster time frames? On the
15 minute chart the shooting star is two candles, and on our 5 minute chart it is six candles. I have annotated
the chart with the yellow box on each to show you the associated price action.
Now the reason I use three charts is very simple. My primary trading chart is the 'middle' time frame of the three.
In this example it is the 15 minute chart, but using the MT4 chart settings we might equally have a 30 minute, 60
minute and 240 minute chart. In this trio our primary trading chart would be the 60 minute. However, in this
example we are using a 5, 15, 30 minute combination, so the primary or trading chart is our 15 minute.
The 30 minute chart is there as our slower time frame, our dominant or benchmark time frame, which tells us
where we are in the slower time frame trend. Imagine we are looking at price action using a telescope. This is
where we are viewing from some way off, so we can see all the price action of the last few days.
Then using our telescope we start to zoom in, first onto the 15 minute chart, and then in fine detail to the 5
minute chart. By using the 15 minute chart we are seeing both sides of the price action if you. A slower time
frame helps in gaining a perspective on where we are in the longer term journey, and a faster time frame on the
other side will give us the fine detail view of the related price action.
What do we see here? First the shooting star sent a clear signal of weakness, and on our 15 minute chart this is
reflected in two candles, with high volume on the up candle which is also topped with a deep wick to the upper
body. And here the point is this. If we had seen this price action in isolation on the 15 minute chart, it may not
have been immediately obvious what we were looking at here.
