
XXI

The Pete Products pool, as I expected, was hung up with
all they held to begin with and with all they had to take in
their futile effort to hold up the price. In the end they did
liquidate; but at much lower figures than they would have
got if Prentiss had let me sell when and as I wished. It
could not be otherwise. But Prentiss still thinks he was
right or says he does. I understand he says the reason I
gave him the advice I did was that I was short of other
stocks and the general market was going up. It implies, of
course, that the break in Pete Products that would have
resulted from selling out the pool's holdings at any price
would have helped my bear position in other stocks.
That is all tommyrot. I was not bearish because I was
short of stocks. I was bearish because that was the way I
sized up the situation, and I sold stocks short only after I
turned bearish. There never is much money in doing
things wrong end to; not in the stock market. My plan for
selling the pool's stock was based on what the experience
of twenty years told me alone was feasible and therefore
wise. Prentiss ought to have been enough of a trader to see
it as plainly as I did. It was too late to try to do anything
else.
I suppose Prentiss shares the delusion of thousands of
outsiders who think a manipulator can do anything. He
can't. The biggest thing Keene did was his manipulation of
U. S. Steel common and preferred in the spring of 1901. He
succeeded not because he was clever and resourceful and
not because he had a syndicate of the richest men in the
country back of him. He succeeded partly because of those
reasons but chiefly because the general market was right
and the public's state of mind was right.
It isn't good business for a man to act against the
teachings of experience and against common sense. But
the suckers in Wall Street are not all outsiders. Prentiss'
grievance against me is what I have just told you. He feels
sore because I did my manipulation not as I wanted to but
as he asked me to.
299

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

There isn't anything mysterious or underhanded or
crooked about manipulation designed to sell a stock in
bulk provided such operations are not accompanied by
deliberate misrepresentations. Sound manipulation must
be based on sound trading principles. People lay great
stress on old-time practices, such as wash sales. But I can
assure you that the mere mechanics of deception count for
very little. The difference between stock market
manipulation and the over-the-counter sale of stocks and
bonds is in the character of the clientele rather than in the
character of the appeal. J. P. Morgan & Co. sell an issue of
bonds to the public—that is, to investors. A manipulator
disposes of a block of stock to the public—that is, to
speculators. An investor looks for safety, for permanence
of the interest return on the capital he invests. The
speculator looks for a quick profit.
The manipulator necessarily finds his primary market
among speculators who are willing to run a greater than
normal business risk so long as they have a reasonable
chance to get a big return on their capital. I myself never
have believed in blind gambling. I may plunge or I may
buy one hundred shares. But in either case I must have a
reason for what I do.
I distinctly remember how I got into the game of
manipulation that is, in the marketing of stocks for others.
It gives me pleasure to recall it because it shows so
beautifully the professional Wall Street attitude toward
stock-market operations. It happened after I had "come
back"—that is, after my Bethlehem Steel trade in 1915
started me on the road to financial recovery.
I traded pretty steadily and had very good luck. I have
never sought newspaper publicity, but neither have I gone
out of my way to hide myself. At the same time, you know
that professional Wall Street exaggerates both the
successes and the failures of whichever operator happens
to be active; and, of course, the newspapers hear about
him and print rumors. I have been broke so many times,
300

XXI

according to the gossips, or have made so many millions,
according to the same authorities, that my only reaction to
such reports is to wonder how and where they are born.
And how they grow! I have had broker friend after broker
friend bring the same story to me, a little changed each
time, improved, more circumstantial.
All this preface is to tell you how I first came to
undertake the manipulation of a stock for someone else.
The stories the newspapers printed of how I had paid back
in full the millions I owed did the trick. My plungings and
my winnings were so magnified by the newspapers that I
was talked about in Wall Street. The day was past when an
operator swinging a line of two hundred thousand shares
of stock could dominate the market. But, as you know, the
public always desires to find successors to the old leaders.
It was Mr. Keene's reputation as a skilful stock operator, a
winner of millions on his own hook, that made promoters
and banking houses apply to him for selling large blocks of
securities. In short, his services as manipulator were in
demand because of the stories the Street had heard about
his previous successes as a trader.
But Keene was gone—passed on to that heaven where
he once said he wouldn't stay a moment unless he found
Sysonby there waiting for him. Two or three other men
who made stock-market history for a few months had
relapsed into the obscurity of prolonged inactivity. I refer
particularly to certain of those plunging Westerners who
came to Wall Street in 1901 and after making many
millions out of their Steel holdings remained in Wall
Street. They were in reality super-promoters rather than
operators of the Keene type. But they were extremely able,
extremely rich and extremely successful in the securities of
the companies which they and their friends controlled.
They were not really great manipulators, like Keene or
Governor Flower. Still, the Street found in them plenty to
gossip about and they certainly had a following among the
professionals and the sportier commission houses. After
301

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

they ceased to trade actively the Street found itself without
manipulators; at least, it couldn't read about them in the
newspapers.
You remember the big bull market that began when the
Stock Exchange resumed business in 1915. As the market
broadened and the Allies' purchases in this country
mounted into billions we ran into a boom. As far as
manipulation went, it wasn't necessary for anybody to lift a
finger to create an unlimited market for a war bride.
Scores of men made millions by capitalizing contracts or
even promises of contracts. They became successful
promoters, either with the aid of friendly bankers or by
bringing out their companies on the Curb market. The
public bought anything that was adequately touted.
When the bloom wore off the boom, some of these
promoters found themselves in need of help from experts
in stock salesmanship. When the public is hung up with all
kinds of securities, some of them purchased at higher
prices, it is not an easy task to dispose of untried stocks.
After a boom the public is positive that nothing is going
up. It isn't that buyers become more discriminating, but
that the blind buying is over. It is the state of mind that
has changed. Prices don't even have to go down to make
people pessimistic. It is enough if the market gets dull and
stays dull for a time.
In every boom companies are formed primarily if not
exclusively to take advantage of the public's appetite for all
kinds of stocks. Also there are belated promotions. The
reason why promoters make that mistake is that being
human they are unwilling to see the end of the boom.
Moreover, it is good business to take chances when the
possible profit is big enough. The top is never in sight
when the vision is vitiated by hope. The average man sees
a stock that nobody wanted at twelve dollars or fourteen
dollars a share suddenly advance to thirty which surely is
the top until it rises to fifty. That is absolutely the end of
the rise. Then it goes to sixty; to seventy; to seventy-five. It
302

XXI

then becomes a certainty that this stock, which a few
weeks ago was selling for less than fifteen, can't go any
higher. But it goes to eighty; and to eighty-five.
Whereupon the average man, who never thinks of values
but of prices, and is not governed in his actions by
conditions but by fears, takes the easiest way he stops
thinking that there must be a limit to the advances. That is
why those outsiders who are wise enough not to buy at the
top make up for it by not taking profits. The big money in
booms is always made first by the public on paper. And it
remains on paper.

303

XXII
One day Jim Barnes, who not only was one of my principal
brokers but an intimate friend as well, called on me. He
said he wanted me to do him a great favour. He never
before had talked that way, and so I asked him to tell me
what the favour was, hoping it was something I could do,
for I certainly wished to oblige him. He then told me that
his firm was interested in a certain stock; in fact, they had
been the principal promoters of the company and had
placed the greater part of the stock. Circumstances had
arisen that made it imperative for them to market a rather
large block. Jim wanted me to undertake to do the
marketing for him. The stock was Consolidated Stove.
I did not wish to have anything to do with it for various
reasons. But Barnes, to whom I was under some
obligations, insisted on the personal-favour phase of the
matter, which alone could overcome my objections. He
305

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

was a good fellow, a friend, and his firm, I gathered, was
pretty heavily involved, so in the end I consented to do
what I could.
It has always seemed to me that the most picturesque
point of difference between the war boom and other
booms was the part that was played by a type new in stockmarket affairs the boy banker.
The boom was stupendous and its origins and causes
were plainly to be grasped by all. But at the same time the
greatest banks and trust companies in the country
certainly did all they could to help make millionaires
overnight of all sorts and conditions of promoters and
munition makers. It got so that all a man had to do was to
say that he had a friend who was a friend of a member of
one of the Allied commissions and he would be offered all
the capital needed to carry out the contracts he had not yet
secured. I used to hear incredible stories of clerks
becoming presidents of companies doing a business of
millions of dollars on money borrowed from trusting trust
companies, and of contracts that left a trail of profits as
they passed from man to man. A flood of gold was pouring
into this country from Europe and the banks had to find
ways of impounding it.
The way business was done might have been regarded
with misgivings by the old, but there didn't seem to be so
many of them about. The fashion for gray-haired
presidents of banks was all very well in tranquil times, but
youth was the chief qualification in these strenuous times.
The banks certainly did make enormous profits.
Jim Barnes and his associates, enjoying the friendship
and confidence of the youthful president of the Marshall
National Bank, decided to consolidate three well-known
stove companies and sell the stock of the new company to
the public that for months had been buying any old thing
in the way of engraved stock certificates.

306

XXII

One trouble was that the stove business was so
prosperous that all three companies were actually earning
dividends on their common stock for the first time in their
history. Their principal stockholders did not wish to part
with the control. There was a good market for their stocks
on the Curb; and they had sold as much as they cared to
part with and they were content with things as they were.
Their individual capitalisation was too small to justify big
market movements, and that is where Jim Barnes' firm
came in. It pointed out that the consolidated company
must be big enough to list on the Stock Exchange, where
the new shares could be made more valuable than the old
ones. It is an old device in Wall Street to change the colour
of the certificates in order to make them more valuable.
Say a stock ceases to be easily vendible at par. Well,
sometimes by quadrupling the stock you may make the
new shares sell at $30 or $35. This is equivalent to $120 or
$140 for the old stock a figure it never could have reached.
It seems that Barnes and his associates succeeded in
inducing some of their friends who held speculatively
some blocks of Gray Stove Company a large concern to
come into the consolidation on the basis of four shares of
Consolidated for each share of Gray. Then the Midland
and the Western followed their big sister and came in on
the basis of share for share. Theirs had been quoted on the
Curb at around $25 to $30, and the Gray, which was better
known and paid dividends, hung around $125.
In order to raise the money to buy out those holders
who insisted upon selling for cash, and also to provide
additional working capital for improvements and
promotion expenses, it became necessary to raise a few
millions. So Barnes saw the president of his bank, who
kindly lent his syndicate three million five hundred
thousand dollars. The collateral was one hundred
thousand shares of the newly organised corporation. The

307

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

syndicate assured the president, or so I was told, that the
price would not go below $50. It would be a very profitable
deal as there was big value there.
The promoters' first mistake was in the matter of
timeliness. The saturation point for new stock issues had
been reached by the market, and they should have seen it.
But even then they might have made a fair profit after all if
they had not tried to duplicate the unreasonable killings
which other promoters had made at the very height of the
boom.
Now you must not run away with the notion that Jim
Barnes and his associates were fools or inexperienced kids.
They were shrewd men. All of them were familiar with
Wall Street methods and some of them were exceptionally
successful stock traders. But they did rather more than
merely overestimate the public's buying capacity. After all,
that capacity was something that they could determine
only by actual tests. Where they erred more expensively
was in expecting the bull market to last longer than it did.
I suppose the reason was that these same men had met
with such great and particularly with such quick success
that they didn't doubt they'd be all through with the deal
before the bull market turned. They were all well known
and had a considerable following among the professional
traders and the wire houses.
The deal was extremely well advertised. The
newspapers certainly were generous with their space. The
older concerns were identified with the stove industry of
America and their product was known the world over. It
was a patriotic amalgamation and there was a heap of
literature in the daily papers about the world conquests.
The markets of Asia, Africa and South America were as
good as cinched.
The directors of the company were all men whose
names were familiar to all readers of the financial pages.
The publicity work was so well handled and the promises
of unnamed insiders as to what the price was going to do
308

XXII

were so definite and convincing that a great demand for
the new stock was created. The result was that when the
books were closed it was found that the stock which was
offered to the public at fifty dollars a share had been
oversubscribed by 25 per cent.
Think of it! The best the promoters should have
expected was to succeed in selling the new stock at that
price after weeks of work and after putting up the price to
$75 or higher in order to average $50. At that, it meant an
advance of about 100 per cent in the old prices of the
stocks of the constituent companies. That was the crisis
and they did not meet it as it should have been met. It
shows you that every business has its own needs.
General wisdom is less valuable than specific savvy. The
promoters, delighted by the unexpected over-subscription,
concluded that the public was ready to pay any price for
any quantity of that stock. And they actually were stupid
enough to underallot the stock. After the promoters made
up their minds to be hoggish they should have tried to be
intelligently hoggish.
What they should have done, of course, was to allot the
stock in full. That would have made them short to the
extent of 25 per cent of the total amount offered for
subscription to the public, and that, of course, would have
enabled them to support the stock when necessary and at
no cost to themselves. Without any effort on their part
they would have been in the strong strategic position that I
always try to find myself in when I am manipulating a
stock. They could have kept the price from sagging,
thereby inspiring confidence in the new stock's price
stability and in the underwriting syndicate back of it. They
should have remembered that their work was not over
when they sold the stock offered to the public. That was
only a part of what they had to market.
They thought they had been very successful, but it was
not long before the consequences of their two capital
blunders became apparent. The public did not buy any
309

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

more of the new stock, because the entire market
developed reactionary tendencies. The insiders got cold
feet and did not support Consolidated Stove; and if
insiders don't buy their own stock on recessions, who
should? The absence of inside support is generally
accepted as a pretty good bear tip.
There is no need to go into statistical details. The price
of Consolidated Stove fluctuated with the rest of the
market, but it never went above the initial market
quotations, which were only a fraction above $50. Barnes
and his friends in the end had to come in as buyers in
order to keep it above $40. Not to have supported that
stock at the outset of its market career was regrettable. But
not to have sold all the stock the public subscribed for was
much worse.
At all events, the stock was duly listed on the New York
Stock Exchange and the price of it duly kept sagging until
it nominally stood at $37. And it stood there because Jim
Barnes and his associates had to keep it there because then
bank had loaned them thirty-five dollars a share on one
hundred thousand shares. If the bank ever tried to
liquidate that loan there was no telling what the price
would break to. The public that had been eager to buy it at
$50, now didn't care for it at $37, and probably wouldn't
want it at $27.
As time went on the banks' excesses in the matter of
extensions of credits made people think. The day of the
boy banker was over. The banking business appeared to be
on the ragged edge of suddenly relapsing into
conservatism. Intimate friends were now asked to pay off
loans, for all the world as though they had never played
golf with the president.
There was no need to threaten on the lender's part or to
plead for more time on the borrower's. The situation was
highly uncomfortable for both. The bank, for example,

310

XXII

with which my friend Jim Barnes did business, was still
kindly disposed. But it was a case of "For heaven's sake
take up that loan or we'll all be in a dickens of a mess!"
The character of the mess and its explosive possibilities
were enough to make Jim Barnes come to me to ask me to
sell the one hundred thousand shares for enough to pay off
the bank's three-million-five-hundred-thousand-dollar
loan. Jim did not now expect to make a profit on that
stock. If the syndicate only made a small loss on it they
would be more than grateful.
It seemed a hopeless task. The general market was
neither active nor strong, though at times there were
rallies, when everybody perked up and tried to believe the
bull swing was about to resume.
The answer I gave Barnes was that I'd look into the
matter and let him know under what conditions I'd
undertake the work. Well, I did look into it. I didn't
analyse the company's last annual report. My studies were
confined to the stock-market phases of the problem. I was
not going to tout the stock for a rise on its earnings or its
prospects, but to dispose of that block in the open market.
All I considered was what should, could or might help or
hinder me in that task.
I discovered for one thing that there was too much stock
held by too few people—that is, too much for safety and far
too much for comfort. Clifton P. Kane & Co., bankers and
brokers, members of the New York Stock Exchange, were
carrying seventy thousand shares. They were intimate
friends of Barnes and had been influential in effecting the
consolidation, as they had made a specialty of stove stocks
for years. Their customers had been let into the good
thing. Ex-Senator Samuel Gordon, who was the special
partner in his nephews' firm, Gordon Bros., was the owner
of a second block of seventy thousand shares; and the
famous Joshua Wolff had sixty thousand shares. This
made a total of two hundred thousand shares of
Consolidated Stove held by this handful of veteran Wall
311

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Street professionals. They did not need any kind person to
tell them when to sell their stock. If I did anything in the
manipulating line calculated to bring in public buying that
is to say, if I made the stock strong and active I could see
Kane and Gordon and Wolff unloading, and not in
homeopathic doses either. The vision of their two hundred
thousand shares Niagara-ing into the market was not
exactly entrancing. Don't forget that the cream was off the
bull movement and that no overwhelming demand was
going to be manufactured by my operations, however
skilfully conducted they might be. Jim Barnes had no
illusions about the job he was modestly sidestepping in my
favour. He had given me a waterlogged stock to sell on a
bull market that was about to breathe its last. Of course
there was no talk in the newspapers about the ending of
the bull market, but I knew it, and Jim Barnes knew it, and
you bet the bank knew it.
Still, I had given Jim my word, so I sent for Kane,
Gordon and Wolff. Their two hundred thousand shares
was the sword of Damocles. I thought I'd like to substitute
a steel chain for the hair. The easiest way, it seemed to me,
was by some sort of reciprocity agreement. If they helped
me passively by holding off while I sold the bank's one
hundred thousand shares, I would help them actively by
trying to make a market: for all of us to unload on. As
things were, they couldn't sell one-tenth of their holdings
without having Consolidated Stove break wide open, and
they knew it so well that they had never dreamed of trying.
All I asked of them was judgment in timing the selling and
an intelligent unselfishness in order not to be
unintelligently selfish. It never pays to be a dog in the
manger in Wall Street or anywhere else. I desired to
convince them that premature or ill-considered unloading
would prevent complete unloading. Time urged.
I hoped my proposition would appeal to them because
they were experienced Wall Street men and had no
illusions about the actual demand for Consolidated Stove.
312
