
'

The Theory of Reflexivity

45

participants' bias can be taken as given: that provides a static
equilibrium. To make the analysis more dynamic, changes in the
participants' bias can be added piecemeal, expressed as changes
in consumer habits or production methods. All that is obscured
by this piecemeal approach is the possible connection between
the various changes in the conditions of supply and demand, but
that omission does nbt invalidate the conclusions microeconomic
analysis seeks to establish.
When it comes to financial markets, the distortion is more serious. The participants' bias is an element in determining prices
and no important niarket development leaves the participants'
bias unaffected. The'search for an equilibrium price turns out to
be a wild goose chase and theories about the equilibrium price
can themselves become a fertile source of bias. To paraphrase J.
P. Morgan, financial markets will continue to fluctuate.
In trying to deal with macroeconomic developments, equilibrium analysis is totally inappropriate. Nothing could be further
removed from reality than the assumption that participants base
their decisions on perfect knowledge. People are groping to anticipate the future with the help of whatever guideposts they can
establish. The outcome tends to diverge from expectations, leading to constantly chgnging expectations and constantly changing
outcomes. The process is reflexive.
In his General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
Keynes managed to show that full employmentT%a special case;
if we could develop a general theory of reflexivity, equilibrium
would appear as a special case. While it will hardly qualify as a
general theory, I shall try to explore the role of reflexivity in
financial markets; that means that I shall try to inierpret their
functioning as a historical process.

REFLEXIVITY LN THE STOCK MARKET

In trying to develop a theory of reflexivity, I shall start with the
stock market. For one thing, it is the market I am most familiar
with: I have been a professional investor for more than twentyfive years. For another, the stock market provides an excellent
laboratory for testing theories: changes are expressed in quantitative terms and the data are easily accessible. Even the participants' views are usually available in the form of brokers' reports.
Most important, I have actually tested my theory in the stock
market and 1have some interesting case studies to present.
As I mentioned in the introduction, I did not develop my ideas
on reflexivity in connection with my activities in the stock market. The theory of reflexivity started out as abstract philosophical
c et?ae
speculation and only gradually did I discover its ~ l e v ~ nto
behavior of stock prices. I was singularly unsuccessful in formulating my theory at the level of abstraction at which I conceived
it: my failure as a philosopher stands in stark contrast with my
career as an investment professional. I hope that by presenting
my ideas in the reverse order from the one in which I arrived at
them I may be able to avoid getting lost in arcane abstractions.
There is yet another reason why the stock market may provide
the best entry point for the study of reflexive phenomena. The
stock market comes as close to meeting the criteria of perfect
competition as any market: a central marketplace, homogeneous
products, low transaction and transportation costs, instant communications, a large enough crowd of participants to ensure that
no individual can influence market prices in the ordinary course
of events, and special rules for insider transactions as well as

.

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

47

special safeguards to provide all participants with access to relevant information. What more can one ask for? If there is any place
where the theory of perfect competition ought to beatranslated
into practice, it is in the stock market.
Yet there is little edpirical evidence of an equilibrium or even
a tendency for prices tp move toward an equilibrium. The concept
of an equilibrium seems irrelevant at best and misleading at
worst. The evidence shows persistent fluctuations, whatever
length of time is chosen as the period of observation. Admittedly,
the underlying conditions that are supposed to be reflected in
stock prices are also ,constantly changing, but it is difficult to
establish any firm relationship between changes in stock prices
and changes in underlying conditions. Whatever relationship can
be established has to be imputed rather than observed. I intend to
use the theory of reflexivity to criticize the preoccupation of economic theory with the equilibrium position. What better example
could I find than the stock market?
Existing theories about the behavior of stock prices are remarkably inadequate. They are of so little value to the practitioner that
I am not even fully familiar with them. The fact that I could get
by without them speaks for itself.
Generally, theories fall into two categories: fundamentalist and
technical. More recently, the random walk theory has come into
vogue; this theory holds that the market fully discsunts all future
developments so that the individual participant's chances of
over- or underperforming the market as a whole are even. This
line of argument has served as theoretical justification for the
increasing number of institutions that inyest their money in index
funds. The theory is manifestly false-I have disproved it by consistently outperforming the averages over a period of twelve
years. Institutions may be well advised to invest in index funds
rather than making specific investment decisions, but the reason
is to be found in their substandard performance, not in the impossibility of outperforming the averages.
Technical analysis studies market patterns and the demand and
supply of stocks. It has undoubted merit in predicting probabilities but not the actual course of events. For the purposes of this
discussion it is of no particular interest, because it has little theoretical foundation other than the assertions that stock prices are
determined by their supply and demand and that past experience
is relevant in predicting the future.
Fundamental analysis is more interesting because it is an out-

48
I

Theory

growth of equilibrium theory. Stocks are supposed to have a true
or fundamental value as distinct from their current market price.
The fundamental value of a stock may be defined either in relation to the earning power of the underlying assets or in relation
to the fundamental value of other stocks. In either case, the market price of a stock is supposed to tend toward its fundamental
value over a period of time so that the analysis of fundamental
values provides a useful guide to investment decisions.
The important point about this approach is that the connection
between stock prices and the companies whose stocks are traded
is assumed to be in one direction. The fortunes of the companies
determins--however belatedly-the relative values of the various stocks traded in the stock market. The possibility that stock
market developments may affect the fortunes of the companies is
left out of account. There is a clear parallel with the theory of
price where the indifference curve determines the relative
amounts consumed, and the possibility that the market may influence the indifference curve is disregarded. The parallel is not
accidental: the fundamentalist approach is based on the theory of
price. But the omission is more glaring in the stock market than
in other markets. Stock market valuations have a direct way of
influencing underlying values: through the issue and repurchase
of shares and options and through corporate transactions of all
kinds-mergers, acquisitions, going public, going private, and so
on. There are also more subtle ways in which stock prices may
influence the standing of a company: credit rating, consumer acceptance, management credibility, etc. The influence of these factors on stock prices is, of course, fully recognized; it is the
influence of stock pric2s on these factors that is so strangely ignored by the fundamentalist approach.
If there are any glaring discrepancies between prevailing stock
prices and fundamental values, they are attributed to future developments in the companies concerned that are not yet known
but are correctly anticipated by the stock market. Movements in
stock prices are believed to precede the developments that subsequently justify them. How future developments ought to be discounted is the subject of an ongoing debate, but it is presumed
that the market is doing the job correctly even if the correct
method cannot be theoretically established. This point of view
follows naturally from the theory of perfect competition. It is
summed up in the assertion that "the market is always right." The

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

49

assertion is generally accepted, even by people who do not put
much faith in fundamental analysis.
I take a totally opposite point of view. I do not accept the proposition that stock prices are a passive reflection of underlying
values, nor do I accept Rhe proposition that the reflection tends to
correspond to the underlying value. I contend that market valuations are always distohed; moreover-and this is the crucial departure from equilibrium theory-the distortions can affect the
underlying values. Stock prices are not merely passive reflections;
they are active ingredients in a process in which both stock prices
and the fortunes of the companies whose stocks are traded are
determined. In other words, I regard changes in stock prices as
part of a historical process and I focus on the discrepancy between the participants' expectations and the actual course of
events as a causal factor in that process.
To explain the process, I take the discrepancy as my starting
point. I do not rule out the possibility that events may actually
correspond to people's expectations, but I treat it as a limiting
case. Translating this assertion into market terms, I claim that
market participants are always biased in one way or another. I do
not deny that markets have a predictive or anticipating power that
seems uncanny at times, but I argue that it can be explained by
the influence that the participants' bias has on the course of
events. For instance, the stock market is generally believed to
anticipate recessions; it would be more correct to""say that it can
help to precipitate them. Thus I replace the assertion that markets
are always right with two others:
1. Markets are always biased in one direction or another.
2. Markets can influence the events that they anticipate.

The combination of these two assertions explains why markets
may so often appear to anticipate events correctly.
Using the participants' bias as our starting point, we can try to
build a model of the interaction between the participants' views
and the situation in which they participate. What makes the analysis so difficult is that the participants' views are part of the
situation to which they relate. To make any sense of such a complex situation, we need to simplify it. I introduced a simplifying
concept when I spoke of the participants' bias. Now I want to take

50

Theory

the argument a step further and introduce the concept of a prevailing bias.
Markets have many participants, whose views are bound to
differ. I shall assume that many of the individual biases cancel
each other out, leaving what I call the "prevailing bias." This
assumption is not appropriate to all historical processes but it
does apply to the stock market and to other markets as well. What
makes the procedure of aggregating individual perceptions legitimate is that they can be related to a common denominator,
namely, stock prices. In other historical processes, the participants' views are too diffuse to be aggregated and the concept of a
prevailing bias becomes !ittie more Clan a metaphor. In these
cases a different model may be needed, but in the stock market
the participants' bias finds expression in purchases and sales.
Other things being equal, a positive bias leads to rising stock
prices and a negative one to falling prices. Thus the prevailing
bias is an observable phenomenon.
Other things are, of course, never equal. We need to know a
little more about those "other things" in order to build our model.
At this point I shall introduce a second simplifying concept. I
shall postulate an "underlying trend" that influences the movement of stock prices whether it is recognized by investors or not.
The influence on stock prices will, of course, vary, depending on
the market participants' views. The trend in stock prices can then
be envisioned as a composite of the "underlying trend" and the
"prevailing bias."
How do these two factors interact? It will be recalled that there
are two connections at play: the participating and the cognitive
functions. The underlying trend influences the participants' perceptions through the cognitive function; the resulting change in
perceptions affects the situation through the participating function. In the case of the stock market, the primary impact is on
stock prices. The change in stock prices may, in t u n , affect both
the participants' bias and the underlying trend.
We have here a reflexive relationship in which stock prices are
determined by two factors-underlying trend and prevailing bias
-both of which are, in turn, influenced by stock prices. The interplay between stock prices and the other two factors has no
constant: what is supposed to be the independent variable in one
function is the dependent variable in the other. Without a constant, there is no tendency toward equilibrium. The sequence of

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

51

events is best interpreted as a process of historical change in
which none of the variables-stock prices, underlying trend, and
prevailing bias-remains as it was before. In the typical sequence
the three variables reinforce each other first in one direction and
then in the other in a battern that is known, in its simplest form,
'
as boom and bust.
First, we must startowith some definitions. When stock prices
reinforce the underlyihg trend, we shall call the trend self-reinforcing; when they work in the opposite direction, self-correcting.
The same terminology holds for the prevailing bias: it can be selfreinforcing or self-correcting. It is important to realize what these
terms mean. When a trend is reinforced, it accelerates. Yhsn the
bias is reinforced, the divergence between expectations and the
actual course of future stock prices gets wider and, conversely,
when it is self-correcting, the divergence gets narrower. As far as
stock prices are concerned, we shall describe them simply as rising and falling. When the prevailing bias helps to raise prices we
shall call it positive; ,when it works in the opposite direction,
negative. Thus rising prices are reinforced by a positive bias and
falling prices by a negative one. In a boomhust sequence we
would expect to find at least one stretch where rising prices are
reinforced by a positive bias and another where falling prices are
reinforced by a negative bias. There must also be a point where
the underlying trend and the prevailing bias combine to reverse
the trend in stock prices.
“ee
Let us now try to build a rudimentary model of boom and bust.
We start with an underlying trend that is not yet recognizedalthough a prevailing bias that is not yet reflected in stock prices
is also conceivable. Thus, the prevziling bias is negstive to start
with. When the market participants recognize -Che trend, this
change in perceptions will affect stock prices. The change in stock
prices may or may not affect the underlying trend. In the latter
case, there is little more to discuss. In the former case we have the
beginning of a self-reinforcing process.
The enhanced trend will affect the prevailing bias in one of two
ways: it will lead to the expectation of further acceleration or to
the expectation of a correction. In the latter case, the underlying
trend may or may not survive the correction in stock prices. In
the former case, a positive bias develops causing a further rise in
stock prices and a further acceleration in the underlying trend. As
long as the bias is self-reinforcing, expectations rise even faster

52

t

I

Theory

than stock prices. The underlying trend becomes increasingly influenced by stock prices and the rise in stock prices becomes
increasingly dependent on the prevailing bias, so that both the
underlying trend and the prevailing bias become increasingly vulnerable. Eventually, the trend in prices cannot sustain prevailing
expectations and a correction sets in. Disappointed expectations
have a negative effect on stock prices, and faltering stock prices
weaken the underlying trend. If the underlying trend has become
overly dependent on stock prices, the correction may turn into a
total reversal. In that case, stock prices fall, the underlying trend
is reversed, and expectations fall even further. In this way, a selfreinforcing process gets started in the opposite dircctior,. EVGE
tually, the downturn also reaches a climax and reverses itself.
Typically, a self-reinforcing process-undergoesorderly corrections in the early stages, and, if it survives them, the bias tends to
be reinforced, and is less easily shaken. When the process is advanced, corrections become scarcer and the danger of a climactic
reversal greater.
I have sketched out a typical boomhust sequence. It can be
illustrated by two curves that follow more or less the same direction. One represents stock prices, and the other, earnings per
share. It would be natural to envision the earnings curve as a
measure of the underlying trend, and the divergence between the
two curves as an indication of the underlying bias. The relationship is much more complex. The earnings curve incorporates not
only the underlying trend but also the influence of stock prices
on that trend; the prevailing bias is expressed only partially by
the divergence between the two curves-partially it is already
reflected in those curves. Concepts that are only partially observable are extremely difficult to work with; that is why we have
chosen variables that can be observed and quantified-although,
as we shall see later, the quantification of earnings per share can
be very misleading. For present purposes, we shall assume that
the "fundamentals" in which investors are interested are properly
measured by earnings per share.
A typical path for the two curves may be as follows. (See the
figure below.) At first, recognition of an underlying trend is lagging but the trend is strong enough to manifest itself in earnings
per share (AB). When the underlying trend is finally recognized,
it is reinforced by rising expectations (BC). Doubts arise, but the
trend survives. Alternatively, the trend waivers but reasserts it-

Reflexivity in the Stock Market

53

I

A

I

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Time d

self. Such testing may be repeated several times, but here I show
~,
develops and it is no
it only once (CD). ~ v e n t u a l l conviction
longer shaken by a setback in the earning trend (DE).Expectations
become excessive, and fail to be sustained by reality (EF). The
bias is recognized as such and expectations are lowered (FG).
Stock prices lose their, last prop and plunge (G). The underlying
trend is reversed, reinforcing the decline (GH). Eventually, the
pessimism becomes overdone and the market stabilizes (HI).
It should be emphasized that this is only one po&ble path that
results from the interplay of a single underlying trend and a prevailing bias. There could be more than one trend at work and the
prevailing bias could have many nuances, so that the sequence of
events might require a totally different representation.
A few words about the theoretical construction of the model
may be in order. We are interested in the interplay between the
participants' bias and the actual course of events. Yet the participants' bias is not directly represented in our model; both curves
denote the actual course of events. The prevailing bias is partially
incorporated in the two curves and partially denoted by the divergence between them.
The great merit of this construction is that it uses variables that
can be quantified. Stock prices serve as a convenient proxy for the
situation to which the participants' bias relates. In other historical
processes the situation that is interconnected with the partici-

54

t

4

Theory

pants' perception by the cognitive and participating functions is
more difficult to identify and impossible to quantify. It is the
availability of a convenient proxy that renders the stock market
such a useful laboratory for studying reflexivity.
Unfortunately, the model offers only a partial explanation of
how stock prices are determined. The concept of an underlying
trend has been introduced as a placeholder term, to denote
changes in the "fundamentals." What the fundamentals are has
not been defined. Even the question of how the fundamentals are
to be measured has not been answered. Earnings, dividends, asset
value, free cash flow: all these yardsticks are relevant, as well as
many others, but the relative weight given to each depends on the
investors' jadgments and is therefore subject to their bias. We may
use earnings per share for purposes of illustration, but that merely
begs the question. It is a question security analysts have been
struggling with for a long time. We do not need to answer it here
in order to develop a theory of reflexivity.
Without knowing afiything about the fundamentals we can
make some worthwhile generalizations. The first generalization is
that stock prices must have some effect on the fundamentals
(whatever they are), in order to create a boomhust pattern. Sometimes the connection is direct, as in the examples I shall use in
this chapter, but generally it is indirect. Often it makes its effect
felt through a political process, such as changes in taxation, or
regulation, or attitudes to saving and investment.
It is possible to have a reflexive connection between stock
prices and the prevailing bias even if the fundamentals remain
unaffected, but the connection becomes interesting only if the
fundamentals are also involved. Without a change in fundamentals, the prevailing bias is likely to be corrected in short order, as
we can observe in the daily fluctuations of stock prices. It would
be quite in order to ignore the bias as mere noise. That is what the
theory of perfect competition and the fundamentalist approach to
security analysis have done. By contrast, when the fundamentals
are affected, the bias cannot be left out of account without serious distortion, because the bias gives rise to a self-reinforcing/
self-defeating process that leaves neither stock prices, nor the
fundamentals, nor the participants' views the same as they were
before.
The second generalization is that there is bound to be a flaw in
the participants' perception of the fundamentals. The flaw may
