
hard, cold reality of trading is that every trade has an uncertain outcome. Unless you learn to
completely accept the possibility of an uncertain outcome, you will try either consciously or
unconsciously to avoid any possibility you define as painful. In the process, you will subject yourself to
any number of self-generated, costly errors.
Now, I am not suggesting that we don't need some form of market analysis or methodology to define
opportunities and allow us to recognize them; we certainly do. However, market analysis is not the path
to consistent results. It will not solve the trading problems created by lack of confidence, lack of
discipline, or improper focus. When you operate from the assumption that more or better analysis will
create consistency, you will be driven to gather as many market variables as possible into your arsenal
of trading tools. But what happens then? You are still disappointed and betrayed by the markets, time
and again, because of something you didn't see or give enough consideration to. It will feel like you
can't trust the markets; but the reality is, you can't trust yourself.
Confidence and fear are contradictory states of mind that both stem from our beliefs and attitudes. To
be confident, functioning in an environment where you can easily lose more than you intend to risk,
requires absolute trust in yourself. However, you won't be able to achieve that trust until you have
trained your mind to override your natural inclination to think in ways that are counterproductive to
being a consistently successful trader. Learning how to analyze the market's behavior is simply not the
appropriate training. You have two choices: You can try to eliminate risk by learning about as many
market variables as possible. (I call this the black hole nf analv<!i<: bpoanif* it is fhp nafh nf ultimate
frustration.) Or you can learn how to redefine your trading activities in such a way that you truly accept
the risk, and you're no longer afraid.
When you've achieved a state of mind where you truly accept the risk, you won't have the potential to
define and interpret market information in painful ways. When you eliminate the potential to define
market information in painful ways, you also eliminate the tendency to rationalize, hesitate, jump the
gun, hope that the market will give you money, or hope that the market will save you from your
inability to cut your losses.
As long as you are susceptible to the lands of errors that are the result of rationalizing, justifying,
hesitating, hoping, and jumping the gun, you will not be able to trust yourself. If you can't trust yourself
to be objective and to always act in your own best interests, achieving consistent results will be next to
impossible. Trying to do something that looks so simple may well be the most exasperating thing you
will ever attempt to do. The irony is that, when you have the appropriate attitude, when you have
acquired a "trader s mind-set" and can remain confident in the face of constant uncertainty, trading will
be as easy and simple as you probably thought it was when you first started out.
So, what is the solution? You will need to learn how to adjust your attitudes and beliefs about trading in
such a way that you can trade without the slightest bit of fear, but at the same time keep a framework in
place that does not allow you to become reckless. That's exactly what this book is designed to teach
you. As you move ahead, I would like you to keep something in mind.

The successful trader that you want to become is a future projection of yourself that you have to grow
into. Growth implies expansion, learning, and creating a new way of expressing yourself. This is true
even if you're already a successful trader and are reading this book to become more successful. Many
of the new ways in which you will learn to express yourself will be in direct conflict with ideas and
beliefs you presently hold about the nature of trading. You may or may not already be aware of some of
these beliefs. In any case, what you currently hold to be true about the nature of trading will argue to
keep things just the way they are, in spite of your frustrations and unsatisfying results.
These internal arguments are natural. My challenge in this book is to help you resolve these arguments
as efficiently as possible. Your willingness to consider that other possibilities exist—possibilities that
you may not be aware of or may not have given enough consideration to—will obviously make the
learning process faster and easier.

CHAPTER 2
THE LURE
(AND THE DANGERS)
OF TRADING
In January 1994, I was asked to speak at a trading conference in Chicago, sponsored by Futures
Magazine. At one of the luncheons I happened to be sitting next to an editor for one of the major
publishers of books about trading. We were having a lively conversation about why so few people
become successful at trading, even people who are otherwise very accomplished. At one point, the
editor asked me if a possible explanation for this phenomenon might be that people were getting into
trading for the wrong reasons.
THE ATTRACTION
I had to pause for a moment to think about this. I agree that many of the typical reasons people are
motivated to trade—the action, euphoria, desire to be a hero, the attention one can draw to himself by
winning, or the self-pity that comes from losing—create problems that will ultimately detract from a
traders performance and overall success. But the true underlying attraction to trading is far more
fundamental and universal. Trading is an activity that offers the individual unlimited freedom of
creative expression, a freedom of expression that has been denied most of us for most of our lives.
Of course, the editor asked me what I meant by this. I explained that in the trading environment, we
make almost all of the rules. This means there are very few restrictions or boundaries on how we can
choose to express ourselves. Of course there are some formalities such as having to become a member
of an exchange to be a floor trader, or meeting the minimum financial requirements to open a brokerage
account if you're an off-the-floor trader. But otherwise, once you are in a position to start trading, the
possibilities that exist for how you go about doing it are virtually limitless.
I went on to give him an example from a seminar I attended several years ago. Someone had calculated
that, if you combined bond futures, bond options, and the cash bond markets, there would be over eight
billion possible spread combinations. Now add the timing considerations based on how you read the
revailing market conditions, and the various ways to trade become virtually limitless.
The editor paused for a moment and asked, "But why would having access to such an unrestricted
environment result in fairly consistent failure?" I answered, "Because unlimited possibilities coupled
with the unlimited freedom to take advantage of those possibilities present the individual with unique
and specialized psychological challenges, challenges that very few people are properly equipped to deal

with, or have any awareness of for that matter, and people can't exactly work on overcoming something
if they don't even know its a problem."
The freedom is great. All of us seem to naturally want it, strive for it, even crave it. But that doesn't ean
that we have the appropriate psychological resources to operate effectively in an environment that has
few, if any, boundaries and where the potential to do enormous damage to ourselves exists. Almost
everyone needs to make some mental adjustments, regardless of their educational background,
intelligence or how successful they've been in other endeavors.
The kind of adjustments I'm talking about have to do with creating an internal mental structure that
provides the trader with the greatest degree of balance between the freedom to do anything and the
potential that exists to experience both the financial and psychological damage that can be a direct
result of that freedom.
Creating a mental structure can be difficult enough, especially if what you want to instill is in conflict
with what you already believe. But for those of us who want to be traders, the difficulty of creating the
appropriate structure is invariably compounded by a backlog of mental resistance that starts developing
at the very earliest stages of our lives.
All of us are born into some sort of social environment. A social environment (or society), whether it's
a family, city, state, or country, implies the existence of structure. Social structures consist of rules,
restrictions, boundaries, and a set of beliefs that become a code of behavior that limits the ways in
which individuals within that social structure can or cannot express themselves. Furthermore, most of
the limitations of social structure were established before we are born. In other words, by the time any
of us get here, most of the social structure governing our individual expression is in place and well
entrenched. It's easy to see why a society's need for structure and the individual's need for selfexpression can conflict. Every person who wants to master the art of trading faces just such a
fundamental conflict. I'd like you to ask yourself what one characteristic (a form of personal
expression) is common to every child born on this planet, regardless of the location, culture, or social
situation the child is born into. The answer is curiosity. Every child is curious. Every child is eager to
learn. They can be described as little learning machines.
Consider the nature of curiosity. At its most fundamental level, it is a force. More specifically, it is an
inner-directed force, which means there's no necessity to motivate a child to learn something. Left on
their own, children will naturally explore their surroundings. What is more, this inner-directed force
also seems to have its own agenda; in other words, even though all children are curious, not all children
are naturally curious about the same things. There's something inside each of us that directs our
awareness.
Even infants seem to know what they want and don't want. When adults encounter this unique display
of individuality expressed by an infant, they're usually surprised. They assume that infants have
nothing inside of them that makes them uniquely who they are. How else would infants express their
individuality than by what in their environment attracts or repels them? I call this inner-directed

guidance the force of natural attractions.
Natural attractions are simply those things about which we feel a natural or passionate interest. Ours is
a big and diverse world, and it offers each of us a great deal to learn about and experience. But that
doesn't mean each of us has a natural or passionate interest in learning about or experiencing all there
is. There's some internal mechanism that makes us "naturally selective."
If you think about it, I'm sure you could list many things to do or be that you have absolutely no
interest in. I know I could. You could also make another list of the things you are only marginally
interested in. Finally, you could list everything you have a passionate interest in. Of course, the lists get
smaller as the interest levels rise. Where does passionate interest come from? My personal view is that
it comes from the deepest level of our being—at the level of our true identity. It comes from the part of
us that exists beyond the characteristics and personality traits we acquire as a result of our social
upbringing.
THE DANGERS
It is at the deepest level of our being that the potential for conflict exists.The social structure that we're
born into may or may not be sensitive to these inner-directed needs and interests. For example, you
may have been born into a family of extremely competitive athletes, but feel a passionate interest in
classical music or art. You may even have natural athletic ability, but no real interest in participating in
athletic events. Is there any potential for conflict here?
In a typical family, most members would put a great deal of pressure on you to follow in the footsteps
of your brothers, sisters, or parents. They do everything possible to teach you their ways and how to get
the most out of your athletic ability. They discourage you from seriously pursuing any other interests.
You go along with what they want, because you don't want to be ostracized, but at the same time, doing
what they want you to do just doesn't feel right, although everything you've learned and been taught
argues in favor of becoming an athlete. The problem is, it doesn't feel like who you are.
The conflicts that result from what we're taught about who we're supposed to be and the feeling that
resonates at the deepest levels of our being is not at all uncommon. I would say that many, if not most
people, grow up in a family and cultural environment that gives little, if any, objective, nonjudgmental
support to the unique ways in which we feel compelled to express ourselves. This lack of support is not
simply an absence of encouragement. It can be as deep as the outright denial of some particular way in
which we want to express ourselves. For example, let's look at a common situation: A toddler, who for
the first time in his life, notices "this thing," which we call a vase, on the coffee table. He is curious,
which means there's an inner force that's compelling him to experience this object. In a sense, it's as if
this force creates a vacuum in his mind that has to be filled with the object of his interest. So, he
focuses on the vase, and, with deliberate intent, crawls across the vast expanse of the living room floor
to the coffee table. When he gets there, he reaches up to the edge of the table to pull himself to his feet.

With one hand firmly on the table to maintain his balance, his other hand reaches out to touch this thing
he has never experienced. Just at that moment, he hears a scream from across the room, "NO! DON'T
TOUCH THAT!"
Startled, the child falls back on his butt, and begins to cry. Obviously, this is a very common
occurrence and one that is completely unavoidable. Children have absolutely no concept of how they
can injure themselves or how valuable something like a vase can be. In fact, learning what is safe and
what isn't and the value of things are important lessons the child must learn. However, there are some
extremely important psychological dynamics at work here that have a direct effect on our ability to
create the kind of discipline and focus necessary to trade effectively later in life.
What happens when we're denied the opportunity to express ourselves in the way we want to, or we're
forced to express ourselves in a way that doesn't correspond with the natural selection process?
The experience creates an upset. Being "up-set" implies an imbalance. But what exactly is out of
balance? For something to be out of balance, there has to be something that's in balance or in equal
proportion in the first place. That something is the relative degree of correspondence that exists
between our inner, mental environment and the exterior environment where we experience our lives. In
other words, our needs and desires are generated in our mental environment, and they are fulfilled in
the exterior environment . If these two environments are in correspondence with one another, we're in a
state of inner balance and we feel a sense of satisfaction or happiness. If these environments are not in
correspondence, we experience dissatisfaction, anger, and frustration, or what is commonly referred to
as emotional pain.
Now, why would not getting what we want or being denied the freedom to express ourselves in some
particular way cause us to experience emotional pain? My personal theory is that needs and desires
create mental vacuums. The universe in which we live has a natural tendency to not tolerate a vacuum
and moves to fill it, whenever one exists. (The philosopher Spinoza observed centuries ago that,
"Nature abhors a vacuum.")
Suck the air out of a bottle and your tongue and lips will stick to the mouth of the bottle, because you
have created an imbalance (a vacuum), which now must be filled. What are the dynamics behind the
expression "Necessity is the mother of all invention"? The recognition that a need creates a mental
vacuum that the universe will fill with inspiring thoughts (if your mind is receptive). The thoughts, in
turn, can inspire movement and expression that result in the fulfillment of that need.
In this respect, I think our mental environment works like the universe at large. Once we recognize a
need or desire, we move to fill the vacuum with an experience in the exterior environment. If we are
denied the opportunity to pursue the object of this need or desire, it literally feels as if we are not
whole, or that something is missing, which puts us into a state of imbalance or emotional pain. (Do our
minds also abhor a vacuum, once one has been created?) Take a toy away from a child who is not
finished playing with it (regardless of how good your reasons may be for doing so) and the universal
response will be emotional pain.

By the time we're 18 years old, we've been on Earth approximately 6,570 days. On average, how many
times per day does the typical child hear statements like:
"No, no, you can't do that."
"You can't do it that way. You have to do it this way."
"Not now; let me think about it."
"I'll let you know."
"It can't be done."
"What makes you think you can do it?"
"You have to do it. You have no choice."
These are just a few of the relatively nice ways in which all of us are denied individual expression as
we grow up. Even if we only heard such statements once or twice a day, that still adds up to several
thousand denials by the time we reach adulthood.
I call these lands of experiences "denied impulses" to learn— impulses that are based on an inner need,
originating from the deeper part of our identity, from the natural selection process.
What happens to all of these impulses that have been denied and left unfulfilled? Do they just go away?
They can, if they are reconciled in some way: if we do something, or someone else does something, to
put our mental environment back into balance. What can put our mental environment back into
balance? There are a number of techniques.
The most natural one, especially for a child, is simply to cry. Crying is a natural mechanism (nature's
way) for reconciling these denied, unfulfilled impulses. Scientific researchers have found tears to be
composed of negatively charged ions. If allowed to take its natural course, crying will expel the
negatively charged energy in our minds and bring us back to a state of balance, even though the
original impulse was never fulfilled.
The problem is that, most of the time, events are not allowed to take their natural course and the denied
impulses are never reconciled (at least, not while we're still children). There are many reasons why
adults don't like it when their children (especially boys) cry, and do everything they can to discourage
this behavior. There are just as many reasons why adults will not bother to explain to children why they
are being forced to do something they don't want to do. Even if adults do try, there are no assurances
that they will be effective enough to reconcile the imbalance. What happens if these impulses aren't
reconciled?
They accumulate and usually end up manifesting themselves in any number of addictive and
compulsive behavior patterns. A very loose rule of thumb is: Whatever we believe we were deprived of
as children can easily become addictions in adulthood. For example, many people are addicted to
attention. I am referring to people who will do most anything to draw attention to themselves. The most
common reason for this is that they believe they either didn't get enough attention when they were

young or didn't get it when it was important to them. In any case, the deprivation becomes unresolved
emotional energy that compels them to behave in ways that will satisfy the addiction. What's important
for us to understand about these unreconciled, denied impulses (that exist in all of us) is how they
affect our ability to stay focused and take a disciplined, consistent approach to our trading.
THE SAFEGUARDS
To operate effectively in the trading environment, we need rules and boundaries to guide our behavior.
It is a simple fact of trading that the potential exists to do enormous damage to ourselves—damage that
can be way out of proportion to what we may think is possible. There are many kinds of trades in
which the risk of loss is unlimited.
To prevent the possibility of exposing ourselves to damage, we need to create an internal structure in
the form of specialized mental discipline and a perspective that guides our behavior so that we always
act in our own best interests. This structure has to exist within each of us, because unlike society, the
market doesn't provide it. The markets provide structure in the form of behavior patterns that indicate
when an opportunity to buy or sell exists. But that's where the structure ends—with a simple indication.
Otherwise, from each individual's perspective, there are no formalized rules to guide your behavior.
There aren't even any beginnings, middles, or endings as there are in virtually every other activity we
participate in.
This is an extremely important distinction with profound psychological implications. The market is like
a stream that is in constant motion. It doesn't start, stop, or wait. Even when the markets are closed,
prices are still in motion. There is no rule that the opening price on any day must be the same as the
closing price the day before. Nothing we do in society properly prepares us to function effectively in
such a "boundary-less" environment. Even gambling games have built-in structures that make them
much different from trading, and a lot less dangerous. For example, if we decide to play blackjack, the
first thing we have to do is decide how much we are going to wager or risk. This is a choice we are
forced to make by the rules of the game. If we don't make the choice, we don't get to play.
In trading, no one (except yourself) is going to force you to decide in advance what your risk is. In fact,
what we have is a limitless environment, where virtually anything can happen at any moment and only
the consistent winners define their risk in advance of putting on a trade. For everyone else, defining the
risk in advance would force you to confront the reality that each trade has a probable outcome, meaning
that it could be a loser. Consistent losers do almost anything to avoid accepting the reality that, no
matter how good a trade looks, it could lose. Without the presence of an external structure forcing the
typical trader to think otherwise, he is susceptible to any number of justifications, rationalizations, and
the kind of distorted logic that will allow him to get into a trade believing that it can't lose, which
makes determining the risk in advance irrelevant.
All gambling games have specified beginnings, middles, and endings, based on a sequence of events
