
c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:32

166

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

who sells the option, is obligated to purchase the underlying instrument
from the option buyer if it is assigned.

FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE THE PRICE
OF AN OPTION
Many things can contribute to and change the price of an option. Since
an option is a derivative of an underlying instrument, its value is directly
tied to that underlying instrument, whether it is a stock, commodity, or
futures index option. Here are a few of the main variables that will affect
the option’s price:
Ĺ The price of the underlying stock, commodity, or future.
Ĺ The strike price—whether it is in-the-money, at-the-money, or out-ofthe-money. See Figures 12.1 and 12.2 for examples of all of these.
Ĺ In-the-money refers to a call option that is above the strike price and
a put option that is below the strike price.
Ĺ At-the-money refers to a call or put option that is at the strike price.
Ĺ Out-of-the-money refers to a call option where the strike price is
above the underlying instrument’s price and a put option where the
strike price is below the underlying instrument’s price.

Figure 12.1 Microsoft (MSFT) daily chart showing a call option example of atthe-money, in-the-money, and out-of-the-money strike prices.

c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:32

Using Options with the Fibonacci Ratios and Patterns

Char Count=

167

Figure 12.2 Microsoft (MSFT) daily chart showing a put option example of
at-the-money, in-the-money, and out-of-the-money strike prices.

Ĺ The amount of time to the expiration date—time premium is priced
into an option, and as the expiration date draws closer the time premium will decay.
Ĺ Volatility of the underlying instrument—as a rule of thumb, the higher
the volatility, the higher the price of the option.
Ĺ Dividend payout of an underlying stock during the lifetime of the
option.
Ĺ Interest rates, both long-term and short-term, will have an effect on the
option’s pricing.
Ĺ Open interest, or how much interest there is in any particular option at
a particular strike price and expiration date. If there is more open interest, then there is likely to be a larger premium priced into the option.
The option buyer wants to purchase options that have a fair amount of
open interest.

CONTROLLING RISK WITH OPTIONS
There are many ways to use options, but here we will focus on just one
simple strategy for each type of option:
Ĺ Buy call options when there may be a significant move to the upside
based on a longer-term pattern.

c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

168

9:32

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 12.3 Buy call options when expecting a large rise in prices, and buy put
options when expecting a large decline in prices.

Ĺ Buy put options when there may be a significant move to the downside
based on a longer-term pattern.
Figure 12.3 illustrates when we utilize call options and put options.
The main reason to use options at what may be major or significant market turning points is the leverage they offer. Options can be purchased for a set dollar amount that can be a small portion of trading
capital. When a particular market or underlying instrument has a large
move in the anticipated direction, option prices can increase dramatically,
giving the option investor a potential large return on a relatively small
investment.
It is important to understand that about 85 percent or all options expire
worthless. Therefore, the trader must risk only a small portion of total trading capital on any one option strategy. When using this option strategy, the
trader’s risk is limited to the cost of the option. If the trade does not work
and the option expires worthless, then the total dollar amount expended
for the option purchase is the total loss in the trade. This gives the trader
limited risk and a large profit potential. This must be viewed and utilized
as part of the trader’s overall money management plan.

EXAMPLES OF USING OPTIONS WITH
EXTENSION PATTERNS
One of the reasons we like to use options with extension patterns, such as
the Butterfly pattern or a 1.272 or 1.618 extension, is that the options generally are marked down in price at that point. In longer time frames, such
as daily or weekly charts, patterns generally will have an excessive amount

c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:32

Using Options with the Fibonacci Ratios and Patterns

Char Count=

169

of bullishness or bearishness close to the completion points—bullishness
in the case of sell patterns and bearishness in the case of buy patterns.
This in itself will generally cause the out-of-the-money options to collapse
in premium.
Our strategy is to buy out-of-the-money calls or puts on or near the
completion of the pattern. This gives the trade and pattern some time to
complete, and we do not have to time an exact entry point in sometimes
volatile market conditions. This can be an advantage at times over trading
the outright futures or stocks.
We will look at two examples, one a purchase of call options that was a
successful trade and one a purchase of put options that expired worthless.

Soybeans Call Option Purchase
Call options are purchased around the completion of the 1.272 extension
(shown in Figure 12.4). Soybeans are trading in the 5.50 per bushel area
at the end of August, and December out-of-the-money call options at a 600
strike price are purchased for around $2.00 per option or $200 per contract
(100 calls). The expiration in December would give the market time to
move up.

Figure 12.4 Soybeans daily chart of out-of-the-money call options purchased
near a 1.272 extension pattern completion.

c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

170

9:32

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

After being held for over two months with little price action, once the
market starts to move up in a trendlike fashion the options increase in
value. The same trade management techniques we have covered in earlier
chapters can be used with options. The .618 level offers a good first profitable exit point, as the options have gone from out-of-the-money to at-themoney around the 600 strike price. A good trade management technique
with options is to sell half of the option contracts once they reach close to
double in price. For example, this option contract was purchased at $200;
half the options could be sold once the value of the option contract reaches
approximately $400 in value. This reduces the risk in the trade, and even if
the other half then expires worthless the trade has become risk-free.
Once the price of soybeans reaches the 1.272 extension on the upside,
the options then trade in-the-money; with little time left, the value of the
options becomes almost all intrinsic and is close to triple the price paid.
The second half of the call options could be sold around the 1.272 extension
at a good profit.

S&P 500 Put Option Purchase
This put option trade does not work out as well as the soybeans call option
trade. The same basic strategy is used—buy out-of-the-money put options

Figure 12.5 S&P 500 weekly chart example of put option purchase where options
expired worthless.

c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:32

Using Options with the Fibonacci Ratios and Patterns

Char Count=

171

based on longer-term extension patterns. The put options are purchased
for around $850 per option contract. The futures index options such as
these are generally more expensive than other options, and we try to purchase them below a $1,000 risk level per option contract.
As you can see in Figure 12.5, the extension pattern is the Butterfly
pattern, but the options in this trade are purchased near the completion
of the first Gartley sell pattern. The assumption is that the Gartley pattern
is a retest of the Butterfly pattern highs and the market will then have a
larger correction down. However, the market continues to trend up and
these options expire worthless.
Always use strict money management when trading options, and risk
only a small portion of total trading capital on one option trade. Trading
options can be a profitable strategy when used correctly. You can reduce
market exposure by not trading the stock, commodity, or future outright
through volatile periods. Trading options requires due diligence on the
trader’s part and an understanding of the nature and pricing of options.

c12

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:32

Char Count=

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 13

Building a
Trading Plan

D

eveloping a sound trading plan is essential to successful trading.
The trading plan gives the trader guidelines, rules, focus, and direction. It can greatly aid traders during periods of drawdown or difficult trading times. A trading plan will help the trader identify whether the
rough trading times are due to market conditions or to trading errors. The
trading plan acts as a rebalancing tool and enables the trader to get back
on track to following and executing sound trading principles according to
the trading plan.
A well-defined trading plan can help traders to see in black and white
what is happening in the internals of their own trading. It allows for an
objective view of where the greatest areas of profit come from and how
to increase profits. It also allows an objective view of where losses are
coming from so as to make adjustments to correct unnecessary losses or
losses that are too large in proportion to wins.
As traders, we are always looking for the best tools to help us maximize
profits and minimize risk and losses. A trading plan can be one of the best
tools we give ourselves to help us achieve both of those goals.
In this chapter we break the trading plan into three components:
1. Daily trading plan—defines what and how you will trade.
2. Business plan—provides an overall look at expenses of your trading

business.
3. Disaster plan—looks ahead to act at times of unforeseen events and

circumstances.

173

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

174

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

The trading plan is something that can be changed and be modified
over time. Successful trading requires fine-tuning your execution skills as
well as your money management. Taking steps early in the process to establish a trading plan will help put the trader on a path of treating trading
as a business.

DAILY TRADING PLAN
The depth and extent of a trading plan will depend largely on your current
trading skill level. The more in depth your experience and skill level, the
more in depth you can develop a trading plan.
For a novice trader, starting with just a few basics would be appropriate. As skill and experience are acquired, the trader can add onto the initial
trade plan. This section explains the basics to help you get started.

Basics of a Trading Plan
The most obvious place to start is with what you are trading. Here are
several ideas to include as a start:
Ĺ Define the markets you will trade.
Ĺ Define specific setups you will trade.
Ĺ Define entry point triggers into a trade.
Ĺ Define market conditions that would void the trade.
Ĺ Define the number of shares or contracts to be traded.
Ĺ Define how much risk is in the trade by using money management
rules.
Ĺ Define stop-loss placement.
Ĺ Define profit objective targets and how and when a stop-loss order is
moved.
Use this list as a checklist until these questions become second nature.
One excellent habit to develop is to write the information on a chart of
the market that you will be trading. Refer to Figure 13.1 for an example of
using a price chart as a checklist for the basic trading plan.
Let’s assume that a trader will be trading the S&P E-mini market from
a 5-minute time frame and is going to trade all Gartley patterns that form,
and the trader has done due diligence in planning how the trades are entered and what conditions prevent the trader from entering a trade. As the
pattern is forming and before it reaches the completion point, the trader
can write out all information pertaining to the basic trading plan for that

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Building a Trading Plan

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

175

Figure 13.1 S&P E-mini 5-minute chart of Gartley sell pattern. Example of using
a chart as a trading plan.

pattern in that market. We suggest actually printing out the chart as the
pattern is forming and writing in by hand the trading plan for that pattern.
This will accomplish a few important trading goals:
Ĺ Keeps the trader focused on what he should be doing and following the
trading plan.
Ĺ Defines a specific reason for the trade.
Ĺ Outlines what actions the trader will take at specific times during the
trade and how he will execute the trade management.
Ĺ Defines the specific risk the trader must assume for the trade so that
he will determine in advance of the trade if the risk is acceptable.
The important part is learning to follow the trading plan. Doing so repetitiously will greatly help you achieve taking one trade after another according to your trading plan.
The exercise will help the trader as the market is moving in real time to
follow a specific set of preplanned actions, which will help minimize emotional decisions. If emotional decisions and actions are taken that override
the original trading plan, the trader can then use that information in review
as a tool for finding specific patterns in the trading that inhibit developing
trading skills and growth.

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

176

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

It is easy to look at a static chart in hindsight and see what should
have been done. Part of building trading skills is to do this in real time in
advance of any trade setups forming, and then have the ability to follow the
plan time and time again.
As markets move in real time, price movement can cause all types of
mental interference with a trade setup. The more planning and preparation
the trader can do before the actual trade, the stronger trading skills he will
build. This will also help the trader to learn to think in probabilities.
As you can see, all of the items in the checklist have been addressed
in advance of the trade. Taking time to do this will build skills in planning
trades, executing trades, and managing trades.
Mark Douglas, author of Trading in the Zone, has an excellent exercise to help in developing trading skills and seeing an edge play out with
his 20 sample trades exercise.
This exercise has the trader try to execute 20 trades of the same setup
without error. In the exercise the trader commits to making a series of 20
trades of the same setup and executes the trades as flawlessly as possible.
This helps traders identify flaws in the method or in their execution skills.
If they make an error during the 20 trades exercise, they simply refocus
on their goal and continue. Refer to Figure 13.2 for a worksheet of the 20
sample trades exercise that can be used for this purpose.
Traders can track the exact performance of the specific patterns they
have chosen to trade and are using for each 20 sample trades exercise. This
enables them to gauge and measure in objective terms how closely they
are following the actual performance of that setup compared to their own
performance. If there is a large difference between how the setup performs
and the actual outcome of their performance, then they can begin to take
steps to stay on par with the setup according to their trading plan.
This will allow traders to look inside their trading and determine important information such as exiting early, entering late, moving stops incorrectly, and other common trading errors that interfere with developing
finely tuned trading skills. It is an excellent way to pinpoint problem areas
so that corrective measures can be taken to improve performance.
An example would be if 20 trades were completed and the actual
performance of the setup yielded +50 S&P E-mini points, but the trader
yielded only +15 S&P E-mini points because of trading errors; that gives
the trader important information to work with. The trader can now take
steps to work on whichever areas need improvement to close that gap.
Take note of the quote that is at the top of the worksheet: “All traders
give themselves exactly what they feel they deserve. Trading is an exercise in accumulating money. Once we have learned how to trade (perceive
opportunity and execute our trades), who else or what else could be responsible for how much we end up with in our equity account?”—Mark
Douglas.

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

Building a Trading Plan

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

177

Figure 13.2 Twenty Sample Trades Worksheet.
Source: Mark Douglas, Trading in the Zone (New York: New York Institute of Finance/Prentice Hall, 2000).

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

178

9:34

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Tracking Performance
As we have discussed, building a trading plan will teach traders to keep focused on what they are supposed to be doing and focused on the process of
trading. Adding to the trading plan statistics on the trader’s performance is
extremely beneficial. When you think about it, how could a trader identify
problem areas or evaluate true strengths without some system for doing
so? Each trader should have a system that collects objective data on trading performance. It would be hard to imagine a scientist not collecting and
analyzing data in order to complete a scientific experiment.
Athletes focus and collect their performance data on a continuous basis. Traders must come to realize that because trading is a performancebased arena with many components contributing to success or failure, each
piece of data is important and will contribute to the success or failure of
that trader.
In real time many things can happen quickly that can contribute to
profits or losses. Each action the trader takes will contribute to either the
profit side or the loss side. At the end of the day, week, or month, it is easy
for the trader to overlook important information that contributed to either
profit or loss.
The trader may not remember or may rationalize a random trade or
other trading errors that keenly affected performance. It is vital that traders
have some system of monitoring their own performance. It is also important to learn correct habits that build strengths and eliminate weaknesses.
Creating a system to accomplish this will only benefit the trader. This can
be accomplished by recognizing what is traded according to the trading
plan and what trades or actions do not fall into the trading plan.
It is an unfortunate reality in trading that even trading errors can make
a profit. These instances will reinforce very bad trading habits. These types
of wins will instill a sense of false confidence. They wrongly tell the trader
that if it worked once it will work again. This is usually not the case, and
eventually the trader will pay the price.
Keeping track of performance can give the trader an objective view
of what needs adjustment. It is an opportunity to improve performance.
We refer you to Trading Risk by Kenneth L. Grant and Enhancing Trader
Performance by Brett N. Steenbarger; these are both guides to setting up
this information.

Using Trader Performance Statistics
A situation that could occur within the trader’s statistics that could be
unidentified and overlooked may be something like the trader achieving a
70 percent wins record on total trades for a one-month period but still losing money. This could be evidence that there is a problem with controlling

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:34

Char Count=

Building a Trading Plan

179

losses or a tendency to taking profits too soon before the trade plan calls
for it, or a combination of both. It could also be evidence that there are
random trades occurring that are not profitable and are eating away at the
profits of the trading plan. Whatever the case may be, it is imperative that
the trader look inside his trading to determine the cause so that a solution
may be applied.
Statistics may also uncover a problem with overtrading. The number of
trades per day, week, and month could help the trader identify a problem
in this area and then find a solution. Having a system to match up what
they are trading compared with what they should be trading will greatly
aid traders in fine-tuning their trading skills.
Another example could be giving away profits. If traders find that profits are given away frequently at particular times of day, it may help them to
establish that they need work identifying a trend occurring if the losses are
countertrend trades initiated during a trend.
There are many areas that the trader can become aware of and benefit
greatly from by keeping statistics on performance. Here are some basic
ideas to start with that can easily be put into spreadsheet format. Traders
can start with as much as they feel is necessary and appropriate to their
current skill level.
Ĺ Win/loss ratio (number of wins divided by number of losses).
Ĺ Number of trades per day.
Ĺ Number of contracts or shares.
Ĺ Number of wins.
Ĺ Number of losses.
Ĺ Number of scratched trades.
They can be broken down further by:
Ĺ Number of wins—long trades.
Ĺ Number of losses—long trades.
Ĺ Number of wins—short trades.
Ĺ Number of losses—short trades.
Ĺ Number of scratched trades—long trades.
Ĺ Number of scratched trades—short trades.
Determining the dollar amounts of wins and losses is important:
Ĺ Dollar wins.
Ĺ Dollar losses.
Ĺ Dollar average win per share or contract.
Ĺ Dollar average loss per share or contract.

c13

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

180

9:34

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Some other items that the trader can easily keep track of include:
Ĺ Number of consecutive wins.
Ĺ Number of consecutive losses.
Ĺ Number of consecutive win days.
Ĺ Number of consecutive loss days.
Ĺ Average profit per trade.
Ĺ Average loss per trade.
Keeping track of trader performance statistics will uncover patterns
that otherwise would be impossible to see. For example, a trader might
maintain a steady record of 65 percent wins and then suddenly drop down
to 50 percent; the trader then has information on where to look for the
cause of the sudden change.
Another pattern could be a trader who maintains profitability at a
steady 65 percent to 70 percent win record but then incurs a larger than
usual loss one month with the same win/loss ratio. On the flip side, the
trader’s win record might drop down to 50 percent one month but still remain profitable.
All of the information can be used to determine what traders are doing
correctly and what errors are being made so that they can make changes.
This type of information can also alert the trader to a change in market
environment that may warrant adjustments to the original trading plan. If
there is no system incorporated into the trading plan to determine this, then
it will be unlikely anything will be changed in the long run, good or bad.
