
Selling Options against Futures or Cash Position
The simplest approach to implementing a covered option position involves
the combination of a cash position with an option. The crux of the idea is

Gunning for Premiums with Covered Options

157

that when a stock's shares flatten out or get weaker in price call options
can be sold to generate income.
If the stock's price goes down the trader gains the premium, which
diminishes his losses in the shares. If the price goes up the stock trader has
one of two choices-buy back the option at a higher premium or give up
any gains in his shares above and beyond the option strike price. The same
scenario can be played out for the futures, forex, or CFD markets.

Initiating a Covered Position Few decisions have to be made when
it comes to trading covered positions in the stock market. Those people
who buy stocks are automatically long-side specialists who therefore understand that they will only be selling calls. Also since there is no leverage
on the stock itself it is simpler to purchase one stock option for every 100
shares of stock owned. Finally, since the option is sold as a secondary position to the actual stock shares the option strike price is not given much
thought.
The ease with which covered option positions can be implemented in
the stock market gives us a contrast to the difficulty that can be associated
with the futures and forex markets. When it comes to putting on covered
option positions in the futures market, unlike stocks, there are too many
choices. Since longs and shorts are treated equally in the futures market
covered positions can be implemented with puts or calls. Delta also has
a larger impact on the option selling decision. The less the delta is, the
more likely multiple options at the same strike price will be sold in order
to match the movement of the underlying asset.
Finally, in a covered position the sold option may actually be the primary position with the futures or spot contract acting as the protective
position. This makes the option strike price more important based on how
much premium can be collected.
The spot forex market has one flaw that the futures market doesn't
have-lack of a true option market. Spot forex options tend to be customized contracts between the traders and the deal makers. This makes for
liquidity issues and can limit the strike prices that deal makers are willing
to work with. In the end, since there is no centralized exchange in the spot
forex market, it is difficult for spot options to be both fairly priced and liquid enough to be realistically used in a covered option scenario. This does
not mean, though, that you can't cross trade with forex futures options to
create the exact same trades.
In this section we look at two different ways to initiate a covered option position. One is an aggressive way to put on a covered position. This
action, when all of the indicators are pointing one way and a covered option is intentionally initiated in the opposite direction, is known as fading
the market. The second way to initiate a covered option is when a position

158

BASIC STRATEGI ES

has already gained a profit and is stalling out. In fact, if done properly it can
actually give the winning position a way to weather temporary pullbacks
or retracements.
To make covered options
work a strict approach must be taken. First, make sure you are a trend or
counter-trend trader, long side or short side specialist. This specialization
is paramount to having a consistent approach when selling options. In the
stock market you are forced to be a trend specialist, but in futures or spot
forex you can be either a trend or a counter-trend specialist. Choosing a
side helps dictate how comfortable you will be with your option selling
decisions and how you will react to the market's moves.
Second, the delta can play an important role in the number of options
you will want to sell. If the option's delta is moving at one third of the
underlying contract's actual price it makes sense to sell three options, not
one, in order to gain the full benefit of protective option. This can backfire
if the delta and volatility gets closer to the value of the underlying asset
while at the same time prices are moving against you.
Third, you must make a decision regarding what type of option will be
sold. While three types of options are available-out-of-the-money, in-themoney CITM) , and at-the-money CATM)-only two, ITM and ATM, are of
importance to futures and forex option sellers. Stock traders want to hold
on to their stock position, but futures and forex are happy to collect as
much premium as possible while totally disregarding the underlying position. This can best be accomplished with an ITM option, but if the trader
has a conservative streak then selling an ATM option may be a better bet.
Finally, there is an issue of timing. There are no rules set in stone requiring that a sold option must be held until expiration. If a profit is evident,
then the option can be bought back ahead of time. This requires the option
seller to have a set goal on his profit targets and to stay in control of the
maximum loss on his underlying futures or forex position.
Rules for Worldng with Covered Options

The following are two examples of
a market setup that is perfect for selling an option. The prices are sitting
around the 50-day MA and to the naked eye the market could go either up
or down. Based on the technical analysis it can clearly be seen that the
market will be going long or short. Then the covered option is put in place
to fade the actual direction of where the market is predicted to go.
Fading the market means that if the market signals suggest that the
market will move up in value, long, you initiate a covered put position to
collect the premium. If the market signals suggest that the market will drop
in value, short, you initiate a covered call position to collect the premium.
Examples of Fading the llfarket

159

Gunning for Premiums with Covered Options

This allows the trader to put on in-the-money trades and collect a significant premium in the process.

Long Market, Covered Put Position Crude oil's price in Figure 10.1 is
$85.40 and there is support sitting at $84.25. That means there is at least
$1.15 difference before the market may stop moving downward and decide
to tum around. With that in mind you can sit on the sidelines before initiating a covered put trade. You are looking to put the odds in your favor.
If the market breaks through support then you can initiate a covered call
strategy.
In Figure 10.2 the market hits the $84.25 support line and bounces back
around, stopping beneath the 50-day MA. As we know from Winning the
Trading Game, the 50-day MA plays a significant role in determining a market's direction. If it can successfully break through the 50-day MA, a new
long market will be initiated; if it hits the 50-day MA and collapses, it will
continue its bearish trend aggressively.
With all of the momentum on the bullish side, this is the perfect setup
to put on a covered put. You want to make sure you collect the premium
with few or no problems. So as it gets close to the 50-day MA it makes sense
to sell a put, with the hope it will break through the 50-day MA and start

Cl.067: cfU~ OM NY (PH) CadjUq (OaliY bafa)
02lO6l2OO3 .. as.40 {~f.21}

Crude Oil Bearish Momentum

.1
- .100Jltr

- 9&.00

18.00

Crude Oil Support

7UIl

- 72.00

i Tr~N'v' tor.com
121f0l07

FIGURE 10.1

Bearish Crude Oil

Source: TradeNavigato r.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

:160

BASIC STRATEGIES

I"t

Il,t'it .r',

-----tt"'"------'.r------ ,---------I~ I
1

I'r

c__________ ,- •• ___________________ •

+.1

Sell $90 Crude Oil Put

FIGURE 10.2 Initiating a Covered Put
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

a new bullish trend. Just in case the market drops in value you execute a
short position, to cover the sold put.
In Table 10.1 several strike prices are compared to the premiums that
can be collected. Since the market in Figure 10.2 has an overall bearish
bias it makes sense that the put options with a higher strike price are more
expensive than the premiums that are closer to the money.
In Figure 10.3 the price breaks above the 50-day MA and stays above it
for 2 or 3 days. This is a significant clue to whether this is a false breakout
or there has been a fundamental shift in the supply and demand of the
commodity. It also signals you to exit your short position and stop eroding
the premium you have collected.

TABLE 10.1
Strike Price

90.50
90.00
89 . 50

Oil Put Option Premiums
Premium

Dollar Amount

5.20
4.39
4.09

$5,200
$4,390
$4,090

161

Cunning for Premiums with Covered Options
CL~7: Crude OM NY (Pit) Cadj Uq([)ally baR)

81),00

Sell $90 Crude OJ, Put

10J23n)T

Crude Oil Br!NIJ<;g,!4

11106lO7"

' 1112010"7 ;
~

''''''''1

01 MS

FIGURE 10.3 Crude Oil Breakout
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

In this instance you enter your short position at $90 and exit your short
position at $91.15 for a total loss of $1,115. This is subtracted directly from
the premium you collected depending on the strike price you sold.
There are a few things to keep in mind when you unwind your position. First, once you get out of the protective short you will need to put a
stop on the sold call in order avoid losing the premium you have already
made. Second, you will immediately lose the special margin rate you were
receiving; therefore you will need to have enough margin in the account to
maintain the position. Finally, you need to be sure that you are willing to
exit the trade without carrying it all the way until expiration. At some point
you will be risking too much premium compared to what you will earn if
you hold the position until expiration, so keep the rule of risking one to
gain two in mind.

Short Market, Covered Long Position In the covered long position we take
a look at the com market. In Figure 10.4 we can see that the com market
has built up a lot of bullish momentum. It has filled at $4.60 and is heading
straight for the resistance at $4.90. Again, we are looking for a setup to
occur. If com breaks $4.90 it can get as high as $5.20.
In Figure 10.5 we see the com market slow down and reverse at the
$4.90 price. At the time the com $4.90 options are worth $1,400. If you sell

'

162

BASIC STRATEGIES

1::067: Com CBT (Pit) CadfU.t(Oally b...)

.....
Com Bullish Momentum

Com Resistance

\ .
' TraGeNle::o~

0llOSt1J7~~
'lIW<1=7"""""'~"""""~~-;;"""""~7~~;"""="=7-""""'
05/1="'7~-=
_=7"'--'-~'

Com 8tJlrtsh Momentum

FIGUltE 10.4 Corn Bullish Momentum
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

c:061r<:'om CBT (Pit) Cadj lIcrib.llyb....)
Com market weakening momentum

i

1.1

11,1 ..."nIIIIIJt..... itj.......

..............

~" c.mM.~t.~

.... :

,... . . ... . .. '1111 !IIL .. .. . ... s." ~~ c'mC'~" f
111,lb11111tI)1,11' t .tl~IIII'i.11,111,11

, 1rad!'H.v· .tor.com
O2.I'2;Wl

0JI0W07

03l23i07

IW09ro1

Q.4I2.3J07

05ID7,'07

Initiating Com Covered Optian

FIGURE 10.5 Initiating Corn Covered Option
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

05fl1J07

1l6AlW7

j~

163

Gunning for Premiums with Covered Options
TABLE 10.2 Corn Call Option Premiums
Strike Price

495
490
485

Premium

Dollar Amount

23

$1,150
$1,400
$1,500

28
30

a call option at that price a premium of $1,400 can be collected. A long
position is put into play to cover the position in case the market breaks
through $4.90. This is a preemptive move. Unlike the previous example,
the market has proven itself for several down days. The only reason it is
worthwhile to take a chance on it is because of gravity. Markets have a
tendency to fall faster than they can move up. So as a rule I have a tendency
to be more adventurous when taking signals for the short side as opposed
to the long side (see Table 10.2).
In Figure 10.6 everything is against com. The price is collapsing off
the upper Bollinger band, RSI is overbought, and the price gaps down the
next day. The long position cannot be exited fast enough. In fact, slippage
would most likely end up giving back half of your collected premium. But
that's okay-you have the protected position to ensure you don't expose

FIGURE 10.6 Corn Price Collapse
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

164

BASIC STRATEGIES

yourself to unlimited losses. If the market had shot up your position would
have been naked. This is the trade-off of having a protective position.
E.. ha .. ci .. g the Profits of a Wi ....i ..g Positio.. Another type of covered option position can come after holding onto a successful position for
some time. If a position trade has been placed on and has become successful, for instance if a long spot forex has racked up decent returns, but
suddenly stalls out, there is an opportunity to sell a call option to generate
income from the successful position. As soon as the market returns to the
direction of the winning trade the sold call is immediately offset, hopefully
with a small profit or at least at break-even. This strategy works just as
easily for traders who are in a successful short trade.
In Figure 10.7 a trader has entered the S&P 500 on a 50-day MA
crossover. As the market moves up for a significant gain the S&P 500 slows
its move upward at 1560 and the market begins to move sideways. This is
a definite bearish signal after such a long move upward.
There is an opportunity to sell a call at these heights and generate a
significant income. An at-the-money full-size option can easily command
thousands in premium. Therefore you can have the best of both worlds; you
can protect your trade from any temporary pullback with money collected

SP.()67: S&P 500 Index (Pit) Cad) LIq (OaBy bart)
MovlngAvg IC,50) 0511712001- 1561.7I·ial

f

- .1580.0 '

, Initiating a covered option on a successful position

- '570.0

I· .···· . · · · . ······· . . ·· · · . · . ·. . . . . ··. ·. . . . · · . . ·. . . . ~. ,,,o.o

,t'l ' ,

Market Stalling Sell S&P 1560 Call

.+h

. '!""

"t f153"

l ·,,'

1

• 1490,0
1480.0
- 1470.0

'4SO.0
- 14CD.O

Buy Market at Crossing of 50 day MA

:- 14S0,0

1.uo.o
U10.0

f ~~~=··~~1~~~~~.. ~"~=O'~~
~
7 =-~~
~7,--.. ·.
· ~~~
.. ·· ~~
.. ·~
.. ·-··.. ·M~~~-·~
.. ·~~~
.. ·M
· ..~
.. ~··.. ·.. ~~w
.. ·~.. -.. ·-.. ·-..,.. ~~
.. · .. ~;'-"'-'~'~~
S&P 500 Price Stall

FIGURE 10.7 S&P 500 Price Stall
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

Gunning for Premiums with Covered Options

J65

from the premium. You will also reduce your margin requirements since
the position is a covered option sale.
In Figure 10.8 we see the S&P 500 drop in value and come back to the
50-day MA. At that time the long position and the sold call should be exited.
Profits should be set aside and a reassessment of the trade should be made
to determine what the new direction could be.
1\\'0 Advanced Covered Option Strategies

In Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 we looked at two different strategies that involved options, collars, and synthetic options. In each instance we used a
protective option to protect the cash, futures, or stock position. The protective option was put in place to protect against any sudden drops or jumps,
but with a little more imagination an option can be sold on either type of
position to generate income to add to the overall profit of the position.

Selling an Option against a Synthetic Option This strategy is
slightly advanced because there are three moving parts, but it is another
way to initiate a covered option position, and thus it's important to expose you to the idea. As we learned in Chapter 8, a synthetic option is the
combination of an at-the-money option and a futures, spot, or cash market.
SP-06l: sap 500 Index IPn) CadJ Llq joaHy bars)

I S&P 500 Reverses
I

r·········· ....................................................
M~~k;t 'Stalling Sell S&P 1560 Cail

I
i

........./

I ·l+·~.·t.,

"''.

1,1 ~_..--~

I!i 11+111 II"
1 r

Buy Market at Crossing of 50 day MA

FIGURE JO.S S&P 500 Price Reverses
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved .

166

BASIC STRATEGIES

Whether you go long or short, the protective option is purchased to protect
against any risk of loss.
There is no set rule that the position the option is covering has to solely
be the futures , spot, or cash position. In fact another option can be added
to the mix. An option can be sold out-of-the-money, a few points away from
the synthetic's protective option. If the position is working in favor of the
underlying asset, then the extra premium is added to your overall profits. If
the position fails, the protective option covers any price move that may occur in the sold option. You give up the profits from any market move against
your position, but at the same time you have a way to capitalize on your
protective option or at the very least have a way to pay for part or all of it.
Let's take a market example from Chapter 8.
In Figure 10.9 we see the market rally through the 50-day MA. A put
was purchased at $930. The option cost $1,830. It would take little effort
to sell a put at $925 or at $935, if you're aggressive. A sold option at either
strike price will produce enough premium to either match or cover the cost
of the purchased option.

Selling an Option against a Collar In Chapter 7 we attacked the collar trade. By now you may have figured out that the very nature of a collar
is based on the covered option concept and the synthetic option combined.
Even though the sold option is a far out-of-the-money option, once the

GC2-067:-- GOld COIM. (Comb) Cad} L.iq (Dlity bara)

Jul. bill IIUlJlIlIJJJJJJliJJ
IIVIlI08

I!2.<71J'D&

G3It2iO!I

FIGUlm 10.9 Gold Futures Breakout
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved .

Cunning for Premiums with Covered Options

167

underlying asset breaks through the strike price it immediately turns into
a covered position.
But the fact that a synthetic option is the core component of a collar
means that an option can be sold out of the money against the purchased
option to produce a little extra income as well.

CONCLUSION
Selling options can be a complex proposition. Myths, like the belief that 80
to 90 percent of options expire worthless, do more harm than good when
making an informed decision to sell options. Add to that the impact that
margin rules have on the ability to sell options, plus the effects that volatility has on choosing the right option to sell, and it's easy to see that in the
wrong hands option selling can be disastrous.
Selling options requires a healthy dose of respect and discipline. Once
it is accepted that the option has the potential for unlimited losses, the
proper measures can be taken to minimize or eliminate that loss. Proper
measures can mean selling an option against a futures or spot position,
tying a sold option to the tail of a synthetic option, or being aggressive with
a straddle or strangle position. As long as a trader is willing to step out of
the box when it comes to selling options, its liabilities can become assets
over time.
As with all of the strategies presented in this book, the goal is to put
you in control of how you interact with the market. Whether that means
combining various tools so the odds are in your favor or avoiding this strategy altogether, then so be it. Whatever will make you ultimately feel comfortable with selling options is exactly how you should employ them in
your trading. This strategy is solely a means to an end-increased profits
coupled with diminished risk. If you fail to see an opportunity, don't force
it. Just let it flow.

CHI\P'fEK 11

Outflanldng
the Market

n Chapter 9 spread trading was explained in detail for futures contracts
and the cash market. In this chapter spread trading is being explored
once again, but from an option perspective. There are many different
types of option spreads, from iron condors to horizontal spreads to vertical
spreads, along with a myriad of other exotically named spreads. Many of
these are outside the scope of this book, either because they are too exotic
or because they cannot be easily tied back into a futures or cash position.
In no way does that mean that they are inferior, and in fact you can benefit
from learning how they work.
For the purposes of this book, the most effective option spread for
our dual goals of minimizing losses and maximizing profits is a very specific ratio spread. The overall definition of the ratio spread requires that an
unequal number of long and short positions be held. There can be a multitude of ways to execute this strategy. In one scenario a ratio spread can,
if done properly, limit the overall risk of a trader through simultaneously
diminishing losses and practically setting up a free trading opportunity. In
another scenario of the ratio spread, things can be exactly the opposite.
This type of ratio spread can expose a trader to unlimited losses if the market moves aggressively. In fact, being on the wrong side ofthis type of ratio
spread can ruin all but the most astute trader's account.
Distinguishing between these ratio spreads is just the tip of the iceberg
when it comes to trading the ratio spreads. There is the matter of being able
to select the proper ratio based on the underlying asset's market direction,
and there is the question of whether the ratio between longs and shorts
should relate to price or delta or both. Regardless of how the ratio spread

I

169

170

BASIC STRATEGIES

is implemented, it is a simple way for a trader to participate in various
market moves without having to risk too much of his own capital, which
can be important if you are trading with tight capital constraints.

FRONTSPREADS AND BACKSPREADS
Since a ratio spread is simply the act of holding an unequal number of long
and short positions, two different permutations of this scenario can occur.
Either you can buy one call or put and sell two calls or puts (known as
a frontspread) or you can sell one call or -put and buy two calls or puts
(known as a backspread).

Frontspl'eads
Let's look at the frontspread first. The frontspread is typically considered
the default ratio spread. It simply requires that an option be purchased at a
set price, preferably out-of-the-money, and two options be sold at a slightly
higher strike price. The goal is to profit from the difference between the
option strike prices. The trade is designed as a way to exploit a decrease in
option volatility. It is assumed that with less volatility the options are less
likely to move, and the premiums, along with the call's profit gains between
strike prices, are assured.
The downside of the frontspread is self-evident, though. As highlighted
earlier, there is an inherent flaw when it comes to selling options. When an
option is sold the trader is subject to the potential of unlimited losses. This
means that when a frontspread ratio spread is initiated the trader is at an
automatic disadvantage. If the underlying asset takes off in price and the
option volatility increases, then the sold options will gain in value quickly.
While there is one purchased option covering the increase in value of one
sold option, the second option is uncovered and thus exposes the trader to
unlinlited loss potential.
For example, a trader may purchase a gold put for $950 and then sell
two gold puts at $940. There is an apparent belief that there is a window
of trading opportunity between $950 to $940, or $1,000 in profits. The two
sold options, particularly at this close strike price range, produce enough
premium to pay for most if not all of the bought gold put.
The primary drawback would be if the price of gold drops past $940,
then the unlimited risk of one of the sold options kicks in. The secondary
drawback is if the price actually moves in the opposite direction. In this
example if gold moves from $950 to $960 the purchased option begins to
