
260

FIGURE 5.25

TAS PRO VAP Map on Daily Gold Chart

261

FIGURE 5.26

Movement away from HVA and PoC is sharp
and it breaks the extreme of the balance area.

Mature balance
Mature horizontal
development

TAS PRO VAP Map on Daily Chart of U.S. Bonds Highlights a Strong Breakaway from Point of Control

262

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Mature vertical development describes the phase of market development
that occurs at or near the end of a vertical, trending move. Indications that
a phase of vertical development is mature can include a slowing of the price
movement (i.e., a formation of balance on a smaller timeframe), a decreased
slope of price movement, greater overlap and retracements of the price bars,
weak internals to the price movement, divergences in volume, or divergences
in indicators such as TAS PRO Navigator. Smaller countertrend moves will
begin to break initial support/resistance areas that have previously held. (See
Figure 5.27.)
TAS PRO Navigator is one of the tools we use to give an advanced
indication that a stage of vertical development is ending. The appearance of
magenta bars is a high-probability indication of peaking conditions. When
magenta bars appear, you should be on high alert that the market may be
ending its trending move and transitioning to a phase of balance (transitioning
from vertical development to horizontal development). This is most often the
time when our traders are tightening their stops on directional trades.
Once a phase of vertical development is over and a stopping price has been
established, early stage horizontal development is deﬁned by the development
of a range (deﬁned low and high). Tests of the range extremes will have yet to
take place or will presently be taking place (ﬁrst or second tests). The volume
proﬁle or time-at-price proﬁle will look malformed/immature (meaning it
will not resemble a symmetrical bell-shaped distribution) and a somewhat
centered High Volume Area (HVA) will not yet be established.
Dynamic VAP and Dynamic TAP are very sensitive to detecting rotational price behavior and give an advanced indication that the market may
be entering early stage horizontal development. The appearance of a new Dynamic VAP or Dynamic TAP that brackets the current price is an indication
that the tool has identiﬁed rotational behavior and that the market may be
entering horizontal development in the timeframe under observation. (See
Figure 5.28.)
Once we’ve established which stage of market development is in place, we
then identify the Areas of Opportunity, which are different balanced versus
imbalanced markets. In balanced markets, the Areas of Opportunity are:
r Range extremes—high and low of the balance area or distribution.
r If the phase of horizontal development is mature, it’s the POC of a mature

balance area.
In imbalanced markets, the Areas of Opportunity are:
r When a market is in vertical development up, prior swing lows and Unfair

Lows of Dynamic VAPs.

263

FIGURE 5.27

Slowing of price movement. Formation of
overlapping swings and/or overlapping balance areas.
Decrease in slope. Divergence (price/oscillator)

TAS PRO Navigator on Daily Chart of Silver (SLV) Identifying Bearish Divergence

28.320

264

FIGURE 5.28

Appearance of new TAS Dynamic VAP
braketing price, indicates possible entrance
into horizontal development/rotational behavior

TAS PRO Dynamic VAP and Navigator on Daily Chart of Intel Corp Suggesting That a Range-Bound Market Is Developing

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

265

r When a market is in vertical development down, prior swing highs and

Unfair Highs of Dynamic VAPs.

r Smaller-scale HVAs formed as the market trades/trends.
r Price level where one-sided volume enters or volume becomes distinctly

one-sided, the result being a signiﬁcant vertical move in one direction. The
starting point/price of this kind of vertical move is a future potential area
of opportunity.

Reﬁning Market Analysis and Trading Using TAS PRO Dynamic VAP
Dynamic VAP offers a dynamic representation of developing balance versus
existing imbalance using a proprietary three-line display that is a proxy for
actual TPO-based proﬁles as is shown in Figure 5.29.
In Dynamic VAP’s simplest use, when price is trading within the lines, the
market is in balance—and when price is trading outside the lines, the market
is in imbalance. We therefore use Dynamic VAP to maintain objectivity when
determining phases of market development with the following set of objective
guidelines:
Is the market trading above, below, or within the weekly and daily Dynamic
VAPs? When a market is trading above the Unfair High on both daily and
weekly time frames, it is a strong suggestion that the market is in vertical
nondevelopment up. The opposite is true if the market is trading below the
Unfair Low on both the daily and weekly time frame; in this case it would
suggest vertical nondevelopment down.

When a market is mixed in its position or trading within a range of
consolidation, it may be in horizontal development. We use VAP Map and
our rules about identifying phases of market development to determine which
characteristics ﬁt the present market. For example, the daily chart may be
under horizontal development while the weekly is still downtrending in a
vertical move. We know that new vertical moves start from horizontal—and
they manifest in smaller timeframes ﬁrst. So we look for one of two events to
occur based on the daily chart:
r Is the daily pausing here horizontally to resume the downtrend?
r Is the daily pausing here to begin a new uptrend?

To get our answer, we repeat this analysis using the next-smaller timeframe, the 60-minute, and compare it to the daily. This top-down, stepwise

266
FIGURE 5.29

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
TAS PRO Dynamic VAP on Multiple Timeframes

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

267

reﬁnement process takes our analysis to the point where we have conﬁrmation
that a change is in fact taking place, and we adjust our tactics accordingly.
(See Figure 5.30.)
Do the Dynamic VAPs overlap? If so, by how much? Signiﬁcant overlap of
consecutive Dynamic VAPs is often an indication of horizontal development
while progressively higher or lower consecutive Dynamic VAPs is indicative
of vertical nondevelopment.
Is the migration of consecutive center POC lines higher, lower, or mixed?
Similar to the evaluation of the progressively higher or lower sets of Unfair
Highs and Lows, higher or lower consecutive POCs indicate that a trend is
continuing.
Are the Dynamic VAPs beginning to narrow or widen? The narrower the
price range between an Unfair High and an Unfair Low—and the tighter
the area of support and resistance—the more coiled the market is becoming.
And consecutive higher or lower Dynamic VAPs that are narrowing tell us
that volatility is decreasing and we are getting closer to horizontal range
development. Wider and wider Dynamic VAPs tell us that volatility is
increasing and this is where we will use TAS PRO Navigator to watch for
trend exhaustion (magenta bars in the momentum histogram).
Are the Dynamic VAPs acting as reliable support and resistance areas in
the current move/phase? Based on the observations of the VAP Map and the
answers to the foregoing questions, we can make reasonable assumptions
about the present phase of market development in any time frame. This
decision deﬁnes where the Areas of Opportunity are as well as determines
which strategies and tactics to use.

VAP Map and Dynamic VAP provide concrete and objective levels that
allow market professionals to know when and at what price levels the phase
of development is conﬁrmed or invalidated. And when invalidated, a new
trade premise and analysis process begins. The great advantage of this type
of analytical approach is that it is based on objective information that helps
market professionals develop trust and conﬁdence in their analyses.

A Trading Plan for Trade Locations, Entries, Stops, and Targets
Each phase of market development has speciﬁc tactics according to the TAS
PRO Approach to Trading and Market Analysis. Before we consider the
different types of trades based on market development, let’s ﬁrst cover two
basic tactics that we will refer to: the Probe and Pullback and the Reversal and
Retest.

268
FIGURE 5.30

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
TAS PRO Dynamic VAP on Multiple Timeframes

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.31

269

Breaking Away from Balance Area

The Probe and Pullback, which is illustrated in Figure 5.31, is a technical
setup where the market has broken from a phase of horizontal development
(balance) to probe prices beyond one of the current extremes of the range
and has then retraced back to or into the area of balance. The expectation is
that after retesting the balance extreme or the HVA, the market will reassert
itself in the direction of the probe and make a directional move. The retest of
the balance area after the “probe” outside of balance should not retrace any
further than the HVA of that balance area. Trade entry in this setup can occur
at any point between where the balance area extreme is retested to the lower
limit of the HVA (long setup) or the upper limit of the HVA (short setup). A
stall in this area or an indication of support/resistance while in this zone (such
as a balance on a smaller-degree timeframe) is a potential entry into this type
of trade. A retrace through the entire HVA of the balance area invalidates the
setup.
Figure 5.32 is an example of a Probe and Pullback.
The Reversal and Retest, which is illustrated in Figure 5.33, is a technical
setup that can occur when a Probe and Pullback setup fails or when the pullback portion of that setup shows no sign of stall or small-degree balance and
price trades through the HVA of the balance area in an aggressive/persistent
fashion. The key to this setup is the piercing of the HVA of the balance area
in an initiative way. Once broken, entries into this type of trade can be taken
upon a retest of the range or of the HVA. Fading extremes of smaller-degree
balances or taking smaller-degree trade setups once the HVA is broken and/or
once the opposite extreme of the balance is broken is also appropriate.

270

13

14 15

FIGURE 5.32

18 19 20

21 22 25 26
Oct 2010

Balance
27 28 29

01

02 03 04 05

Probe

08

09

10 11 12 15
Nov 2010

16 17

18 19

22

Pullback (to HVN)

TAS PRO VAP Map on Russell E-Mini Breaking Away from and Pulling Back to Balance Area

23 24

740

690

700

710

720

730

735.60

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

271

FIGURE 5.33

Breakout Higher, Reversal to Balance Area and Then Breakout Below with
Retest of Lower Balance Extreme

Figure 5.34 is an example of a Reversal and Retest.

Mature Balance Trades
A. Fade a test of the High Value Area (HVA) favoring the price side of the
HVA (long above the POC, short below POC).
r Stop placement is beyond the opposite extreme of the HVA.
r First target is the extreme of the balance area.
r The intention of taking a trade near the HVA in a mature balance is in
anticipation of the transition to a new phase of vertical development so
second targets and beyond will be outside the immediate structure (the
mature balance area).
B. Trade off a smaller scale balance that forms just above or just below the
HVA, either by fading the extreme of the small balance or by using a
Probe and Pullback setup.
r Stop placement can be beyond the extreme of the smaller balance area
or beyond the extreme of the HVA of the larger structure.
r First target is the extreme of the balance area.
r The intention of taking a trade near the HVA in a mature balance is in
anticipation of the transition to a new phase of vertical development so
second targets and beyond will be outside the immediate structure (the
mature balance area).

272

06:00
06:00
04 Nov 2010 05 Nov 2010

06:00
08 Nov 2010

06:00
09 Nov 2010

Balance

06:00
10 Nov 2010

06:00
11 Nov 2010

Reversal
through HVN

06:00
12 Nov 2010

06:00
16 Nov 2010

Retest of balance
extreme

06:00
15 Nov 2010

Retest of HVN

477,0000

60000
40000

85.00

86.00

87.00

88.00

TAS PRO VAP Map on Crude Oil Reversing Breakout Higher by Testing Lower Extreme and HVN and Then Breaking to the

CL1 Comdty - Volume 1477,0000 -1386,1400

Downside

FIGURE 5.34

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

273

C. Fade the extreme of a smaller scale balance that forms at the extreme of
a larger scale balance, anticipating a transition to a new phase of vertical
development in the larger degree.
r Stop placement is beyond the extreme of the smaller balance.
r First target is beyond the extreme of the mature balance area range as
a transition to a new phase of vertical development is the anticipated
move.
D. Take a Probe and Pullback trade if an extreme of the mature balance
is broken and then price revisits extreme of the mature balance area or
retraces into the HVA.
r Stop placement can be determined by using a smaller structure or setup;
otherwise, stop placement is beyond the opposite extreme of the HVA.
r First target can be the extreme of the Probe, but this setup is designed to
take advantage of a transition to a new phase of vertical development,
which should put the targets beyond the Probe’s extreme.
E. Take Reversal and Retest trade if Probe and Pullback trade setup does not
manifest or if it fails.
r Stop placement is determined using a smaller structure or setup; otherwise, stop placement is beyond the opposite extreme of the HVA
r First target is determined by larger structure, as a transition to a new
phase of vertical development is the anticipation.

Early Stage Vertical Development Trades
A. Take position in the direction of the new vertical development on retracement tests of smaller HVAs that form along the way. Stop placement is
beyond the balance area extreme of the prior smaller balance that is being
used to target entry.
B. Take Probe and Pullback trade to the HVA. Stop placement is beyond
the opposite extreme of the HVA.
C. Take smaller Probe and Pullback trades in the direction of the new vertical
development. Stop placement is beyond the extreme of the HVA at
minimum and for smaller structures often requires stop to be beyond the
extreme of the balance area as the smaller structure HVAs are less robust.
D. Fading extremes of smaller balances in favor of a new vertical move. Stop
placement is beyond the extreme of the smaller balance.
In each case of A–D, we determine the ﬁrst target based on the largertimeframe context because a new vertical development phase may be underway
in the larger timeframe.

274

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Mature Vertical Development Trades
A. Take smaller Probe and Pullback trades against the direction of trend.
r Stop placement is beyond the extreme of the HVA at a minimum and
for smaller structures often requires stop to be beyond the extreme of
the balance area as the smaller structure HVAs are less robust.
r First target will be determined by smaller structures/balances to the left
with the best opportunities being setups that include a low volume-atprice hole in the VAP Map. In these cases the target becomes the far
side of the low volume-at-price hole.
B. Take Reversal and Retest setup, using the last balance prior to making a
top or bottom.
r Stop placement is beyond the extreme of the HVA at a minimum and
more often requires stop beyond the extreme of the balance that has
been reversed through.
r First target will be determined by smaller structures/balances to the left
with the best opportunities being setups that include a low-volume hole
in the VAP Map. In these cases the target becomes the far side of the
low-volume hole.
C. Fade extreme of smaller balance areas formed at potential top/bottom.
r Stop placement is beyond the extreme of the smaller balance or beyond
the top/bottom.
r First target will be determined by smaller structures/balances to the left
with the best opportunities being setups that include a low-volume hole
in the VAP Map. In these cases the target becomes the far side of the
low-volume hole.

Early Stage Balance Trades
A. Fade a ﬁrst or second test of the extremes of the newly establishing
balance/range.
Note: This tactic requires careful observation as it will not yet be well deﬁned and will usually require other supporting conﬂuences or divergences
to support this type of trade premise.
r Stop placement is beyond the current extreme of the new potential
balance area. Other balances to the left can be used as support/resistance
and suggest where to place the stop as well.
r First target is the opposite extreme of the new potential balance area.
B. Fade a range expansion/extension (with the same caveat as in A above).
r Stop placement is beyond support/resistance determined by structures/balances to the left.
r First target is the opposite extreme of the new potential balance area.

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

275

C. Do not take trades in the middle of a developing (early stage) balance as
this is where the price movements are most random and the level of trade
noise is the highest.

Reward-to-Risk Considerations
Without proper attention to reward-to-risk ratios, the advantage created by
the foregoing approach can be completely nulliﬁed. The plan is to target trade
locations and setups that provide a 4:1 reward-to-risk ratio or greater. One way
to do this is to identify an Area of Opportunity in a larger timeframe and then
use a smaller timeframe to locate a deﬁned-risk setup (refer to the previous
section, “A Trading Plan for Trade Locations, Entries, Stops, and Targets”).
The objective here is to use the stop level from the smaller-timeframe setup
and the target from the larger timeframe.

Trading Applications
In this section we examine in detail two trading and analysis application
examples that employ many of the concepts discussed in this chapter.
Trading Application #1

Trading into a Proﬁle Hole

Instrument Traded/Timeframe
Indicators Used
Market Characteristics

Gold (GC1)/Daily Chart
TAS PRO VAP Map + TAS PRO Dynamic VAP
Gold has been in a multimonth consolidation
and is testing the unfair lows of the
rotation/distribution. A hole in the VAP Map
is highlighted in Figure 5.35.
Buying unfair lows for rotational long or selling
short a break into a hole

Trading Premise

As discussed, markets are either balanced or imbalanced and we use VAP
Map to make our determination as to which of these two conditions are
prevailing:
1. Fat areas in proﬁles reﬂect a market that is moving slowly and horizontally
through time in a well-deﬁned price range—a balanced market. These are
the areas of the market that lend technical support once revisited.
2. Skinny areas in proﬁles reﬂect a market that is moving rapidly and vertically
through price—an imbalanced market. These are the areas of the market
where there is a lack of technical support.

276

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

These skinny areas are known as holes in the market in the sense that
where price/volume did not accumulate and develop horizontally, it leaves a
hole in the chart. A hole in a chart is an area that expresses an absence of
horizontal development.
A characteristic of holes is that when price revisits these areas, it more often
than not tends to move rapidly and vertically since there are few technical
support areas. Holes offer superior opportunities for directional trades.
In Figure 5.35, we observe the following market conditions:
r VAP Map is displaying two distinct areas of horizontal development that

envelop a distinct hole in the market—an area where there was a prior
absence of horizontal development.
r The market is trading in the range of the upper balance area, exhibiting a
mature market state.
r Price is very close to entering a low volume-at-price hole as shown by the
VAP Map proﬁle.
r After eight consecutively higher Dynamic VAP proﬁles, the current Dynamic VAP proﬁle is lower, indicating a pause or stall in the market.
r Price has broken below the unfair low of the current Dynamic VAP, putting
the market in a short-term downtrend as it approaches the intermediateterm Unfair Lows.
Our trading plan for these market conditions is one of the two following
strategies.
1. Enter long
r Entry should be as close to $1,315 as possible and only if shorter-term
charts such as the 60-minute or 15-minute indicate that the shortterm downtrend is pausing (which will become apparent because a new
Dynamic VAP on the 60- or 15-minute chart will form, identifying
supporting volume entering the market).
r Stop loss and/or stop-and-reverse below $1,315, at $1,309.85.
2. Enter short
r On a break below the $1,315 support, the bias becomes bearish and the
expectation is that the hole will be traversed. Entering short on a break
or using similar tactics on a 60- or 15-minute chart once below $1,315
is appropriate.
r Stop loss would be above $1,315 and preferably above the high of the
breakdown bar.

277

FIGURE 5.35

“Hole”

Daily candle chart
GOLD FUTURES
TAS PRO VAP MAP (210,5,250)
TAS PRO DYNAMIC MAP (2,7,7)

TAS PRO VAP Map and TAS PRO Dynamic VAP Illustrating Hole in Proﬁle

If price enters a hole in the
VAP Map, it is common to
see price action speed up
and become trending until it
reaches the opposite end.

1150

1200

1250

1300

1334.50

1359.87
1350

1400
1383.55
1381.33

278

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

We can further reﬁne our trade timing by using multiple timeframes such
as the 60- or 15-minute charts, mindful of our goal to act in the Area of
Opportunity that is nearest $1,315.
The target to the upside would be for trade back to the upper region of
the high-volume area shown by the VAP Map or at least to the POC.
The target to the downside would initially be to the high-volume area
below the hole and then to the lower end of that high-volume area as a second
target.
Trading Application #2

Trading a Breakout from a Balanced Proﬁle

Instrument Traded/Timeframe
Indicators Used (Settings)
Market Characteristics

S&P 500 e-mini generic futures contract (ES1)/daily
TAS PRO Dynamic VAP + TAS PRO VAP Map
The market is breaking out of a multiday balanced state
that is denoted by a narrow-range Dynamic VAP in
the area of an unfair high that is exhibited by VAP
Map.
Trade the direction of the breakout using shorter
timeframes for entry.
