
France, or nineteenth-century Britain. I think that we are going to be in for a period of pain. We are
going to relearn what financial discipline is all about.
Do you use trading systems at all?
We have tested every system under the sun and, amazingly, we have found one that actually works
well. It is a very good system, but for obvious reasons, I can't tell you much more about it.
What type of realm does it fall into: contrarian? trend following?
Trend following. The basic premise of the system is that markets move sharply when they move. If
there is a sudden range expansion in a market that has been trading narrowly, human nature is to try
to fade that price move. When you get a range expansion, the market is sending you a very loud,
clear signal that the market is getting ready to move in the direction of that expansion.
Are you trading a portion of your funds on that system at the present time?
We just started trading the system about six months ago, and so far it is doing very well.
Do you feel a good system can compete with a good trader?
A good system may be able to trade more markets effectively than a good trader because it has the
advantage of unlimited computing power. After all, every trade decision is the product of some
problem-solving process—human or otherwise. However, because of the complexity in defining
interacting and changing market patterns, a good trader will usually be able to outperform a good
system.
But a good system can help diversify?
Unequivocally. A good system will catch ten times as much of the price move as I will, during the
15 percent of the time a market is in a major trending phase.
The following section of the interview was conducted two weeks later. During the interim, Jones
had reversed his trading bias on the stock market from bearish to bullish.
Two weeks ago you were very bearish. What made you change your mind?
You mean besides the Wall Street Journal article that publicized to the world that I was short 2,000
S&P contracts? The market didn't go down. The first thing I do is put my ear to the railroad tracks.
I always believe that prices move first and fundamentals come second.
Do you mean that if you were right, prices should have gone down and the didn't?
and; they didn't?
One of the things that Tullis taught me was the importance of time. When I trade, I don't just use a
price stop, I also use a time stop. If I think a market should break, and it doesn't, I will often get out
even if I am not losing any money. According to the 1929 analog model, the market should have
gone down — it didn't. This was the first time during the past three years that we had a serious
divergence. I think the strength of the economy is going to delay the stock market break.
I believe one reason why we are diverging from the 1 929 model is because of the much easier
availability of credit today. Volvo is giving out 120-month car loans. Think about that! Who owns a
car for ten years? Twenty years ago, the average length of a car loan was twenty-four months;
today it is fifty-five months. I think the final bottom line will be the same, but the ease of credit will
delay the process relative to the 1920s, when we had a cash economy.
Some of your preliminary comments before the start of our interview today make it sound
like you are paranoid because of your success.
If the misery in this country gets deep enough, the perception is going to be that we did well as a
trading firm, while other people were hurt, because we had some knowledge. It is not that we had
any unfair knowledge that other people didn't have, it is just that we did our homework. People just
don't want to believe that anyone can break away from the crowd and rise above mediocrity.
I understand that, similar to a number of other traders I have interviewed, you have trained a
group of apprentice traders. What was your motivation?
When I was twenty-one years old, a guy took me under his wing and it was the greatest thing that
ever happened to me. I felt an obligation to do the same thing for other people.
68

How did you find the people you trained?
Countless interviews. We have been deluged by applicants.
How many traders have you hired?
About thirty-five.
Have they been successful?
Some have done very well, but overall we have had mixed success.
Do you believe that is because it takes talent to be a good trader?
I never thought that before, but I am starting to believe that now. One of my weaknesses is that I
always tend to be too optimistic, particularly about the ability of other people to succeed.
Was your I Have a Dream Program, in which you have pledged to sponsor the education of a
group of kids from a poverty sticken area, inspired by the "60 Minutes" show about Eugene
Lang?
Right. I went to talk to him the week after the show, and within three months we had set up our
own program. I have always been a big believer in leverage. The thing that really turned me on
about the program was the potential for its multiplicative impact. By helping one kid, you can have
an impact on his family and other kids.
We have also recently set up a new program called the Robin Hood Foundation. We are trying to
seek out and fund people who are on the frontlines in providing food and shelter to the poor. We
are seeking out the people who are used to working with virtually no budget at all, rather than the
bureaucracies, which often do not deploy the money effectively.
Has this become a major part of your life?
I would say so. The markets have been so good to me that I feel I should give back something in
return. I can't say that I have been successful because I am better than anybody else. By the grace of
God, I was in the right place at the right time, so I feel a tremendous obligation to share.
Is the positive intensity of winning as strong as the pain of losing?
There is nothing worse than a bad trading day. You feel so low that it is difficult to hold your head
up. But, if I knew that I could also have a similar experience in the exhilaration of winning, I would
take the combination of winning and losing days any time because you feel that much more alive.
Trading gives you an incredibly intense feeling of what life is all about. Emotionally, you live on
the extremes.
What is the most important advice you could give the average trader?
Don't focus on making money; focus on protecting what you have.
Do you still see yourself trading ten or fifteen years down the road?
I wouldn't have it any other way.
Paul Jones was a winning trader from his start in the business, but, in the early years, his
performance was volatile. It took a traumatic trading experience to permanently forge the
importance of risk control into his mind. Since that gut-wrenching cotton trade in 1979, Jones has
managed to maintain excellent net profitability, while bringing his risk way down.
Today, risk control is the essence of Jones' trading style and success. He never thinks about what he
might make on a given trade, but only on what he could lose. He mentally marks each of his
positions to the market. No matter how large a profit he may have in a position, in Jones' mind his
entry price was the previous night's close. Since this approach assures that there is never a cushion
in his trades, Jones never gets complacent about any of his positions. He not only watches the risk
of each position, but he closely monitors the performance of his entire portfolio in real-time. If his
total equity drops 1 to 2 percent during a single trading session, he might well liquidate all of his
positions instantaneously to cut his risk. "It is always easier to get back in than to get out," he says.
If Jones' trading starts going poorly, he will continually reduce his position size until he is on track
again. That way, when he is trading his worst, he is also trading his smallest. In any month with net
trading losses, Jones will automatically reduce his risk exposure to make sure he never registers a
69

double-digit loss in a single month. After big winning streaks, he is particularly cautious about
getting overconfident.
In short, Jones maintains risk control in a dozen different ways. As he puts it, "The most important
rule in trading is: Play great defense, not great offense."

70

Gary Bielfeldt-Yes, They Do Trade T-Bonds in Peoria
For years, I have heard the name BLH mentioned as one of the major players in the futures
markets, particularly T-bonds, the world's largest futures market. I assumed BLH was a huge
trading corporation, but in seeking out the country's best traders, I discovered that BLH was basically a single individual: Gary Bielfeldt.
Who is Gary Bielfeldt? Where did he get the capital to rival the primary Wall Street institutions as
a major force in the T-bond futures market? Bielfeldt began his trading career twenty-five years
ago, with a mere $1,000 investment. At first, his capital was so limited he confined himself to
trading a single corn contract—one of the smallest futures contracts at a time of relative stagnation
in agricultural prices. From this extremely modest start, Bielfeldt eventually built his account up to
staggering proportions.
How did he do it? Bielfeldt does not believe in diversification. His trading philosophy is that you
pick one area and become expert at it. For much of his trading career, the soybean complex and, to
a more minor extent, the related grain markets provided that focal point of attention.
Although Bielfeldt had the desire to become a full-time trader from the beginning, his tiny capital
base restricted his trading to a part-time endeavor. In those early years, he earned his living running
a small brokerage office. The problem he faced was how he, a trader without any independent
funds, could develop a sufficient capital base to become a professional trader. Bielfeldt's strong
desire to make this leap in his capital base prompted him to take a large, if not imprudent, risk.
By 1965, Bielfeldt had painstakingly built up his initial $1,000 stake to $10,000. Based on his
fundamental evaluation of the soybean market, as well as the concurring opinion by his former
agricultural economics professor, Thomas Hieronymus, Bielfeldt strongly believed that prices
would go higher. In an all-or-nothing play, he bought twenty soybean contracts, an extremely highleverage position given his $10,000 account size. A mere 10-cent price decline would have completely wiped out his account, while a considerably smaller decline would have been sufficient to
generate a forced-liquidation margin call. Initially, prices did move lower, and Bielfeldt came
perilously close to that damaging margin call. But he held on, and prices eventually reversed to the
upside. By the time he liquidated the position, he had more than doubled his equity on that single
trade. That trade launched Bielfeldt toward his much sought after goal of becoming a full-time
trader.
Bielfeldt built his account with unerring consistency. By the early 1980s, Bielfeldt's trading size
had grown to the point that government-established speculative position limits in the soybean and
grain markets were becoming an impediment. This factor, aided by a particularly bad trade in the
soybean market in 1983, prompted Bielfeldt to shift his focus to the T-bond futures market, which
at the time had no position limit. (Although a position limit was eventually implemented in the Tbond market, the 10,000 contract limit dwarfed the 600-contract limit in soybeans.)
The 1983 soybean loss may have been the best thing that ever happened to Bielfeldt. His shift to Tbonds coincided with an evolving major bottom in that market. He became very bullish and built up
a huge long T-bond position at the right time. When the T-bond market exploded during the mid1984 to early 1986 period, Bielfeldt was perfectly positioned to garner huge profits. His ability to
stay with a major position for a long-term move allowed him to leverage his well-timed trade to a
much greater degree than would have been achieved by most professional traders with the same
initial position. This long T-bond position was Bielfeldt's best trade ever and catapulted him into a
new echelon. That, in short, is the story of how a one-lot corn trader became a T-bond futures
trader in the same league as the most prominent institutional market participants.
Bielfeldt could not be further removed from the popular image of a large-scale trader in the highly
leveraged sphere of futures trading. One would hardly expect to find one of the world's largest bond
traders in Peoria. Bielfeldt's attachment to his home town is so strong that he refused to consider
becoming a trader on the floor of the Chicago Board of Trade because it would have meant giving
up his cherished lifestyle. He is the epitome of the small town model American citizen: honest, hard
working, devoted to family and community. One of Bielfeldt's major goals has been to plow back a
portion of his trading-derived wealth into projects benefiting his home town.
I interviewed Bielfeldt in his large, comfortably furnished office. The huge, wraparound desk
71

configuration was flanked by ten quote screens. Despite this vast array of electronics, Bielfeldt was
low keyed. He rarely glanced at the screens during the afternoon I spent in his office, and it is hard
to visualize him trading frantically at any time, the vast array of quote machines notwithstanding.
Bielfeldt is a soft-spoken man of few words. He is also a very modest man who consistently
hesitated talking about his achievements, lest it sound like bragging. His very conservative nature
led him to avoid even seemingly innocuous subjects. For example, at one point in discussing the
reasons for his net trading losses in a given year, he asked me to turn off my tape recorder. I could
hardly imagine what he might say that necessitated this precautionary measure. The off-the-record
comments proved far from shocking. It turned out that his trading losses in that year were
influenced by an overextension into other commitments, including his membership on the Chicago
Board of Trade Board of Directors, a position which required frequent travel to Chicago. Apparently, he was reluctant to be quoted because he did not want to make it seem that he was
blaming his other responsibilities—which he deemed part of his natural obligations—for his trading
losses.
The combination of Bielfeldt's laconic nature, modesty, and conservatism made this a very difficult
interview. In fact, this was the only interview I conducted in which the average length of the
questions was longer than the average length of the responses. I considered deleting the interview
from the book—a tempting choice since I had an excess of material. However, I found Bielfeldt's
story so compelling and his character so strong that I was reluctant to take the easy way out. As a
compromise, I weighted this chapter to the narrative side and limited the interview section to a few
excerpts.
What is your basic approach in analyzing and trading the markets?
I always try to lean primarily on fundamental analysis. However, since I found it was very difficult
to know all the fundamentals—usually you are doing pretty well if you have 80 percent of the
pieces—I thought it was important to have something to fall back on in case my fundamental
analysis was wrong.
I assume you are referring to technical analysis as a supplement.
Right. I developed my own trend-following system.
Do you trade this system in any consistent way?
I use the system primarily as a backup to tell me when to get out of a position.
Can you think of an example?
At the start of 1988,1 was long the bond market primarily because I was expecting a weaker
economy. Everything seemed to be on target until early March when the bond market started
edging down. At some point, you have to say you are wrong. In this case, my system provided me
with the rationale for getting out of my losing position.
What went wrong with that trade?
Basically, the economy was a lot stronger than I had anticipated. I thought that there would be a
bigger fear factor left over from the October 1987 stock market crash than actually materialized.
What is your opinion of trend-following systems?
The best thing anyone can do when starting out is to learn how a trend system works. Trading a
trend system for a while will teach a new trader the principle of letting profits run and cutting losses
short. If you can just learn discipline by using a trend-following system, even temporarily, it will
increase your odds of being successful as a trader.
Do you have an opinion about systems sold to the public?
I looked at some of these systems a few years ago and found that they generally made too many
trades. If a system trades too frequently, the transaction costs will be too high, a factor that will
significantly reduce the probability of the system working. I think to be viable, a trend-following
system has to be medium to longer term. The more sensitive systems just generate too much
commission.
Besides providing a training vehicle for learning good trading habits, do you feel that trend72

following systems can provide an effective trading approach?
I would advise anyone who develops a system to combine it with their own judgment. In other
words, they should trade half the money on a system and the other half using their own judgment,
just in case the system isn't working.
Is that the way you trade?
I used to pay more attention to systems than I do now. Basically, I just focus on my own judgment.
Is that because your own judgment is more reliable, or because systems haven't been working
as well as they used to?
They haven't worked as well as they used to because there are too many people using them.
Whenever too many people are doing the same thing, the market will go through a period of
adjustment.
What are the key factors you focus on in fundamentally evaluating the T-bond market?
The economy is definitely the single most important factor. Four other important elements are
inflation expectations, the dollar, the trade balance, and the budget deficit.
You have been trading for over twenty-five years—a much longer time period than most
other traders. Is there any single trade that stands out as the most dramatic?
There are quite a few trades that would qualify as dramatic, but the one that stands out most
prominently was my attempt to pick the bottom of the bond market in 1983 and 1984.
When did you start trying to buy the bonds?
I started trying to pick a bottom when the bonds were trading in the 63-66 area.
How much risk did you allow when putting on a trade?
Generally anywhere from \ to ГА points. [One point in T-bond futures is equal to 32 ticks. A 1-point
move is equal to $1,000 per contract.]
So if you tried to pick a spot that looked good and it didn't work, you would bail out and try
again at another spot?
Right.
Since bonds eventually declined into the 50s, I guess you must have had a few strikes against
you before you finally went long in the right place.
Yes, there were several losses over a period of time.
Do you remember when you finally got positioned at a point where you didn't have to get
out?
I turned really bullish in May 1984, when they auctioned off five-year notes at a 13.93 yield. I had
been involved in banking since 1974, and at the time, we couldn't find any qualified borrowers for
three-year loans at 13 percent. Yet here were government five-year notes selling at nearly a full
percentage point above that level. Moreover, this was at a time when we were at the height of a
recession in Peoria: Unemployment was approaching 20 percent and the farm crisis was worsening.
I felt that interest rates had probably gone high enough. From that point on through April 1986,1
traded T-bonds heavily from the long side. There is no question that that was my best trade and
longest trend ever.
What are the elements of good trading?
The most important thing is to have a method for staying with your winners and getting rid of your
losers.
What do you do to make sure that you stay with a winning position to exploit the longer-term
trend? How do you avoid the temptation of taking profits prematurely?
The best way I know to learn discipline and patience is to think through a trade thoroughly before
putting it on. You need to develop a plan of your strategies for various contingencies. That way,
you won't get swayed by every news item that hits the market and causes prices to move up or
down. Also, it helps greatly to have a long-term objective that you have derived by really doing
your homework. You combine that long-term objective with a protective stop that you move as the
73

position goes your way. Alternatively, you could use a trend-following system to signal when you
should get out of the trade. By having thought out your objective and having a strategy for getting
out in case the market trend changes, you greatly increase the potential for staying in your winning
positions.
Why do most traders lose?
They overtrade, which means that they have to be right a lot just to cover commissions.
What are the traits of a successful trader?
The most important is discipline—I am sure everyone tells you that. Second, you have to have
patience; if you have a good trade on, you have to be able to stay with it. Third, you need courage
to go into the market, and courage comes from adequate capitalization. Fourth, you must have a
willingness to lose; that is also related to adequate capitalization. Fifth, you need a strong desire to
win.
Those elements seem fairly straightforward, except for the willingness to lose. Can you
expound on that?
You should have the attitude that if a trade loses, you can handle it without any problem and come
back to do the next trade. You can't let a losing trade get to you emotionally.
Can you talk more about what you mean by courage?
If a 260-pound fullback is running through the line and a 175-pound linebacker has to stop him, he
has to have the courage to go into him. You need that kind of courage to be able to participate in
the markets. If everyone is bullish the dollar, and the yen is sharply lower, it takes courage to fade
that major consensus and buy the yen.
How do you judge success?
Most people will judge success by how well they do in their field. A teacher would judge success
by how well the students do and how they go through life. A trader would probably judge success
by whether he wins or loses in the market.
Speaking personally, how do you judge success'.
I judge success by what I do with the money I accumulate. One of the things that my wife and I
have done is to establish a foundation so that we could share some of our success with the
community by supporting various programs.
Is this foundation one that you just fund, or do you have a hands-on relationship in running
it?
My family and I are directly involved in evaluating different projects and deciding which ones to
fund.
When did you set up this foundation?
In 1985. But I had thought about the idea as far back as the early 1970s. I had always planned that
if I were to become successful, I would set up a foundation to help the community.
Do you think this long-term goal was an important motivation leading to your success as a
trader?
Yes, I think it helped.
What advice do you have for the beginning trader?
When you are starting out, it is very important not to get too far behind because it is very difficult
to fight back. Most traders have a tendency to take risks that are too large at the beginning. They
tend not to be selective enough about when they take risks.
At this point, Bielfeldt asked me to turn off the tape recorder. He talked about the relevance and
application of poker strategy to trading. His reason for keeping the comments off-the-record was
that he didn't want to contribute to the image of trading as a form of gambling. I found his analogy
particularly apropos and finally persuaded him to put it on the record.
Could you explain your analogy between trading and poker?
I learned how to play poker at a very young age. My father taught me the concept of playing the
74
