
finally constricts into a tight range and the stock breaks out strongly to the upside. Many times
Eve’s top prints a flat shelf that marks an excellent entry point. Shelf resistance typically develops
right along the top of the center retracement pivot. The relationship between this center pivot and
current price marks the important focal point as the swing trader closely watches the development
of the suspected pattern.
Manage risk defensively—bottoms occur in downtrends. The greedy eye wants to believe the
immature formation, and fast execution fingers may bypass better judgment. Even spectacular
reversals offer little profit if price can’t ascend back out of the hole it came from. Violation of the
prior low presents the natural first choice for stop loss. Make certain the entry permits a safe exit for
an acceptable loss at this location. Don’t stick around long if the uptrend begins to fail. Price will
gather downside momentum quickly at broken lows as it searches for new support.
Successful bottom entry requires a strong stomach. Highly negative sentiment infects these volatile
turning points even when all S/R and other technicals line up. But the profit potential for these
classic setups presents very high reward:risk. In addition to new longs ready to speculate on a good
upside move, high short interest will fuel explosive impulses off these levels. Perhaps for this
reason alone, swing traders must explore the secrets of double bottom execution.
Rounded bottoms also provide opportunity for patient traders. Enter a long position after
momentum clearly shifts back toward the positive, but realize that it may take some time for a profit
to grow. Better yet, use rounded bottoms to identify bear markets that wash out and gear up for a
new bull leg. The formation supports a very stable base for price to move upward once the pattern
completes.
The Big W reference pattern maps the entire bottom reversal process. This signpost identifies key
pivots and flashes early warning signals. The pattern begins at a market’s last high just prior to the
first bottom. The first bounce after this low marks the center peak of the W as it retraces between
38% and 62% of that last downward move. This rally fades and price descends back toward a test of
the last low. The swing trader then waits patiently for the first bell to ring. A wide range reversal
bar (preferably a doji or hammer) may appear close to the low price of the last bottom. Or volume
may spike sharply but price holds firm. Better yet, a 2B reversal prints where price violates the last
low by a few ticks but then bounces sharply back above support. Focus attention on the potential
second leg of this Big W when any or all of these events occur.
Initiate entry near the bottom of this second leg when multiple cross-verification supports the trade
and conditions permit tight stop loss. The middle of the W now becomes the central analysis point
for further setups. Price must retrace 100% of the last minor decline to jump to this level. This small
move finally breaks the descending bear cycle. Enter less aggressive positions when this emerging
second bottom retraces through 62% of the fall into the second low. But sufficient profit must exist
between that entry and the top of the W center pivot for the setup to make sense. Longer-term
participants can hold positions as price tries to mount this barrier but most traders should exit
immediately.
Expect another upward leg after support establishes along the center pivot. The break of the
downtrend invites many new players, and price has a high probability of rising further. Look for the
next thrust to retrace 100% of the original downward impulse that pushed price into the first
bottom. This final move completes both the double bottom and the Big W. The pattern may provide
further opportunity on a quick pullback, but extended congestion can form in this area before trend
pushes much higher. So assume a defensive posture and wait for the market to signal the next
direction.

BREAKOUTS
Significant declines evolve into long basing periods characterized by failed rallies and retesting of
prior lows. But as new accumulation slowly shakes out the last crowd of losers, a bear market’s
character changes. Price starts to rally toward the top of key resistance. Short-term relative strength
improves and the chart may print a series of bullish bars with closing ticks near their highs. Finally,
the issue begins a steady march through the wall marked by previous failures.
Stocks must overcome gravity to enter new uptrends. Value players build bases but can’t supply the
critical force needed to fuel strong rallies. Fortunately, the momentum crowd arrives just in time to
fill this chore. As a stock slowly rises above resistance, greed rings a loud bell and these growth
players jump on board all at the same time.
The appearance of a sharp breakout gap has tremendous buying power. But the swing trader must
remain cautious if the move lacks heavy volume. Bursts of enthusiastic buying must draw wide
attention that ignites further price expansion. The gap may fill quickly and trap the emotional longs
when significant volume fails to appear. Non-gapping, high-volume surges provide a comfortable
breakout floor similar to gaps. But support can be less dependable and force a stock to swing into a
new range rather than rise quickly.
Moderate strength breakouts often set up good pullback trades. The uptrend terrain faces
considerable obstacles marked by clear air pockets and congestion from prior downtrends. These
barriers should force frequent dips that mark good buying opportunities. The swing trader must
identify these profitable resistance zones in advance and be ready to act. Look for price to shoot
past the top Bollinger Band just as it strikes a strong ceiling. This should define the most likely
turning point. Then follow the price correction back to natural support and look for low-risk entry.
Price surges register on trend-following indicators such as MACD and ADX as momentum builds.
Volatility quickly absorbs each new thrust and vertical rallies erupt. Abandon dip setups once this
starts and try to catch these runaway expansion moves by shifting down to the next-lower time
frame and finding small support pockets. Volume peaks as a trend wave draws to a climax while
price expands bar to bar and often culminates in a final exhaustion spike.
Markets need time to absorb instability generated by rapid price movement. They pause to catch
their breath as both volume and price rate of change drop sharply. During these consolidation
periods, new ranges undergo continuous testing for support and resistance. To the pattern reader,
these appear as the familiar shapes of flags, pennants and triangles. Relatively simple mechanics
underlie the formation of these continuation patterns. The orderly return to a market’s mean state
sets the foundation for a new thrust in the same direction. Price pulls back with declining volume
but does not violate any significant support. The primary trend reasserts itself as stability returns.
Congestion tends to alternate between simple and complex patterns in a series of sharp trend
waves. This odd phenomenon occurs in both range time and size. For example, the first pullback
after a rally may only print 8–10 bars in a tight pattern while the subsequent congestion exhibits
wide price swings through 20–25 bars. Always take a look back at the last range to estimate the
expected price action for the new congestion. Trade more defensively if the prior pattern was both
short and simple. Go on the offense after observing an extended battle in the last range.
Swing traders must pay close attention to proportionality when examining continuation patterns.
This visual element will validate or nullify other predictive observations. Constricted ranges should
be proportional in both time and size to the trends that precede them. When they take on dimensions
larger than expected from visual examination, odds increase that the observed range actually relates

to a broader trend than the rally just completed. This can trigger devastating trend relativity errors,
in which traders base execution on patterns longer or shorter than the targeted holding period.
FIGURE 3.2
The Big W pattern provides swing traders with a powerful tool to locate low-risk bottom entry in all time frames and all
markets. The center pivot may retrace 38%, 50%, or 62% of the selloff that leads into the first low. As the second
bottom breaks the downtrend, look for a fast pullback to the top of the W center before the market moves higher. The
pattern completes when price pushes through a 100% retracement of the last selloff.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Evaluate all patterns within the context of this trend relativity. A constricted range exists only
within the time frame under consideration. For example, a market may print a strong bull move on
the weekly chart, a bear on the daily, and a tight continuation pattern on the 5-minute bars, all at the
same time. A range drawn through one time frame does not necessarily signal swing conditions in
the other periods that particular market trades through.
FIGURE 3.3
Very strong gap breakouts rise more quickly toward higher prices than simple resistance breakouts. Trading
tactics that wait for a low-risk pullback may prove futile because the new uptrend often goes vertical. Extreme
crowd enthusiasm ignites continued buying at higher levels and the market never needs a dip to locate more fuel.
Use a momentum strategy to enter a long position in this environment and manage risk with absolute price or
percentage stop loss.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

RALLIES
The cult of Elliott Wave Theory (EWT) intimidates the most experienced swing traders. But simple
elements of this arcane practice add great insight to Pattern Cycle analysis. Strong trends routinely
print orderly action-reaction waves. EWT uncovers these predictive patterns through their repeating
count of three primary waves and two countertrend ones.
Wave impulses correspond with the crowd’s emotional participation. A surging first wave
represents the fresh enthusiasm of an initial breakout. The new crowd then hesitates and prices drop
into a countertrend second wave. This coils the action for the rising greed of the runaway third
wave. Then, after another pullback slowly awakens fear, the manic crowd exhausts itself in a final
fifth-wave blowoff.
Primary wave setups require very little knowledge of the underlying theory. Just look for the fivewave trend structure in all time frames. While these price thrusts may seem hard to locate, the
trained eye can uncover wave patterns in many strong uptrends. Trading strategy follows other
types of swing tactics. Locate smaller waves embedded within larger ones and execute positions at
convergent points where two or more time frames intersect. These cross-verification zones capture
major trend, reversal, and breakout points. For example, the third wave of a primary trend often
exhibits dynamic vertical motion. This single thrust can hide a complete five-wave rally within the

next-smaller time frame. Locate this hidden pattern and execute a long position at the ‘‘third of a
third,” one of the most powerful wave phenomena within an entire uptrend.
Dynamic third waves often trigger broad continuation gaps. These occur just as emotion replaces
reason, and they frustrate good swing traders. Many exit positions on the bars just prior to the big
gap because common sense dictates that the surging stock should retrace. Use timely wave analysis
and a strong stomach to anticipate this big move before it occurs. It often prints right after several
vertical bars close near the top of their ranges. Look for the last bar to reach right into broad
resistance. Price should jump beyond that level on the gap. Also watch for RSI and other strength
indicators to rise to the middle of their plots just as the big event erupts.
Fourth-wave corrections initiate the sentiment mechanics for the final fifth wave. The crowd
experiences an emotional setback as this countertrend slowly generates fear through a sharp
downturn or long sideways move. The same momentum signals that carry the crowd into positions
now roll over and turn against it. But as the herd prepares to exit, the trend suddenly reawakens and
price again surges into a new wave.
FIGURE 3.4
The greedy crowd ignites a powerful December rally in Amgen. Note the embedded five-wave pattern within the
larger primary third wave. This potent time frame alignment appears frequently in surging trends and marks a
significant profit opportunity. A third wave within another third wave (third of a third) signals the most dynamic
momentum for an entire rally.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The crowd loses good judgment during this final, fifth wave. Both parabolic moves and aborted
rallies occur here with great frequency. Survival through the last sharp countertrend (fourth wave)
builds an unhealthy sense of invulnerability into the crowd mechanics. Movement becomes
unpredictable and the uptrend ends suddenly just as the last greedy participant jumps in.
Analyze the specific wave landscape through this classic pattern’s special characteristics. The
bottom of the fourth wave should never touch the top of the second-wave. The second and fourth
waves should alternate between simple and complex shapes. The fifth wave may exhibit a parabolic
rally under the right circumstances but can also fail as soon as it breaks out of the fourth-wave
range. Two of the three primary waves tend to print identical price change. The wave structure often
exhibits very clean Fibonacci relationships. For example, two primary waves may print 38% each of
the complete wave set.
Use volatile past action to identify effective trades when trend finally turns back through old price
and begins a correction. Battles between bulls and bears leave a scarred landscape of unique
charting features. For example, prior gaps can present excellent profit opportunities. Third-wave
continuation gaps rarely fill on the first retracement, except through an opposing gap. Execute
pullback entry in the direction of support as soon as price dips into a continuation gap, as long as
the setup meets other reward:risk considerations. This pattern also generates good intraday setups
because most major gaps occur overnight. But don’t jump in without first recognizing the important
differences between continuation gaps and other, less dependable ones. Some will fill easily and
trigger immediate price expansion in the opposite direction.
Past breaks in support identify low-risk short sales as corrections evolve. The more violent the
break, the more likely it will resist penetration. Head and shoulders, rectangles, and double top
formations leave their mark with strong resistance levels. These patterns often print multiple doji
and hammer lows just prior to a final break as insiders clean out stops near the extremes of the
pattern. Use their descending tails to pinpoint a reversal target for short sale entry.
Clear air marks price pockets with thin participation and ownership. These volatile zones often print
a series of wide range bars as trends thrust from one stable level to another. This rapid movement
tends to repeat each time that price action passes its boundaries. Potential reward spikes sharply
through these unique levels for obvious reasons. But watch out: reversals tend to be sharp and
vertical as well. Use tight stops at all times.
The 3D charting landscape recognizes that important features may not be horizontal. What the eye
resolves as uptrend or downtrend may contain multiple impulses that shoot out in many directions.
Parallel price channels offer the most common example of this multipath phenomenon. These
complex patterns also offer very clean trade setups. Fade one trendline with a stop loss just beyond
the violation point. Book the profit and reverse when price swings to the other channel extreme.

HIGHS
Swing traders discover great rewards in uncharted territory. Stocks at new highs generate unique
momentum properties that ignite sharp price movement. But these dynamic breakouts can also
demonstrate very unexpected behavior. Old S/R battlegrounds disappear at new highs, and few
chart references remain to guide execution. Risk escalates with each promising setup in this volatile
environment. The final breakout to new highs completes a stock’s digestion of overhead supply. But
the struggle for greater price gains still continues. These strong markets often undergo additional
testing and base-building before resuming their dynamic uptrends. Watch this building process
through typical pattern development seen during these events.

New high stocks may return to test the top of prior resistance several times. This can force a series
of stepping ranges before trend finally surges upward. Some issues go vertical immediately when
they enter these breakouts. New high trade analysis faces the challenge of predicting which
outcome is more likely. Let accumulation-distribution indicators and the developing pattern guide
decision-making at these interfaces. Acc-dis consistently signals whether new highs will escalate
immediately or just mark time. Price either leads or lags accumulation. When stocks reach new
highs without sufficient ownership or buying pressure, they will usually pause to allow these broad
forces to catch up. When accumulation builds more strongly than price, the initial thrust to new
highs confirms the indicator signal. Odds then favor that the breakout will trigger a fresh round of
buying interest and force price to take off immediately with no basing phase.
As stocks push into uncharted territory, examine the action through existing features of the pattern.
The last congestion phase before the breakout often prints sharp initiation points for the new
impulse. Locate this hidden root structure in double bottom lows embedded within the range under
the breakout price. The distance between these lows and the top resistance boundary may yield
accurate price targets for the subsequent rally. Barring larger forces, this new high should extend
approximately 1.38 times the distance between that low and the resistance top before establishing a
new range (see Figure 5.27).
A strong bull impulse can go vertical for an extended period after it finally escapes initial breakout
gravity. Price action may even print a dramatic third wave for the trend initiated at the final
congestion low. This thrust can easily exceed initial price targets when it converges with large-scale
wave motion. In other words, when forces on the weekly, daily, and intraday charts move into
synergy, trend movement can greatly exceed expectations. This explains why so many professional
analysts routinely underestimate stock rallies.
Measure ongoing new highs with a MACD Histogram indicator. Effective swing trading of postgravity impulses relies on the interaction between current price and the momentum cycle.
Aggressive participants can enter long positions when price pulls back but the MACD slope begins
to rise. Conservative traders can wait until the indicator crosses the zero signal line from below to
above. Use the descending histogram slope to exit positions and flag overbought conditions that
favor ranges or reversals. Ignore the MACD when well-marked charting landscape features signal
an immediate opportunity. For example, if an established trendline can be drawn under critical
lows, key entry timing to that line rather than waiting for the indicator slope to turn up or down.
Avoid short sales completely when price and momentum peak, unless advanced skills can safely
manage the increased risk. Remember that trying to pick tops is a loser’s game. Delay short sales
until momentum drops sharply but price sits high within a rangebound market. Pattern Cycle
analysis will then locate favorable countertrends with much lower risk.
How long should a rally last when a stock breaks to new highs? Physics teaches that the star that
burns brightest extinguishes itself long before one that emits a cooler, darker light. So it is with
market rallies. Parabolic moves cannot sustain themselves over the long haul. Alternatively, stocks
that struggle for each point of gain eventually give up and roll over. So logic dictates that the most
durable path for uptrends lies somewhere in between these two extremes.
FIGURE 3.5
Alternation predicts major trend waves with few retracements when complex basing occurs early in a dynamic
uptrend. This CMGI parabolic move supports that theory. Note the extended range at the right shoulder of the
inverse head and shoulders pattern. Inadequate accumulation stalled the stock just under the breakout high until
fresh demand could push price through the barrier. Once the building process completed, price expanded through
the old high, paused briefly, and ejected into an astounding rally.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Overbought conditions trigger a decline in price momentum and illustrate one ever-present danger
when trading new highs: stocks may stop rising at any moment and start extended sideways
movement. Watch rallies closely to uncover early warning signs for this range development. The
first break in a major trendline that follows a big move flags the end of a trend and beginning of
sideways congestion. Exit momentum-based positions until conditions once again favor rapid price
change. In this environment, consider countertrend swing trades if reward:risk opens up good
opportunities. But stand aside as volatility slowly dissipates and crowd participation fades.

TOPS
No trend lasts forever. Crowd enthusiasm eventually outpaces a stock’s fundamentals and the rally
stalls. But topping formations do not end uptrends all by themselves. This stopping point may only
signal a short pause that finally yields to higher prices. Or it may represent a long-term high just
before a major collapse. Learn to evaluate topping ranges by understanding the psychology that
drives them. Then get in the reversal door early and allow the herd to trigger sharp price expansion.
Classic topping formations take forever to issue their reversal signals. Head and shoulders and
double tops draw complex distribution patterns as the crowd slowly loses faith. While the swing
trader waits, the herd takes notice of the action and all stand together to wait for the eventual
