
16

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

banks and you’ll ﬁnd very few who talk about Freud being the ticket to
making millions.
However, trading was harder than Dennis let on. The early ups and
downs took a toll on him, but he learned the hard lessons within
months. “You have to have mentally gone through the process of failure,” he said. “I had a day during which I made every mistake known
to modern man. I took too big risks. I panicked and sold at the bottom
of every break. I had built my net worth up to about $4,000 coming
into that day and I lost about $1,000 in two hours. It took me about
three days to work through that experience emotionally, and I think it
was the best thing that ever happened to me.” 20
It was about this time, in 1972–73, that fellow traders Tom Willis
and Robert Moss met Dennis. They would go on to work together for
years as close friends and business associates, with Dennis as their
leader. The star did not wear a polished Armani suit, nor did his buddies. They sported used-car-salesman jackets, with muttonchops and
bad hair, but their appearance disguised calculated gamers looking to
beat the pants off their peers every day of the week.
Willis, like Dennis, was brought up in a working-class family. His
father, who worked ﬁrst as a milkman and then delivering bread, helped
him buy a seat on the MidAm for $1,000 at age twenty-one. Willis had
never heard of the exchange until he saw an article in the Chicago
Tribune with the headline “Altruistic Grain Trader Successful.” It was
about 221⁄2-year-old Richard Dennis.
Willis immediately identiﬁed with his peer’s anti-establishment way
of viewing the world. Dennis was not afraid to say that he had voted for
Eugene McCarthy and didn’t think that just because he had radical
ideas he should be driving a cab. Years later, Dennis was even more
direct, saying that “the market was a legal and moral way to make a living. Being a trader doesn’t oblige one to be a conservative.” 21
Yet Dennis’s political stance was not what ﬁrst caught Willis’s attention; it was his attitude about making money in a world where class and
distinction were always barriers to entry. Without a second thought,
Willis hopped in his Jeep and drove to the Fisher Building in the Chicago Loop to check out the exchange. When he arrived at the MidAm
for the ﬁrst time, his soon-to-be role model dominated the landscape:
“Rich was in the pit. I knew him by the photo from the Tribune.”

Prince of the Pit

17

Willis started trading with his MidAm seat, but had no immediate
contact with Dennis even though they were the two youngest traders in
the pit. Nearly everybody else was sixty-ﬁve to eighty years old, and they
actually had chairs and spittoons in the trading pit. A young Dennis,
towering above a sea of old guys lounging on chairs, must have been a
sight.
Situated only a few blocks from the Chicago Board of Trade, the
MidAm was a bit player at the time. It was small, perhaps ﬁfteen hundred square feet. While Willis didn’t know how his start at the MidAm
would unfold (he ended up building a thirty-plus-year trading career),
he was certain Dennis saw a much bigger future.
Even then, big wigs from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME) were coming over in their limos to pick young Dennis’s mind.
Ultimately, Dennis approached Willis most likely because he was
good enough not to go broke and because they were both about the
same age.
Dennis told Willis, “If you’re buying wheat and it’s strong and the
beans are too low and the wheat is ﬁve higher, why don’t you sell soybeans instead of selling the wheat you bought?” It was a very sophisticated insight. In fact, buying “strength” and selling “weakness” short
still befuddles investors. It is counter-intuitive to buying low and
selling high.
Dennis was already sharing his knowledge with other traders. He
was a natural-born teacher. Dennis was teaching the young exchange
members at either his or Willis’s apartment. Willis would buy two hundred pieces of chicken and a barrel of potato salad. There were ﬁfty or
sixty guys in his one-bedroom apartment with Dennis holding court,
explaining how to trade.
There was a practical need for this. The MidAm was selling new
memberships to all kinds of traders, many with no experience. Dennis
and Willis were teaching “liquidity.” To give the market conﬁdence in
the viability of the MidAm exchange, there had to be a critical mass of
buyers and sellers. This culture of education was creating a better exchange with better traders. And those better traders were starting to
make money. It could all be traced to Dennis.
Craig and Gary Lacrosse, Ira Shyman, John Grace, Wayne Elliott,
Robert Tallian, and David Ware are all Chicago traders who learned

18

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

from Dennis. While they may not be household names, they became
hugely successful in part because of the generosity of the young Dennis, who felt no compunction about sharing his skills with others.
After the apartment-training sessions everyone would go home, and
they would meet the next day in the pits. During market hours they
would ask Dennis, “Is this what you meant?” and he’d say, “Yeah.” Dennis freely gave away his knowledge.
The Chicago Board of Trade
Great experiences and proﬁts aside, it wasn’t long before Dennis
needed a bigger playing ﬁeld than the minor-league MidAm. He was
already plotting how to beat the big boys at the Chicago Board of Trade
(CBOT), the world’s largest futures exchange. Once at the CBOT,
his placid demeanor contrasted sharply with the hoarse shouts and wild
gestures of other ﬂoor traders, many of whom were millionaire traders
with decades of experience. He was soon beating them at their own
game with a “betting” style that was often so relaxed that his trading
cards would literally slip out of his hand onto the ﬂoor.
Dennis’s move to the CBOT was historic. Willis could hardly believe it: “Richard goes to the Board of Trade and knocks the cover off
the ball. They’ve never seen anything like this. I mean this kid takes the
whole pit off. Not because he can or not because he wants to show off,
but corn is up, beans are up two and the corn is down three and they
sell him a million bushels of soybeans up one and a half and the next
thing you know they close up seven and they’re talking about him,
‘Who’s this new kid?’ ” Willis refrained from divulging the names of
old-timers that Dennis was beating the pants off when he ﬁrst hit the
CBOT, since many of those losing traders are still around today.
One of Dennis’s students said that their teacher believed his physical
attributes to be behind his pit-trading success: “You ever heard why he
considered himself really successful? He is six feet something and the
size of a freight train. He could see over people and more importantly,
people could see him. People always knew that he was there. He honestly felt that’s why he was successful.”
Dennis’s attributing his height and weight as the reason he was successful is not the full story. There was more to becoming a millionaire

Prince of the Pit

19

by twenty-ﬁve than being “six foot something” and three hundred
pounds plus. Even with excess weight, his peers described him as having cat-quick reﬂexes on the trading ﬂoor.
The Move from the Pit
Trading on the ﬂoor, down in the pit, might have been exciting during
this era, but today the Chicago Board of Trade ﬂoor is silent. That
doesn’t mean trading is dead today—far from it. Electronic trading outdated the old ways faster than anyone ever thought could happen.
However invigorating the trading ﬂoor may have been in the 1970s,
the only way for Dennis to expand his trading success was to move
away from it. The Chicago trading ﬂoors were designed with multiple
pits and each pit traded a different market. To trade more than
one market, he had to physically move back and forth across the ﬂoor
to the various pits.
Dennis’s solution allowed him to remain faithful to buying in
strength and selling in weakness. He knew that if his system worked in
soybeans and corn, then it would also work in gold and stocks and all
other markets.
At the same time, he saw Wall Street changing, with new markets
appearing fast and furiously as economies around the world opened and
expanded. Fixed income futures were launched, and by 1975 the International Monetary Market (IMM) was allowing anyone to trade currencies the way they did stocks. Dennis knew what this would all mean.
To trade in that bigger world, Dennis moved into an ofﬁce on the
twenty-third ﬂoor of the CBOT, leaving the turmoil of screaming traders behind. Concurrent with his move, in November 1975, Dennis and
Larry Carroll formed a partnership. Known simply by the ﬁrst initial of
their last names, C&D Commodities was born.
There is little public information on Larry Carroll (they did meet on
the MidAm ﬂoor). And, although Dennis’s “D” came second, theirs
was not a partnership where the decisions and proﬁts were split ﬁftyﬁfty. Dennis was always the man. Within short order, C&D Commodities became one of the largest independent trading ﬁrms in the world.
They quickly rivaled such established institutional investors as Salomon Brothers and the Pillsbury Company.22

20

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

However, other traders who had seen him dominate the pits were
shocked when Dennis left the ﬂoor. They thought he was crazy. To
compete against the likes of Pillsbury and Salomon Brothers was
considered suicide, because no one thought he could maintain that
ﬂoor “edge.” Dennis himself had always said the pit was the safest
place to be.
The transition did almost sink Dennis. When he went off ﬂoor, he
struggled. In the late 1970s, the markets were getting to him. Tom Willis saw the struggle and recalled, “He was a little disillusioned, a little
off balance frankly.” Both men went out to a bar to discuss the situation. Dennis was not throwing in the towel. He looked at Willis and
said, “Tom, I got stuff that’s so good that used off ﬂoor in the right
hands it would make $50 million a year.”
In today’s terms, this would be like someone saying he has a way of
trading that’s so good he can make $200 million a year. Or think of
some number that is ﬁfty times more than is rationally achievable by
any normal measure. With anyone else, Willis would have been skeptical: “If I didn’t know Rich. I would have said, ‘Gee, he really does
sound a little more off balance than I’m even thinking.’ Saying $50
million in 1979 is a crazy thing to do, but I believed it. And he did it.
If an edge is good or the idea is good, let’s get in front of the screen
and trade them all. If it’s that good, let’s get in front of the screen and
have 20 people do this. As a matter of fact, it’s very, very consistent to
expanding geometrically the ability to take advantage of this good
idea.”
The goal of trading every market he could and making more money
in the process was reached within a year, just as Dennis had predicted.
Yet making that much more money didn’t change him one bit. His
new ofﬁce was not marble and glass. The outside hallway to the ofﬁce
had dingy brown paneling. On his ofﬁce door was “C&D Commodities, Richard J. Dennis and Company.” No ﬂash. The men’s room for
the ﬂoor was next door.
Martin Hare, a nephew of Larry Carroll’s, was sixteen and in high
school when he was working for Dennis. Now an executive with Merrill Lynch in San Diego, he worked in Dennis’s unconventional ofﬁce
environment from 1982 to 1989. Hare still gets enthusiastic when he
thinks about his after-school job: “I cut out the Wall Street settlement

Prince of the Pit

21

prices for three summers. My weekly salary at C&D was $120. That
was up from $90 the summer before. The C&D ofﬁce was royal blue
in color. There was a sleeping room for those that needed to nap, mostly
for Rich, and a refrigerator full of the best beer.”
Dennis may have physically disappeared from the trading ﬂoor,
but the hermit-like trading wizard hovered over the markets like
Zeus. Everyone knew he was there when a huge order came into the
pits. Traders also knew not to get in front of his orders, or they could
be potentially wiped out. Critics and regulators at times thought he
was too big and moved markets unfairly. Dennis scoffed, “Sour
grapes.”
The criticisms were an excuse for people who had learned to lose.
Dennis had no patience for people targeting his success. “I cringe a
little when I’m identiﬁed as a millionaire,” Dennis said after reading
that his $250,000 contribution to Adlai Stevenson was the largest individual political gift ever in Illinois. “If somebody just had $100,000, he
wouldn’t be called a thousandaire, and if a pauper gave a dollar, they
wouldn’t say, ‘Pauper gives his last buck.’ ” 23
Although he grew wealthier by the day, he still kept an antinuclear
poster hanging in his ofﬁce and remained outside the chummy atmosphere of the exchanges. He was not prone to travel in the limelight.
“We don’t have much contact with him,” remarked one Board of Trade
player.24
While his peers collected vintage cars and mansions, Dennis kept
wearing those out-of-date polyester pants hiked over an ever-expanding
waist. He exercised by eating cheap hamburgers at noisy grills. Dennis
in a short-sleeved shirt, no tie, religiously pouring over arcane baseball statistics from the Baseball Abstract, was a common sight. In
fact, he would eventually buy a piece of the White Sox baseball team.
Once he was an owner, his 1980s attempt to get White Sox management to see the beneﬁts of Bill James–style “Moneyball” fell on deaf
ears.
One of his students, Michael Shannon, watched his friends try to
dress him up by moving him from his South Side studio apartment,
and recalled, “Bill Eckhardt and others actually forced him to move
into something that was a little bit more parallel to his station.”
Money for Dennis was just a way to keep score in the game. He was

22

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

frank about it: “Trading is a little bit like hitting a ball. If you’re thinking what your batting average should be, you’re not concentrating on
the right thing when you bat the ball. Dollars are the batting average of
the trader.” 25
This original thinker and big-time baseball fan left a visual image on
everyone. Several conﬁdantes talked about Dennis’s socks. One of his
students smiled, “You need to make sure he’s wearing a matched pair
of the same color.”
Bradley Rotter, a former West Point graduate and often called
Dennis’s ﬁrst investor, witnessed his eccentricity: “I was at his house for
a Fourth of July tennis party and Richard Dennis couldn’t be found . . . at
the end of the party he came out of his house wearing a white tennis
shirt, white tennis shorts, and black shoes and black socks. I’ll never
forget that picture.”
Rotter was not mocking Dennis. He respected Dennis’s testicular
fortitude to trade trends no matter what. In baseball, testicular fortitude
means everyone can talk about the game, but if you’re going to get
into the game, you must swing the bat. Dennis swung and swung hard.
No singles. His was Babe Ruth, home-run, swing-for-the-fences-style
moneymaking.
However, the Babe Ruth of trading was near oblivious to the basics
of everyday life. Mail and personal bills were handled by C&D’s back
ofﬁce because of his inattention. His ofﬁce would even send over toilet
paper to his apartment. The weight room in his Gold Coast condo was
virtually unused. “I pat the weights once in a while.” said Dennis.26 He
enjoyed using a third of his time to do absolutely nothing.
Another Dennis student, Erle Keefer, went beyond his eccentricities: “Rich is probably the greatest trigger puller that I personally have
ever known: he has the ability under tremendous pressure to stand
there with his own money and pull the trigger when other people
wilted. And when he was wrong, he could turn on a dime. That’s amazing—that’s not trading, that’s genetic.” The genetic line was debatable;
after all, that was the point of his Turtle experiment.

Prince of the Pit

23

Political Ambitions
Dennis’s success eventually caused more serious problems. In the mid1980s, critics accused him of strong-arming the market. They blamed
him for too much market volatility. Words like “collusion” were thrown
around. Dennis was not buying it. He said, “One man’s volatility is
another man’s proﬁt.” 27
When Dennis was a guest on a radio show in 1984, a caller assured
him that if he traded long enough, he would give it all back.28
You could feel the anger. Some people simply did not want to hear
about a young guy making millions. Even though everyone knew exchanges needed speculators, too many people didn’t want those same
risk-takers to make a proﬁt. Dennis himself appeared before Congress
as they investigated the “efﬁciency of the markets”—unable to deﬁne
what that phrase meant. His detractors were silenced after government
regulators testiﬁed that the total buying and selling by Dennis did not
breach exchange limits.
Soon, Dennis would join the political ﬁght at a whole new level. He
became one of the largest Democratic donors in the country, often focusing his generosity on standard politicians and assorted underdogs.
From donating millions to battered women’s shelters to the decriminalization of marijuana, causes without wide publicity appealed to him
(he would give away 10 percent of his earnings every year). While calling himself a liberal libertarian, he once donated $1,000 to former
Black Panther Bobby Rush.
Dennis did more than just write checks. He became good friends
with Bill Bradley and supported Walter Mondale (1984) and Bruce
Babbitt (1988) for President. He lobbied hard against conservative stalwart Robert Bork. There was a rational justiﬁcation in Dennis’s mind
for his political ideals: “If it’s something everyone hates but you think is
right, those are the important things to do because no one else is going
to do them.” 29
However, becoming a successful politician on the basis of supporting the have-nots of society was not as easy as trading to make millions.
It wasn’t enough merely to fund his causes; Dennis also wanted to
“work” them, and immediately ran into roadblocks. Politics was not a

24

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

zero-sum game, and he got frustrated. “Politicians, at worse, are mindless replicas of what their constituents think. People . . . don’t want to
hear painful truths.” 30
When invited to participate in the diplomatic dances that made up
Washington politics, he stepped on toes, and seldom refrained from
voicing his opinions. Former Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker
was once introduced to Dennis. He told Dennis that he didn’t “like
those casinos you have out there in Chicago.” 31
Dennis was well aware that he was being indulged because he was
rich and would be listened to only if he had something signiﬁcant to
say. Soon after he founded his new 1982 think tank, the Roosevelt
Center for American Policy Studies in Washington, D.C., it began to
ﬂounder.
Washington was a tough market no matter how many millions you
had. And now Democrats were frustrating him, too. He said, “My
principal irritation with liberals in general: they don’t understand how
it can possibly be true that you make the poor richer by making everyone richer. I don’t understand that they don’t even consider that possibility.” 32
The problem in a political world was that Dennis couldn’t work the
ﬂoors of Congress the way he had the Chicago trading ﬂoors. It was one
thing to own one of the six original copies of the U.S. Constitution
(which he did) and an entirely different thing to try to inﬂuence modern political leaders. He was impatient.
Ultimately, over time he would become a board member of the
libertarian Cato Institute, serving with such notable peers as John C.
Malone, chairman, Liberty Media Corporation, and Frederick W.
Smith, chairman and CEO, FedEx Corporation. He also joined the
board of the Reason Foundation, another libertarian think tank.
Dennis’s political forays were never easy. One political critic of his
thought Dennis was a bully because he didn’t adjust his thinking to
accommodate others.33 Dennis saw that criticism as coming from a
typical Washington careerist being afraid to rock the boat.
His stance on the decriminalization of narcotics best illustrated
what made him tick. He knew the “drug czar” of the day, Bill Bennett,
would never defeat drug violence with his “just say no” approach.

Prince of the Pit

25

Dennis thought people should be allowed to do what they wanted to
do, even if they injured themselves, as long as they did not hurt others.
He commented:
The drug war violates the Golden Rule of doing unto others as
you would have them do unto you. None of us is free of vice or
temptation. Does any one of us really want to be jailed for our
moral shortcomings? If our teenaged child is arrested for drug
possession—a distinct possibility, since 54 percent of teenagers
admit trying illicit drugs—do we really want him or her sent to
prison for falling victim to the curiosity of youth?34
Here was a man making millions in the pits by winning as much
money from others as possible, but at the same he was clearly worried
about others well being. He was a mass of contradictions.
Rough Seas
Dennis had some severe down periods before that banner year of
1986. Perhaps his political ambitions had caused a loss of focus. Adding to his responsibility, by this time he had moved beyond trading only his own money. He was trading for others, and managing
their money was not his strongest suit. He said, “It’s drastically more
work to lose other people’s money. It’s tough. I go home and worry
about it.” 35
This was not what his clients wanted to hear. In 1983, when his assets under management peaked at over $25 million, his accounts for
clients hit turbulence. After a 53 percent rise in January, accounts
dropped 33 percent in February and March. That drop was enough to
prompt George Soros to yank the $2 million he had invested with Dennis only two months earlier. After a partial rebound in April and May,
Dennis’s funds dived another 50 percent in value. His 1983-era computer that cost $150,000 did little to console nervous clients.
It took many of his investors more than two years to get back to
even with their investment. Most didn’t stick around, and Dennis
closed down some accounts in 1984. He rebated all management
