
New Zealand Dollar/U.S. Dollar and New Zealand
Yield Curves

What if we know New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar rises in U.S. markets with
the rise of U.S. bond yields? The question of what direction will New Zealand
dollar/U.S. dollar take when New Zealand bond yields rise during New
Zealand trading is another issue.
Because New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar are opposing pairs in this form,
New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar will follow its own bond price up or down
rather than New Zealand bond yields. Stated differently, when New Zealand
bond prices are down, New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar will fall, and rise when
bond prices rise.
Both markets have opposite effects due to the opposite alignment of the
New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar conﬁguration. If the alignment were conﬁgured as U.S. dollar/New Zealand dollar, then a completely opposite effect
would occur. The Royal Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) would rather see a rise
in New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar more than any currency pair in their TWI.

Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

181

The only method to obtain a weakening or rise in New Zealand dollar/U.S.
dollar is for U.S. bond yields to rise to levels acceptable to the RBNZ.
New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar rises only on the basis of good U.S. economic conditions. So if U.S. and New Zealand yield curves were compared
against each other, what would be the factors to go long or short? If yields
rose in the United States during U.S. trading hours and trading shifts to
New Zealand, chances are good New Zealand bond prices will rise and New
Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar will rise along with those bonds. This is so because
many nations and their currencies are dependent on a healthy U.S. economy
for their own healthy economies. Further, continuity normally exists from
U.S. to NZ markets as all take their cues from the United States. A down
U.S. market may easily see a down New Zealand market. It is the question of
the business of trade that New Zealand transacts in the United States more
so than any dependency factor. Yet if the U.S. economy falls, so does New
Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar. Continuity of markets holds as long as political or
economic news doesn’t disrupt the balance between markets.
Track New Zealand Dollar/U.S. Dollar

On the ASX, New Zealand trades the 30-day Ofﬁcial Cash Rate Futures and
the 90-day Bank Bill Futures contract. Margin requirements were lowered in
May 2010 to a tier structure that enhances trading in these contracts. The
30-day contract is quoted in yield percent per annum in multiples of 0.005,
it is yield – 100. 1 basis point  New Zealand dollar 24.66. New Zealand,
like Australia, works on a ﬁxed-tick arrangement. Multiply price movements
by the ﬁxed-tick dollar value of New Zealand dollar—24.66 per 0.01 move
by number of contracts (ASX).
Australian Dollar/New Zealand Dollar and Yield Curves

If New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar and Australian dollar/U.S. dollar follow
their own bond prices during New Zealand and Australia trading, which way
will Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar move? This pair is the yield seeker.
Currency pairs must be viewed as not only trading mechanisms to proﬁt,
but mechanisms for ﬁnance. Currency pairs conﬁgured as New Zealand dollar/
U.S. dollar and Australian dollar/U.S. dollar only satisfy one side of the ﬁnance
equation. This was the reason for inventing these cross pairs. Australian dollar/
New Zealand dollar allowed for the ﬂow of funds to travel either inside Australia
or New Zealand from abroad or it was used as a cheaper mechanism to ﬁnance

182

Inside the Currency Market

outﬂows. For this reason, Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar will always
move opposite to its counterparts in terms of yields and bond prices.
Think about the current economic conditions in Australia and New
Zealand. Both economies are growing in GDP and OCR. And both economies are earning enormous revenues from the Australian dollar/U.S. dollar and
New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar conﬁguration from the U.S. dollar side. This
allows both currency-pair prices to rise, good for both nations. But what
about the U.S. dollar side of this equation? How does the U.S. dollar side
ﬁnance Australia and New Zealand operations against a high Australian
dollar/U.S. dollar and New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar currency price? The
price is prohibitive in terms of Australian dollar/U.S. dollar and New Zealand
dollar/U.S. dollar. Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar satisﬁes the U.S.
dollar side by following yields, and is used as the ﬁnance aspect for U.S. dollar operations.
As Australian dollar/U.S. dollar and New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar
prices continue to rise, Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar continues to
fall. These pairs are called U.S. dollar pairs because they allow the U.S. dollar
to seek yield outside of the United States. Or it allows ﬁnancing in Australian
dollar/New Zealand dollar to occur in yields at a preferable cost. So Australian
dollar/New Zealand dollar can also be viewed as a ﬁnance mechanism as it is
cheaper to ﬁnance in terms of yields than it is to ﬁnance in terms of a high
currency price.
In terms of the yield curve, Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar will follow U.S. bond prices during U.S. trading, while Australian dollar/U.S. dollar
and New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar will follow U.S. bond yields. The U.S.
dollar will follow Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar and Australia and
New Zealand bond yields in Australia and New Zealand trading.
Euro Yield Curve

The yield curve for the euro comprises four nations: france, Germany, Italy, and
Spain (German Finance Agency). Of the four, German bonds, called bunds,
comprise 21 percent of the European debt market, Italian bonds called BTPs
are 29 percent, French bonds called OATs are 20 percent, and Spanish bonds
called Letras del Tesoro comprise 7 percent (Investinginbondseurope.org).
The focus to trade the euro/U.S. dollar will be granted to German bonds
due to Germany’s powerful and always leading economic position in the
euro zone, its low debt compared to the others—euro 1.043 billion—and its
close proximity to the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. Plus the ECB is housed in
Frankfurt and the German Bundesbank.

Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

183

Prior to the euro, the German Deutsche mark was the leading currency of
Europe, so it is only natural that the Germans help steer the economic policy
process in Europe to secure their legacy from the Deutsche mark to the euro.
The last important consideration is that bunds are quoted and traded in euros.
The Germans issue two types of bonds, tradeable and non-tradeable. By
doing this, the Germans track two yield curves, one for tradeable bonds, and the
other for non-tradeable debt. The tradeable bonds with an interest rate exposure
comprise the two-year German Federal Treasury Schaetze Note, the ﬁve-year
Federal Treasury Note, and the 10-year Federal Treasury Note. Federal Bonds
or bunds comprise the 30-year note and determine the long end of the curve.
Non-tradeable Bonds include the German Government Day Bond that
currently pays a rate per day of 0.21 percent (German Finance Agency). This
rate is managed by the German Finance Agency and represents an important
indicator. Purchasers receive par value plus interest to determine yields.
Federal Treasury Financing Paper offers maturities from 12 to 24 months.
Yields are determined by offering paper at a discount and redemption at
maturity. BuBills or bund Bills are discount paper offered for maturities of
six months and one year. Currently the Germans are negotiating the offer
of three- and nine-month BuBills.
Federal Savings Notes comprise a six-year note for type-A issues and a
seven-year note for type-B issues. Inﬂation-indexed bonds include the 5- and
10-year note. Inﬂation is tied to the interest rate at maturity.

Yield Calculations for German Federal Securities with Fixed Interest
Compound interest formula, yield for ﬁxed interest securities with annual
interest payment and maturity N years is equal to:
C  p/g  p/g2  . . . p/gn  r/gn
where

C  purchase price including accrued interest in percent,
p  coupon rate in percent,
n  maturity in years,
r  redemption price in percent,
1/g  conversion factor in compound discounting, discount factor,
(1/g  1/1  p/100), and
p  yield in percent.
p/g  p/g2 gave discount interest payments (cash value of interest
payments).

184

Inside the Currency Market

Simpliﬁed as:
C  p  (1/g  1/g2  . . .  1/gn)  r/gn
 p  gn  1/ gn  (g  1)  r/gn
gn  1/gn  (g 1)
 annuity value factor
Using an annuity value factor rewritten as:
C  p  an  r/gn
P yields are not possible after four years, determined iteratively—estimate
yield value and insert into equations.
Track the Euro Yield Curve

The German Bundesbank reports daily yield curves on its web site. Eurex
trades a 10- and 30-year bund Futures contract and Markit has an index
called the iBoxx that reports cash bond-market transactions for the euro.
Markit is many things in Europe: a data vendor, a market analysis provider,
and, through a host of indices that calculate within seconds, a market reporter
of up-to-the-minute market information. The information materializes quickly,
but it is reliable so any trade decision can be instituted with reliability.
The key for EURO/USD in European trade is once German yields are
up, the majority of European nations normally follow. At times the peripheral
nations can drag down EUR/USD prices such as the Greek crisis, Ireland crisis, Italy, Portugal, and Spain termed the Pigs in market parlance. Peripherals
are other European nations.
Euro/British Pound and Yield Curve

Euro/British pound satisﬁes the same scenario as Australian dollar/New
Zealand dollar. As euro/U.S. dollar and British pound/U.S. dollar seek their
yield from U.S. bonds and Bills in U.S. trading, euro/British pound as the
U.S. dollar pair follows U.S. Bond prices.
Euro/British pound and Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar are the
safe trades in U.S. trading as they like the safety backing of U.S. Bonds. In
European trading, the opposite scenario holds.
Euro/British pound loves yields while euro/U.S. dollar likes bund yields
and British pound/U.S. dollar likes the safety of the bond price. This says that

Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

185

U.S. dollars seek yields in Europe through euro/British pound. Yet euro/British
pound is the ﬁnance mechanism for trade and other operations from the
United States to Europe and the United Kingdom to Europe. It is a pair of vital
importance and monitored continuously by the United Kingdom and Europe.
Swiss Franc Yield Curve

Between the SIX Swiss Exchange and Eurex, the Swiss offer up-to-the-minute
comparisons of not only their own yield curve as their bonds trade but an
interactive assortment of yields can be monitored to compare Swiss franc
bonds against other nations’ bonds.
Eurex trades derivatives and option contracts on bonds and various
investment instruments while SIX Swiss Exchange trades Swiss Sovereign
bonds through the Swiss Domestic Bond Index, termed the SBI. Any bond
in the SBI can be compared to 26 nations bonds so yield curves can be viewed
on a chart. This can be viewed from the interactive yield-curve tool directly on
the SIX Swiss Exchange web site. It is useful and reliable.
Because the Swiss so heavily monitor their economy and calculate every
transaction as it occurs, a trading decision based on yield curve comparisons
is very reliable. For example, Swiss franc yield curves can be compared to
U.S. dollar curves, euro to U.S. dollar, or euro to Swiss franc. Any combination of the 26 nations can be viewed within seconds. This interactive device
serves well for European trading but is employable in any market.
The Swiss offer ﬁxed SNB Bills formally known as Debt Register Claims
that are tradable money market instruments. SNB Bills are issued at a discount in denominations of 28, 84, 168, and 336 days. Swiss Government
Confederate Bonds are offered in maturities of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
20, and 30 years.
To further measure Swiss Yield Curves, Scoach Schweiz introduced
a Yield Enhancement Index developed by Derivative Partners Research in
February 2009. Scoach Schweiz is an exchange that trades cash and forward
transactions in securities traded on the SIX Swiss Exchange.
The index comprises four products that offer coupons or discounts:
Discount Certiﬁcates, Barrier Discount Certiﬁcates, Reverse Convertibles,
and Barrier Reverse Convertibles. All are equal weighted with clean prices as
are the vast majority of Swiss ﬁnancial instruments. The index is calculated
once daily by Derivative Partners, but plans to calculate the index every three
minutes will materialize in the future.
Index calculations are derived from market mid prices that include the mean
of the best bid and ask price. The index is benchmarked against a synthetic index

186

Inside the Currency Market

that comprises 60 percent of SMI equities and a bond component that comprises
40 percent of the Total Return Index of all Swiss bonds (Scoach). The formula is:
M

It

It 1

It 1

⎡ ⎛ Pi,s

∑ ⎢ ⎜⎝ P
i 1

⎣⎢

i,t 1

i,t
i,t 1

Ci
Ci

⎤
⎞
1⎟ / M ⎥
⎠
⎦⎥

where

It  Current Index level,
It1  Closing value of index on previous day,
Pi,s  Last mid price of security I at times,
Pi,t1  Last mid price of security I on previous day,
i,t  Current fraction of an interest period since the last coupon for
security i fell due prior to inclusion in the index (calculated
30/360),
i,t1  Current fraction of an interest period on the previous day
since the last coupon for security I fell due prior to inclusion
in the index,
Ci  Coupon of security I per annum in percent,
s  current time on day t, and
m  number of securities in the index.

The Swiss offer three variations of the SBI: SBI Domestic T with one- to
three-year maturities, SBI Government with three- to seven-year maturities,
and Domestic Government with 7-to 15-year maturities. Swiss yield curves are
factored based on accrued interest with yield variations based on each index.
The yield curve is factored as yield-to-worst-case scenario which is a Value as
Risk calculation and duration is factored based on a worst-case scenario.
Swiss Yield Curve

Yield  g  (cc  cp)/L
g  annual coupon in percent,
cp  clean price,
c  redemption value at maturity date or earliest redemption in
percent, and
L  life to maturity/earliest redemption in years  d/y.
Accrued interest is factored as coupon amount  (N/360). Swiss bonds
are factored the same as the German 30/360 day-count convention, where 30
equates to number of interest-bearing days to 360 days per year. The formula is:
N  (D2  D1)  30  (M2  M1)  360  (Y2  Y1)

Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

187

where
N  Start date,
D1, M1, Y1  date from which accrued interest is calculated (Exclusive),
D2, M2, Y2  date accrued interest is calculated (Inclusive), and
D3, M3, Y3 factored as n  1  date of next interest payment.
Between D1 and D2, factor number of interest-bearing days to determine
proportion of next coupon equal to accrued interest.
where
day count methods  A  accrued interest amount,
F  annual coupon frequency,
N  number of interest bearing days,
Swiss bond interest payments  P  coupon/F, and
P  coupon amount  (N/360).
U.S. Dollar/Swiss Franc

During New York trading hours, U.S. dollar/Swiss franc loves U.S. bond prices,
Swiss franc/U.S. dollar loves bond yields. The opposite holds for Swiss trading.
Swiss franc/U.S. dollar is the confederate bond follower, U.S. dollar/Swiss franc
the yield seeker. It is important to remember that the Swiss Central Bank much
prefer the Swiss franc/U.S. dollar conﬁguration. This principle is just like the
U.S. dollar/Japanese yen example. The Swiss would much prefer to earn Swiss
francs against the U.S. dollar. U.S. dollar/Swiss franc almost defeats the purpose
for the Swiss due to their enormous trade with the United States.
U.S. Yield Curve

The Ofﬁce of Debt Management offers T-Bills with maturities of one, three,
and six months and one year. Treasury Notes are offered in maturities of 2, 3,
5, 7, and 10 years. Treasury Bonds are offered with maturities of 20 and 30
years. The 30-year bond was reissued in 2006 (Treasury Department).
The following information was derived from Treasury Direct: Four-week bills
are issued every week, auctions occur on Tuesdays. Thirteen- and 26-week
bills are issued weekly, and auctions occur on Mondays. Fifty-two-week bills
are issued every four weeks, and auctions occur on Tuesdays. Two-year
notes are auctioned somewhere in the latter part of the month. Three-year notes
are issued on the ﬁfteenth of each month, with auctions around the middle
of the month. Five-year-note auctions occur somewhere in the middle of the
month. Seven-year notes are announced in the second half of the month, and

188

Inside the Currency Market

auctions occur in the middle of the month. Ten-year notes are announced in
the ﬁrst part of February, May, August, and November, and auctions occur
in the second week of that month. Thirty-year bonds are announced, issued,
and auctioned with the 10-year note.
The U.S. Treasury offers Treasury Inﬂation Protected Securities (TIPS)
with maturities of 5, 10, and 30 years. Inﬂation protected ties these securities
to the U.S. CPI. Five-year auctions occur the last week of April, 10-year TIPS
are auctioned in the second weeks of January and July, and 30-year TIPS are
auctioned in the last week of February.
The U.S. factors yield curves by two methods, the discount yield and
the investment yield. The discount yield is employed to factor three- and
six-month T-Bills and calculates as:
(FV  PP)/FV)  (360/M)
where

FV  Face Value,
PP  Purchase Price, and
M  Maturity.
For three-month T-Bills, use 91 and use 182 for six month.
360  Bank calculation to determine interest rates.
The Investment yield relates the return to the purchase price of notes and
bonds. To factor:
R  (FV  PP)/M)/(FV  PP)/2
where

R  Coupon Rate,
FV  Face Value,
PP  Purchase Price, and
M  Years to maturity.

Dollar Pairs and Yield Curves

The following pairs are cross pairs that are considered U.S. dollar pairs due to
their movements in terms of U.S. bond prices and yields. U.S. dollar/South
African rand is considered a dollar pair because it follows U.S. bond prices in
U.S. markets, but the U.S. dollar side of the equation follows yields of South
African bonds when trading in South Africa. The time difference is six hours
ahead when compared to New York Eastern Standard Time.

Government Bonds, Yields, Yield Curves, and Currency Prices

189

The Johannesburg Stock Exchange opens for trading in Bond Futures,
currencies and other stocks and derivatives at 3:00 a.m. EST and closes at
11:00 a.m. EST, so part of a New York morning will have duality of trading between both markets. Yet U.S. dollar/South African rand should and
normally does hold precedence in U.S. markets. This pair has large swing
tendencies that derive from the South African side for the U.S. dollar more so
than South African rand in U.S. trading. Look for the London gold ﬁx before
the Johannesburg close to swing this pair.
British pound/New Zealand dollar, euro/Australian dollar, British
pound/Australian dollar, and euro/New Zealand dollar are dollar pairs, but
the tendencies for all pairs are very volatile. Remember that neither pairs are
among the list of large interest in the central bank scheme of interested pairs.
The euro/New Zealand dollar was once an interested pair when euro-Kiwi
bonds were issued by New Zealand. Consider these pairs as a sort of outlier
arrangement. Sometimes they follow Treasury Bonds or yields, other times
they follow the U.S. dollar underlying pair. At times, movements may confound a trader. Overall they revert to trend, so wild swings may be market
gifts. So while these pairs are dollar pairs, volatility can be high and caution
is advised in any market.

Reserve Requirements and Bonds

Why the opposite scenario holds for currency pairs can be related to funding
requirements. Suppose a government passes a budget. Outside of tax revenues,
budgets are ﬁnanced by the sale of bonds. Because the budget is a known ﬁgure,
bonds will be sold to equal the number. This ties the particular nation’s currency into the budget ﬁgure. The currency now rises and falls based on revenue
earned or lost from bond sales and the direction it takes in the marketplace. Past
issuance means nothing unless large redemptions occur in short time frames.
A home currency can’t always be tied to yield because yield can’t be a
guarantee since it is costly and risky due to the many unknown market and
economic variables. Now suppose this nation can match its currency pair with
another nation’s currency. Suppose the second nation had a rising economy
and its bond yields or bond prices were rising. This allows revenue to be earned
by the ﬁrst nation by rising yields or bond prices. It is the method to offset its
own budget requirements. Stated differently, suppose Australia passes a budget
and sells its bonds. They will also know in advance what their currency price
will be at the start and end of the budget year, at least in terms of the target.
What if the price was, say, 9100 at the beginning and they planned for 9200 at

190

Inside the Currency Market

the end of the year. Now Australia ties its currency to U.S. dollar bond yields.
U.S. dollar bond yields rise and Australian dollar/U.S. dollar trades to, say,
9500 and completes the year at 9700 Australian dollar/U.S. dollar. Australia
offsets its budget and bond sales from 9200 to 9700. It is a basic example, but
one that holds. Nations share the economic services of each other and are tied
together by currency-pair arrangements.
The same scenario holds for the United States, Great Britain, New Zealand,
Japan, Switzerland, euro Land, and Canada. One side of a currency pair is a yield
seeker while the other side is a bond follower. It is an economic relationship, a
relationship that has held since currency pairs became two-sided equations.
Reserve requirements form the basis of the bond sales. It is the target, the
rate that must be managed throughout the year, as bond sales are conducted
and revenue is earned from yields or bonds and economic conditions. All dictate the imperatives of the bond sales in terms of issuance, prices, and maturities. The quarter-to-quarter LIBOR and in-nation rates help to manage the
yearly target on a quarterly basis.
As currency pairs became connected, it created a dependency—an interdependency—that linked the world together. As new tax rules, cross pairs,
and issues of open borders for trade were created, the interdependency aspect
became tighter. Add the ability to communicate nation to nation through
technology, and we found the world not to be the wide-open spaces we once
thought. Suddenly we found New Zealand not to be such a distant and
unknown land. Further add the ability to ﬁnd advantage in each nation’s
economies, and the interdependency link became tighter.
Technology allowed us to know and understand New Zealand’s economic
structure in terms of merchandise trade, ﬁnancing mechanisms, central
bank operations, debt management, and stock and bond markets. The most
important aspect was to allow the world to evaluate the second part of the
currency-pair trade in an instant. It was found that smaller economies were
dependent on larger economies and all were dependent on the United States,
so their currencies aligned with the U.S. dollar with the hope of appreciation
to offset their own nation’s economic budgets. Up-to-the-second information
allowed a certainty of a trade, a conﬁdence feature.
Yet the United States offers nations the opportunity to sell their goods,
ﬁnance operations, and enjoy currency appreciation. This scenario describes
the vast majority of nations and their currencies, not just the major currencies addressed in this text. To align with the United States presupposes that
the U.S. economy continues its historic winning ways in stable political and
economic growth. If the U.S. dollar falls, all will fall due to the many varied
investments that nations maintain in the United States.
