
Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

171

nounced preference for industry leaders and a corresponding lack
of interest most of the time in the ordinary company of secondary
importance. This has meant that the latter group have usually sold
at much lower prices in relation to earnings and assets than have
the former. It has meant further that in many instances the price
has fallen so low as to establish the issue in the bargain class.
When investors rejected the stocks of secondary companies,
even though these sold at relatively low prices, they were expressing a belief or fear that such companies faced a dismal future. In
fact, at least subconsciously, they calculated that any price was too
high for them because they were heading for extinction—just as in
1929 the companion theory for the “blue chips” was that no price
was too high for them because their future possibilities were limitless. Both of these views were exaggerations and were productive
of serious investment errors. Actually, the typical middle-sized
listed company is a large one when compared with the average privately owned business. There is no sound reason why such companies should not continue indefinitely in operation, undergoing the
vicissitudes characteristic of our economy but earning on the
whole a fair return on their invested capital.
This brief review indicates that the stock market’s attitude
toward secondary companies tends to be unrealistic and consequently to create in normal times innumerable instances of major
undervaluation. As it happens, the World War II period and the
postwar boom were more beneficial to the smaller concerns than to
the larger ones, because then the normal competition for sales was
suspended and the former could expand sales and profit margins
more spectacularly. Thus by 1946 the market’s pattern had completely reversed itself from that before the war. Whereas the leading stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average had advanced only
40% from the end of 1938 to the 1946 high, Standard & Poor’s index
of low-priced stocks had shot up no less than 280% in the same
period. Speculators and many self-styled investors—with the
proverbial short memories of people in the stock market—were
eager to buy both old and new issues of unimportant companies at
inflated levels. Thus the pendulum had swung clear to the opposite extreme. The very class of secondary issues that had formerly
supplied by far the largest proportion of bargain opportunities was
now presenting the greatest number of examples of overenthusi-

172

The Intelligent Investor

asm and overvaluation. In a different way this phenomenon was
repeated in 1961 and 1968—the emphasis now being placed on
new offerings of the shares of small companies of less than secondary character, and on nearly all companies in certain favored fields
such as “electronics,” “computers,” “franchise” concerns, and others.*
As was to be expected the ensuing market declines fell most
heavily on these overvaluations. In some cases the pendulum
swing may have gone as far as definite undervaluation.
If most secondary issues tend normally to be undervalued, what
reason has the investor to believe that he can profit from such a situation? For if it persists indefinitely, will he not always be in the
same market position as when he bought the issue? The answer
here is somewhat complicated. Substantial profits from the purchase of secondary companies at bargain prices arise in a variety of
ways. First, the dividend return is relatively high. Second, the reinvested earnings are substantial in relation to the price paid and will
ultimately affect the price. In a five- to seven-year period these
advantages can bulk quite large in a well-selected list. Third, a bull
market is ordinarily most generous to low-priced issues; thus it
tends to raise the typical bargain issue to at least a reasonable level.
Fourth, even during relatively featureless market periods a continuous process of price adjustment goes on, under which secondary
issues that were undervalued may rise at least to the normal level
for their type of security. Fifth, the specific factors that in many

* From 1975 through 1983, small (“secondary”) stocks outperformed large
stocks by an amazing average of 17.6 percentage points per year. The
investing public eagerly embraced small stocks, mutual fund companies
rolled out hundreds of new funds specializing in them, and small stocks
obliged by underperforming large stocks by five percentage points per year
over the next decade. The cycle recurred in 1999, when small stocks beat
big stocks by nearly nine percentage points, inspiring investment bankers to
sell hundreds of hot little high-tech stocks to the public for the first time.
Instead of “electronics,” “computers,” or “franchise” in their names, the new
buzzwords were “.com,” “optical,” “wireless,” and even prefixes like “e-” and
“I-.” Investing buzzwords always turn into buzz saws, tearing apart anyone
who believes in them.

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

173

cases made for a disappointing record of earnings may be corrected by the advent of new conditions, or the adoption of new
policies, or by a change in management.
An important new factor in recent years has been the acquisition
of smaller companies by larger ones, usually as part of a diversification program. In these cases the consideration paid has almost
always been relatively generous, and much in excess of the bargain
levels existing not long before.
When interest rates were much lower than in 1970, the field of
bargain issues extended to bonds and preferred stocks that sold at
large discounts from the amount of their claim. Currently we have
a different situation in which even well-secured issues sell at large
discounts if carrying coupon rates of, say, 41⁄2% or less. Example:
American Telephone & Telegraph 25⁄8s, due 1986, sold as low as 51
in 1970; Deere & Co. 41⁄2s, due 1983, sold as low as 62. These may
well turn out to have been bargain opportunities before very
long—if ruling interest rates should decline substantially. For a
bargain bond issue in the more traditional sense perhaps we shall
have to turn once more to the first-mortgage bonds of railroads
now in financial difficulties, which sell in the 20s or 30s. Such situations are not for the inexpert investor; lacking a real sense of values
in this area, he may burn his fingers. But there is an underlying tendency for market decline in this field to be overdone; consequently
the group as a whole offers an especially rewarding invitation to
careful and courageous analysis. In the decade ending in 1948 the
billion-dollar group of defaulted railroad bonds presented numerous and spectacular opportunities in this area. Such opportunities
have been quite scarce since then; but they seem likely to return in
the 1970s.*

* Defaulted railroad bonds do not offer significant opportunities today. However, as already noted, distressed and defaulted junk bonds, as well as convertible bonds issued by high-tech companies, may offer real value in the
wake of the 2000–2002 market crash. But diversification in this area is
essential—and impractical without at least $100,000 to dedicate to distressed securities alone. Unless you are a millionaire several times over, this
kind of diversification is not an option.

174

The Intelligent Investor

Special Situations, or “Workouts”
Not so long ago this was a field which could almost guarantee
an attractive rate of return to those who knew their way around in
it; and this was true under almost any sort of general market situation. It was not actually forbidden territory to members of the general public. Some who had a flair for this sort of thing could learn
the ropes and become pretty capable practitioners without the
necessity of long academic study or apprenticeship. Others have
been keen enough to recognize the underlying soundness of this
approach and to attach themselves to bright young men who
handled funds devoted chiefly to these “special situations.” But
in recent years, for reasons we shall develop later, the field of “arbitrages and workouts” became riskier and less profitable. It may
be that in years to come conditions in this field will become more
propitious. In any case it is worthwhile outlining the general
nature and origin of these operations, with one or two illustrative
examples.
The typical “special situation” has grown out of the increasing
number of acquisitions of smaller firms by large ones, as the gospel
of diversification of products has been adopted by more and more
managements. It often appears good business for such an enterprise to acquire an existing company in the field it wishes to enter
rather than to start a new venture from scratch. In order to make
such acquisition possible, and to obtain acceptance of the deal by
the required large majority of shareholders of the smaller company,
it is almost always necessary to offer a price considerably above
the current level. Such corporate moves have been producing interesting profit-making opportunities for those who have made a
study of this field, and have good judgment fortified by ample
experience.
A great deal of money was made by shrewd investors not so
many years ago through the purchase of bonds of railroads in
bankruptcy—bonds which they knew would be worth much more
than their cost when the railroads were finally reorganized. After
promulgation of the plans of reorganization a “when issued” market for the new securities appeared. These could almost always be
sold for considerably more than the cost of the old issues which
were to be exchanged therefor. There were risks of nonconsumma-

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

175

tion of the plans or of unexpected delays, but on the whole such
“arbitrage operations” proved highly profitable.
There were similar opportunities growing out of the breakup of
public-utility holding companies pursuant to 1935 legislation.
Nearly all these enterprises proved to be worth considerably more
when changed from holding companies to a group of separate
operating companies.
The underlying factor here is the tendency of the security markets to undervalue issues that are involved in any sort of complicated legal proceedings. An old Wall Street motto has been: “Never
buy into a lawsuit.” This may be sound advice to the speculator
seeking quick action on his holdings. But the adoption of this attitude by the general public is bound to create bargain opportunities
in the securities affected by it, since the prejudice against them
holds their prices down to unduly low levels.*
The exploitation of special situations is a technical branch of
investment which requires a somewhat unusual mentality and
equipment. Probably only a small percentage of our enterprising
investors are likely to engage in it, and this book is not the appropriate medium for expounding its complications.6

Broader Implications of Our Rules for Investment
Investment policy, as it has been developed here, depends in the
first place on a choice by the investor of either the defensive (passive) or aggressive (enterprising) role. The aggressive investor
must have a considerable knowledge of security values—enough,
in fact, to warrant viewing his security operations as equivalent to
a business enterprise. There is no room in this philosophy for a

* A classic recent example is Philip Morris, whose stock lost 23% in two
days after a Florida court authorized jurors to consider punitive damages of
up to $200 billion against the company—which had finally admitted that cigarettes may cause cancer. Within a year, Philip Morris’s stock had doubled—
only to fall back after a later multibillion-dollar judgment in Illinois. Several
other stocks have been virtually destroyed by liability lawsuits, including
Johns Manville, W. R. Grace, and USG Corp. Thus, “never buy into a lawsuit” remains a valid rule for all but the most intrepid investors to live by.

176

The Intelligent Investor

middle ground, or a series of gradations, between the passive and
aggressive status. Many, perhaps most, investors seek to place
themselves in such an intermediate category; in our opinion that is
a compromise that is more likely to produce disappointment than
achievement.
As an investor you cannot soundly become “half a businessman,” expecting thereby to achieve half the normal rate of business
profits on your funds.
It follows from this reasoning that the majority of security owners should elect the defensive classification. They do not have the
time, or the determination, or the mental equipment to embark
upon investing as a quasi-business. They should therefore be satisfied with the excellent return now obtainable from a defensive
portfolio (and with even less), and they should stoutly resist the
recurrent temptation to increase this return by deviating into other
paths.
The enterprising investor may properly embark upon any security operation for which his training and judgment are adequate
and which appears sufficiently promising when measured by established business standards.
In our recommendations and caveats for this group of investors
we have attempted to apply such business standards. In those for
the defensive investor we have been guided largely by the three
requirements of underlying safety, simplicity of choice, and promise of satisfactory results, in terms of psychology as well as arithmetic. The use of these criteria has led us to exclude from the field
of recommended investment a number of security classes that are
normally regarded as suitable for various kinds of investors. These
prohibitions were listed in our first chapter on p. 30.
Let us consider a little more fully than before what is implied in
these exclusions. We have advised against the purchase at “full
prices” of three important categories of securities: (1) foreign
bonds, (2) ordinary preferred stocks, and (3) secondary common
stocks, including, of course, original offerings of such issues. By
“full prices” we mean prices close to par for bonds or preferred
stocks, and prices that represent about the fair business value of
the enterprise in the case of common stocks. The greater number
of defensive investors are to avoid these categories regardless of
price; the enterprising investor is to buy them only when obtain-

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

177

able at bargain prices—which we define as prices not more than
two-thirds of the appraisal value of the securities.
What would happen if all investors were guided by our advice
in these matters? That question was considered in regard to foreign bonds, on p. 138, and we have nothing to add at this point.
Investment-grade preferred stocks would be bought solely by corporations, such as insurance companies, which would benefit from
the special income-tax status of stock issues owned by them.
The most troublesome consequence of our policy of exclusion is
in the field of secondary common stocks. If the majority of
investors, being in the defensive class, are not to buy them at all,
the field of possible buyers becomes seriously restricted. Furthermore, if aggressive investors are to buy them only at bargain levels,
then these issues would be doomed to sell for less than their fair
value, except to the extent that they were purchased unintelligently.
This may sound severe and even vaguely unethical. Yet in truth
we are merely recognizing what has actually happened in this area
for the greater part of the past 40 years. Secondary issues, for the
most part, do fluctuate about a central level which is well below
their fair value. They reach and even surpass that value at times;
but this occurs in the upper reaches of bull markets, when the lessons of practical experience would argue against the soundness of
paying the prevailing prices for common stocks.
Thus we are suggesting only that the aggressive investor recognize the facts of life as it is lived by secondary issues and that they
accept the central market levels that are normal for that class as
their guide in fixing their own levels for purchase.
There is a paradox here, nevertheless. The average well-selected
secondary company may be fully as promising as the average
industrial leader. What the smaller concern lacks in inherent stability it may readily make up in superior possibilities of growth. Consequently it may appear illogical to many readers to term
“unintelligent” the purchase of such secondary issues at their full
“enterprise value.” We think that the strongest logic is that of experience. Financial history says clearly that the investor may expect
satisfactory results, on the average, from secondary common
stocks only if he buys them for less than their value to a private
owner, that is, on a bargain basis.

178

The Intelligent Investor

The last sentence indicates that this principle relates to the ordinary outside investor. Anyone who can control a secondary company, or who is part of a cohesive group with such control, is fully
justified in buying the shares on the same basis as if he were investing in a “close corporation” or other private business. The distinction between the position, and consequent investment policy, of
insiders and of outsiders becomes more important as the enterprise
itself becomes less important. It is a basic characteristic of a primary
or leading company that a single detached share is ordinarily
worth as much as a share in a controlling block. In secondary companies the average market value of a detached share is substantially
less than its worth to a controlling owner. Because of this fact, the
matter of shareholder-management relations and of those between
inside and outside shareholders tends to be much more important
and controversial in the case of secondary than in that of primary
companies.
At the end of Chapter 5 we commented on the difficulty of making any hard and fast distinction between primary and secondary
companies. The many common stocks in the boundary area may
properly exhibit an intermediate price behavior. It would not be
illogical for an investor to buy such an issue at a small discount
from its indicated or appraisal value, on the theory that it is only a
small distance away from a primary classification and that it may
acquire such a rating unqualifiedly in the not too distant future.
Thus the distinction between primary and secondary issues
need not be made too precise; for, if it were, then a small difference
in quality must produce a large differential in justified purchase
price. In saying this we are admitting a middle ground in the classification of common stocks, although we counseled against such a
middle ground in the classification of investors. Our reason for this
apparent inconsistency is as follows: No great harm comes from
some uncertainty of viewpoint regarding a single security, because
such cases are exceptional and not a great deal is at stake in the
matter. But the investor’s choice as between the defensive or the
aggressive status is of major consequence to him, and he should
not allow himself to be confused or compromised in this basic decision.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 7

It requires a great deal of boldness and a great deal of caution
to make a great fortune; and when you have got it, it requires
ten times as much wit to keep it.
—Nathan Mayer Rothschild

TI M I NG I S NOTH I NG
In an ideal world, the intelligent investor would hold stocks only when
they are cheap and sell them when they become overpriced, then
duck into the bunker of bonds and cash until stocks again become
cheap enough to buy. From 1966 through late 2001, one study
claimed, $1 held continuously in stocks would have grown to $11.71.
But if you had gotten out of stocks right before the five worst days of
each year, your original $1 would have grown to $987.12.1
Like most magical market ideas, this one is based on sleight of
hand. How, exactly, would you (or anyone) figure out which days will
be the worst days—before they arrive? On January 7, 1973, the New
York Times featured an interview with one of the nation’s top financial
forecasters, who urged investors to buy stocks without hesitation: “It’s
very rare that you can be as unqualifiedly bullish as you can now.” That
forecaster was named Alan Greenspan, and it’s very rare that anyone

1

“The Truth About Timing,” Barron’s, November 5, 2001, p. 20. The headline
of this article is a useful reminder of an enduring principle for the intelligent investor. Whenever you see the word “truth” in an article about investing, brace
yourself; many of the quotes that follow are likely to be lies. (For one thing, an
investor who bought stocks in 1966 and held them through late 2001 would
have ended up with at least $40, not $11.71; the study cited in Barron’s appears to have ignored the reinvestment of dividends.)
179

180

Commentary on Chapter 7

has ever been so unqualifiedly wrong as the future Federal Reserve
chairman was that day: 1973 and 1974 turned out to be the worst
years for economic growth and the stock market since the Great
Depression.2
Can professionals time the market any better than Alan Greenspan? “I see no reason not to think the majority of the decline is
behind us,” declared Kate Leary Lee, president of the market-timing
firm of R. M. Leary & Co., on December 3, 2001. “This is when you
want to be in the market,” she added, predicting that stocks “look
good” for the first quarter of 2002.3 Over the next three months,
stocks earned a measly 0.28% return, underperforming cash by 1.5
percentage points.
Leary is not alone. A study by two finance professors at Duke University found that if you had followed the recommendations of the best 10%
of all market-timing newsletters, you would have earned a 12.6% annualized return from 1991 through 1995. But if you had ignored them and
kept your money in a stock index fund, you would have earned 16.4%.4
As the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard noted, life can only
be understood backwards—but it must be lived forwards. Looking
back, you can always see exactly when you should have bought and
sold your stocks. But don’t let that fool you into thinking you can see,
in real time, just when to get in and out. In the financial markets, hindsight is forever 20/20, but foresight is legally blind. And thus, for most
investors, market timing is a practical and emotional impossibility.5
