stop-loss level than other mere mortals.
To apply the risk-reward ratio in a conservative and prudent manner, turn it
upside down. Instead of calculating it with your best-case expected gain, use
a realistic worst-case estimate of the gain. Your worst-case gain should be
higher than your worst-case loss. For example, say you’re prepared to lose $2
for the chance to make $4. Your risk-reward ratio is 4:2, or 2:1. If you practice
this exercise on every trade, the risk-reward ratio becomes a filter that winnows out trades that may be high probability but with excessive risk.
Calculating the risk-reward ratio and using it to set a stop has its own dangers. In
the Blue Widget case above, you’re willing to lose 50 percent of your capital. If you
lose, you can take only a few such trades before you run out of money. Moreover,
you can start out with a fixed risk-reward money stop but then change it to an
adjustable stop as you modify your idea of how much the trade could potentially
gain. Say the price falls from $5, your original entry, to $3.50. But the average
range is widening and still telling you the potential high price is $15. If you buy
more at $3.50 and the $15 is indeed reached, your gain is even bigger in percentage terms. Using the risk-reward ratio this way is how traders trick themselves
into adding to losing positions, the blackest of cardinal sins in trading.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 5: Managing the Trade
Analyzing risk-reward ratios is a complex task requiring knowledge of statistics and probability — a sophisticated task and beyond the scope of this
chapter. But just remember that in technical trading, the general rule is to
take small losses and aim for bigger gains, not to take big losses and aim for
gigantic gains.

Maximum adverse excursion
John Sweeney developed the concept of maximum adverse excursion, which is
the statistically determined worst-case loss that may occur during the course
of your trade. Using this method, you calculate the biggest change in the highlow range over a fixed period (say 30 days) that’s equivalent to your usual
holding period. Actually, you need to calculate the maximum range from the
entry levels you would’ve used. Because you know your entry rules, you can
backtest to find the maximum range that was prevalent at each entry.
For example, if the security never changes from high to low by more than
$10 over the period, you could set your stop at $11. You should see a regular pattern between the maximum adverse excursion and your winning and
losing trades over time. In fact, you can use the inverse of the adverse excursion, the maximum favorable excursion, to select trades in the first place. See
Chapter 14 on volatility.

Trailing stops
Trailing stops use a dynamic process that follows the price: You raise the
stop as the trade makes profits. A trailing stop is set on a money basis — you
maintain the loss you can tolerate at a constant dollar amount or percentage
basis. You could, for example, say that you want to keep 20 percent of each
day’s gain, so every day you’d raise the stop day to include 80 percent of
the day’s gain. This method means calling the broker or reentering the stop
electronically every day. The important point is to keep the stop updated to
protect gains and guard against losses at the same time.
Trailing stops are highly protective, but you risk being stopped out on an arbitrary price event that isn’t really related to the overall price trend. Some traders object to the trailing stop on the grounds that the normal average daily
trading range almost certainly encompasses the trailing stop level on many
occasions. A random event can cause a small spike, for example.

Indicator-based stops
Indicator-based stops depend on the price action and the indicators you use
to capture it. Indicator stops can be either fixed or self-adjusting. I mention
them at various places throughout the book; here are some important ones:
✓ Last-three-days rule: The most basic of stop-loss rules is to exit the
position if the price surpasses the lowest low (or highest high if you’re
going short) of the preceding three days. This idea sounds a little corny.
However, it jibes well with another piece of trading lore that says a trade

www.pdfdummies.com

83

84

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
should turn profitable right away if you’ve done the analysis right and
you’re actually buying right after a low or selling right after a peak. If
the price first rises for a day or two but can’t hold on to the gain, the up
move that you think you’ve identified is probably a false one. Consider
the crowd dynamics (see Chapter 2) and how they play out on the price
bar (covered in Chapter 6). You need a series of higher highs and higher
lows to name an uptrend. If you get a lower low in the first three days,
the probability is good that the trade is going south.
✓ Pattern stops: Pattern stops relate directly to market sentiment and are
very handy. Most are of the fixed variety. I list a few below:
• The break of a support or resistance line is a powerful stop level,
chiefly because so many other traders are drawing the same lines.
• The last notable high or low (the historic level; see Chapter 4) or
the high or low of an important time period, like a year, are noteworthy.
• You can infer stops from other pattern indicators, such as the
center confirmation point of the W in a double bottom or the M
in a double top (see Chapter 9). When the confirmation point is
surpassed, the probability is high that the move continues in the
expected direction. If you’re positioned the wrong way when the
pattern appears, the pattern confirmation is also your stop level.
✓ Moving-average stop: You can also use a separate indicator that isn’t
part of your buy/sell repertoire to set a stop, such as a moving average
(see Chapter 12). You may not use a moving average because of its lagging nature, but many traders use a breakout beyond the 10-day moving
average as a warning to reduce a position, and the 20-day moving average as a stop. You may find it interesting how often a retracement will
penetrate a 10-day moving average but halt just short of crossing the
20-day moving average. A moving-average stop is clearly of the selfadjusting variety.
Volatility stops are the most complex of the indicator-based, self-adjusting
stops to figure out and to apply, but they’re also the most in tune with market
action. Many variations are available. Here are three of particular interest:
✓ Parabolic stop-and-reverse model: Invented by Welles Wilder, the parabolic concept is easy to illustrate and hard to describe. The principle
is to create an indicator that rises by a factor of the average true range
(see Chapter 7) as new highs are being recorded, so that the indicator
accelerates as ever-higher highs are met and decelerates as less-high
highs come in. In an uptrend, the indicator is plotted just below the
price line. It diverges from the price line in a hot rally, and converges to
the price line as the rally loses speed. See Figure 5-1. The parabolic stop
is both self-adjusting and trailing — a rare combination.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 5: Managing the Trade

SELL HERE
DOTS REPRESENT STOPLOSS LEVEL TO STAY IN
TRADE AS LONG AS PRICE
IS RISING

BUY HERE

Figure 5-1:
Parabolic
stop.

UP MOVE FALTERS
AND PRICE
CONVERGES TO
STOP-LOSS DOT

✓ Average true-range stop: This stop is set just beyond the maximum
normal range limits. The average true-range channel is described in
Chapter 14. You take the average daily high-low range of the price bars,
adjusted for gaps, and expand it by adding on a constant, like 25 percent
of the range. Say your average daily trading range is $3. If the price goes
more than 25 percent beyond the $3 high-low range, you consider it an
extreme price and the signal to exit. The average true-range stop has the
virtue of being self-adjusting, but it also has the drawback of setting a
stop that has nothing to do with your entry.
✓ Chandelier exit: This stop solves the entry-level issue. Invented by
Chuck LeBeau, the chandelier exit sets the stop at a level below the
highest high or the highest close since your entry. You set the level as a
function of the average true range. The logic is that you’re willing to lose
only one range worth (or two or three) from the best price that occurred
since you put on the trade. Like the parabolic stop, the chandelier is
both self-adjusting and trailing.
Indicator stops usually entail taking a loss greater than the 2 percent benchmark rule (see “The 2 percent stop rule” section on this topic). This factor
hands you a hard decision. If you take the 2 percent rule, you have to live with
the remorse of exiting trades only to see the price move your way later on, the
dreaded whipsaw. If you take an indicator rule that entails losses greater than
2 percent of your capital, but have a series of losing trades early in your trading career, you could lose a lot of money before you figure out how to adapt
and apply indicators.

www.pdfdummies.com

85

86

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis
Time stops
Time stops acknowledge that money tied up in a trade that’s going nowhere
can be put to better use in a different trade. Say you’re holding a position that
starts going sideways. It is reasonable to exit the trade and find a different
security that is moving. Remember, the purpose of trading is to make money.

Clock and calendar stops
Clock and calendar stops pertain to a price event happening (or not happening) considering the time of day, week, month, or year. Clock-based rules
abound. Some technical traders advise against trading during the first hour in
the U.S. stock market, because buy- or sell-on-open orders are being executed
then (see Chapter 6). Others say that more gain can be had from the first
hour than any other hour of the trading day if you can figure out which way
the crowd is trading. As I describe in Chapter 16, one setup technique is to
buy or sell the direction of an opening gap — and be done in an hour.
In foreign exchange, you often see prices retrace at the end of the European
trading day — about 11 a.m. in New York — as traders there close positions.
Not only is this a swell entry place when you’re sure that you know the trend,
but it’s also a benchmark for the U.S. trading day. If the price fails to close
higher or lower than the European close, it means that American traders are
having second thoughts about the trend.

Adjusting Positions
Stops are the first line of defense against indicator failures and market catastrophes. But to exit a position is an extreme response when your uncertainty
isn’t high. A stop is a blunt instrument when more delicacy may be called for.
(For more on stops, see the earlier section, “Using the First Line of Defense:
Stop-Loss Orders.”)
Most indicators are black and white. You should either buy or sell. They lack
nuance. Similarly, stops are a one-way proposition. But often when you’re
using multiple indicators, you don’t get a clear-cut trading decision, or as the
trade progresses, one of your confirming indicators weakens and is no longer
offering the comfort of full confirmation. Perhaps a pattern spells doom to
your position. You don’t use patterns and perhaps you don’t like patterns,
but it’s a nagging worry.
Another reason to adjust positions gradually instead of betting the ranch
on day one is to follow the confirmation principle (see Chapter 16). You can
start a new position by placing the first trade for one-quarter or one-third the

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 5: Managing the Trade
amount of money you plan to place in that specific security and add to it as
confirming indicators come in. Likewise, you can reduce the size of your position as warnings arrive from indicators (such as momentum indicators like
the stochastic oscillator; see Chapter 13).
Position sizing can add or subtract from your bottom line by as much or more
than your choice of securities or indicators. When you get an itch to change
position size, consider whether it’s because your appetite has changed, or
variance has changed. Appetite may change because you just got a big bonus
and are putting it all into your trading account. Now you’re willing to take a
bigger loss per trade. Or perhaps one of your securities makes a giant breakout, and the trend gathers steam in a straight line for an abnormally long
period of time (with low volatility). Risk is (temporarily) lower.
In the fixed fractional allocation system I describe, you allocate capital
among securities according to potential loss as a percentage of total capital.
Therefore, scaling in or scaling out of each security by simply changing the
amount of loss you are willing to take on any single security is very easy.
Willingness to increase the loss you may take automatically (and conveniently) changes the number of shares or contracts you should be holding.
To increase the size of a position is called scaling in and to reduce the amount
you have at risk is scaling out. In the sections that follow, I go into more detail
on these terms and concepts.

Reducing positions
The safest way to reduce the risk of loss is to reduce exposure to it — start
scaling out. If you’ve bought on an indicator-based signal but you think you
know of a fundamental reason why it’s not going to be a good trade, the two
conflicting ideas may cancel each other out. Similarly, you may have a nicely
trending security and get a surprise stop hit that you don’t trust, because
you think you can identify the cause as an anomaly. Instead of being paralyzed or not trading at all, you have a few options:
✓ Delay following the indicator signal until the nontechnical event risk
is past. Some traders advise reducing (or exiting) positions ahead of
known event risks, such as central bank meetings, earnings announcements, and national elections.
✓ Stay in the trade, but reduce the amount of money you allocate to it (and
perhaps tighten the stop). You can also hedge the risk in the options
market or by taking the opposite position in a correlated security, but
on the whole, scaling out is the most direct and efficient method.

www.pdfdummies.com

87

88

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis

Adding to positions
You can add to a position, or scale in, when your existing position is highly
profitable. Statisticians debate whether you should add to winning positions
by using unrealized profits from the existing trade, called pyramiding. To pyramid is to use hypothetical profits to enlarge your position. Say you started
with $1,000 and the trade has now generated another $1,000 in paper profits.
Why not borrow against that extra $1,000 to buy some more of this high-performing security? The answer is that if a catastrophe strikes and the trade
goes against you, your risk of loss can become huge — more than your original stake if your stop fails (or, heaven forbid, you didn’t place one). Be aware
that if you engage in pyramiding, you’re taking a higher risk than if you don’t.
Pyramiding without proper stops has probably caused more traders to go
broke than any other cause.
In addition to the fixed fractional rule I describe in an earlier section called
“Common questions and concerns” in this chapter, other techniques for scaling in and out include:
✓ If you’re using a 2 percent stop rule (see section on this topic), when the
existing position has gained a profit that is greater than the 2 percent of
starting capital you would have lost if the stop had been triggered, you
add the amount of the surplus profit to the position with its own 2 percent stop. The problem, of course, is that it’s awkward to trade in odd
lots, and odd lots don’t even exist in futures.
✓ If you’re using margin (where the trader puts down only a fraction of the
value of the contract being traded), one rule of thumb is to add to the
position when the existing trade has earned the cost of the minimum initial margin of a second position. If you’re trading on a 50 percent margin,
you add to the position when the existing position has racked up enough
paper gain to fund the new position.
This rule is especially valuable in the futures market, in which the
trader puts down only a small fraction of the value of the contract being
traded. For example, if the initial margin required by the exchange and
your broker is $2,500, you don’t add a second contract to your position
until the first contract has a profit of $2,500. By then, you figure that the
move is well in place. But remember, you have to have one stop-loss
order on the first contract and a different one on the second trade.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 5: Managing the Trade

Applying stops to adjusted positions
If you’re using an indicator stop and it signals that the price rise is over,
doesn’t that mean you want to exit all positions at the same level as soon as
possible? The answer from statisticians is “maybe.” It depends on whether
you’re thinking in chart terms or money-management terms. If you’re using a
breakout concept to set your stop, for example, the price crossing a support
line (see Chapter 10) is a sell signal that would apply equally to all positions.
If you’re using a 2 percent or other rule (like the chandelier exit I mention in
this chapter) that is calculated specifically with reference to your starting
point, you exit each trade according to the rule. This method has benefits
and drawbacks. The benefit is that you’re still in the trade if the stop was
triggered for one trade but the price retracement is only a minor, temporary
one. You still have other positions left and if the price makes a big jump your
way, you’re correctly positioned to take advantage of it. The drawback is that
a well-set stop may really identify a change in overall price behavior. If it’s a
catastrophic price move, you may not get good execution of your stops and
may end up losing more than the amount you planned.

www.pdfdummies.com

89

90

Part II: Preparing Your Mind for Technical Analysis

www.pdfdummies.com

Part III

Observing Market
Behavior

www.pdfdummies.com

T

In this part . . .

he key to understanding technical analysis is to
understand the price bar. Everything in technical
analysis, even the most sophisticated indicator, arises out
of the price bar and its components. When you look
closely at the price bar and at small series of price bars,
you can understand what the trading crowd really thinks
of the security.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 6

Reading Basic Bars: Showing
How Security Prices Move
In This Chapter
▶ Seeing information graphically
▶ Interpreting feelings from a dot, a bar, and a line
▶ Identifying trends 101

W

hen you start looking at charts, you may see what looks like a bunch
of unrelated dots. It may take a little practice to see, but inside each
dot on the chart lies a world of information. The “dot” is really a price bar,
which graphically represents all the transactions done in the security, revealing supply and demand at each point.
In this chapter, I define each component of the price bar. I demonstrate how
to transform the numbers on the price bar from abstract dollar amounts into
the market sentiment of the participants in that security, either optimistic
or pessimistic. You know the phrase “Actions speak louder than words”?
Reading price bars is the perfect application of that saying. Traders may say
that they feel optimistic about the price of the security going up, but the
price bar tells you what they really think by showing you what action they
took. Reading price bars is about being a detective examining the hard evidence — and disregarding witness accounts.

Building Basic Bars
The price bar is the basic building block of technical analysis. After you have
a grip on the price bar, almost nothing in technical analysis can confuse you
for long. Honest. Resist the temptation to skim over the bar chart material
to get to the more glamorous-sounding techniques. You can’t grasp the principle of most indicators without first understanding the price bar because
most indicators are nothing more than an arithmetic manipulation of the four
price bar components.

www.pdfdummies.com

94

Part III: Observing Market Behavior
The price bar is also your touchstone for identifying trendedness and critical
changes in trendedness. Prices change from day to day in numerous ways,
but seldom in random or meaningless ways. Every major trend starts with a
change in the price bar on a single day or over only a few days, and the earlier you get in a new trend, the more profit you make. In Chapters 8 and 15, I
describe two other ways of displaying price information, but right now, focus
on getting the components of the standard bar down cold.
I start off here with a brief overview of the price bar and then detail each
piece of it at length in the sections that follow.

Getting in on the action:
The price bar in brief
The price bar describes and defines the trading action in a security for a
given period. Trading action means all the real-money transactions conducted
during the period. The price bar measures actual deals done with cold, hard
cash, not what somebody wished, imagined, or contemplated. For the sake of
simplicity, this chapter refers to a daily price bar because most of the time,
you’re working with daily price information. As I explain later in this chapter,
a price bar can encompass different periods — anything from a minute to a
month. But the scope of the period doesn’t change the price bar dynamics I
describe in this chapter.
Check out the standard price bar in Figure 6-1. Like all bars, it consists of four
components:
✓ Open: The little horizontal line on the left is the opening price.
✓ High: The top of the vertical line defines the high of the day.
✓ Low: The bottom of the vertical line defines the low of the day.
✓ Close: The little horizontal line on the right is the closing price.
This Open-High-Low-Close component set of the price bar is often abbreviated OHLC.
The two little horizontal lines on the price bar are called tick marks. In trading parlance, a tick represents a single trade at a single price, so the tick mark
representing the open or the close refers literally to a single transaction or to
a batch of transactions all at the same price and at the same time. The high
and the low don’t need a tick mark because the end of the bar conveys that
information.
The daily price bar shows the effects of every price factor in the market for
that day, including the overall environment, the fundamentals of the security,
and the collective emotional condition of the traders in the security that day.
