
When prices violate a trendline, however, it should normally be
heeded. To illustrate this point, imagine yourself driving a car down a deserted highway. Since you want to understand the concept of trendlines
well, you decide to not look at the road ahead but simply open your door
and keep your eye on the median line. You have no idea how the road will
twist or turn or whether it will continue straight.
For a while, the yellow line whizzes by more or less in the same place.
It sometimes moves a little away from the car, but it soon returns to be
just outside the driver’s door. Suddenly, the median line moves underneath your car, disappearing from sight. You’d better look up quickly to
see what’s happening, because the road must be turning!
That’s sort of what trendlines are like (although not nearly as
dangerous—at least in the physical sense). They provide a line that prices
should stay above (if the line is support) or below (if resistance), and if
prices should stray across the trendline, something has changed. As with
your car, it doesn’t necessarily mean a crash is ahead, but you’d better start
paying better attention.
One instance where a crash certainly did happen is Yahoo! in early
2000. Yahoo! had soared hundreds of percent during the Internet bubble

Trendlines and Reversals

167

FIGURE 8.3 As the Internet bubble of the late 1990s ended, Yahoo! violated its
ascending trendline early in April 2000. It tried to recover, but once the trend was
broken, the damage was done.

of the late 1990s. Figure 8.3 shows how Yahoo! peaked at about $125 on
the first day of the 2000 trading year, then it starting softening. After losing
about 40 percent of its value, it started firming up again, making a small
saucer pattern, then it reweakened.
On the first trading day of April, 2000, the price briefly pierced the
long-term trendline, only to recover. A few days later, prices clearly
slipped beneath the trendline. At this point, the line which formerly had
been support now had become resistance. This is a vital concept, since the
“turncoat” nature of trendlines is a key part of their value.
Just because the trendline was broken doesn’t mean Yahoo! immediately collapsed. But it did mean that the stock was no longer in a defined uptrend. Paradoxically, stocks that break their uptrends can still move higher
in price, as you will learn later in this chapter. In Yahoo!’s case (Figure
8.4), the price firmed up for a couple of months and then started falling
even more. Before it was all over, Yahoo! had lost more than 97 percent of
its peak value.
A similar chart during the same time period can be seen in Figure 8.5,
which shows the S&P 500 exchange-traded fund (symbol SPY, commonly

168

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.4 Following the violation of its trendline, Yahoo! collapsed, losing almost its entire value.

FIGURE 8.5 Here is the SPY over a period close to a decade. Its ascending trendline was intact from 1994 through 2000, but once it was violated, the fall that followed was severe.

Trendlines and Reversals

169

known as the “spiders”). The ascending trendline is quite long, beginning
in late 1994 and being violated in the autumn of 2000. After prices cracked
below the trendline, the decline was swift and terrible. This illustrates an
important principle with trendlines: the length of the trendline is a strong
indicator of how meaningful the trend change will be once that line
has been crossed. A trendline spanning 10 days is probably meaningless,
whereas a trendline spanning ten years is terribly important.
You certainly don’t have to look just at the Internet bubble to
find examples of trendline violations and their aftermath. Krispy Kreme
(Figure 8.6), the makers of incredibly delicious (particularly when fresh)
doughnuts was the darling of 2000 and 2001. It held onto that distinction
since virtually every other stock was getting clobbered. Perhaps people
were gobbling down doughnuts to distract themselves from their sorrows
of this major bear market. In any event, as the Atkins diet craze started
gathering momentum, Krispy starting to weaken.
Late in 2003, KKD broke below its trendline. Had you been long this
stock, you would have already suffered a 20 percent loss from the stock’s
peak. But the value of trendlines isn’t that they guarantee you will make as

FIGURE 8.6 Krispy Kreme was one of the very few stocks that went up during
2000 and 2001. It violated its trendline late in 2003 and quickly lost most of its
value.

170

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

much profit as possible. Instead, they try to give you as much time as possible to remain in a position before being given evidence that you should
get out. So in this case, even though the stock had already fallen from $50
to $40 before you were warned, this warning at least would have prevented
you from holding on to the later price of $4, a 90 percent drop from the
trendline violation.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, a stock doesn’t necessarily
collapse because it has broken below its trendline (keep in mind prices
can break above trendlines as well, but for this introduction, we will focus
on breakdowns). After a price crosses below a trendline, the price can
(a) go up, (b) go down, or (c) go sideways. There’s really no way to know
for sure! But the trendline at least provides a likely indication of what the
stock will do next.
Take Diebold, for instance (Figure 8.7), which fell below its trendline
in early 1984. Had you sold right away, you would have received about
$6.50 per share for your stock. However, it slowly climbed its way to
$8, more than a 20 percent increase in value. But this is the important
point: The stock did not cross above its trendline again. It clung to it,
inching higher, staying just beneath its newfound resistance level. It finally

FIGURE 8.7 A stock can break its trendline and still go up in price. Diebold fell
below its trendline early in 1984, then it climbed higher for the ﬁrst half of the year.
It failed to cross back over its trendline, however, and subsequently fell hard.

Trendlines and Reversals

171

FIGURE 8.8 A trendline break can precede the creation of a diﬀerent pattern. In
this case, after Cleveland Cliﬀs broke its trendline, it formed a head and shoulders
pattern, which strengthened the bearish case.

succumbed and fell over the next year to $4.50, losing about half its peak
value.
As you learn about other drawn objects (such as channels, retracements, horizontal lines, and so on), you will see how to combine them to
perform more complex analyses. Figure 8.8 shows Cleveland Cliffs (CLF)
dipping beneath its trendline. In retrospect, when it did this, it was about
halfway through the job of creating what is known as a head and shoulders
pattern, highlighted here by the use of a horizontal line.
Now that you have the general idea as to what constitutes a trendline
and why it is useful, it’s time to learn how to make them in ProphetCharts.

USING THE TOOL
Using any drawn object in ProphetCharts begins with the selection of the
tool you want from the toolbar (Figure 8.9). The toolbar’s default location
is in the lower-left portion of the price pane, although you can drag-anddrop the toolbar to any other side or even have it “float” separate from the
chart area.

172

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.9 The toolbar contains all the drawing tools, including the trendline,
which is the third from the left.

The tools are, from left to right: pointer, expansion, trendline, channels, horizontal line, text, oval highlight, rectangle highlight, Fibonacci
retracements, Fibonacci time series, Fibonacci arcs, and Fibonacci fans.
The trendline tool, the third from the left, is the one you want to click.
Once you have selected the trendline tool, all you need to do to draw
a trendline is (1) click on the point where you want the line to begin, (2)
drag the mouse, during which time the line will be displayed, no matter
where you move the mouse, and (3) click a second time, which completes
the creation of the line.
Any trendline you draw has a number of properties, any one of which
can be changed: color, style, and extension. You will learn how to alter the
color and style later in this chapter, but let us take a moment to understand
the concept of trendline extension.
You may recall from geometry the distinction between a line segment
and a ray. A line segment is a finite line that has two endpoints. A ray has
one endpoint and continues into infinity. And a line, just to complete the
review, goes infinitely in both directions.
In the case of trendlines, you will apply either a line segment or a ray.
Using a ray is more common, since you are watching prices on an ongoing
basis, and the trend will extend off the right edge of the chart. Using a line
segment is more appropriate in the case of prior trends, since the trend has
already changed and there is no reason to clutter your chart with a line that
continues going past the trend’s end.
In order to choose whether you want to extend the line or not, you
use the Extend option. This option is available for a number of drawn
objects, but the principle is the same for all of them: Extend makes the
drawn object continue forward in time, all the way to the rightmost edge of
the chart.
Notice how the pointer changes into a hand when you move the mouse
over the drawn object. This is the signal that you can right-click to modify
that particular object. To access Extend, right-click on any trendline, which
creates the popup menu shown in Figure 8.10, and choose Extend. If it is
checked, the line will be extended into a ray. If it is unchecked, the line
will exist only between its two endpoints. You can toggle back and forth
between these settings for any given trendline (it does not affect any others
elsewhere).

Trendlines and Reversals

173

FIGURE 8.10 Right-clicking on a trendline yields a popup menu with a number
of command choices.

Let us take an opportunity to consider several important properties of
the popup menu. These four general rules are important to effective and
efficient use of any of the drawn objects.
1. To access the popup menu that controls one particular drawn object,

right-click on that object.
2. Changes made to that object affect that object and no others. You

therefore need not be concerned that you will alter any of the other
trendlines (or any other kind of object, for that matter) by altering one
of them.
3. However, when you draw another drawn object—in this case, a
trendline—ProphetCharts will use the most recent settings since it assumes that is what you want to use. So whatever color, style, and extension choice you last made will be applied to all subsequent trendlines until you change those settings again.
4. Every single object on a chart can be completely unique. Each and every object can be colored differently, styled differently, and extended
differently. Although you can preserve the settings you have chosen to
save yourself time when drawing additional objects, it is useful to keep
in mind the uniqueness of every drawn object, since those distinctions
can help make a chart easier to read and interpret.
Another selection on the popup menu is Move. The Move function reveals the two handles on the trendline, thus allowing you to change the
location of the trendline. The existence of these handles is probably the
single most powerful and useful feature of all the drawn objects, so it is
crucial to understand their purpose.

174

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.11 Double-clicking on a trendline gives you access to the two handles,
which allow for careful placement of the line.

The handles of any drawn object are the places where the endpoints
were established. Once you draw a trendline, only the line is shown, and
no special mark is given to the endpoints. However, once you select Move
from the popup menu (or once you double-click on the trendline, which
is actually a faster way to achieve the same thing), the two handles will
appear as small squares (Figure 8.11).
When you point your mouse to a handle, the mouse pointer changes
from an arrow to a hand, indicating it is ready for you to move the handle.
You can drag the handle anywhere in the chart that you like. One of the
reasons this is so useful is that you can create very precisely laid trendlines, which is important to good charting (Figure 8.12). You might want
to make sure that the “Snap to OHLC values during drawing” checkbox is
checked in the preferences menu (see Figure 3.18 back in Chapter 3) to
make precise placement of handles easier.
If you point at the trendline but do not click any button (this is known
as a “mouseover”), then information about the trendline will appear as a
tool tip (Figure 8.13). This tool tip will identify the object (in this case,
“Trendline”) as well as the starting and ending values of the endpoints in
terms of both price and date.
There is usually a variety of ways to get to the same function, in order
to save time. The ability to alter a trendline’s style, color, or extension is

175

Trendlines and Reversals

FIGURE 8.12 You can zoom in to the handle of a trendline to ensure precise
placement.

FIGURE 8.13 When you mouseover a
trendline, a tool tip will appear identifying the object as well as its starting and
ending points.

FIGURE 8.14 By clicking on the
small triangle in the trendline tool you
can access the features of the tool.

available through right-clicking the line as well as clicking the trendline
tool itself (Figure 8.14). There are two ways to access the popup menu
using the trendline tool: You can either hold down the mouse button on
the tool for a few moments, or you can click the small triangle in the tool’s
lower-right corner to get instant access.
You can also access many of the functions of the toolbar through the
Drawing Tools menu itself (Figure 8.15). The choices on this menu provide
the functions shown in Table 8.1.

CHANGING COLOR AND STYLE
Flexibility is one of ProphetCharts’ main advantages, and one example of
this is that you can alter the color and style of any individual object on
any chart. As you are applying drawn objects, whatever settings you most
recently used for that tool will be applied until such time as you either
customize that tool or modify an individual object that you drew earlier.
To alter the color or style of a trendline you’ve already drawn,
right-click on the trendline and choose “Change Style/Color” from the

176

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.15 The Drawing Tools menu also provides access to any of the drawn
objects and their settings.

popup menu. A dialog box (Figure 8.16) will appear with the following
elements:

r Sample—This shows what the trendline will look like based on the
settings. As you change settings, this sample will update to reflect
those changes. Think of it as a preview of what your trendline will
look like.

Trendlines and Reversals

177

TABLE 8.1 Drawing Tools Functions
Snap to

Hide Tools

Undo

Pointer Tool

Pointer Guides

Zoom In

This is either checked or unchecked, which indicates whether
or not handles will snap to OHLC (open, high, low, or close)
values. You alter this setting either here or through the
Preferences menu. It is recommended that you leave this
checked, since doing so makes laying down precise
trendlines much easier. If you would prefer to have total
free-form control over the placement of trendlines, you
should uncheck this box. Otherwise, price points in bars
will attract the handles of your trendlines like magnets.
If you do not want to see the toolbar, you can choose this
setting, which will put a checkmark next to it. The only
reason you would want to do so would be to free up a little
more space for the chart. Keep in mind you do not
necessarily have to leave the toolbar where it is. You can
click on the handle of the toolbar, located on its left edge,
and drag the toolbar to any edge of the chart or have it
free-ﬂoating for quick access.
ProphetCharts provides the ability to undo your last action
(and that action will alter the exact wording of this menu
item; for instance, it might read Undo Last Deletion if you
most recently deleted an object). There will be many times
that you accidentally do something that you realize was a
mistake, and by selecting Undo or its keyboard equivalent,
Ctrl-Z, ProphetCharts will undo the action.
This is the default tool, which is just the mouse cursor. The
Pointer doesn’t alter the graph in any way; it simply lets you
move the mouse around and take actions. The Pointer is by
default the selection, and choosing any other tool (such as
Trendline) temporarily deselects this choice. Once you have
ﬁnished drawing your object, the Pointer will be selected
once again.
You have four choices for what appears wherever the cursor
goes: None, Vertical, Horizontal, or Crosshair. You can
therefore have a horizontal line only, a vertical line only,
both, or neither as you move your mouse around. Most
people leave the vertical line on, using the crosshair choice
when they are trying to make a very precise judgment on
both time and price. If you ﬁnd the lines bothersome or
annoying, you change this to None.
This zooms in on the rightmost 50 percent of the chart. The
keyboard equivalent is Ctrl-Plus. If you want to zoom in on
a precise part of the chart, just click-and-drag with the
mouse. Using Zoom In repeatedly will home in closer and
closer to the most recent data.
(Continued )

178

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

TABLE 8.1 (Continued)
Zoom Out

This does the opposite of Zoom In, since it doubles the
amount of time you are viewing (until you see all the data
that you fetched in the ﬁrst place, at which time this menu
choice becomes grayed out). The keyboard equivalent is
Ctrl-Minus.
Unzoom
To unzoom all the way and see all of the data you have
fetched for the chart, you can choose this function or, for
the same result, double-click anywhere inside the chart.
Resize Graph
This allows you to change how much of the chart space is
dedicated to the chart itself. This function is covered in
detail in Chapter 9.
Various tools
There are 10 diﬀerent tool choices, the ﬁrst of which is
Trendline. Choosing any of these selections is the
equivalent of choosing the tool icon within the toolbar. A
checkmark will appear next to whatever tool is currently
selected (which may be the Pointer Guides, previously
described).
Customize
This brings up a submenu of the same 10 tools so that you
can select the tool whose settings you want to customize.
The equivalent action can be performed by holding down
the mouse button on top of the tool you want to customize
or clicking on the small triangle in the lower-right corner of
any of the tool icon squares.
Delete All Drawings This deletes all of the drawn objects on the currently
displayed graph. It will not aﬀect the drawn objects on any
other charts. If you use this accidentally, you can reverse
the damage by choosing the Undo command. Take note
that when you right-click on any drawn object, this
command is also available in the popup menu, as well as
another command—Delete—which will delete only the
currently selected object.

r Color—This shows the color you have selected. By clicking this small
box, a palette of 15 color choices will appear. You can click on any of
these color choices to change the color of the selected trendline.
r Opacity—This is a number ranging from 0.1 to 1 that dictates how
transparent or not the trendline is. An opacity setting of 1 means the
trendline will be a solid line and nothing can be seen through it. At the
other extreme, an opacity setting of .1 would result in an extremely
faint line through which other objects can be seen. As you become an
expert user of ProphetCharts, you will develop your own preferences
for how bold certain objects appear.

179

Trendlines and Reversals

FIGURE 8.16 Changing the color
and style of a trendline can be done with
this dialog box.

FIGURE 8.17 Clicking on the Pattern
dropdown shows the patterns available
for the trendline selected.

r Weight—This controls how thick the line is. Clicking on this lets you
choose from a dropdown menu of five different weights. If you want
lines to be heavy and easy to see, choose a heavier weight.
r Pattern—Clicking on this (Figure 8.17) yields a dropdown of three different pattern styles (solid, dotted, and dashed). Most people use solid
trendlines, but you may want to use different line styles to indicate
different meanings of lines on the chart.
There also is a checkbox at the bottom of the dialog box that reads,
“Save as default trendline style.” If you check this, all the future trendlines
you draw with ProphetCharts will use these same settings unless you alter
them later.

HISTORICAL CHART EXAMPLES
Understanding the mechanics of creating trendlines is important, but more
important is the knowledge of how to apply trendlines well. Part of this
comes from taking care to follow the rules cited earlier in this chapter
about the properties of trendlines. But most of it comes from experience,
and you can gain experience yourself or by learning about the experiences
of others. This chapter seeks to help you with the latter.
There is an adage about how a person can never step into the same
stream twice, and the reason is that the stream is constantly changing.
The markets are like that, which is why it is not possible to describe precisely what rules to follow when embellishing charts with drawn objects

180

CHART YOUR WAY TO PROFITS

FIGURE 8.18 Multiple trendlines can work together to identify directional
changes in a stock.

under all circumstances. You will gain proficiency—some may even say
artistry—about how you mark up your charts only through trial, error, and
experience.
This book has hundreds of different charts from actual market history
to help save you some of the challenges of learning through only your experience. Study these charts and their commentary, not to seek unbendable
rules about how trendlines are laid down, but to understand the different
circumstances and nuances to charts and what they demand of your analytical skills.
Figure 8.18 illustrates how charts are certainly not limited to one trendline. In this case, two are used, and you could just as easily have three,
four, or more. You want to avoid what some call the “pick-up sticks effect”
of having lines scattered all over the chart, because that just creates noise,
and what you seek is clarity. The old saw that “less is more” certainly applies to good charting.
The reasons for having multiple trendlines fall into two camps: to
show contrary trends (as was the case with Figure 8.18, which showed
a general uptrend and a shorter-lived downtrend) or to show varying degrees of momentum for a single trend, such as with Figure 8.19. In this
instance, which is a chart of the crude oil commodity market from 2001
