
- 156 -

John Grisham

The Broker

ation, this one named Alex. Thirty years old, a lawyer in Vancouver,
divorced with two kids, etc., etc.
Fortunately, Luigi had given him a little biography on Marco Lazzeri,
complete with all the data he was now reaching for in the back of a frigid
church. She prodded him on, urging perfection, cautioning against speaking
too fast, the natural tendency.
"Deve parlare lentamente," she kept saying. You must speak slowly.
She was strict and no fun, but also very motivational. If he could learn to
speak Italian half as well as she spoke English, then he would be ahead of
the pack. If she believed in constant repetition, then so did he.
As they were discussing his mother, an elderly gentleman entered the church
and sat in the pew directly in front of them. He was soon lost in meditation
and prayer. They decided to make a quiet exit. A light snow was still falling
and they stopped at the first cafe for espresso and a smoke.
"Adesso, possiamo parlare della sua famiglia?" he asked. Can we talk about
your family now?
She smiled, showed teeth, a rarity, and said, "Benissimo, Marco." Very
good. "Ma, non possiamo. Mi displace." But, I'm sorry. We cannot.
"Perche non?" Why not?
"Abbiamo delle regole." We have rules.
"Dov'e suo marito?" Where is your husband?
"Qui, a Bologna." Here, in Bologna.
"Dov'e lavora?" Where does he work?
"Non lavora."
After her second cigarette they ventured back onto the covered sidewalks
and began a thorough lesson about snow. She delivered a short sentence in
English, and he was supposed to translate it. It is snowing. It never snows in
Florida. Maybe it will snow tomorrow. It snowed twice last week. I love the
snow. I don't like snow.
They skirted the edge of the main plaza and stayed under the porticoes. On
Via Rizzoli they passed the store where Marco bought his boots and his
parka and he thought she might like to hear his version of that event. He
could handle most of the Italian. He let it pass, though, since she was so
engrossed in the weather. At an intersection

- 157 -

John Grisham

The Broker

they stopped and looked at Le Due Torri, the two surviving towers that the
Bolognesi were so proud of.
There were once more than two hundred towers, she said. Then she asked
him to repeat the sentence. He tried, butchered the past tense and the
number, and was then asked to repeat the damn sentence until he got it right.
In medieval times, for reasons present-day Italians cannot explain, their
ancestors seized upon the unusual architectural compulsion of building tall
slender towers in which to live. Since tribal wars and local hostilities were
epidemic, the towers were meant principally for protection. They were
effective lookout posts and valuable during attacks, though they proved to be
less than practical as living quarters. To protect the food, the kitchens were
often on the top floor, three hundred or so steps above the street, which
made it difficult to find dependable domestic help. When fights broke out,
the warring families were known to simply launch arrows and fling spears at
each other from one offending tower to the other. No sense fighting in the
streets like common folk.
They also became quite the status symbol. No self-respecting noble could
allow his neighbor and/or rival to have a taller tower, so in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries a curious game of oneupmanship raged over the skyline
of Bologna as the nobles tried to keep up with the Joneses. The city was
nicknamed la turrita, the towered one. An English traveler described it as a
"bed of asparagus."
By the fourteenth century organized government was gaining a foothold in
Bologna, and those with vision knew that the warring nobles had to be
reined in. The city, whenever it had enough muscle to get away with it, tore
down many of the towers. Age and gravity took care of others; poor
foundations crumbled after a few centuries.
In the late 1800s, a noisy campaign to tear them all down was narrowly
approved. Only two survived-Asinelli and Garisenda. Both stand near each
other at the Piazza di Porto Ravegnana. Neither stands exactly straight, with
Garisenda drifting off to the north at an angle that rivals the more famous,
and far prettier, one in Pisa. The two old survivors have evoked many
colorful descriptions over the decades. A French poet likened them to two
drunk sailors staggering home, trying to lean on one another for support.
Ermanno's guidebook referred to them as the "Laurel and Hardy" of
medieval architecture.

- 158 -

John Grisham

The Broker

La Torre degli Asinelli was built in the early twelfth century, and, at 97.2
meters, is twice as tall as its partner. Garisenda began leaning as it was
almost completed in the thirteenth century, and was chopped in half in an
effort to stop the tilt. The Garisenda clan lost interest and abandoned the city
in disgrace.
Marco had learned the history from Ermanno's book. Francesca didn't know
this, and she, like all good guides, took fifteen cold minutes to talk about the
famous towers. She formulated a simple sentence, delivered it perfectly,
helped Marco stumble through it, then grudgingly went to the next one.
"Asinelli has four hundred and ninety-eight steps to the top," she said.
"Andiamo," Marco said quickly. Let his go. They entered the thick
foundation through a narrow door, followed a tight circular staircase up fifty
feet or so to where the ticket booth had been stuck in a corner. He bought
two tickets at three euros each, and they started the climb. The tower was
hollow, with the stairs fixed to the outside walls.
Francesca said she hadn't climbed it in at least ten years, and seemed excited
about their little adventure. She took off, up the narrow, sturdy oak steps,
with Marco keeping his distance behind. An occasional small open window
allowed light and cold air to filter in. "Pace yourself," she called over her
shoulder, in English, as she slowly pulled away from Marco. On that snowy
February afternoon there were no others climbing to the top of the city.
He paced himself and she was soon out of sight. About halfway up, he
stopped at a large window so the wind could cool his face. He caught his
breath, then took off again, even slower now. A few minutes later, he
stopped again, his heart pounding away, his lungs working overtime, his
mind wondering if he could make it. After 498 steps he finally emerged
from the boxlike attic and stepped onto the top of the tower. Francesca was
smoking a cigarette, gazing upon her beautiful city, no sign of sweat
anywhere on her face.
The view from the top was panoramic. The red tile roofs of the city were
covered with two inches of snow. The pale green dome of San Bartolomeo
was directly under them, refusing any accumulation. "On a clear day, you
can see the Adriatic Sea to the east, and the Alps to the north," she said, still
in English. "It's just beautiful, even in the snow."

- 159 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"Just beautiful," he said, almost panting. The wind whipped through the
metal bars between the brick posts, and it was much colder above Bologna
than on its streets.
"The tower is the fifth-tallest structure in old Italy," she said proudly. He
was certain she could name the other four.
"Why was this tower saved?" he asked.
"Two reasons, I think. It was well designed and well built. The Asinelli
family was strong and powerful. And it was used as a prison briefly in the
fourteenth century, when many of the other towers were demolished.
Truthfully, no one really knows why this one was spared." Three hundred
feet up, and she was a different person. Her eyes were alive, her voice
radiant.
"This always reminds me of why I love my city," she said with a rare smile.
Not at him, not at anything he said, but at the rooftops and skyline of
Bologna. They stepped to the other side and looked in the distance to the
southwest. On a hill above the city they could see the outline of Santuario di
San Luca, the guardian angel of the city.
"Have you been there?" she asked.
"No."
"We'll do it one day when the weather is nice, okay?"
"Sure."
"We have so much to see."
Maybe he wouldn't fire her after all. He was so starved for companionship,
especially from the opposite sex, that he could tolerate her aloofness and
sadness and mood swings. He would study even harder to gain her approval.
If the climb to the top of the Asinelli Tower had buoyed her spirits, the trip
down brought back the same old dour demeanor. They had a quick espresso
near the towers and said goodbye. As she walked away, no superficial hug,
no cheek-pecking, not even a cursory handshake, he decided he would give
her one more week.
He put her on secret probation. She had seven days to become nice, or he'd
simply stop the lessons. Life was too short.
She was very pretty, though.
The envelope had been opened by his secretary, just like all the other mail
from yesterday and the day before. But inside the first en

- 160 -

John Grisham

The Broker

velope was another, this one addressed simply to Neal Backman. In bold
print on the front and back were the dire warnings: personal,
CONFIDENTIAL, TO BE OPENED ONLY BY NEAL BACKMAN.
"You might want to look at the one on top," the secretary said as she hauled
in his daily stack of mail at 9:00 a.m. "The envelope was postmarked two
days ago in York, Pennsylvania." When she closed the door behind her, Neal
examined the envelope. It was light brown in color, with no markings other
than what had been hand-printed by the sender. The printing look vaguely
familiar.
With a letter opener, he slowly cut along the top of the envelope, then pulled
out a single sheet of folded white paper. It was from his father. It was a
shock, but then it was not.
Dear Neal:Feb. 21
I'm safe for now but I doubt it will last. I need your help. I have no address,
no phone, no fax, and I'm not sure I would use them if I could. I need access
to e-mail, something that cannot be traced. I have no idea how to do this, but
I know you can figure it out. I have no computer and no money. There is a
good chance you are being watched, so whatever you do, you must not leave
a trail. Cover your tracks. Cover mine. Trust no one. Watch everything. Hide
this letter, then destroy it. Send me as much money as possible. You know
I'll pay it back. Never use your real name on anything. Use the following
address:
Sr. Rudolph Viscovitch, Universita degli Studi, University of Bologna, Via
Zamboni 22, 44041, Bologna, Italy. Use two envelopes- the first for
Viscovitch, the second for me. In your note to him ask him to hold the
package for Marco Lazzeri.
Hurry.'Love, Marco
Neal placed the letter on his desk and walked over to lock his door. He sat
on a small leather sofa and tried to arrange his thoughts. He had already
decided his father was out of the country, otherwise he would've made
contact weeks earlier. Why was he in Italy? Why was the letter mailed from
York, Pennsylvania?
Neal's wife had never met her father-in-law. He'd been in prison for two
years when they met and married. They had sent photos of the wedding, and
later a photo of their child, Joel's second granddaughter.
Joel was not a topic Neal liked to talk about it. Or think about.

- 161 -

John Grisham

The Broker

He had been a lousy father, absent for most of his childhood, and his
astounding plunge from power had embarrassed everyone close to him. Neal
had grudgingly sent letters and cards during the incarceration, but he could
truthfully say, at least to himself and his wife, that he did not miss his father.
He'd rarely been around the man.
Now he was back, asking for money that Neal did not have, assuming with
no hesitation that Neal would do exactly as he was instructed, perfectly
willing to endanger someone else.
Neal walked to his desk and read the letter again, then again. It was the same
scarcely readable chicken scratch he'd seen throughout his life. And it was
his same method of operation, whether at home or at the office. Do this, this,
and this, and everything will work. Do it my way, and do it now! Hurry!
Risk everything because I need you.
And what if everything worked smoothly and the broker came back? He
certainly wouldn't have time for Neal and the granddaughter. If given the
chance, Joel Backman, fifty-two, would once again rise to glory in the power
circles of Washington. He'd make the right friends, hustle the right clients,
marry the right woman, find the right partners, and within a year he'd once
again work from a vast office where he would charge outrageous fees and
bully congressmen.
Life had been much simpler with his father in prison.
What would he tell Lisa, his wife? Honey, that $2,000 we have buried in our
savings account has just been spoken for. Plus a few hundred bucks for an
encrypted e-mail system. And you and the baby keep the doors locked at all
times because life just became much more dangerous.
With the day shot to hell, Neal buzzed his secretary and asked her to hold his
calls. He stretched out on the sofa, kicked off his loafers, closed his eyes,
and began massaging his temples.

- 162 -

John Grisham

The Broker

In the nasty little war between the CIA and the FBI, both
sides often used certain journalists for tactical reasons. Preemptive strikes
could be launched, counterattacks blunted, hasty retreats glossed over, even
damage control could be implemented by manipulating the press. Dan
Sandberg had cultivated sources on both sides for almost twenty years and
was perfectly willing to be used when the information was correct, and
exclusive. He was also willing to assume the role of courier, cautiously
moving between the armies with sensitive gossip to see how much the other
side knew. In his effort to confirm the story that the FBI was investigating a
cash-for-pardon scandal, he contacted his most reliable source at the CIA.
He was met with the usual stonewall, one that lasted less than forty-eight
hours.
His contact at Langley was Rusty Lowell, a frazzled career man with
shifting titles. Whatever he was paid to do, his real job was watching the
press and advising Teddy Maynard on how to use and abuse it. He was not a
snitch, not one to pass along anything that wasn't true. After years of
working at the relationship, Sandberg was reasonably confident that most of
what he got from Lowell was doled out by Teddy himself.
They met at Tysons Corner Mall, over in Virginia, just off the

- 163 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Beltway, in the back of a cheap pizzeria on the upper-level food court. They
each bought one slice of pepperoni and cheese and a soft drink, then found a
booth where no one could see them. The usual rules applied: (1) everything
was off the record and deep background; (2) Lowell would give the green
light before Sandberg could run any story; and (3) if anything Lowell said
was contradicted by another source, he, Lowell, would have the chance to
review it and offer the last word.
As an investigative journalist, Sandberg hated the rules. However, Lowell
had never been wrong, and he was not talking to anyone else. If Sandberg
wanted to mine this rich source, he had to play by the rules.
"They've found some money," Sandberg began. "And they think it's linked
to a pardon."
Lowell's eyes always betrayed him because he was never deceitful. They
narrowed immediately and it was obvious that this was something new.
"Does the CIA know this?" Sandberg asked.
"No," Lowell said bluntly. He had never been afraid of the truth. "We've
been watching some accounts offshore, but nothing's happened. How much
money?"
"A lot. I don't know how much. And I don't know how they found it."
"Where did it come from?"
"They don't know for sure, but they're desperate to link it to Joel Backman.
They're talking to the White House."
"And not us."
"Evidently not. It reeks of politics. They'd love to pin a scandal on President
Morgan, and Backman would be the perfect conspirator."
"Duke Mongo would be a nice target too."
"Yes, but he's practically dead. He's had a long, colorful career as a tax
cheat, but now he's out to pasture. Backman has secrets. They want to haul
him back, run him through the grinder over at Justice, blow the top off
Washington for a few months. It will humiliate Morgan."
"The economy's sliding like hell. What a wonderful diversion."
"Like I said, it's all about politics."

- 164 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Lowell finally took a bite of pizza and chewed it quickly as he thought.
"Can't be Backman. They're way off target."
"You're sure."
"I'm positive. Backman had no idea a pardon was in the works. We literally
yanked him out of his cell in the middle of the night, made him sign some
papers, then shipped him out of the country before sunrise."
"And where did he go?"
"Hell, I don't know. And if I did I wouldn't tell you. The point is that
Backman had no time to arrange a bribe. He was buried so deep in prison he
couldn't even dream of a pardon. It was Teddy's idea, not his. Backman's not
their man."
"They intend to find him."
"Why? He's a free man, fully pardoned, not some convict on the run. He
can't be extradited, unless of course they squeeze an indictment."
"Which they can do."
Lowell frowned at the table for a second or two. "I can't see an indictment.
They have no proof. They have some suspicious money sitting in a bank, as
you say, but they don't know where it came from. I assure you it's not
Backman's money."
"Can they find him?"
"They're gonna put the pressure on Teddy, and that's why I wanted to talk."
He shoved the half-eaten pizza aside and leaned in closer. "There will soon
be a meeting in the Oval Office. Teddy will be there, and he'll be asked by
the President to see the sensitive stuff on Backman. He will refuse. Then it's
showdown time. Will the Prez have the guts to fire the old man?"
"Will he?"
"Probably. At least Teddy is expecting it. This is his fourth president, which,
as you know, is a record, and the first three have all wanted to fire him.
Now, though, he's old and ready to go."
"He's been old and ready to go forever."
"True, but he's run a tight ship. This time it's different."
"Why doesn't he just resign?"
"Because he's a cranky1, contrary, stubborn old son of a bitch, you know
that."
"That's well established."

- 165 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"And if he gets fired, he's not going peacefully. He'd like balanced
coverage."
"Balanced coverage" was their long-standing buzzword for "slant it our
way."
Sandberg slid his pizza away too and cracked his knuckles. "Here's the story
as I see it," he said, part of the ritual. "After eighteen years of solid
leadership at the CIA, Teddy Maynard gets sacked by a brand-new
president. The reason is that Maynard refused to divulge details of sensitive
ongoing operations. He stood his ground to protect national security, and
stared down the President, who, along with the FBI, wants classified
information so that it, the FBI, can pursue an investigation relating to
pardons granted by former president Morgan."
"You cannot mention Backman."
"I'm not ready to use names. I don't have confirmation."
"I assure you the money did not come from Backman. And if you use his
name at this point, there's a chance he'll see it and do something stupid."
"Like what?"
"Like, run for his life."
"Why is that stupid?"
"Because we don't want him running for his life."
"You want him dead?"
"Of course. That's the plan. We want to see who kills him."
Sandberg settled back against the hard plastic bench and looked away.
Lowell picked slices of pepperoni off his cold rubbery pizza, and for a long
time they thought in silence. Sandberg drained his Diet Coke, and finally
said, "Teddy somehow convinced Morgan to pardon Backman, who's
stashed away somewhere as bait for the kill."
Lowell was looking away but nodding.
"And the killing will answer some questions over at Langley?"
"Perhaps. That's the plan."
"Does Backman know why he was pardoned?"
"We certainly haven't told him, but he's fairly bright."
"Who's after him?"
"Some very dangerous people who carry grudges."
"Do you know who?"
A nod, a shrug, a nonanswer. "There are several with potential. We'll watch
closely and maybe learn something. Maybe not."

- 166 -

John Grisham

The Broker

"And why are they carrying grudges?"
Lowell laughed at the ridiculous question. "Nice try, Dan. You've been
asking that for six years now. Look, I gotta go. Work on the balanced piece
and let me see it."
"When is the meeting with the President?"
"Not sure. As soon as he gets back."
"And if Teddy's terminated?"
"You'll be the first person I call."
As a small-town lawyer in Culpeper, Virginia, Neal Backman was earning
far less than what he had dreamed about in law school. Back then, his
father's firm was such a force in D.C. that he could easily see himself
making the big bucks after only a few years of practice. The greenest
associates at Backman, Pratt 8c Boiling started at $100,000 a year, and a
rising junior partner thirty years of age would earn three times as much.
During his second year of law school, a local magazine put the broker on the
cover and talked about his expensive toys. His income was estimated at $10
million a year. This had caused quite a stir around law school, something
Neal was not uncomfortable with. He could remember thinking how
wonderful the future would be with all that earning potential.
However, less than a year after signing on as a green associate, he was
sacked by the firm after his father pled guilty, and was literally thrown out of
the building.
But Neal had soon stopped dreaming of the big money and the glitzy
lifestyle. He was perfectly content to practice law with a nice little firm on
Main Street and hopefully take home $50,000 a year. Lisa stopped working
when their daughter was born. She managed the finances and kept their lives
on budget.
After a sleepless night, he awoke with a rough idea of how to proceed. The
most painful issue had been whether or not to tell his wife. Once he decided
not to, the plan began to take shape. He went to the office at eight, as usual,
and puttered online for an hour and a half, until he was sure the bank was
open. As he walked down Main Street he found it impossible to believe that
there might be people lurking nearby watching his movements. Still, he
would take no chances.

- 167 -

John Grisham

The Broker

Richard Koley ran the nearest branch of Piedmont National Bank. They
went to church together, hunted grouse, played softball for the Rotary Club.
Neal's law firm had banked there forever. The lobby was empty at such an
early hour, and Richard was already at his desk with a tall cup of coffee, The
Wall Street Journal, and evidently very little to do. He was pleasantly
surprised to see Neal, and for twenty minutes they talked about college
basketball. When they eventually got around to business, Richard said, "So
what can I do for you?"
"Just curious," Neal said casually, delivering lines he'd been rehearsing all
morning. "How much might I borrow with just my signature?"
"Bit of a jam, huh?" Richard was grabbing the mouse and already glancing
at the monitor, where all answers were stored.
"No, nothing like that. Rates are so low and I've got my eye on a hot stock."
"Not a bad strategy, really, though I certainly can't advertise it. With the
Dow at ten thousand again you wonder why more folks don't load up with
credit and buy stocks. It would certainly be good for the old bank." He
managed an awkward banker's chuckle at his own quick humor. "Income
range?" he asked, tapping keys, somber-faced now.
"It varies," Neal said. "Sixty to eighty."
Richard frowned even more, and Neal couldn't tell if it was because he was
sad to learn his friend made so little, or because his friend earned so much
more than he. Hed never know. Small-town banks were not known for
overpaying their people.
"Total debts, outside the mortgage?" he asked, tapping again.
"Hmmm, let's see." Neal closed his eyes and ran through the math again. His
mortgage was almost $200,000 and Piedmont held that. Lisa was so opposed
to debt that their own little balance sheet was remarkably clean. "Car loan of
about twenty grand," he said. "Maybe a thousand or so on the credit cards.
Not much, really."
Richard nodded his approval and never took his eyes off the monitor. When
his fingers left the keyboard, he shrugged and turned into the generous
banker. "We could do three thousand on a signature. Six percent interest, for
twelve months."
Since he'd never borrowed with no collateral, Neal wasn't sure what to
expect. He had no idea what his signature would command,
