
As to the quintessential aspect of the original paradigm—assuring, indeed guaranteeing, that investors will
earn their fair share of the stock market’s return—the fact
is that investors who trade ETFs have nothing even resembling such a guarantee. In fact, after all the selection
challenges, the timing risks, the extra costs, and the
added taxes—typical ETF investors have absolutely no
idea what relationship their investment return will have to
the return earned by the stock market.
These differences between the classic index fund and
the index fund nouveau represented by the ETF are stark
(Exhibit 15.1). Exchange traded funds march to a different

[166]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

EXHIBIT 15.1

Classic Index Funds versus Index Funds Nouveau
Exchange Traded Funds
Classic
Broad Index
Index
Specialized
Funds Investing Trading
Index

Broadest possible diversification

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Longest time horizon

Yes

Lowest possible cost

Yes

Yes

No

Rarely

Yes

No*

No*

Greatest possible tax efficiency
Highest possible share of
market return

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Unknown

Unknown

* Including trading costs.

tune than the original, and I’m left to wonder, in the words
of the old song, “What have they done to my song, ma?”
The first exchange traded fund, created in 1992 by
Nathan Most, was named “Standard & Poor’s Depositary
Receipts” (SPDRs), and quickly dubbed “Spider.” It was a
brilliant idea. Investing in the S&P 500 Index, operated at
low cost with high tax efficiency, and held for the long term,
it held the prospect of providing ferocious competition to
the traditional S&P 500 Index Fund. (Brokerage commissions, however, made it less suitable for investors making
small investments regularly.) Most of the investors in the
Spiders, however, were not long-term investors. They were
active money managers, hedgers, and professional traders.
Currently, some 65 million (!) shares of Spiders ($8.8 billion
worth) are now traded every day.

THE EXCHANGE TRADED FUND

[167]

From that single fund, ETFs have grown to be a huge
part—$410 billion—of the $1 trillion index fund asset base, a
41 percent share, up from just 9 percent as 2000 began and
only 3 percent a decade ago. Led by index portfolios whose
shares are rapidly traded in narrow market segments (despite their stark contradiction of each of the five concepts
underlying the original index fund), ETFs have become a
force to be reckoned with in the financial markets. Their
amazing growth certainly says something about the energy of
Wall Street’s financial entrepreneurs, the focus of money
managers on gathering assets, the marketing power of brokerage firms, and the willingness—nay, eagerness—of investors to favor complexity over simplicity, continuing to
believe, against all odds, that they can beat the market.
The growth of ETFs has approached a stampede, not
only in number but in diversity. There are now nearly 340
ETFs available, including 122 already formed during 2006,
and the range of the investment choices available is remarkable.* There are 12 total stock market index funds
(U.S. and international) such as the Spider, still the largest
segment in terms of assets; 68 focused on investment
styles; 173 based on stock market sectors; and 58 concentrating their assets in particular foreign countries. There
* Early in 2007, 343 ETFs were on the drawing board, soon to be launched.
This stampede suggests a new investment fad. Such fads have rarely
enhanced the well-being of investors.

[168]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

are also a handful of bond ETFs and a scattering of ETFs
utilizing high leverage (doubling the swings in the stock
market), tracking commodity prices and currencies, and
using other high-risk strategies.
The march of assets into ETFs has also been impressive. Since 1999, ETFs have drawn $280 billion of net
new money, even larger than the $190 billion flowing into
their classic cousins. What’s more, the flow into style,
sector, and foreign funds has overwhelmed the flow into
the broad stock market index component. While these
broad funds accounted for 100 percent of the total ETF
inflow in the early years, they accounted for less than 20
percent from 2000 through 2006.

The renowned Purdey shotgun is great
for big-game hunting in Africa. But it’s also
excellent for suicide.

All-stock-market ETFs are the only instance in which
an ETF can replicate, and possibly even improve on, the
five paradigms of the original index fund listed earlier. But
only when they are bought and held for the long-term.
Their annual expense ratios are usually—but not always—
slightly lower than their mutual fund counterparts, although
commissions on purchases erode any advantage, and may
even overwhelm it. While their tax efficiency should be

THE EXCHANGE TRADED FUND

[169]

higher, actual practice so far has failed to confirm theory,
and investors who trade them are subject to their own taxes.
Their use by long-term investors is minimal. The Spiders
are, in fact, marketed to day traders. As the advertisements
say, “Now you can trade the S&P 500 all day long, in real
time.” I can’t help likening the ETF—a cleverly designed financial instrument—to the renowned Purdey shotgun, supposedly the world’s best. It’s great for big-game hunting in
Africa. But it’s also excellent for suicide.
I suspect that too many ETFs will prove, if not suicidal
to their owners in financial terms, at least wealth-depleting.
We know that ETFs are largely used by traders, for the
turnover of Spider shares is running at 3600 percent annual
rate. The turnover for the NASDAQ Qubes is even higher,
at 6,000 percent per year. It is only guesswork, but longterm investors hold perhaps 20 percent of the $100 billion
assets of these Spider-like broadly diversified ETFs, or
about $20 billion. The remaining assets, I presume, are
held by market makers and arbitrageurs, making heavy use
of short-selling and hedging strategies.
Assets of the other types of ETFs now total $310 billion.
Trading these funds is also remarkably high. The shares
of the major sector ETFs are typically turned over at an average annual rate of some 200 percent per year (an average
holding period of just six months), with the most popular
ETFs recently running turnover rates from 578 percent to

[170]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

735 percent, all the way up to 7,100 percent (Russell 2000
iShares) and 8,500 percent (SPDR Energy shares). Could
there be speculation going on here? In all, some $390 billion
of the current $410 billion ETF base represents a vast departure from the beneficial attributes of the original index fund.
Yes, these specialized ETFs are diversified, but only in
their narrow arenas. Owning the semiconductor industry is
not diversification in any usual sense, nor is owning the
South Korean stock market. And while sector ETFs frequently have the lowest expense ratios in their fields, they
can run three to six times the level of the lowest-cost allmarket index funds. What is more, sector ETFs not only
carry brokerage and trading costs, but often are sold as
parts of actively managed fund portfolios with adviser fees
of 1 percent or more, or in wrap accounts with annual fees
of 1.5 percent to 2.0 percent or more.
The net result of these differences is that sector
ETFs as a group are virtually certain to earn returns that
fall well short of the returns delivered by the stock market. Perhaps 1 percent to 3 percent a year is a fair estimate of these all-in costs, many times the 10 to 20
basis-point cost of the best classic index funds. It is not a
trivial difference. For no matter how often derided or ignored, the tautology remains that sector funds, soundly
administered, will earn a net return equal to the gross return of that sector, less intermediation costs.

THE EXCHANGE TRADED FUND

[171]

But whatever returns each sector ETF may earn, the
investors in those very ETFs will likely, if not certainly,
earn returns that fall well behind them. There is abundant
evidence that the most popular sector funds of the day are
those that have recently enjoyed the most spectacular recent performance, and that such “after-the-fact” popularity is a recipe for unsuccessful investing. The lesson in
Chapter 5—that mutual fund investors almost always do
significantly worse than the funds they own, and still
worse when they choose funds that are less diversified—is
likely to be repeated in ETFs.
To illustrate this point, consider the record of the 20
best performing ETFs during 2003–2006. Only one earned
a better return for its shareholders than the return it reported. The average shortfall in shareholder return was
equal to 5 percentage points per year. The largest gap was
14 percentage points; iShares Austria reported a 42 percent
return, but its investors earned just 28 percent. “Handle
with Care” should be the first warning on the ETF label
(though I have yet to see it used). Or perhaps: “CAUTION: PERFORMANCE CHASING AT WORK.”

A “double whammy”: betting on hot sectors
(emotions) and paying heavy costs (expenses)
are sure to be hazardous to your wealth.

[172]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

And so we have a “double whammy”: the nearinevitability of counterproductive market timing (emotions), as investors bet on sectors as they grow hot—
and bet against them when they grow cold—combined
with those heavy commissions and fees (expenses). Together, these two enemies of the equity investor are
sure to be hazardous to your wealth, to say nothing of
consuming giant globs of your time that could easily be
used in more productive and enjoyable ways.
In 2006, ETFs were also at the cutting edge of the
“market-beating” (at least in retrospect) strategies described
earlier. These promoters and entrepreneurs seem to acknowledge that their “fundamental indexing” approach is a
long-term strategy. Yet by choosing the ETF format, they
strongly imply that bringing stockbrokers into the distribution mix and actively buying and selling the funds will lead to
even larger short-term profits. I doubt it.

ETFs are an entrepreneur’s dream come true.
But are they an investor’s dream come true?

ETFs are clearly a dream come true for entrepreneurs,
stock brokers, and fund managers. But is it too much to
ask whether these index funds nouveau are an investor’s
dream come true? Do investors really benefit from being
able to trade ETFs “all day long, in real time”? Is less
diversification better than more diversification? Is trend-

THE EXCHANGE TRADED FUND

[173]

following a winner’s game, or a loser’s game? Are ETFs
truly low-cost when we add brokerage commissions to their
expense ratios? Is buy-and-sell (often with great frequency)
really a better strategy than buy-and-hold? If the classic
index fund was designed to capitalize on the wisdom of
long-term investing, aren’t investors in these index funds
nouveau too often engaging in the folly of short-term speculation? Doesn’t your own common sense give you the obvious answers to these questions?
On the broad spectrum that lies between advancing
the interests of the business and the interests of the
clients, where do ETFs fit? If you are making a single
large initial purchase of either of those two versions of
classic indexing—the Spider or the Vanguard Total Stock
Market ETF—at a low commission rate and holding them
for the long term, you’ll profit from their low expense ratios and may even enjoy a bit of extra tax efficiency. But if
you trade them, you’re defying the relentless rules of
humble arithmetic that are the key to successful investing.
If you like the idea of sector ETFs, use the appropriate
ones, don’t trade them, and use them in the right way—
sparingly, and only to diversify your portfolio.
Let me now answer the question I asked at the outset
of this chapter, “What have they done to my song, ma?”
As the creator of the world’s first index fund all those
years ago, I can only answer: “They’ve tied it up in a plastic bag and turned it upside down, ma, that’s what they’ve

[174]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

done to my song.” In short, the ETF is a trader to the
cause of classic indexing. I urge intelligent investors to
stay the course with the proven strategy. While I can’t say
that classic indexing is the best strategy ever devised,
your common sense should reassure you that the number
of strategies that are worse is infinite.
Don’t Take My Word for It
In an essay entitled “Indexing Goes Hollywood,”
here’s what Don Phillips, managing director of
Morningstar, has said: “[T]here is a dark side to indexing that investors should not ignore. The potential for harm to investors increases as index offerings
become more specialized, which is exactly what has
happened in the world of ETFs. . . . In the right
hands, precision tools can create great things; in the
wrong ones, however, they can do considerable
damage. In creating more complex offerings, the
index community has found new revenue sources
from . . . very specialized tools, but it has done so at
the risk of doing considerable harm to less sophisticated investors. The test of character facing the
index community is whether it ignores that risk or
steps up and tries to mitigate it. The continued
good name of indexing lies in the balance.”
(continued)

THE EXCHANGE TRADED FUND

From Jim Wiandt, editor of the Journal of Indexes:
“I have always found it ironic that indexing—like
most everything else in the world of finance—comes
in waves. Hedge fund indexes, microcap indexes, dividend indexes, commodities indexes, China indexes
and ‘enhanced’ indexes are all flavors of the month.
And I’ll give you three guesses as to what all these indexes have in common: (1) chasing returns, (2) chasing returns, or (3) chasing returns.
“If you believe in indexing, then you know that
there is no free money. Ultimately, the push toward
enhanced indexing is about enhancing the bottom
line for managers. . . . But it’s important for us to
keep our eyes on the ball and remember what makes
indexing, well, indexing. Low fees, broad diversification, hold hold hold. Don’t believe the hype. Try
to beat the market—in any manner—and you’re
likely to get beat . . . by about the cost of doing it.”
And now listen carefully to the warnings from two
senior officers of a major ETF sponsor. Chief executive: “For most people, sector funds don’t make a
lot of sense . . . [don’t] stray too far from the market’s
course.” Chief investment officer: “It would be unfortunate if people focused pin-point bets on very
narrowly defined ETFs. These still involve nearly as
much risk as concentrating on individual stock
picks. . . . You’re taking extraordinary risk. It’s possible to take a good thing too far. . . . How many people
really need them?”

[175]

C

e r Si x te
en

pt
ha

What Would Benjamin
Graham Have Thought
about Indexing?


A Confirmation from Mr. Buffett

THE FIRST EDITION OF The Intelligent Investo r was published in 1949. It was written by Benjamin Graham, the
most respected money manager of the era, and coauthor
(with David Dodd) of Security Analysis, a scholarly tome
originally published in 1934. The Intelligent Investo r is regarded as the best book of its kind—comprehensive, analytical, perceptive, and forthright—a book for the ages.
Although Benjamin Graham is best known by far for
his focus on the kind of value investing represented by the

WHAT WOULD GRAHAM HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT INDEXING? [177]

category of stocks he describes as “bargain issues,” he
cautioned, “the aggressive investor must have a considerable knowledge of security values—enough, in fact, to
warrant viewing his security operations as equivalent to a
business enterprise. . . . It follows from this reasoning
that the majority of security owners should elect the defensive classification.”

The majority of investors should be
satisfied with the reasonably good return
obtainable from a defensive portfolio.

Why? Because “[the majority of investors] do not
have the time, or the determination, or the mental equipment to embark upon such investing as a quasi-business.
They should therefore be satisfied with the reasonably
good return obtainable from a defensive portfolio, and
they should stoutly resist the recurrent temptation to increase this return by deviating into other paths.” While
the index fund was not even imagined in 1949, he was certainly describing the very approach that this precedentsetting fund would later follow. (Coincidently, it was also
in 1949 that an article in Fortune magazine introduced
me to the mutual fund industry, inspiring me to write my
1951 Princeton senior thesis on mutual funds, in which I

[178]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

even hinted at the index fund idea: “Mutual funds can
make no claim to superiority over the market averages.”)
For the defensive investor who required assistance, Graham originally recommended professional investment advisers who rely on “normal investment experience for their
results . . . and who make no claim to being brilliant (but)
pride themselves on being careful, conservative, and competent . . . whose chief value to their clients is in shielding
them from costly mistakes.” He cautioned about expecting
too much from stock-exchange houses, arguing that “the
Wall Street business fraternity . . . is still feeling its way toward the high standards and standing of a profession.” (A
half-century later, the quest remains far from complete.)
He also noted, profoundly if obviously, that Wall
Street is “in business to make commissions, and that the
way to succeed in business is to give customers what they
want, trying hard to make money in a field where they are
condemned almost by mathematical law to lose.” Later
on, in 1976, Graham described his opinion of Wall Street
as, “highly unfavorable . . . a Falstaffian joke that frequently degenerates into a madhouse . . . a huge laundry
in which institutions take in large blocks of each other’s
washing.” (Shades of Harvard’s Jack Meyer and Yale’s
David Swensen, from whom we heard earlier.)
In that first edition of The Intelligent Investo r, Graham commended the use by investors of leading investment

WHAT WOULD GRAHAM HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT INDEXING? [179]

funds as an alternative to creating their own portfolios.
Graham described the well-established mutual funds of his
era as “competently managed, making fewer mistakes than
the typical small investor,” carrying a reasonable expense,
and performing a sound function by acquiring and holding
an adequately diversified list of common stocks.
But he was bluntly realistic about what fund managers
might accomplish. He illustrated this point in his book
with data showing that from 1937 through 1947, when
the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index provided a total return
of 57 percent, the average mutual fund produced a total
return of 54 percent, excluding the oppressive impact of
sales loads. (The more things change, the more they remain the same.) Graham’s conclusion: “The figures are
not very impressive in either direction . . . on the whole,
the managerial ability of invested funds has been just
about able to absorb the expense burden and the drag of
uninvested cash.” In 1949, fund expenses and turnover
costs were far lower than in the modern fund industry.
That change explains why, as fund returns were overwhelmed by these costs in recent decades, the figures
were impressive only in a negative direction.
By 1965, Graham’s confidence that funds would
produce the market’s return, less costs, was somewhat
shaken. “Unsoundly managed funds,” he noted in a
later edition of The Intelligent Investo r, “can produce

[180]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

spectacular but largely illusionary profits for a while, followed inevitably by calamitous losses.” He was describing the so-called performance funds of the mid-1960s
Go-Go era, in which a “new breed that had a spectacular
knack for coming up with winners . . . (managed by)
bright, energetic, young people who promised to perform miracles with other people’s money . . . (but) who
have inevitably brought losses to their public in the end.”
He could have as easily been presciently describing the
hundreds of risky “new economy” mutual funds formed
during the great bull market of 1998 to 2000, and their
utter collapse in the subsequent 50 percent market crash
that followed.

“Unsoundly managed funds can produce
spectacular but largely illusionary profits for a
while, followed inevitably by calamitous losses.”

Graham also would have been appalled, not only by
the enormous (100 percent-plus) increase in those oncereasonable fund expenses, but also by the incredible increase in stock trading in mutual fund portfolios. During
Graham’s era, portfolio turnover ran to about 15 percent
per year. It now averages more than 100 percent. Graham would surely, and accurately, have described such an

WHAT WOULD GRAHAM HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT INDEXING? [181]

approach as rank speculation that flies directly in the
face of his deeply held investment principles.
Graham’s timeless lesson for the intelligent investor,
as valid today as when he prescribed it in his first edition,
is clear: “the real money in investment will have to be
made—as most of it has been made in the past—not out of
buying and selling but of owning and holding securities,
receiving interest and dividends and increases in value.”
His philosophy has been reflected over and over again in
this book, exemplified in the parable of the Gotrocks family in Chapter 1 and the distinction between the business
market and the expectations market in Chapter 2.

The real money in investment will be made
not out of buying and selling but
of owning and holding securities.

Owning and holding a diversified list of securities?
Wouldn’t Graham recommend a fund that essentially
buys the entire stock market and holds it forever, patiently receiving interest and dividends and increases in
value? Doesn’t his admonition to “strictly adhere to
standard, conservative, and even unimaginative forms of
investment,” eerily echo the concept of market indexing? When he advises the defensive investor “to emphasize diversification more than individual selection,”

[182]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

hasn’t Benjamin Graham come within inches of describing the modern-day stock index fund?
Late in his life, in an interview published in 1976,
Graham candidly acknowledged the inevitable failure of
individual investment managers to outpace the market.
(Again coincidentally, the interview took place at the very
moment that the public offering of the world’s first mutual index fund—First Index Investment Trust, now Vanguard 500 Index Fund—was taking place.) He was asked,
“Can the average manager obtain better results than the
Standard & Poor’s Index over the years?” Graham’s
blunt response: “No.” Then he explained: “In effect that
would mean that the stock market experts as a whole
could beat themselves—a logical contradiction.”*
Then he was asked whether investors should be content with earning the market’s return. Graham’s answer:
“Yes.” All these years later, the idea that earning your fair
share of the stock market’s return is the winning strategy
is the central theme of this Little Book. Only the classic
index fund can guarantee that outcome.
Finally, he was asked about the objection made
against the index fund—that different investors have
* That is to say, there is no evidence that professional experts earn higher
returns than individual amateurs, nor that any class of institutional investor
(e.g., pension managers or mutual fund managers) earns more than any
other class.
