
The Iron Triangle of Risk Control
How many shares will you buy or sell short in your next trade? Beginners often
choose an arbitrary number, such as a thousand or 200 shares. They may buy more if
they’ve made money in their latest trade or less if they’ve lost money.
In fact, trade size should be based on a formula instead of vague gut feel. Use the
2% Rule to make rational decisions on the maximum number of shares you may buy
or sell short in any trade. I named this process “The Iron Triangle of risk control”
(Figure 50.1).
For example, when I volunteered to teach a yearlong course “Money and Trading”
in a local high school and wanted to make the experience real for the kids, I opened
a $40,000 account. I told my students that if, at the end of the school year, we made
money, I’d give half the profit to their school and distribute the rest among class
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

205

50. THE TWO PERCENT RULE

A

B

C
FIGURE 50.1â•… The Iron Triangle of risk control.

Construct the Iron Triangle in three steps:
A. Your maximum dollar risk for the trade you’re planning (never more than 2% of your
account).
B. The distance, in dollars, from your planned entry to your stop—your maximum risk per
share.
C. Divide “A” by “B” to find the maximum number of shares you may trade. You aren’t
obligated to trade this many shares, but you may not trade more than this number.

participants. I also told them that their maximum risk per trade was one percent. A
kid would stand up in class and make a case for buying Nokia at $16, with a stop at
$14.50. “How many shares may we trade?”—I’d ask. With the maximum risk of $400
per trade and $1.50 risk per share, the kids would be allowed to buy 250 shares, with
some leeway for commissions.
If you have a tiny account, you may end up trading the maximum permitted number of shares each time. As your account grows bigger, you may want to vary the size
of your trades: say a third of the maximum for regular trades, two thirds for extra
strong trades, and the full amount for exceptional trades. Whatever you do, the Iron
Triangle of risk control will set the maximum number of shares you may trade.

The 2% Rule in the Futures Markets
A trader recently asked me how he could apply the Iron Triangle of risk control to
trading e-mini futures in his $50,000 account. I replied:
A. If you are trading a $50k account, the 2% Rule would limit your risk on any
trade to $1,000. Let’s say you want to be conservative and risk only 1% of that
account, or $500. That will be the first side of â•›“the Iron Triangle of risk Control.”
B. Suppose you look at your favorite e-minis and want to sell a contract short at
1810, with a profit target at 1790 and a stop at 1816.You’ll be risking 6 points,
and since one point in e-minis is worth $50, your total risk will be $300 (plus
commissions and possible slippage). That will be the second side of your Iron
Triangle of risk control.
C. Close the triangle by dividing “a” by “b” to find the maximum size you may trade.
If your maximum risk is $500, then one contract, but if $1,000, then three.

206

RISK MANAGEMENT

Please meet two futures traders, Mr. Hare and Mr. Turtle, each with a $50,000
account. The agile Mr. Hare sees that the average daily range in gold is about
$30, worth $3,000 per day for a single contract. The daily range in corn is about 10
cents, worth $500 per day for a single contract. He thinks that if he can catch just
half of a day’s range, he’ll make $1,500 per contract in gold, while the same level of
skill will bring him only $250 in corn. Mr. Hare logs into his brokerage account and
buys two contracts of gold.
The cautious Mr. Turtle has a different arithmetic. He begins by using the 2%
Rule to cap his maximum risk per trade at $1,000. He sees that it would be impossible to place a meaningful stop while trading gold which can move $3,000 a day.
To buy gold in his account would be like grabbing a very large tiger by a very short
tail. If, on the other hand, he trades corn, he’ll have good staying power. That tiger
is smaller and has a longer tail, which he can wrap around his wrist. Mr. Turtle buys
a contract of corn. Who do you think is more likely to win in the long run, Mr. Hare
or Mr. Turtle?
Futures markets are more deadly than stocks not because of any special complexity. Sure, they have some specific angles, but those aren’t too hard to learn.
Futures kill traders by seducing them with paper-thin margins. They offer enormous leverage –ability to trade large positions on a 5% margin. This works wonders
when the market moves in your favor, but it slices your wallet when the market
turns against you.
You can succeed in futures only with sensible risk control, using the 2% Rule.
A. Calculate 2% of your account value—this will be the maximum acceptable risk
level for any trade. If you have $50,000 in your futures account, the most you
can risk is $1,000.
B. Examine the charts of the market that interests you and write down your planned
entry, target, and stop. Remember: a trade without these three numbers is not a
trade but a gamble. Express the value of the move from your entry to your stop
in dollars.
C. Divide A by B, and if the result turns out to be less than one, no trade is permitted—it means you cannot afford to trade even one contract.
Let’s review two market examples, featuring similar chart patterns (Figure 50.2).
Let’s assume you have a $50,000 account, which permits you to risk the maximum
of $1,000 per trade.
You can trade futures reasonably safely only with strict money management. The
leverage of futures can work for you—as long as you stay away from those contracts
that can kill your account.
A professional futures trader surprised me early in my career when he told me
he spent a third of his time on risk management. Beginners jump into trades without giving them much thought. Intermediate-level traders focus on market analysis.
Professionals dedicate a massive proportion of their time to risk control—and take
money away from beginners and amateurs.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

207

51. THE TWO PERCENT RULE
Silver

Wheat

B
B
C
A

C

A

FIGURE 50.2â•… Daily charts with 13- and 26-day EMAs and Autoenvelopes. The Impulse system and MACDHistogram 12-26-9. (Charts by Tradestation)

The 2% Rule in Futures—Silver and Wheat
Suppose you want to buy silver at the right edge of this chart. Prices have traced a double
bottom with a false downside breakout. MACD-Histogram has traced a bullish divergence.
The Impulse system has turned blue, permitting buying. The nearby futures contract trades
at $21.415 a few minutes before the close.
You decide that if you buy, your profit target will be near $23, halfway from the EMA to the
upper channel line. Your stop will be at $20.60, the level of the latest low. You’ll be risking
$0.815/oz trying to make about $1.585/oz—a 2:1 reward/risk ratio, an acceptable number.
Are you allowed to take this trade? Absolutely not! That $0.815/oz risk per contract
translates into $4,075 total risk, since one contract covers of 5,000 ounces of silver. Remember, your maximum permitted risk is $1,000. If you’re eager to take this trade, you may
buy a single mini-contract. It covers only 1,000 ounces of silver, meaning you’ll risk $815.
Best wishes for that sensible trade.
Now, suppose you’re interested in buying wheat at the right edge of this chart. Its technical picture looks similar: a double bottom with a bullish divergence of MACD-Lines and
MACD-Histogram. The Impulse system has turned blue, permitting buying. Shortly before
the close, prices are near 658 cents.
You decide that if you enter there, your target will be near 680 cents, near the upper channel line. Your stop will go to 652 cents, the level of a recent low. You’ll be risking 10 cents/bu,
trying to make about 22 cents/bu—a reward/risk ratio of 2:1, similar to that of silver.
Are you allowed to take this trade? Yes! That 10 cent risk per contract translates into
$500 total risk, since the contract covers 5,000 bushels of wheat. Remember, your maximum permitted risk is $1,000. If you’re very bullish, you may even buy two contracts.
You must keep in mind that when trading futures the technical pictures of different markets may look similar, but you must base your decisions to trade or not to trade on money
management rules.

If you cannot afford to trade a certain market, you can still download its data, do
your homework, and paper trade it as if you were doing it with real money. This will
prepare you for the day when your account grows big enough or the market grows
quiet enough for you to put on a trade.

208

RISK MANAGEMENT

■■51. The Six Percent Rule
A piranha is a tropical river fish not much bigger than a man’s hand, but with a mean
set of teeth. What makes it so dangerous is that it attacks in packs. If a dog, a donkey,
or a person stumbles into a tropical stream, a pack of piranhas can attack with such
a mass of bites that the victim collapses. A bull can walk into a river, be attacked by a
pack of piranhas, and a few minutes later only its bones will be left in the water.
A trader, who keeps sharks at bay with the 2% Rule, still needs protection from piranhas. The 6% Rule will save you from being nibbled to death.
Most of us, when we find ourselves in trouble, start pushing harder. Losing traders often take on bigger positions, trying to trade their way out of a hole. A better
response to a losing streak is to step aside and take time off to think. The 6% Rule
sets a limit on the maximum monthly drawdown in any account. If you reach it, you
stop trading for the rest of the month. The 6% Rule forces you to get out of the water before piranhas get you.
The 6% Rule prohibits you from opening any new trades for the rest of
the month when the sum of your losses for the current month and the
risks in open trades reach 6% of your account equity.
We all go through periods when we are in tune with the markets, taking one profit
after another.When everything we touch turns to gold, that’s the time to trade actively.
There are other times when everything we touch turns into a completely different
substance. We go through periods when our systems go out of sync with the market,
delivering one loss after another. It’s important to recognize such dark periods and
not push yourself but rather step back. A professional on a losing streak is likely to
take a break, continue to monitor the market, and wait to get in gear with it again.
Amateurs are more likely to keep pushing until their accounts become crippled. The
6% Rule will make you pause while your account is still largely intact.

The Concept of Available Risk
Before you put on a trade, ask yourself: what would happen if all your trades suddenly turned against you? If you used the 2% Rule to set stops and trade sizes, the
6% Rule will limit the maximum total loss that your account may suffer.
1. Add up all your losses taken this month.
2. Add up your risks on all currently open trades. The dollar risk of any open position is the distance from your entry to the current stop, multiplied by the trade
size. Suppose you’ve bought 200 shares for $50, with a stop at $48.50, risking
$1.50 per share. In that case, your open risk is $300. If that trade starts going
your way and you move your stop to breakeven, your open risk will become zero.
3. Add the two lines above (losses for the month plus risks on open trades). If
their sum comes to 6% of what your account equity was at the beginning of the
month, you may not put on another trade until the end of the month or until the
open trades move in your favor, allowing you to raise your stops.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

51. THE SIX PERCENT RULE

209

The 6% Rule changes the usual question—“do I have enough money for this
trade?”—to a much more relevant one—“do I have enough risk available for
this trade?” â•ƒThat limit—risking no more than 6% of your account equity in any
given month—keeps your total risk under control, ensuring long-term survival.
Your total available risk for the month is 6% of your account equity, and the
first question to ask yourself when considering a new trade is “Considering all
my open and closed trades for this month, do I have enough available risk for
this trade?”
You know how much money, if any, you’ve lost during the current month. It’s
easy to calculate how much money you have at risk in your open trades. If your previous losses for this month plus your risk on existing trades expose you to a total
risk of 6% of your account equity, you may not put on another trade.
If the 6% Rule doesn’t allow you to put on a new trade, continue to track
the stocks you’re interested in. If you see a trade you really want to take, but
don’t have available risk, consider closing out one of your open trades to free up
some risk.
If you are near the 6% limit but see a very attractive trade you wouldn’t want to
miss, you have two options.You can take profits on one of your open trades to free up
available risk. Alternatively, you may tighten some of your protective stops, reducing
your open risk. Just be sure that in your eagerness to trade you do not make your
stops too tight (see Chapter 54).
Let’s review an example, assuming, for the sake of simplicity, that a trader will
risk 2% of his account equity on any given trade.
1. At the end of the month, a trader has $50,000 in his account, with no open positions. He writes down his maximum risk levels for the month ahead—2% or
$1,000 per trade and 6% or $3,000 for the account as a whole.
2. Several days later he sees a very attractive stock A, figures out where to put his
stop, and buys a position that puts $1,000, or 2% of his equity, at risk.
3. A few days later he sees a stock B, and puts on a similar trade, risking another
$1,000.
4. By the end of the week he sees a stock C, and buys it, risking another $1,000.
5. The next week he sees a stock D, more attractive than any of the three above.
May he buy it? No, he may not, because his account is already exposed to 6%
risk. He has three open trades, risking 2% on each, which means he may lose
6% if the market turns against him. The 6% Rule prohibits him from taking any
more risks at this time.
6. A few days later, the stock A rallies and the trader moves his stop above breakeven. Stock D, which he wasn’t allowed to trade just a few days ago, still looks
very attractive. May he buy it now? Yes, he may, because his current risk is only
4% of his account. He is risking 2% in stock B and another 2% in stock C, but
nothing in stock A, because its stop is above breakeven. The trader buys stock D,
risking another $1,000 or 2%.

210

RISK MANAGEMENT

7. Later in the week, the trader sees stock E, which looks very bullish. May he buy
it? Not according to the 6% Rule because his account is already exposed to a
combined risk of 6% in stocks B, C, and D (there is no longer a risk in stock A).
He may not buy stock E.
8. A few days later, stock B hits its stop. Stock E still looks attractive. May he buy it?
No, since he already lost 2% on stock B and has a 4% exposure to risk in stocks
C and D. Adding another position at this time would expose him to more than
6% risk per month.
Three open trades isn’t a lot of diversification. If you wish to make more trades,
set your risk per trade at less than 2%. For example, if you risk only 1% of your
account equity on any trade, you may open up to six positions before maxing out at
the 6% limit. In trading a large account, I use the 6% Rule but tighten the 2% Rule
to well under 1%.
The 6% Rule allows you to increase your trading size when you’re on a winning
streak but makes you stop trading early in a losing streak. When markets move in
your favor, you can move your stops to breakeven and have more available risk for
new trades. On the other hand, if your positions start going against you and hitting
stops, you’ll quickly stop trading and save the bulk of your account for a fresh start
next month.
The 2% Rule and the 6% Rule provide guidelines for pyramiding—adding to
winning positions. If you buy a stock and it climbs high enough to raise your stop
above breakeven, then you may buy more of the same stock, as long as the risk on
the new position is no more than 2% of your account equity and your total account
risk is less than 6%. Handle each addition as a separate trade.
Many traders go through emotional swings, feeling elated at the highs and gloomy
at the lows. Those mood swings will not help you trade, just the opposite. It is better
to invest your energy in risk control. The 2% and the 6% Rules will convert your
good intentions into the reality of safer trading.

■■52. A Comeback from a Drawdown
When the level of risk goes up, our ability to perform goes down. Beginners make
money on small trades, start feeling confident, and jack up trade size. That’s when
they start losing. The increased level of risk on bigger positions makes them stiffer
and less nimble, and that’s all it takes to fall behind.
I saw a great example of that while running a psychological training group for a
day-trading firm in New York. That firm taught its traders a proprietary stock trading system and let them trade the firm’s capital on a profit-sharing basis. Their two
top traders were making up to a million dollars a month; others made much smaller
profits but quite a few lost money. The firm’s owner asked me to come and help losing traders.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

52. A COMEBACK FROM A DRAWDOWN

211

They were shocked to hear that a psychiatrist was coming and loudly protested
they “weren’t crazy.” The owner provided the motivation by telling his worst performers they had to participate—or else leave the firm. After six weeks, the results
were such that we had a waiting list for the second group.
Since the company taught traders its own system, we focused on psychology and
risk control. In one of our first meetings, a trader complained that he had lost money
each day for the past 13 days. His manager, who sat in on our meetings, confirmed
that the fellow was using the firm’s system but couldn’t make any money. I began by
saying that I’d take off my hat for anyone who lost 13 days in a row and had the emotional strength to come in and trade the next morning. I asked the man how many
shares he traded, since the firm set a maximum for each trader. He was permitted to
buy or sell up to 700 shares at a clip, but voluntarily reduced it to 500.
I told him to drop his size down to 100 shares until he had a week with more winning days than losing and was profitable overall. Once he cleared that hurdle for two
weeks in a row, he could go up to trading 200 shares at a clip. Then, after another
2-week profitable period, he could go up to 300 shares, and so on. He was allowed
a 100 share increment after two weeks of profitable trading, but if he had a single
losing week, he’d have to drop back to the previous level. In other words, he had to
start small, increase the size slowly, but drop it fast in case of trouble.
The trader loudly objected that 100 shares weren’t enough to make money. I told
him to stop kidding himself, since by trading 500 shares he wasn’t making any money
either, and he reluctantly agreed. When we met a week later he reported that he had
four profitable days and was profitable overall. He made very little money because
of the 100 share size, but he was ahead of the game. He continued to make money
during the next week and then stepped up to 200 shares. After another profitable
week he asked, “Doc, do you think this could be psychological?” â•ƒThe group roared.
Why would a man lose while trading 500 shares, but make money trading 100
or 200?
I took a $10 bill out of my pocket and asked whether anyone in our group would
like to earn it by climbing on top of our long and narrow conference table and
walking from one end to the other. Several hands went up. Wait, I said, I have a better offer. I’ll give $1,000 cash to anyone who comes with me up to the roof of our
10-story office building and uses a board as wide as this table to walk to the roof of
another 10-story building across the boulevard. No volunteers.
I started egging on the group—the board will be sturdy, we’ll do it on a windless day, I’ll pay $1,000 cash on the spot. The physical challenge would be the same
as walking on the conference table, but the reward so much greater. Still no takers.
Why? Because if you lose your balance on the table, you’ll jump down a couple of
feet and land on the carpet. If you lose your balance between two rooftops, you’d be
splattered on the asphalt.
The higher levels of risk impair our ability to perform.You need to train yourself
to accept risks slowly and in well-defined steps. Depending on how actively you
trade, those steps can be measured in weeks or months, but the principle remains
the same—you need to be profitable during two units of time to go up a step in

212

RISK MANAGEMENT

your risk size. If you lose money during one unit of time, drop down a step in your
risk size. This is especially useful for people who want to return to trading after a
bad drawdown. You need to gradually work your way back into trading, without an
upsurge of fear.
Most beginners are in a hurry to make a killing, but guess who gets killed. Unscrupulous brokers promote overtrading (putting on trades that are too big for your
account) to generate commissions. Some stockbrokers outside the United States
offer a “shoulder” of 10:1, allowing you to buy $10,000 worth of stock for every
$1,000 you deposit with the firm. Some forex houses offer a deadly “shoulder” of
100:1 and even 400:1.
Putting on a trade is like diving for treasure. There is gold on the ocean floor, but
as you scoop it up, remember to glance at your air gauge. The ocean floor is littered
with the remains of divers who saw great opportunities but ran out of air. A professional diver always thinks about his air supply. If he doesn’t get any gold today, he’ll
go for it tomorrow. He needs to survive and dive again. Beginners kill themselves by
running out of air. The lure of free gold is too strong. Free gold! It reminds me of a
Russian saying—the only free thing is this world is cheese in a mousetrap.
Successful traders survive and prosper thanks to their discipline.The 2% Rule will
keep you safe from the sharks, while the 6% Rule will save you from the piranhas.
If you follow these rules and have a reasonable trading system, you’ll be miles ahead
of your competitors.
