
So You Want to Be a Rainmaker
Rainmaker is a term that is used broadly across many different niches. It basically means either that you get paid to make money, or that you’re really good at making

383

money “rain.”
There are two main schools of thought when it comes to becoming a rainmaker. Number one, you can put in a ton of time, sweat, and energy to learn everything and
anything there is about trading so that you can make as much money as possible with your newfound skills. For long-term, consistent cash flow, I believe this is the
best way. Unfortunately, most people don’t have the time, energy, and dedication. And if the stress doesn’t get you, the vodka and tequila will. Sorry, liver, I will try
to be nicer to you in the future. Heads up: if you do have the occasional drink from time to time, take some milk thistle to help protect your liver.
The second school of thought is that you don’t have to become a total package rainmaker if you’re willing to figure out where it’s raining, then head there and set up
tarps and buckets so that you can sit and collect it. Now we’re talking.
I have tried both, but I believe the best mix of the two is to gather some basic knowledge on how the markets work, just enough to keep you from hurting yourself,
then figure out where it’s raining and go there, set up some tarps and buckets, and collect the rain. Let everyone else work harder so that you can work smarter.
Let’s take the S&P E-minis, for example. Pretend that the average true range (ATR) for the S&P is 10 points and you want to take out 2 of those 10 points every
day. Sounds easy, right?
It sounds easier than it actually is. The average true range is really just the average daily range of that market from its low to its high or from its high to its low.
Now let’s assume, for example, that during that same time, gold’s average true range is, say, 40. Which one do you think it’s going to be easier to grab 2 points out
of?
Your common sense tells you that it should be easier to make 2 points from a 40-point move than to make 2 points from a 10-point move.
Which one would you rather try? Would it be easier to land a plane on a large runway, or would it be easier to land a plane on an aircraft carrier? Obviously, the
longer runway is going to be more forgiving of any errors you make in the process than the aircraft carrier.

Shawshank Redemption
One of my favorite movies is Shawshank Redemption. In the movie, Andy Dufresne is wrongly convicted of a murder he didn’t commit. He is in the process of
escaping from prison, but in order to escape, he must burst a two-foot-diameter sewer pipe, then crawl 500 yards through feces to escape and claim his freedom. This
is a line from the movie:
Andy crawled to freedom through five hundred yards of shit smelling foulness I can’t even imagine, or maybe I just don’t want to. Five hundred yards … that’s
the length of five football fields, just shy of half a mile.
You’re probably wondering why I’m telling you this, and where it’s going. Great question. It’s a great analogy for trading. I have no clue how you make money
without first risking it. In order to find the profitable trades, you must get dirty, crawl around in some feces, get stopped out on some trades, and lose some money.
There is no way I know of to tweak out the bad trades so that you only get the good ones.
If there were a field full of diamonds covered in feces, and it was a race to find as many as you could in the shortest amount of time, what would you do? If you
were smart, you would roll up your sleeves and get to work, stink and all. Again, there are no perfect trade setups and no perfect traders. Try not to make trade setups
too complicated. Don’t look for a confirmation of a confirmation of a confirmation, for example, because you are too afraid of being stopped out and losing money.
Stop losses are a large part of what we do; they’re how we manage our risk.
You must learn to be comfortable with your discomfort.

Don’t Worry, Be Happy
That’s a catchy little tune, one you could never get out of your head, just like when you take your kids to Disneyland and go on It’s a Small World After All.
Don’t worry if you don’t know how to trade gold futures; I’m going to teach you everything you need to know so that you can get up and running as quickly as
possible. We’ve already discussed the trading personality of the gold market, so we can skip that and move right into the contract specs.
Any time you look at trading a new market, or adding a new market to your trading toolbox, you must figure out the contract specifications. The contract for gold
that we will be trading is the biggie (not the mini or micro contract). The symbol is GC, and it is currently traded on COM EX/NYM EX, which is owned by the CM E
Group.
The minimum tick move for gold (GC) is 10 cents. Each 10-cent move is worth $10. For example, if gold goes from 1880 to 1880.10, that is 1 tick, and that 1 tick is
worth $10. There are 10 ticks in every point of gold, so every point of gold is worth $100 per contract. If you’re using more contracts, multiply by that number
accordingly.
You must know how much it will cost you to trade gold. There are two different factors you need to know; one is the intraday margin for gold, and the other is the
overnight margin. The exchange sets the minimum intraday margins and the minimum overnight margins, but your broker can, and in most cases will, increase those
minimums. It does this to protect both itself and you.
M argins also change when a market grows volatile. The exchange will increase them in an attempt to limit volatility. Sometimes it works, and sometimes it makes
things worse. The easiest way for you to find out what the intraday and overnight margins are is to pick up your phone and call your broker or clearing firm. It should
be more than glad to help you. If it isn’t, switch to someone else.

The Famous Good Night Gold Trade
The first gold trade I’m going to share with you is the famous good night gold trade. This is a simple trade setup, but don’t let that fool you. It is extremely powerful.
I’ve found over the years that the simple stuff usually kicks the shit out of the complicated stuff. For some reason, I get the most questions on this simple setup. I
think the reason I get the most questions on this setup is that it’s so simple and easy that most people try to make it more complicated. If you find yourself wanting
to add more stuff to this trade, I caution you not to. Here is a famous quote. I’m not sure who said it, but it’s great!
The system wasn’t designed so that most people could beat it. M ost traders take a good system and destroy it by trying to make it into a perfect system.

384

What I have found over the years is that most people don’t like losing money. Successful traders don’t like it either. But it is a risk thing, and I would rather lose a
little than a lot, and live to fight another day.

Gold Settlement Price
The first thing you must know about the good night gold trade is that you have to be able to figure out the settled price of gold, or at least be able to find it easily. The
settlement price is very important for this setup. If you don’t know what the gold settlement price is, you won’t be able to make this trade.
The gold settlement price is determined at 1:30 p.m. EST. There is a close price and a settlement price. You want the settlement price, not the close price. It doesn’t
really matter what it means; all you need to know is that you want to know the settlement price of gold, or at least where to find it.
Notice that at point 1 in Figure 20.1, it is 1:30 p.m. EST on a one-minute chart. If you can’t find the settlement price, this will do in a pinch. Sometimes the close
price and the settlement price will be close; sometimes they will be further apart.

Figure 20.1
If you are a TradeStation or thinkorswim user, they actually calculate it correctly and display it as the net change in gold price. Tada! It’s like magic, but not all
brokers calculate their net from the settlement at 1:30 p.m. EST; some use the close, and others use the electronic close. No worry here; there is still another easy way
to find out the settlement price of gold. Google the CM E Group website and look for “gold settlement price,” then do a quick search and you will find the URL. Figure
20.2 shows how you do it.

385

Figure 20.2

1. Type in the words “CM E Gold Quotes.”
2. Click on the first link that you find at the top of the page in Google from the CM E.
3. It should lead you to this URL: http://www.cmegroup.com/trading/metals/precious/gold_quotes_settlements_futures.html.
When you get there, it will look like Figure 20.3.

386

Figure 20.3

1. Find the Volume column at point 1.
2. Find the month that is showing the most volume. In this case, it is 75 (point 2). This is so low because I took this screen shot as soon as gold opened at 6:00 p.m.
Gold is thin when it opens up. I actually have a trade that I love to do at 6:00 p.m. EST. I call it a gold wiggle trade, where I pick the pockets of retail traders by
playing mental masturbation games in the DOM E, or Depth of M arket, Level 2 if you’re a stock trader. But that is for the next book if John can con me into
writing one more time.
3. Now just line up the month that has the most volume with the column headed Prior Settle, and there you have the settlement price. All you have to do is write this
number down. In this case, it’s 1617.30, as seen at point 3.
You now know how to find the settlement price of gold. Congratulations! I told you that I would walk you through the steps and that they’d be pretty easy to
understand.

How to Turn $600 into $6,000
Here are the good night gold trading rules:
1. Find the settlement price of gold at 1:30 p.m. EST.
2. Look at the Gold ADX (average directional index; this is an indicator that’s available on most platforms) reading on a daily chart. If it’s above 20, then yes, it’s
trending, and it is worth trading. If it isn’t, don’t trade.
3. Look at the daily chart: is gold in an uptrend or a downtrend on the daily chart?
4. If it’s in an uptrend, go long at 11:30 p.m. EST if gold is up more than 3, but not more than 20, from the settlement price.
5. If it’s in a downtrend, go short at 11:30 p.m. EST if gold is down more than 3, but not more than 20, from the settlement price.

387

6. Use a 6-point stop loss and a 60-point target.
7. Stay in the trade until either the target or the stop is hit.
8. You can also have decision points or targets at +20 and +40 to decide whether you are going to keep the trade or cut it loose if the stop hasn’t been hit.
This is a real sweet setup. It works only about 30 or 40 percent of the time, but in reality it needs to work only about 1 out of 10 times because you are risking 6 to
make 60. To break this down to its simplest terms, the smallest possible size that you can trade on a gold futures contract is one contract. You are going to risk $600 to
potentially make $6,000. I will take that trade every day, all day long, and twice on Sunday.

Frequently Asked Questions
Why do you enter the trade at 11:30 p.m. ES T?
Because you have the Asian markets opening and the European markets about to open, so you’re getting in front of a potential move that will take you into the
market, and we are trying to take advantage of potential volatility.
Why do you think this trade works so well?
This setup works so well because you can’t mess with it. You will be in bed, so you will not be able to move your stop or jump out early. It forces you to hold
on to a winner, while also forcing you to cut your losses quickly. Let’s face it, most of the time, when you place the trade with your target and your stop, you
will wake in the morning with either a 6-point stop loss or a target that has been hit, or you will have a working trade that’s going in your direction first thing in
the morning.
It removes the human factor from the equation. I will let you in on a little secret: I’m never smarter once I’m in a trade. I almost always make a bad decision
the second I start messing with a predetermined plan. Plan your trades and trade your plan.
How can you get over the fear of trading?
There are a lot of people who will tell you that your job is to be an unemotional robot while trading, but I think that’s a load of BS. I believe your job is to manage
being a bumble of nervous emotion, and not allow your voice or head talk to interfere with your best course of action.
It’s true that the longer you trade, the less emotional you get about it. But it takes years and years and years of experience to get there, so you will have to
learn how to become comfortable with being uncomfortable.
Does this trade work on the gold mini?
No, it’s too thin.
Do you do this trade every night?
No, I trade it only when it meets the checklist rules for this setup.
What if you are already in the trade from the night before, and you targeted a stop, but it hasn’t been hit. If it meets the criteria again tonight, should
you add to your position?
No. I let the trade play itself out before I do another one.
Do you move your stop to breakeven once you’re up a little?
No, I don’t. I’m in bed. If it’s the next day, I still don’t even know that the target hasn’t been hit. I can decide to cut it loose at +20 or +40 the next day, but I
never move the stop. I have to give it enough room to run. It’s a double-edged sword, but I believe there are more advantages than disadvantages.

For the rest of the chapter, I’m going to take you through some trade setups that are working for me right now. It’s going to look like a step-by-step instruction
manual with tons of details, so there will be a lot of screen shots with numbers on them. Simply follow the steps in order: 1, 2, 3. And don’t worry, these are not like
the instructions you got with the cheap furniture you had when you were in college or when you first got married, which were clearly written by someone who had
never attempted to put it together himself.

388

Figure 20.4

Good Night Gold Step by Step
GOOD NIGHT GOLD LONG EXAMPLE
1. If the 14-period ADX is below 20, don’t trade it. It’s not worth it because the market is too choppy (see point 1 in Figure 20.4).
2. If the 14-period ADX is above 20, the markets are trending and you can trade (see point 2 in Figure 20.4).
You don’t care which way the market is going; you just want to know that it’s trending. You can look at the chart and tell which way it’s going fairly easily.

389

Figure 20.5

1. In Figure 20.5, is the 14-period ADX above 20? Answer: yes!
2. Is the daily gold chart in an uptrend? Answer: yes!
3. Is gold up more than 3 points, but not more than 20, at 11:30 p.m. EST from the 1:30 p.m. EST settlement price? Answer: yes!
All you have to do is place a long trade and use a 6-point stop loss and a 60-point target. You can also have decision points at +20 and +40 where you decide
whether you are going to keep the trade or cut it loose. Now just rinse and repeat.
GOOD NIGHT GOLD SHORT EXAMPLE

390

Figure 20.6

1. In Figure 20.6, is the 14-period ADX above 20? Answer: yes!
2. Is the daily gold chart in a downtrend? Answer: yes!
3. Is gold down more than 3, but not more than 20, at 11:30 p.m. EST from the 1:30 p.m. EST settlement price? Answer: yes!
4. Now all you have to do is place a short trade and use a 6-point stop loss and a 60-point target. You can also have decision points at +20 and +40 where you decide
whether you are going to keep the trade or cut it loose. Now, rinse later and repeat.
What happened next with this trade (see Figure 20.7)?
1. The short trade is filled at 1,750 with a 6-point stop loss and a 60-point target.
2. Notice the drop in gold. I’m warning you right now that this trade can be extremely addicting.
The hardest part about this trade is following the rules and not jumping right back in as soon as your target is hit. M y advice to you is to make sure you have your
mind right for the massive moves.

391

Figure 20.7
You should pass on the trade in Figure 20.8, as it does not meet the filter criteria for the trade.

392

Figure 20.8

1. Is the 14-period ADX above 20? Answer: yes!
2. Is the daily gold chart in a downtrend? Answer: yes!
3. Is gold down more than 3, but not more than 20, at 11:30 p.m. EST from the 1:30 p.m. EST settlement price? Answer: no! It is up 3.70, not down, so there is no
trade.
4. You can enter a sell stop at 1,614.30, which would be when gold would be down 3.00 points. I am testing this right now; sometimes it works and sometimes it
doesn’t, but I figured I would tell you the good with the bad.
GOOD NIGHT GOLD CHECKLIST RECAP
• Is gold trending on the daily chart? To answer that question, we will use the 14-period ADX.

• If the ADX is above 20, you can trade it.
• If the ADX is below 20, you cannot trade it.
• What direction is the daily trend of gold?

• If it is up, focus on long.
• If it is down, focus on short.
• If gold is trending up on a daily chart, place a long trade at 11:30 p.m. EST, as long as gold is up at least 3, but no more than 20, from the settlement price at 1:30 p.m.
EST.
• The stop is 6 points, and the target is 60 points. But we also have decision points at +20 points and +40 points.
• Warning: The big moves are addictive, and this trade will fool you into thinking that you have more trading skills than you actually do, because gold is trending well
and has a good wide ATR. Plus, you cheated a little bit, didn’t you? You figured out where it was raining and set up tarps and buckets. You’re a little crazy, crazy
like a fox! Now laugh all the way to the bank.

The Gold Rush Trade
The gold rush trades off the advantage of the breakout moves that gold produces much of the time. On the surface, it will look a little like the good night gold trade, but
it’s not. Although the filter criteria for this trade are the same, it’s a different setup. The reason you are going to use these filter criteria is to make sure that you keep
yourself on the right side of the market, and that you keep yourself out of trouble by making sure that you are not overaggressively pursuing or chasing the market.
You know what happens to all dogs that chase cars, don’t you? They eventually get hit. If they survive, they either learn their lesson the hard way or lose more legs.
This works on intraday and/or overnight. It’s a basic scalp trade that can turn into a runner if you catch it right. For this trade, you do not care what the daily trend
is; you just want it to be moving.

Gold Rush Rules
1. Is the gold ADX on a one- or two-minute chart above 20? If yes, go to step 2. If no, stop!
2. Is gold up or down at least 3 points on the day, and no more than 60 percent of its daily ATR (average true range)?
3. Place a buy stop at new highs or a sell stop at new lows.
4. Use a 3- to 6-point stop loss, and use a target that is double your stop.
The reason you are looking for gold to be up at least 3 and no more than 60 percent of its daily ATR is that it’s a safer trade. If gold is already up one full ATR
range on the day, you don’t have a lot to work with. I’m not saying that it will never break from the daily ATR range. Actually, it does this quite often, but we want to
play it safe. Plus, if you trade multiple contracts on this trade, you can always scale out and keep the last quarter of your trade for a runner when it happens.

393

Figure 20.9

1. In Figure 20.9, the ADX is above 20 on a one- or two-minute chart.
2. Gold is up at least 3 but no more than 60 percent of its daily ATR.
3. The high of this day is where you place your buy stop. Then use a 3- to 6-point stop and double your stop for the target.
1. In Figure 20.10, is gold up more than 3 but less than 60 percent of a daily ATR? Answer: yes!
2. Place a buy stop 1 tick above the current high of the day. Use a 3- to 6-point stop loss and a target of twice the stop.
1. In Figure 20.11, is gold up more than 3 and less than 60 percent of its daily ATR? Answer: yes!

394

Figure 20.10

395

Figure 20.11

2. Is the ATR on a one- or two-minute chart above 20? Answer: no! Pass; do not do the trade until the ATR is above 20.

The Gold Spike Trade
These are rules and a checklist for the gold spike trade.

Long Trade Rules
1. Identify the trend in gold on the daily chart as up.
2. Wait for a sell-off in the daily uptrend.
3. The sell-off must be at least 15 points or 1 ATR on the daily chart.
4. Use a one-minute chart to find the volume spike to get long gold.
5. Use a stop of 3 to 6 points.
6. Exit 1 is a quick scalp of 3 to 6 points.
7. Exit 2 is to hold for a 60-point target.

396

Figure 20.12

1. In Figure 20.12, gold is down 15 points, but the daily chart is in an uptrend.
2. A sell-off happens.
3. There is a volume spike on the one- or two-minute chart.
4. Get long around 1610 and place a 3- to 6-point stop.
5. Scale out at twice the stop and keep a runner for +60 points.

Short Trade Rules
1. Identify the trend in gold on the daily chart as down.
2. Wait for a retracement of the daily downtrend.
3. The retracement must be at least 15 points or 1 ATR on the daily chart.
4. Use a one-minute chart to find the volume spike to get short gold.
5. Use a 6-point stop and a 60-point target.
6. Exit 1 is a quick scalp of 3 to 6 points.
7. Exit 2 is to hold for the 60-point target.

397

Figure 20.13

1. In Figure 20.13, gold is down 18 to 20 points, but the daily chart is in a downtrend.
2. The retracement happens.
3. There is a volume spike on the one- or two-minute chart.
4. Get short around 1630–1636 and place a 3- to 6-point stop.
5. Scale out at twice the stop and keep a runner for +60 points.
Now you’re armed with three extremely simple but powerful gold-trading setups. I hope they serve you as well as they have served me.

How Do I Buy Bottoms and Sell Tops?
This is a great strategy, and it will work on any market with volume. That means it will work on everything except for the spot forex markets. Now, it does work
better in some markets than it does in others. It starts out as a scalp trade, and it can signal key turning points for tops and bottoms. What if you could look inside a
price bar or candle and find out quickly which side was more aggressive right now, the buyers or the sellers?
What this indicator does is calculate the difference between the volume traded at or above the ask price and the volume traded at or below the bid. Then it represents
this in a histogram form. It is very simple to tell whether the current high or low is more likely to hold or not. The country-boy commonsense definition of this thing is
this: it tells you if there are aggressive buyers at the low or if there are aggressive sellers at the high. The only bad thing about this indicator is that it is real-time only
(you won’t be able to see how it did in the past, only how it does in real time going forward), so you have to turn it on and let it run so that it can calculate the bid/ask
relationship.
