
RULES AND DISCIPLINE
You might think that it is only necessary to have a winning system in place
to succeed in the FOREX market. But are you able to follow the rules of
your system exactly, trade after trade?
A good system certainly is a positive edge in ensuring your success, but
there is another, more important element that has to be present: your discipline and steadiness in executing the rules by the book without adding, changing, or omitting parts of the strategy. Tested and proven winning systems
include a series of rules as well as a series of losing and winning trades that
have to be brought to completion. Not everyone is prepared to assume such a
discipline because it requires changing some of your ingrained habits.

68

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

ATTITUDE TOWARD LOSING
In the everyday life, losing is seen as a bad thing. In the FOREX market,
losing is part of the equation that leads to a successful result. The FOREX
is a zero-sum game, where no additional resources are created and where
someone’s loss is another trader’s win.

GROUP MENTALITY
Don’t let others influence you. In the FOREX, you are on your own and
can’t depend on the decisions of others or other people’s points of view. You
need to develop your own system, which will be based on successive experiences, trial and error, until you are satisfied with the potential results. You
are the one watching the charts and feeling the market.
Don’t confuse this with being part of a network of like-minded
investors. The James Dicks FOREX Network (www.JDFN.com) is just
that—individual investors sharing ideas, strategies, and stories on the market, individual currency pairs, etc. In the end, the trade decision is yours,
but what I have found is that discussing trades that may be setting up can
provide an added benefit when it ultimately comes time to place the trade.
Make sure that you don’t talk yourself out of a trade. Nine of 10 times
if you follow your plan and go with your gut, you will be right, even if
the trade goes against you. Moreover, you don’t have to be right all the
time. In fact, with good money management, you can be right just 34 percent of the time and still make money in the FOREX. This is better than a
coin flip. Focus on your own opinion. Of course, you can compare different
approaches to the same situation, but in the end, you are the one who will
make the decision and the only one responsible for your trading.

RESPONSIBILITY
Be your own leader; make your own the rules! FOREX markets are a force
made of orderly chaos, a powerful mix of human emotions, economic circumstances, and strong financial interests. The market is always right
because it moves as it wants and when it wants and has no fixed rules by
itself. The only stable data on which to depend are your system and you, the
trader, and your ability to make the rules and to change them as many times
as necessary to adapt to ever-changing market conditions.

WORKING HARD VERSUS WORKING EFFICIENTLY
The more you work will not make a difference in your results. Unlike most
working situations, in the FOREX what counts is how efficient you can be,
not how many hours you spend in front of your charts.

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

69

LETTING PROFITS RUN
Holding to a trend can be difficult if, based on the previously mentioned
attitude of expecting results proportional to the effort made, you think that
it is too easy and can’t accept huge profits. Most traders “hit and run” and
don’t have enough discipline to wait patiently for a trend to develop.
Instead, they cut their profits as soon as they appear in fear that they might
go away. I have seen this many times, and I too am guilty of. It is a difficult
attitude to overcome, but stay focused, and you will. Traders often find
themselves in a trade that is going against them and completely forget
about their trading plan. They let their emotions get the best of them, saying such things as, “It will come back,” “I have a feeling about this,” and
“I will cost-average down or double my position so that I can make money
when it comes back.” This is not good; it is the wrong state of mind. What
ends up happening is that you have a huge loss, and then, when you place
your next trade and are up a few dollars, you start saying, “I’ve got to take
money off the table now,” and thus put yourself in an upside-down money
management position, willing to risk hundreds of dollars to gain only a few.
There are some basic rules that never should be broken. First of all, you
need to have a clear objective and know what you really want to achieve.
Without a goal, it is much more difficult to obtain a result because your
efforts will lack direction and focus. Stating your goals and milestones
clearly will help you greatly in achieving success, one step at a time.
Most traders start with the sole purpose of just “making money”—as
much and as soon as possible. However, the other side of the coin has to be
planned as well, and risk has to be defined even more carefully because it
will make or break your final results. Goals also have to be realistic. Your
rules should be measurable and achievable in terms of potential returns and
time and resources available.
This is not to say that you can’t aim big, but don’t expect either to
become a millionaire by the end of the month if your available equity is only
$10,000. Aiming above your real capacities will only lead you to frustration
and failure.
I often ask my students, “How much return would you like to make on
your investment” I then follow up by saying, “Let’s be realistic. Before
there was the FOREX, what would you have been happy making on your
money in the stock market” You would be surprised; 5 to 12 percent is the
usual reply. That’s right, not an unrealistic goal. Think of it this way: The
rule of 72 says to take 72 and divide by the rate of return you would like to
earn. Thus 72 divided by 20 percent ⫽ 3.6. This is the number of years it
would take to double your investment—3.6 years. This is a number I like to

70

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

strive for because doubling my portfolio every 3.6 years is certainly something I can live with.
With that said, people make huge returns in the FOREX. I see it every
day. In fact, I live it as well. But be realistic. A 20 percent return means that
it takes 3.6 years to double your investment. Thus a 40 percent return means
that in 1.8 years you will double your money. What happens if you make
40 percent in one year? I would suggest that you may want to be even more
conservative with your trading for the rest of the year. If you end the year at
40 percent, you should be very happy. In fact, if you end the year up 20 percent, you also should be happy. Keep that in mind when you are placing
trades and developing that realistic goal you are shooting for in terms of
return on investment, don’t get carried away trying to make 1 percent a day
or more because with risk comes reward, but so does the potential for loss.
Just think smart, and stick to your plan.

NOW YOU NEED A SYSTEM
Whether you adopt an already defined trading strategy or choose to
develop one yourself with the various technical tools at hand, you will have
to follow its rules and make sure that all the needed steps are included—
when to enter, when to exit, and what targets and stops it allows. This is
why having a mentor, someone who has already paved the way, a leader in
the field, is important. I am confident that after reading this book, you will
want to learn more, and I know I can help you by sharing with you my
FOREX journey. If not me, then make sure that you get someone to help
you along the way.
You have to be confident in your system, know all its details perfectly,
and have practiced with it enough to be certain of its probable results. The
rules have to be simple and clear, and you should have the discipline to follow them to the letter. Trading impulsively and randomly, led by the flow of
your emotions, and without a precise plan will only lead to negative results.
Your system should include a solution for every situation that you
might encounter in your trading. In this way, the results you obtain from
your testing will be accurate, thus adding to your confidence and ensuring
that you will be trading with consistency in any situation that might arise.
In addition, you should have answers that address all the possible scenarios that can develop and have a precise action plan prepared for each of
them. If all the possible circumstances that can arise are not anticipated and
planned for, an unexpected event could cause you a huge loss. Everything
should be predictable, even the situations that you couldn’t even think
might happen.

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

71

Here’s a list of some of the most basic rules:
Stay with the trend. Identify as soon as possible the main trend and its
subsequent intermediary cycles to minimize the risk for losses.
As is often said, the trend is your friend. If you are going with the
trend, any minor retracement will not affect the final result when
it comes back in your direction. If you are counter-trending, be
careful because the price can move against you and possibly never
recover as it picks up with the long-term trend. In a bullish
market, go long. In a bearish market, go short. In a sideways
market, it is better to stay on the sidelines and wait for a better
opportunity.
Buy strong, sell weak. Identify which currencies are showing more
strength and which ones are weak, and try to pair them up.
Buy low, sell high. Always try to get the best possible price both when
buying and selling. Never sell into a support level nor buy at a
resistance point.
Let your profits run, and cut your losses short. Control your fear of
losing when you are in a winning trade, and learn to develop
patience so that a trade can evolve to its full potential. Conversely,
as soon as a trade has proven to be wrong, don’t hesitate for a
second in closing it according to the rules you have defined for
your risk level. Don’t fall into the temptation of widening your
stops because last time you were stopped out the trade went back
in your direction.
Past performance is not a guarantee of future performance. Your
system might have been performing very well, and suddenly there
is a change in the market behavior. Be aware of the signs of such
a change, and adjust your system accordingly. Markets could have
been trending for a long time, and they now are consolidating
sideways. Be sure to have several strategies ready to use in each
different market condition.
Have an alternate power supply and supplementary Internet
connection, as well as the phone number of your broker’s dealing
desk, ready at hand in case you experience an unexpected power
outage, server disconnect, or general Internet failure. There are
now several options through mobile communications that allow
traders to open or close positions that could be at risk in such
an event.

72

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Know exactly what to do in case you are unable to trade, if you
happen to lose a certain percentage of your account, or if the
markets are closed and you need to get out of your current
positions.
Develop your patience. Not having a position is also a position. There
will be moments when the best trading approach is to stay on the
sidelines and wait patiently for a setup to develop. Never jump
into a nonplanned trade out of impatience or boredom. Wait for
pullbacks to enter if you have missed the initial entry. The market
moves in waves, and by waiting for the correction, you will have
the odds in your favor as to the necessary stops. Reaching that
rate-of-return goal does not have to be done over night. In the
FOREX, it could be reached quickly, allowing you to sit on the
sidelines the rest of the year if you choose to. Have patience.
Let your trade breathe and develop fully to its complete potential.
Inversely, be impatient and eager to close any trade that is proving
itself wrong from the beginning. Capital preservation is a must.
Don’t count and cry over missed pips. Missed money is better than
lost money. There always will be a better opportunity to enter the
market.
Add to your winning trades; never add to your losing positions.
Averaging down is down is a very risky practice that could make
you lose much more than you planned initially. Inversely, when a
trend is developing successfully, consider adding to your trade
after each small correction.
Never risk more than 5 to 10 percent of your equity total and not more
than 1 to 2 percent on a single trade. In this way, if you happen to
hit a losing streak, you still will have more than enough capital
left to take losses back to breakeven.
Avoid trading at news time and when markets open or close. Too
much random volatility can kill your account very fast. Wait for
the market sentiment to settle down, and go with the flow as
soon as the direction is clear. Trade only when conditions are at
their best.
Periodically review your past performance, and redefine your plan if
needed. Adjust your money management and position size
according to your profits or losses on equity. Evaluate your
results, and compare them with your goals. Readjust your goals if
necessary.

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

73

If you experience a heavy loss, take some time off to reevaluate the
situation and clear your mind. Stop trading for a few days.
Absolutely do not trade for revenge! You shouldn’t allow yourself
to fall into the need of getting your money back as soon as
possible. Instead, examine the reasons that caused the loss,
recheck all your rules and trading plan, and take some rest to be
able to come back refreshed and with a clear focus.
Match your position properly to your account size. Risking more
than the recommended percentage can increase your gains
tremendously, and you could be tempted to do so because the
high leverages and small margin requirements of some brokers
allow you to exceed your capabilities. Remember that it works the
other way around as well: Losses can become unmanageable very
soon. Think and plan for a long-term career.
Learn to read chart patterns and price action. Draw trendlines, and
study and analyze the market’s past behavior and present trends.
Watch carefully how price reacts on supports and resistances. Try
to understand what happened at every point of the price wave.
Consider scaling out of your position when it is profitable, if its size
allows. In this way, you take some profit at an appropriate
moment and still remain in the market for the long run, should it
happen. If the trade then goes against you, at least you took some
profit at a good point.
When being extremely successful, proceed with extra caution.
Reinforce the discipline or, better, take a day off from the market.
Overconfidence can occur insidiously and you could lose in a few
hours what took you several days to build. Keep your profits, and
stay alert!

HOW THE MARKET WORKS
A market is a situation where there is an imbalance in supply and demand
between its participants that results in continuous and unpredictable fluctuations in the exchange rates. What causes the market to be so unpredictable?
●
●

Different traders interpret the same fundamental factors differently.
The intents of various market participants are different, as well as
their reasons and purposes for conducting a transaction. Reasons
may include hedging, purchase of currency with the purposes of

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

74

●

financing an international commercial project, or a bargain for a
speculative profit.
Since the market is simultaneously influenced by the various
fundamentals and contradictory forces, the final reaction can vary,
causing fluctuations in the market, and not comply with the expected
reaction to some fundamental event or process.

In addition, even powerful financial institutions can make mistakes
because institutional traders are just people like you and me. This also adds
to the randomness of the whole picture.

RULES FOR WORKING WITH THE MARKET
Try to have no particular bias about the market’s future behavior. Follow
your own system and rules, and react to the signals the market is giving you
(trade what you see, not what you think). Examine the signals given carefully, and be aware of those that go against your point of view instead of
looking for signals that confirm your point of view.
Never try to predict. Listen to what the market is really telling you, here
and now. Forecasts (especially long-term ones) are useless in an unpredictable and changing situation such as the FOREX market. Be here and
now, and trade what you see. The need to be right is a waste of energy and
time, which you should invest instead in focusing on real-time conditions.
Moreover, if your predictions turn out to be wrong, this would add unnecessary stress to your emotions.
There are no guarantees of success independent of your own past performance in this or any other professional activity. Logic and common
sense will not work; for example, the same results in fundamental news can
bring about completely opposite reactions in different time spans because
there are too many details in between that exert an influence on market sentiment. Markets will react based on their interpretations of fundamentals
more than to any specific figure itself.
Most FOREX transactions are done as a result of international business
and commerce. The FOREX is used much less as an investment vehicle,
although there is much room also left for speculation. Commercial participants at the international level only want to produce and sell their products.
They are seldom interested in all the details about exchange rates. Banks
initially only provided the exchange rate between currencies. They bought
the foreign currency at one rate, added a commission for their services (the
spread), and sold the currency to the customers at a higher rate.

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

75

Thereafter, based on the growing volume of all those commercial
transactions, bank traders started to speculate on future currency rates.
They then could give a quote at a certain rate and hold the transaction until
another one came by at a better price. Given these practices, the banks were
able to expand their profits. On the other hand, though, the liquidity redistribution made some transactions impossible to complete.
For this reason, the market was opened to nonbank and noncommercial
participants. More orders started to flow into the market from less experienced participants, from which banks could make an additional profit, providing a better liquidity distribution for their international orders.
The largest proportion of transactions in the FOREX market is performed by the largest central banks from major countries through a series
of communication agreements. This is also known as the Interbank, which
has no physical location. All of the central banks are independent of each
other unless the need arises to execute a transaction (i.e., the exchange of
each country’s currency), and then they interact.
Since it would be difficult for each other to keep track properly of all
the transactions made and resources available, the electronic broking service (EBS) was created as a central server that allows interconnection
between all the computers of the banking network. Through this service,
the banks can show each other the prices at which they are willing to sell or
buy any other currency and their own, creating in effect the Interbank market. In itself, the Interbank is not a market, nor is it a market maker. Rather,
it is an application that is used to see the various bid and offer prices from
all the banks involved.
The EBS—the Interbank—is the first component of the currency markets. The next component is every bank in itself because any one of them
can buy or sell currency to any individual, institution, or business that
needs to exchange one currency into another.
The third component is the sum of all the retail brokers (i.e., market
makers) and electronic communications networks (ECNs). A market maker
is usually associated with a bank from the second level, which will provide
liquidity for all its transactions. Since these are retail institutions, it is not
easy to know how many liquidity providers with whom they are associated.
Very often, small transactions are kept in house and never reach the Interbank market. Orders are matched and resolved internally, and if needed
(depending on the number of lots required), they can be transferred to
another market maker or placed directly with the liquidity provider.
This structure allows the market makers to accept negotiations with
smaller amounts, such as mini and microlots. On the Interbank market, the

76

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

smallest amount is the standard lot (minimum $100,000). A market maker
is the counterpart of almost all its customers’ transactions.
ECNs, on their side, are automated brokers that route your orders to the
best price on the platform from multiple liquidity providers. These liquidity providers may be banks or other traders connected to the platform. The
deals are performed directly on the Interbank without any intermediary
dealing desk.

FOR EVERY BUYER, THERE MUST BE A SELLER
You would think that in a market such as the FOREX that moves around
such a large amount of money, liquidity would never be a problem. However, the truth is that there has to be a seller for every buyer and a buyer for
every seller for transactions to be executed.
When orders are too large at a certain price, exceeding the opposite
orders for that level, the price has to move to a point where there is enough
counterpart interest to match them. Prices that are listed on the Interbank
through the EBS show how much and at which price banks agree to buy or
sell a currency. They choose the price and are in no way forced to transact
if they believe that it is not in their best interest to do so.
The volumes of bids and offers are shown for each price level, and of
course, there are prices at which there are none. All these constitute limit
orders placed in the market.
Thus, at the moment a market order for a certain volume is placed at a
given price, it will have an effect on spreads and will move the price
accordingly. Depending on the volume and level of the opposite orders
available, the price will settle at a higher or lower level, immediately, causing a widening of the spreads and sharp changes in prices, because there
are no intermediary orders to absorb the current quote. Later on, another
order can enter the market at an intermediate price between the widened
bid-ask spread, and thus a new change in spreads and prices will occur.
Slippage means that there is no one to take the other side of the transaction at the exact moment the order is placed in the market. You are being
given the nearest best price according to the volume of matching orders.
Changes occur very fast, especially at news time, because higher volumes
enter and exit continuously. Thus you can be quoted a price that is not available any more less than a second later. This is why you get requotes or
invalid prices because there is no more interest left at that particular level.
The spread is defined by the price levels where there are effectively existing
bids and offers. If all the intermediary limit orders were canceled at the same
time, the spread could widen because a higher offer and lower bid could
