
DETERMINING YOUR TIME FRAME
First and foremost, ask yourself, “How much time will you have to trade?” This will determine
the type of trader you are going to be—a day trader or an end-of-day (EOD) trader. An EOD
trader, or swing trader, can buy and hold a stock for a week or even up to a few months.
Becoming a swing trader is the preferred choice for most traders who are using end-of-day
data. Those who buy and hold stocks for years are known as position traders or long-term
investors.
The next question is to find out how are you going to trade—will it be discretionary trading
or system trading? The type of trading will define the time frame. Active traders who enjoy a
fast paced style would not find much action in weekly or monthly time frames, while less active
traders generally find that the extremely short time frames are too tedious or take too much of
their time. Decide which style best suits your personality, and then select the corresponding
time frame.
One important reminder, regardless of whatever time frame you are going to trade in, you
have to do homework. You have to do your analysis outside of market hours, because when the
market opens, you will not have sufficient time to think and deliberate on the course of your
actions.
Since the data used in this book are end-of-day data, the book addresses issues from the
view of swing traders, and the trading methodology adopted is a combination of mechanical
system trading and discretionary trading, as outlined in Chapter 2 and Chapter 7. Some swing
traders are discretionary; they use technical and/or fundamental analysis to evaluate each
potential trade, and make decisions based on the rules they have outlined for themselves. If
they have a good intuitive sense of the market, they may also use discretionary stops. Many
professional traders use discretionary stops, but we would not recommend it for the novice or
beginning trader.

SELECTING STOCKS
There are many methods for choosing stocks to trade. Stocks may be selected on the criteria of
fundamental and/or technical analysis. The market index may be used as a benchmark to
choose those stocks within a certain range of price-earnings ratios, dividend yield, and
consistent earnings. But there is one universal rule: Never buy any stock on hearsay
information, no matter where the information comes from, without doing a study of it prior to
the purchase. More exoteric approaches on how to select stocks are provided in the next
chapter; however, the methods are not exhaustive.
Whichever method you prefer in selecting stocks, do not trade a stock that has no trading
liquidity. If a stock is not very liquid, it means that you may not be able to buy and sell it at the
volume you want, at the price you would like, or when you want. Trading liquidity is therefore
important to the relative size of your holding. Here is a simple example. If the average daily
trading volume of the stock is about 10,000 shares, it would not be in your best interest to hold
100,000 shares because you will not be able to dispose of them quickly when the trend turns
bearish. But, on the other hand, if the average daily trading volume is 100,000 shares, it should
not be difficult for you to dispose of your holding.
After you have picked the list of stocks to trade, you then have to decide on position sizing:
the number of stocks to trade and the dollar value of each stock you feel you will be able to
handle without undue stress. Should you focus all your trades on one stock, or should you
spread your trades to cover multiple stocks? It will depend on your capabilities and capital
exposure. Some traders may not be able to handle more than 10 stocks in their trading
portfolio. Having a diversified trading portfolio covering a wider selection of stocks does not
necessarily mean lesser risks. In managing a trading portfolio, there is a limit to the size of
portfolios each person can handle in terms of number of stocks and value; you have to find the
limit that you will be comfortable with. Remember that in trading, having a large list of stocks
may not necessarily give you a balanced portfolio if you are unable to focus and manage your
stocks efficiently.

RISK MANAGEMENT
In trading stocks, there is no way that a trader can avoid taking losses on some trades. Some of
the most successful traders are those who are willing to take a loss. The question is how much
of a loss is a trader willing to take, and does he have the discipline to cut his losses. Having a
trading strategy is a good start, but it will not mean anything if the trader has no idea of money
management in trading. Money management planning is a very important part of trading and
has one objective: capital preservation. There are many risk management techniques. It is up to
each trader to form his own plan of how he will keep risk to a minimum while, at the same
time, keeping his investment at a maximum level within the degree of risk he is willing to take.
Before a trader commits to trading, the risk factor of managing various stocks should be
included in the trading plan. Trading stocks is about keeping risks to a minimum. A trader
should have a realistic profit target that meets his reward to risk ratio. What is the estimated
profit of the stock against its downside risk? Many professional traders do not take a trade
unless the potential profit is at least three times greater than the possible loss. How much risk
is appropriate varies with each trader and may be as high as 5 percent of the total portfolio
value on a given day, or as low as 1 percent of the total portfolio. Some traders may prefer
having different risk ratios for each stock, but will also take into consideration the risk factor
against the aggregate risk of the trading portfolio. Through trial and error, a trader has to find
that comfort zone in which he can trade confidently.

DETERMINE ENTRY POINTS
Having made your selection of stocks does not mean a trade should be entered immediately.
You have yet to determine the specific conditions including entry price, which allow you to
execute your trade, and initial protective stops, which allow you to exit should the market turn
against you. This is the challenge.
In trading, you need to know when to engage in a trade and when not to trade; you do not
need to trade every day. You cannot be trading all the time, especially when the trend is against
you. Catching the trend of the market is the key. However, the market does not move in trend
all the time. When the market is not trending, you have to stay on the sideline. You will win
when you are trading with the trend because you will have the support of the trend. You will
lose if you trade against the trend, whether in a bull market or in a bear market.
Do not overtrade. Overtrading means making trades beyond your means and ability.

DETERMINE EXIT STRATEGIES
Traders have various choices when it comes to exiting trades. Some traders use “trailing” stops
as their exit strategy of choice, while others choose to exit when the stock hits a certain target
percentage, or breaks through a support or resistance level. Some traders will choose to exit
based on expected news releases. The exit strategy is one of the most important parts of any
trading plan, and it is important for traders to have an exit plan before entering a trade. In the
event the market turns against you, do you have a strategy that will protect your capital?
You must be ready to take your profits and cut your losses. Do not hang on to any beliefs
based on your ego or your fantasies when the market is not moving the way you expected it to.

REALITY CHECK
Success in trading takes time; it is not served on a platter. As the saying goes, the fried pigeons
don’t fly into a trader’s mouth! Trading, like any other business, requires a plan. A trader has to
develop his strategy and must evaluate and review it constantly to improve his performance
and to trade in accordance with optimal risk to reward parameters. The following are three
examples of checklists: (1) Additional Chart Checklist, (2) Execution of Trade Checklist, and (3)
Trade Plan Summary List. The first two checklists contain certain key reminders that a trader
needs in the course of his trading. The third list is a summary for keeping a trading log. The
keeping of a trading log is imperative as, after a period of trading, it will give the trader an
analysis of how his wins or losses are made, and it will serve as an important study of his
trading style and help him adjust and improve the results.
Additional Chart Checklist

Reminders

Things to Do

Reasons

What is the market
trend?

Check daily trend.
Check weekly trend.
Check the sector trend.
Check market trend.

You have a higher probability of
winning if the stock is bought in a
positive weekly trend and the
overall market is bullish too.

How did you select
the stock?

Fundamental values.
Technical analysis method.
Liquidity of stock.

Choosing the right stock will affect
the performance of your portfolio.

What is the news?

Check current political and
economic news.
Check current news of the
company.
Check stock sector news.

Local or global news will affect the
movements of the general market.
News regarding the company stock
and its relative sector will affect its
price direction.

What is the coming
news?

Check coming economic
news.
Check coming news to be
announced by the company.

Prices often move ahead of
announcement of news.
Government’s regular economic
news can affect the market.

When is the
announcement of
earnings and
dividends to be
made by the
company?

Check announcement date of
earnings and dividends.
Check announcement date of
earnings of similar sector stock,
which may have certain
influence.

Prices tend to move prior to dates
of earnings announcement and
earnings of similar sector stock
may affect the stock movements.

Execution of Trade Checklist

Check
What is the trend?

Look for:
Is the daily BIC trend indicator positive or negative?
Are the medium-term averages in tandem with BIC?

Has price crossed above the medium-term MA’s?
What is the weekly trend indicating?
What is the longer
time frame
average indicating?

What is QMAC indicating?
Is the trend indicating a short-term or long-term move?
Where is the probable support/resistance?
Where is the price relative to the longer MA’s?

Where is the price
position?

Where is the price relative to the longer time frame MA’s?
Is price making a new high/low for the trading time frame?
Is there a price break from a bullish/bearish pattern?
Where is the price in relation to Fibonacci retracements or
projections?
Where is the price relative to Elliott Wave pattern?

What is the
response of
volume?

Is the uptrend supported by higher volume?
Is the downtrend led by higher volume?
Does the volume show any irregularity?

What is the
momentum
oscillator
indicating?

Is there any divergence between the oscillator and price?
Where is the weekly oscillator, oversold/overbought?
Where is the daily oscillator, oversold/overbought?

What is the
strength of the
trend?

Is ADX confirming the strength of the uptrend/downtrend?
Is ADX making a directional turn at its peak?

Trading Plan Summary List

CHAPTER 9

Financial Astrology

This chapter deals with how to make use of the lunar cycle. The lunar cycle manifests as the
most frequent and predominant cycle among the various astrological cycles. Cyclical patterns
have been observed in many fields, such as biology, astronomy, agriculture, and social spheres,
to mention a few. It is well accepted that the phases of the Moon influence people’s behavior,
and scientists established long ago their relation to the rising and falling of the tides. In July
2010, the Royal Bank of Scotland published a report on the correlations between the Moon’s
phases and the behavior of financial markets (“Sheer Lunacy Staring at the Heavens,”
www.rbsm.com/strategy
). The study showed a remarkable increase in profits in a lunar-based buy-sell strategy as
compared to a regular buy-hold strategy.

USING LUNAR CYCLES IN TRADING
The lunar buy-sell strategy is based on buying on the new moon and selling on the next full
moon (usually in 14 to 16 days). We quote here an excerpt from the Bank of Scotland report: “If
an investor had invested PStg 1000 in FTSE in 1984, by now he would have approx. PStg 5,130
by holding the index, which represents index performance, whereas trading FTSE according to
moon phases would make a big difference. First, consider buying FTSE on the new moon and
selling on the full moon, this would result in PStg12, 116 overall figure for the same period. It
means more than double the profits.” It is noteworthy that the strategy would have been even
more profitable for the DAX and the HSI. The result for the S&P 500 data is also higher, but that
is because the strategy was applied since 1928.
Conversely, buying on the full moon and selling on the new moon would have considerably
underperformed the buy-hold strategy. This supports the theory of a correlation between index
prices and moon phases because the new moon traditionally symbolizes low energy or energy
accumulation, whereas the time of the full moon is a period of fruition, high energy, and
spending.
The influence of planetary cycles on stocks has also been well documented by Raymond A.
Merriman in his seminal work, The Ultimate Book on Stock Market Timing, Volumes 1 to 5, in
which he describes how solar and lunar phases correlate to short-term trading reversals.
Similarly, Patrick Mikula, using TradeStation software back in the 1990s, tested a lunar-based
buy-sell system combined with stochastic momentum on soybean futures, and found that using
the new moon for the entry and the full moon for the exit had the highest correlation. For the
period tested, the system produced 44 trades with an overall 66 percent profitability, with the
long trades being 54 percent profitable and the short trades 88 percent profitable.
So it is quite well established that the phases of the Moon influence the prices of certain
stocks and also of some commodities like wheat, corn, soybeans, and silver. For the sake of
simplicity, we are only concerned with two of the various Sun-Moon phases, namely when the
Moon forms a 0-degree conjunction with the Sun at the new moon (the Sun, Moon, and Earth
appear in line) and when the Moon is in opposition to the Sun at the full moon, or 180 degrees
apart. The Sun and Moon are in square aspect (90 degrees) during the first and third quarters,
in 120-degree aspect during a waxing or waning gibbous moon, and in a 60-degree aspect
during a waxing or waning crescent moon. These latter aspects do not have the same influence
as the 0- and 180-degree aspects, but tend to influence the market upward during trines (120
degrees), downward during squares, and can influence the market in either direction during
sextiles (60 degrees). Some traders simply add the time of the new and full moon dates to their
charting tools to indicate potential turning points, and a number of chart-drawing services and
programs now offer this function as well.
Figure 9.1
uses TradeStation software with an add-on module from Soulytion to show the new and full
moon phases as applied to Global X Silver Miners ETF (Symbol: SIL), which is traded on the New
York Stock Exchange. In astrology, the Moon rules silver, and it does seem the correlation
between the spikes in blue indicating the full moons (sell), and the spikes in red at the new
moons (buy), fit well with the price trends in
Figure 9.1
. The bottom part of the chart shows the lunar (blue bars) and solar eclipses (green bars),
which, as mentioned in Chapter 2, may increase the effect of the lunations.

FIGURE 9.1
Lunar signals applied to Global X Silver Miners ETF. The eclipses shown at the bottom add
strength to the lunations. In some cases, it means that an existing trend may accelerate sharply.
In other cases, it increases the odds of a reversal, so the indicator must be viewed in the
context of technical analysis and other signals.
Source: Steffen Peter at
www.soulytion.de
.

Lunar cycles are subject to the laws of accumulation and redistribution. The first half of the
lunar month is a process of accumulation in which the market grows. The second half of the
lunar month is often one of redistribution and weakness. This pattern works well in a rising
market, but can become a trap if the market enters a bear phase, with shares falling sharply.
Therefore, if there is no accumulation in the first half of the lunar month, traders should be
alert to the fact that there may be a change in the larger trend.
To test the observation that lunar cycle coincides with swing tops and bottoms, it is
suggested that a momentum indicator, such as stochastics, is included. Ideally, the buy signal in
the new moon phase should coincide with a reading below 20 in the stochastics. A reading
above 80 should coincide with a sell signal. Naturally, the correlation doesn’t always manifest
so clearly, but the combination is another way of filtering out those Moon-phased buy and sell
signals that may be out of sync with the prevailing market.
Lunar signals can apply quite well to some individual stocks, but for the most part, it will be
found that they correspond better to major indexes, commodities, and some commodity-based
ETFs. This is mainly because of the Moon’s known influence on mass psychology. However, one
should not rely only on a lunar-phased buy-sell program for trading. What the examples are
meant to show is that the lunar phase may be a useful additional indicator, and that the
correlation with market moves is significant enough statistically to warrant the inclusion in
one’s arsenal of trading tools.
To prove the point a little more, a lunar buy-sell trading system was used in the new addition
to Timing Solution software, called Terra Incognita. This advanced program optimizes models,
conducts back-testing, and provides trading signals with all appropriate statistics for trades.
Figure 9.2

is based on the Moon-Sun lunar cycle, as applied to the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA).
FIGURE 9.2
Lunar cycle buy-sell system applied to the DJIA. It has been optimized so that certain signals in
strong up- or downtrending markets have been filtered out. The green areas at the bottom
indicate profitable periods, and the red areas indicate losing periods. During the period from
2003 to 2007, the equity curve (blue line at bottom) was flat, but it turned up again in 2008.

Finally, it may be of interest to see what the pairing of the Moon with Mercury might
produce in terms of cycle signals. Mercury primarily rules communication, but also commerce.
It has a rotational cycle of about 88 days and, like the Moon, is a fast-moving planet.
Figure 9.3
is based on a heliocentric model, and the 120-degree aspect between the Moon and
Mercury correlates well with the changes in trend.
FIGURE 9.3
The Moon and Mercury in increments of 120-degree aspects, that is, 120, 240, and 360
degrees on a heliocentric basis (as seen from the Sun). This cycle does appear to coincide with
major changes in trend. The bottom shows a VZO money-flow indicator, which tends to peak or
bottom at the same time as the CITs.

HOW TO PICK WINNING STOCKS
Investors nowadays have access to a large number of software programs and free online
services that allow them to select stocks based on a customized set of conditions and variables.
Some services apply fundamental analysis to rate thousands of listed companies, perhaps on a
10-point scale, using advanced mathematical systems to determine a stock’s expected risk and
return, or to simply rate it a “buy,” “hold,” or “sell.” Other methods of evaluating securities may
involve technical analysis, as described in Chapter 7, Applied Systems, and Chapter 8,
Formulating Your Trading Plan. There are endless ways one can approach the process, but a
combination of both fundamental and technical analysis seems to be the preferred method for
most investors and fund managers. Given the plethora of choices, the overriding question is
still, how does one improve one’s chances of picking the stock with the best potential to go up
in value? Not everyone has the stock-picking talent of Peter Lynch or Warren Buffett, or access
to sophisticated quantitative stock-rating programs, so an ordinary investor or trader may often
be at a disadvantage. Moreover, stock picking has almost become a lost art since the onset of
the financial crisis. Sentiment has alternated between euphoria and despair, and time-proven
methodologies have failed in the extraordinarily volatile environment since the financial
meltdown in 2008.
This section is not meant to be a primer on how to select stocks or build portfolios using
conventional value-analysis methods like the top-down or bottom-up approaches. Many other
books are available on those topics. The aim is to provide some additional tools that may help
in the stock-selection process through a combination of conventional and more esoteric
approaches.
Before starting, it may be of interest to know how six different fundamental investment
strategies have performed in Asia’s stock markets since the beginning of 1997. Research was
undertaken in July 2009 by strategists Daniel McCormack and Viking Kwok at Macquarie Bank
and reviewed by Tom Holland of the South China Morning Post (“Valuations Say Buy, But the
Fearful Doubt Their Validity,” SCMP Monitor, December 3, 2008).
Some widely used techniques performed surprisingly poorly. Buying the shares of companies
with the strongest balance sheets, for example, would have produced lousy returns.
Macquarie’s analysts ranked their universe by the Altman Z score—a common measure of
financial health—and found that, over the past 10 years, the strongest 20 percent of companies
significantly underperformed the rest of the market.
Buying stocks with strong earnings growth proved similarly disappointing. In this case, the
Macquarie analysts ranked companies by expected earnings growth and found that the first
quintile—the top 20 percent—performed just as poorly as the bottom quintile, with the second
quintile doing almost as badly.
Momentum investing didn’t do well either. Although momentum investing is a popular
strategy, buying stocks that have performed well recently doesn’t work. Macquarie ranked
equities by their performance over the previous three months and found that the first quintile
subsequently underperformed the market. The weakest quintile delivered the best returns.
In fact, by far the best strategies for buyers of Asian stocks over the last 12 years have been
classic value-driven techniques. Buying stocks for their dividend yield works reasonably well,
with the first quintile handsomely outperforming when markets are weak.
Simply buying the cheapest stocks in the market delivers the best returns, however.
According to Macquarie, the 20 percent of stocks with the lowest price to earnings ratios
