
would go up another $10 in London, and by the time New York opened, I was able to sell out at a
$30 profit.
It sounds like there was an enormous advantage to buying gold in the overseas markets
rather than in the United States.
In those days, I had an advantage by being in California, because I was up trading in Hong Kong
when my New York colleagues were asleep. I remember when I heard about the invasion of
Afghanistan on the television news. I called Hong Kong to see if anybody knew about it, and
nobody seemed to; the price wasn't changing. I was able to buy 200,000 ounces of gold before
anybody knew what was happening.
That's 2,000 contracts! Did you have any liquidity problems with their taking on that size
position in Hong Kong?
No, they gave me the stuff, but of course, they got fried by doing it. I was told on my last visit to
Hong Kong that I shouldn't visit the gold floor. Some of the people still remember that episode.
They knew who was on the other side of the trade?
Yes, they knew.
Did they think that you knew something?
No, they probably thought I was just crazy, coming in and buying all that gold. Then, when the
news broke about five to ten minutes later, everybody started scrambling. I had an immediate $10
per ounce profit on 200,000 ounces.
It's hard to believe you could trade off the television news.
I know. I had never done it before. That was the first, last, and only time, but I did do it.
That particular gold market ended in a near-vertical rise and fall. Did you get out in time?
Yes, I got out around $750 on the way up. I felt sick, when I saw gold go up to nearly $900. But
later when it was back down to $400,1 felt much better about it.
All in all, you got out very well. What tipped you off that we were near a top?
At that time, we had many wild markets. One of my rales was to get out when the volatility and the
momentum became absolutely insane. One way I had of measuring that was with limit days. In
those days, we used to have a lot of situations when a market would go limit-up for a number of
consecutive days. On the third straight limit-up day, I would begin to be very, very cautious. I
would almost always get out on the fourth limit-up day. And, if I had somehow survived with any
part of my position that long, I had a mandatory rale to get out on the fifth limit-up day. I just
forced myself out of the market on that kind of volatility.
Your transition from being a losing trader to being very successful coincided with the big bull
phase in the commodity markets during the early to mid-1970s. How much of your early
success was due to your skills as a trader and how much was just the markets?
Honestly, I think the markets were so good, that by buying and holding you just couldn't lose.
There were a lot of other success stories. Fortunes were being made.
But a lot of those people didn't keep their fortunes.
That's true. But, I was very fortunate. By the time the markets got difficult again, I was a good
trader. By then, I had really learned my craft. Also, by that time, I had the advantage of having
become very knowledgeable in one market: cocoa. For almost two years, I traded almost nothing
but cocoa, because of the information and help I got from Helmut Weymar [the founder of
Commodities Corporation]. Helmut was an incredible expert on cocoa. He wrote a book that was so
deep I couldn't understand the cover. Also, he had all kinds of friends in the business. With the
knowledge and information I got from Helmut and his friends, I felt that I knew the universe of
cocoa in a way that I had never known any market before.
That phase of almost exclusive cocoa trading obviously came to an end. What happened?
Helmut retired from cocoa trading.
I assume Helmut was not nearly as successful a trader as you were.
23

Let's just say that I traded much better on Helmut's information than he did.
Excluding the early losing years, were there any trades that stand out as being particularly
traumatic?
Well, I would never let myself get caught up in potentially intimidating disasters. The worst
situation occurred during my heavy currency trading period. I was doing well and could afford to
hold large positions. One time, I had a really large position in Deutsche marks when the Bundesbank came in and decided to punish the speculators. I called in just around the time that all this
was happening and found out that I was out $2k million in about five minutes. So I got out, rather
than see the $2k million loss go to $10 million. Then I had to endure the disturbing experience of
watching the market recover its entire fall.
How long after you got out?
About half an hour.
Did you go back in?
No, they had taken the starch out of me by that point.
In retrospect, do you feel you did the right thing by getting out of that trade?
Yes, but it still hurt to realize that if I had sat it out and done nothing, I would have been OK
instead of losing $2 million.
Did you invest any of the money you were making in your trading, or did you keep plowing it
back into your own account?
I made a number of bad investments and lost a fairly large chunk of the money I had made trading.
When I was trading big, I wanted to have a reason to keep doing it, so I just spent money wildly. At
one time, I owned about ten houses and ended up losing money on all of them. Some I sold before I
had even spent a single night in them. I had a plane charter service and lost a lot of money on that.
At one point, I figured out that for every dollar I made trading, 30 percent was going to the
government, 30 percent was going to support my planes, and 20 percent was going to support my
real estate. So I finally decided to sell everything.
It sounds like as wise as you were as a trader, you were naive as an investor.
Yes, I was incredibly naive. Out of a fairly large number of real estate transactions—many in
California—I lost money on all but one of them. I am probably the only person alive that can claim
that dubious distinction.
Why do you think you did so poorly on your investments?
I would do everything emotionally. I didn't analyze anything.
In a sense, you were repeating the mistake of your early trading experience: getting involved
in something you knew nothing about and then losing money. Didn't any bells go off ? It
almost sounds like you had a self-destructive instinct in losing your money elsewhere.
Yes, absolutely. I probably lost more than half the money I made.
During this period when you were doing all these unwise things, didn't anybody try to grab
you by the shoulders and say, "Do you realize what you're doing?"
Yes, but any time someone on my staff did, I would fire them. At one time, I was employing sixty
or seventy people, hi addition to all my money-losing businesses, I had a huge nut to make to just
support the payroll. Frankly, a lot of the money I made just went down the drain.
Did these losses have any of the emotional impact of losses in the market? The reason I ask is
that you seem to talk about these investment losses very dispassionately.
Yes, it hurt to realize what a fool I had been, but I have learned not to be as attached to material
things. I accepted it as a life lesson. I learned I don't have to own a house in every beautiful place in
the world; I can stay at a hotel and walk on the beach or climb a trail there. Or, if I really feel like
spoiling myself, I can charter a plane; I don't have to own one.
Right, that certainly makes sense, but what I am getting at is that I suspect that if you had
lost the same amount of money trading, it would have been a much more traumatic
24

experience. Is that because your ego wasn't attached to these other ventures?
Yes, I'm sure that's true. I always felt that, at least, I was smart at one thing. I feel like trading is the
only thing I am really good at. If not for that, I probably would have wound up shining shoes.
Do you think being a great trader is an innate skill?
I think to be in the upper echelon of successful traders requires an innate skill, a gift. It's just like
being a great violinist. But to be a competent trader and make money is a skill you can learn.
Having been through the whole trading experience from failure to extreme success, what
basic advice could you give a beginning trader or a losing trader?
The first thing I would say is always bet less than 5 percent of your money on any one idea. That
way you can be wrong more than twenty times; it will take you a long time to lose your money. I
would emphasize that the 5 percent applies to one idea. If you take a long position in two different
related grain markets, that is still one idea.
The next thing I would advise is to always use stops. I mean actually put them in, because that
commits you to get out at a certain point.
Do you always pick a point where you will get out before you get in?
Yes, I have always done that. You have to.
I would imagine in your case you can't actually put a stop in because your orders are too
large.
Yes, but my broker can hold it.
When you place an order to get into a position, is it accompanied by an order to get out?
That's right. Another thing is that if a position doesn't feel right as soon as you put it on, don't be
embarrassed to change your mind and get right out.
So, if you put the trade on and five minutes later it doesn't feel right, don't think to yourself,
"If I get out this quickly, my broker will think that I'm an idiot."
Yes, exactly. If you become unsure about a position, and you don't know what to do, just get out.
You can always come back in. When in doubt, get out and get a good night's sleep. I've done that
lots of times and the next day everything was clear.
Do you sometimes go back in right after you get out?
Yes, often the next day. While you are in, you can't think. When you get out, then you can think
clearly again.
What other advice would you give the novice trader?
Perhaps the most important rule is to hold on to your winners and cut your losers. Both are equally
important. If you don't stay with your winners, you are not going to be able to pay for the losers.
You also have to follow your own light. Because I have so many friends who are talented traders, I
often have to remind myself that if I try to trade their way, or on their ideas, I am going to lose.
Every trader has strengths and weaknesses. Some are good holders of winners, but may hold their
losers a little too long. Others may cut their winners a little short, but are quick to take their losses.
As long as you stick to your own style, you get the good and bad in your own approach. When you
try to incorporate someone else's style, you often wind up with the worst of both styles. I've done
that a lot.
Is it a problem because you don't have the same type of confidence in a trade that isn't yours?
Exactly, hi the final analysis, you need to have the courage to hold the position and take the risk. If
it comes down to "I'm in this trade because Brace is in it," then you are not going to have the
courage to stick with it. So you might as well not be in it in the first place.
Do you still talk to other traders about markets?
Not too much. Over the years, it has mostly cost me money. When I talk to other traders, I try to
keep very conscious of the idea that I have to listen to myself. I try to take their information without
getting overly influenced by their opinion.
I assume that we are talking about very talented traders, and it still doesn't make a
25

difference. If it is not your own idea, it messes up your trading?
Right. You need to be aware that the world is very sophisticated and always ask yourself: "How
many people are left to act on this particular idea?" You have to consider whether the market has
already discounted your idea.
How can you possibly evaluate that?
By using the classic momentum-type indicators and observing market tone. How many days has the
market been down or up in a row? What is the reading on the sentiment indexes?
Can you think of any good examples of market tone tipping you off on a trade?
The most classic illustration I can think of is one of the soybean bull markets in the late 1970s. At
the time, soybeans were in extreme shortage. One of the things pushing the market up was the
weekly government reports indicating strong export commitments and sales. I was holding a heavy
long position in soybeans and someone from Commodities Corporation called me with the latest
export figures. He said, "I have good news and I have bad news." I said, "OK, what is the good
news?" "The good news is that the export commitment figure was fantastic. The bad news is that
you don't have a limit position [the maximum permissible speculative position size]." They were
expecting the market to be limit-up for the next three days.
Actually, I wound up being a little depressed that I didn't have a larger position. The next morning,
I entered an order to buy some more contracts on the opening, just in case I got lucky and the
market traded before locking limit-up. I sat back to watch the fun. The market opened limit-up as
expected. Shortly after the opening, I noticed a lot of ticks being recorded, as if the market was
trading at the limit-up. Then prices eased off limit-up just as my broker called to report my fills.
The market started trading down. I said to myself, "Soybeans were supposed to be limit-up for
three days, and they can't even hold limit-up the first morning." I immediately called my broker and
frantically told him to sell, sell, sell!
Did you get out of your whole position?
Not only that, but I was so excited that I lost count of how much I was selling. I accidentally wound
up being short a substantial amount of soybeans, which I bought back 40 to 50 cents lower. That
was the only time I made a lot of money on an error.
I remember a situation just like that. It was the cotton bull market when prices almost
reached $1 a pound. To this day, I recall I was long cotton and the week's export figure came
out showing a half million bales of exports to China. It was the most bullish cotton export figure I
had ever seen. But instead of opening limit-up the next day, the market opened only about 150
points higher and then started trading off. That proved to be the exact high.
Another interesting example, I remember, occurred when we were in a very inflationary period and
all the commodity markets were trading in lockstep fashion. On one particularly powerful day,
almost all the markets went limit-up. On that day, cotton opened limit-up, fell back, and finished
only marginally higher for the day. That was the market peak. Everything else stayed locked limitup, but cotton never saw the light of day again.
Is the implied rule that if you find a common behavior between markets, you want to sell the
one that is lagging as soon as it starts heading down?
You absolutely want to put down a bet when a market acts terribly relative to everything else.
When the news is wonderful and a market can't go up, then you want to be sure to be short.
What kinds of misconceptions about the markets get people into trouble?
Well, I think the leading cause of financial disablement is the belief that you can rely on the experts
to help you. It might, if you know the right expert. For example, if you happen to be Paul Tudor
Jones' barber, and he is talking about the market, it might not be a bad idea to listen. Typically,
however, these so-called "experts" are not traders. Your average broker couldn't be a trader in a
million years. More money is lost listening to brokers than any other way. Trading requires an
intense personal involvement. You have to do your own homework, and that is what I advise
people to do.
Any other misconceptions?
26

The foolish belief that there is conspiracy in the markets. I have known many of the great traders in
the world, and I can say that 99 percent of the time, the market is bigger than anybody and, sooner
or later, it goes where it wants to go. There are exceptions, but they don't last too long.
You have attributed a lot of your success to Ed and Amos who taught you the principles of
trading. Have you, in turn, taught other traders?
Yes. My best result, in terms of his becoming the best trader I ever worked with, as well as being a
close friend, is Bruce Kovner.
How much of his success do you attribute to your training, and how much of it was just his own
talent?
When I first met Bruce, he was a writer and a professor; in his spare time, he was doing some
trading. I was staggered by the breadth of trading knowledge he had accumulated in such a short
time. I remember the first day I met Bruce I tried to impress him with complicated concepts. Here I
was, a professional trader who, in those days, spent fifteen hours a day trading and analyzing the
markets, and I couldn't come up with anything that he couldn't understand. I recognized his talent
immediately.
That relates to his intellect, but was there something about him that told you that he was
going to be a good trader?
Yes, his objectivity. A good trader can't be rigid. If you can find somebody who is really open to
seeing anything, then you have found the raw ingredient of a good trader—and I saw that in Bruce
right away. I knew from the moment I first met him that he was going to be a great trader. What I
tried to do was convey to Brace the principles that Ed and Amos had taught me, along with some of
my acquired skills. My best trading occurred when Brace and I were collaborating; we did some
phenomenal trading. There were years when I was up 300 percent and he was up 1,000 percent. He
had a very great gift.
Do you feel you get ground down as a trader?
Absolutely. Around 1983,1 began to taper off in my trading. I felt that I needed to recharge my
batteries.
How important is gut feel in trading?
Gut feel is very important. I don't know of any great professional trader that doesn't have it. Being a
successful trader also takes courage: the courage to try, the courage to fail, the courage to succeed,
and the courage to keep on going when the going gets tough.
Do you have any goals aside from trading at this point?
I have taken karate for many years. I am already at a high level, but I would like to get the black
belt. Also, I have made a study of spiritual traditions and there is a bit more work I would like to do
with that.
You sound very vague about it. Do you want to be vague?
It is very hard to talk about this. Let me see how I can put it. Albert Einstein said that the single
most important question is whether the universe is friendly. I think it is important for everybody to
come to a point where they feel inside that the universe is friendly.
Are you there now?
I'm a lot closer.
But that's not where you started off ?
No. I started off with the feeling that it was an unfriendly place.
Do you see yourself trading ten or twenty years from now?
Yes, it's too much fun to give up. I don't want to make a lot more money. I would probably just end
up losing it in real estate again.
Is the fun aspect still there if you are doing it thirteen hours a day?
No. If trading is your life, it is a torturous kind of excitement. But if you are keeping your life in
balance, then it is fun. All the successful traders I've seen that lasted in the business sooner or later
27

got to that point. They have a balanced life; they have fun outside of trading. You can't sustain it if
you don't have some other focus. Eventually, you wind up overtrading or getting excessively
disturbed about temporary failures.
When you do hit a losing streak, how do you handle it?
In the past, I've sometimes tried to fight back by trading even heavier after I start losing, but that
usually doesn't work. Then I start cutting down very fast to the point of stopping completely if it
gets bad enough. But usually it never gets that bad.
Do you sometimes manage to fight your way out of it?
Sometimes, but most of the time I would have been better off if I had just stopped. I've had trouble
bringing myself to do that, because I am a natural fighter. The typical pattern is: Lose, fight like
hell, lose again, then cut back, or sometimes stop, until I get on a winning track.
How long have you stopped for?
Usually three, four weeks.
When you are in a losing streak, is it because you are out of sync with the markets, or is there
a better way to describe it?
I think that, in the end, losing begets losing. When you start losing, it touches off negative elements
in your psychology; it leads to pessimism.
There are very few traders who have been as successful as you. What do you think makes you
different?
I am very open-minded. I am willing to take in information that is difficult to accept emotionally,
but which I still recognize to be true. For example, I have seen others make money much faster than
I have only to wind up giving everything back, because when they started losing, they couldn't stop.
When I have had a bad losing streak, I have been able to say to myself, "You just can't trade
anymore." When a market moves counter to my expectations, I have always been able to say, "I
had hoped to make a lot of money in this position, but it isn't working, so I'm getting out."
Do you keep track of your equity on a day-to-day basis? Do you actually plot it?
I have done that a lot in the past.
Is that helpful? Do you think it's a good idea for traders to plot their equity?
I think so. If the trend in your equity is down, that is a sign to cut back and reevaluate. Or if you see
that you are losing money a lot faster than you made it, that would be a warning.
Are there any advisors you pay attention to?
My favorite market letter in terms of readability, imagination, and knowledge of the subject is the
California Technology Stock Letter (CTSL Publishing Partners, 155 Montgomery Street, Suite
1401, San Francisco, CA 94104). I also like the market letters put out by Marty Zweig
(TheZweigLetter, The Zweig Forecast, P.O. Box 360, Bellmore, NY 11710) and Richard Russell
(Dow Theory Letters, Dow Theory Letters Inc., P.O. Box 1759, LaJolla, CA 92038).
Of the traders I have interviewed, Zweig is probably the one most mentioned.
You always get something of value out of Marty Zweig. He is very solid.
Judging by the letters you have mentioned, I take it that you trade stocks as well. How long
have you been trading stocks?
For about the last two years.
Do you trade stocks differently than you trade futures?
I'm more patient.
Is the selection process different?
No, I look for confirmation from the chart, the fundamentals, and the market action. I think you can
trade anything in the world that way.
Do you focus on any particular types of stock?
I don't trade the Dow stocks. I prefer the little ones, because they are not dominated by the big
28
