
This is the main reason why I think trading is very accessible
and easy for individuals. All you need to do is to make sure all of
your eggs aren’t in one basket—diversify, identify a direction, and
figure out what the top resistance level and bottom support levels
are. Movements in the market on a daily basis are very normal. If
there were no movements, I would probably not want to trade. I
just don’t become obsessed with the market. I want to wait for a
good time to get into the market and go with the movements. Ten,
twenty, thirty pips on fluctuations are very normal. If I become
nervous when the market fluctuates 10, 20, or 30 pips, that may
be more of a problem with myself than with my position. This, of
course is if you trade like me and look for big moves. I am only
worried when it moves beyond my predetermined amount—i.e.,
breaks a key level—and that is when I will revisit my position to
see if I need to make changes. Therefore, even if you have a full
time job, you can be active in the market as well. Just have some
sort of alert system either via e-mail, which you can set up some
charting packages to do, or subscribe to a beeper like I have. It
doesn’t require you to watch the market 24/7.

Q.: How many pips do you look for in an average trade?

A : Usually I look for at least 75 to 100 pips. The good thing
about currencies is that there isn’t much cost involved. If I trade
a currency pair with a 5-point spread, I view that as my cost of
trading and will usually be satisfied with making 50 to 100 pips,

154


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

which is quite lucrative for a 5-pip cost. If the currency pair has a
wider spread, I will usually look to make more pips than that.

Q.- what is your stop usually?

A : It really depends on whether I am looking for a shorter-term
or longer-term trade. But usually what I like to do is to exit in
increments. If it moves 75 to 100 pips, I might stop out a portion of
the position, if it continues to move another 75 to 100 pips, I might
exit another portion and so forth. I really like this exit strategy,
and it is something I have only started using in the past 10 years.
However, I only do this when I still believe that my directional bias
is correct. Keeping a portion of the position allows me to retain the
ability to turn this trade around. I have used this technique in the
past year and it has worked out for my trades on many occasions.
So I may put one stop at 100 points, another at 200 points, and
another at 300 points.

I do the same thing with profit targets. I will begin to slowly take
a portion off the table in increments. If I make 100 pips, I may close
out a quarter of my position, if it moves another 100 pips, I may
take profit on another quarter and so forth. This basically prolongs
the life of my trade in the market which I think is important for
trend trading.

Q.:s0 it seems like you always trade in multiple lots then?

A : Yes, I have quite a bit of speculative capital dedicated to trading
currencies. When I trade and have confidence in my analysis, I may
put my entire speculative capital into the investment but manage
my exits more aggressively by spreading them out.

Q.: When you trade, do you usually focus on one currency pair
at a time or will you hold positions in multiple currencies?

A : L usually trade one currency pair at a time because if I trade
too many, I will not be able to focus on my positions. So if T am

155


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

trading Swiss francs, I will only focus on the franc. Then if T want
to move on to yen, I will wait until I exit out of my franc trade
before taking a yen position.

Q.- what kind of leverage do you use?

A : Usually the maximum leverage offered. In Hong Kong, that
is 20 to 1.

Q.: when you first started trading, did you use your savings, or
did you borrow from the bank?

A : It was basically my savings. Personally, I do not believe in
borrowing money to fund my investments. I use my own funds.

Q.- Doe you have some sort of monetary or pip target every day

or week?

A : No, I do not have daily or weekly targets. The main reason is
because I do not want to stress myself out. If you have a daily or
weekly target, you are making trading a necessity. That is, every
day, you are forcing yourself to look for a trading opportunity even
if there may not be one. I prefer to wait for an opportunity and
then take it. I don’t want to be forced to trade to meet a target. I
would rather wait for an opportunity or setup to occur and then to
act on it. If I see opportunities, I may trade more. If IT do not see
an opportunity, I will opt to preserve my capital and wait. I feel
that having targets could actually erode your performance.

Q.: Have you ever traded full time?

A : Initially, I was an investment advisor. So trading was not my
full-time job or focus. Only in the past few years, after I have been
successful, have I switched over to giving education courses while
trading at the same time. As you have mentioned, there are indeed

156


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

people who trade full time. For those who do, I suggest they look
more at the longer term. That is, to have a quarterly instead of a
daily target. This allows you to more flexible. For example, if you
need to make $30,000 a quarter, you can revisit your records every
month to see how you are doing to meet that goal. This way you
avoid the situation where you have a $300 a day goal and because
you lost money yesterday, you end up overtrading because you
need to make $600 instead of $300 the next day.

: What about life expenses? Like rent, health care, and the
like, how do you deal with that?

A : Well, I am fortunate enough that I do not have that many
expenses. I own my property, so I do not have to pay rent. As for
spending, I do not have high expenses, so that is why my stress is
not that high. As for my education company, there are expenses,
but the income from the business is relatively steady, so there is
no major problem. To me the most important thing is that when
it comes to my trading, I do not have stress. No stress to meet a
goal, no stress to make money to pay my rent so I do not feel like
I have to force myself to trade. Therefore I have no need to make
any quick cash. I can sit with my position and trade only when
opportunities arise.

Q.:Do you do your own taxes?

A : In Hong Kong you do not need to pay taxes on your trading
profits. But at the same time, if you lose money, you cannot use
the losses to reduce taxes. This is as far as I understand, but an
accountant would know the details far better. This is for stocks and
currencies. Property/real estate gains, you have to pay taxes.

Q:p id you have a mentor when you first started?
A : Thad colleagues in my company that taught me the basics.

157


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: pia you ever join a support group?

A : No, because 20 years ago there wasn’t that many advanced
services for trading. Support groups did not exist. These days I
will sometimes attend a lecture, but not really take classes because
now that I have been in the industry for 20 years, I feel that I have
enough experience that I do not need to take any of the classes.

Q.: Do you recommend classes for new people?

A : There are a lot of things to learn in the markets, but learning
yourself could involve a lot of time and a lot of brick walls. You may
spend time looking at tools that may not be right for the market
that you want to trade. These days, there are many classes available
which help start traders on the right foot and ease their learning.
But don’t expect to take a class no matter how expensive it may be
and be successful right away. The class will give you knowledge,
teach you techniques, help you to develop a trading plan, and
through this knowledge you will learn the product’s characteristics
and after that you can learn to develop trading techniques. A class
helps people to accelerate their learning, take the first step. But
just accelerating your learning will not guarantee success. If it did,
everyone would pay a few hundred dollars for one class and never
go to work again. No one will teach you the main secret to trading.
It is a matter of how aggressive you are at learning and your talent
at picking up the information.

Q.: Do you have a number one rule for trading?

A : Yes. Stops. The number one rule I have is to use stops and
to diversify your investments and do not be afraid to lose. There
will always be risk. There are many people who analyze intensively
for hours, days, or weeks until they find a trade that they have 90
percent confidence in. But there is nothing that can be 90 percent
right all the time. As long as you find something that may only be
80 percent right, that is good enough because it still means that it
only has a 20 percent likelihood of being wrong.

158


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

Q.- what about fear of losing?

A : I think that the more you are afraid to lose, the more unsuc-
cessful you will be. You will be overselective and find that you have
missed opportunities. You need to analyze and do your homework.
But you also need to be willing to take the chance, to take the risk.
If you are wrong, that is okay as long as you have a stop in, your
stop will be taken out, and your loss is limited. Maintaining limited
risk is better than missing out on what otherwise could be great
opportunities. Making sure what your worst-case scenario is at any
time will help you manage your trades better, which will ultimately
lead to more success.

Q.: What was your most memorable trade?

A : It happened two years ago. I took a trade and was able to make
40 percent in one week and a bit more. This was in August 2005.
At the time, I was long 5 million U.S. dollars/Swiss francs. I added
2 million later, totaling 7 million. Then I held them both at the
same time for eight days before getting out at a 40 percent profit.
At the time, U.S. dollars/Swiss francs was range trading and it was
nearing a key support zone, I checked my charts and saw a minor
breakout and felt that it was a good point to enter into the trade. I
initially bought at 1.2487, then I went long again at 1.2485. I exited
the whole position at 1.2737, which was the fastest time I exited
out of the trade with such large profits.

Q what was your worst trade?

A. It was in June 2005. I lost close to half of my investment. I was
long 5 million British pounds/U.S. dollars and then added another
4 million. I had small profits at the time, but then got greedy and
added another 5 million. Then the market reversed and collapsed
and because I was long so many lots, I incurred huge losses. The
problem here was really my greed. It caused me to let a winner
turn into a loser.

159


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q - How did you recover your confidence after this?

A : Winning and losing are all a part of trading. If you believe in
your system, you shouldn’t let it get to your confidence because
you will be able to trade again and hopefully make the money
back. Even though I lost half my capital, I still had the other half,
so I had the capital to recover my prior losses. I think that capital
preservation is most important.

Q: pia you learn something from this trade?

A : Definitely not to be greedy. If I have profits, I now look to
pocket them. At the time, I was hoping for a big ticket winner if
the position moved in my favor, ignoring the risks. It’s a mistake I
won't make again. At the time I lost close to $200,000 U.S. dollars.

Q.: when you look at charts, do you add indicators?

A: Yes, MACD, moving averages, DMI. My charts are generally
very simple—only a moving average on top and then maybe either
the MACD or DMI on bottom. If there are too many things on the
charts, I think it’s confusing. I don’t think you need to put too many
things onto the charts. It’s important to analyze when trading, but
because every indicator is different and may give different entry
signals, you can get more confused rather than more clear. I don’t
rely on too many indicators. Picking a few key ones is enough.

Q.: You have already said that entries are important, as well as
scattered exits, which do you think is the most important?

A : I think entries are the most important because if you enter
well, then it gives you a good price to work with. But I also think
that exit is also important because many people will enter in the
market, have profits, but because they do not exit properly, the
profits will turn into losses.

160


THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE

LESSONS FROM FRANKI LAW
Cut Your Losses, Retain Control

For Franki Law, trading is all about retaining control. Our favorite
piece of advice from the Hong Kong-based trader is to make
sure that you never lose control of your position because if you
do, you will also lose your power to make intelligent decisions.
Franki believes that it is extremely dangerous to average down or
post margin calls on a losing position. Although you are lowering
your average entry price, requiring a smaller price movement to
return to breakeven, every point move against you also becomes
even more damaging because of the increased position size. At this
point, you are essentially at the whim of the market and can only
go where it takes you. Even if, based on your analysis, you wanted
to take a trade in the opposite direction, you may not be able
to because you are paralyzed by your losing position. Therefore,
sometimes the smartest trade to make may be the hardest one. If
you cut your losses, you not only end the pain, but you also regain
your decision-making power and can examine the market from an
objective point of view.

Averaging Down Increases Risk, Averaging Up
Decreases It

Instead of averaging down, Franki averages up. In fact, many of the
traders that we have interviewed also trade this way. By averaging
up, you are actually lowering your risk because you are risking
profits and not original capital. Franki also tries to milk his trades
for everything they are worth by scaling out of his positions. This
prolongs the life of his trades and allows him to capture as much
of the trend as possible. The way he exits is based on what he feels
is the potential of a move, which is his methodology of ranking
movements. What we like about Franki’s style of trading is the fact
that he ranks the potential movements of a currency. For example,
if prior breakout moves have lasted for 400 pips and the current
move has extended by 100 pips, you can consider that the move
is only beginning to run its course and may elect to take off 25
percent of the position just to bank some profits. If the move has

161


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

extended by 300 pips, then the move is nearing its potential. At
this time, traders using a ranking system may elect to take off 75
percent of the position. A small percentage of the position is kept
on with a trailing stop in case the current trend has the momentum
to extend beyond 400 pips. This way, you are riding as much of the
move as possible while also locking in profits along the way.

Rank Your Profits

Day traders may also find it useful to employ a ranking system. For
example, if a currency pair has a daily average range of 100 pips,
trying to bank all of those 100 pips on a given day may be very
difficult. Aiming to bank 30 to 40 of those pips on a day trade is
very feasible, 50 to 70 pips may be harder but still possible while
80 to 90 pips may be extremely difficult. This could give traders a
frame of reference of when to take profits on their day trades by
controlling their greed.

162


CHAPTER 7

THE TREASURE
HUNTER

INDI JONES

Indi Jones—an alias—is a self-confessed treasure hunter who flies
around the world looking for hidden gems. Spending six months
trading from a beachfront condo in the Caribbean and six months
trading from an emerging market country every year, he lives a
lifestyle most of us can only dream of. Having passed on a cushy
job at a major bank, Indi started his career in the New York com-
modity pits earning $16K per year two decades ago. He trades
extreme sentiment and takes positions in the market when no one
else wants to. His forte is trading options for volatility as well as
directionality. His motto is to press the trade when it moves in
your favor and to always know your maximum loss limit. This disci-
pline and eye for intelligent and unique trades have resulted in an
impressive record, as Indi turned $25,000 into a million dollars be-
fore he was 30. He is a true professional and an extremely creative
trader.

163


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

We were delighted that he agreed to share his ideas with us
on his brief layover in New York as he was headed down to the
Caribbean for some fun in the sun.

Q..we are excited about having you participate in our interview
series because your story of success is particularly interesting. Let’s
start by talking about your background and how you got into finance
and trading.

A : My education in finance and trading began in my junior year at
New York University. We went on a class trip to the commodities
exchanges. I looked at the gold pits and the crude oil pits and I
thought to myself, “Wow, this is kind of where high finance meets
professional sports.” It looked like an exciting way to combine my
interest in finance and economics with something a little bit more
exciting. I saw some guys making a few thousand dollars in a few
minutes in the gold pit and then, maybe a half hour later, I saw a
similar episode in the crude oil pit.

Q.: How long ago was that?
A: It was 1986.

Q.:s0 why did you pick finance and economics as a major? Was
it something that your parents encouraged you to study?

A : No, actually, I loved finance since I was a little kid. I used
to ask my mom to get me two newspapers, one she didn’t have
a problem with and that was Newsday, so I could read how the
Yankees did, and the second one was the Wall Street Journal,
which she could not understand because nobody in my house was
involved in finance. So she used to get me the Wall Street Journal
and Newsday every day from when I was about 10 or 11 years old,

164


THE TREASURE HUNTER

and I just became really fascinated with finance and economics
from that time on. I loved to study trends. I used to read the
commodities sections when I was a kid and I guess I related it to
some type of sports score.

QO: Given your interest, did you ever try trading before you went
to college?

A : No, I didn’t try doing any type of trading until college. That’s
when I started, and that’s when I got my baptism under fire. Shortly
after that class trip, I decided, well, hey, I'm studying finance,
economics—some of these guys on the floor looked like street
thugs—maybe I can outsmart them with a college degree. So I
opened up a trading account and started trading these commodi-
ties. I basically put in my whole net worth, which was about $5,000
and that wasn’t enough to meet the account minimum at the time,
so my father put in $5,000 of his money.

Q.: How did you convince him?

A : I don’t remember how I did that sales job at the moment. But
I guess he kind of liked me and thought that the kid can now get
some practical experience and see if he knows what he’s doing. I
had also made some calls during my teenage years, like crude oil
is going to go up or the dollar’s going to weaken, and maybe he
heard some of these and they actually happened, and he thought,
“Well, you know, let’s let the kid roll the dice.”

Q.:s0 your whole family was very supportive then?

A : Yes, they were very supportive, especially my father, ‘cause
like I said, he had to open the account, too. I think we had a joint ac-
count because he had to open it for some reason. It might have been
the net-worth thing, or maybe I was under 21 at the time. There
was some reason why we had a joint account. It was in his name and
my name and we opened it up. I put in $5,000 of my money, which

165


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

was everything I had, and he put in $5,000 of his to top it off to
meet the account minimum, which I think was $10,000 at the time.

Q.: 80 tell us about your very first trade. Did you do a lot of
research, or were you so excited about opening the account that
you just wanted to put something on for the sake of it?

A : No, I didn’t do much research, and I made probably every
mistake in the world because I couldn’t wait to put on the trade. I
mean that account couldn’t get opened up fast enough as far I was
concerned. Low and behold, of all things, I decided to dabble in
coffee. There was some type of crop report coming out on Friday
afternoon. So, on the day before, I took a position in coffee based on
what I thought was going to happen in the crop report. Right away I
made a host of mistakes, as I later realized that it’s very risky trading
before a crop report. You don’t do that, definitely not as a newbie.
To make matters worse, I had a midterm exam in marketing the
next day at NYU, and I didn’t understand all the orders at the time
such as stop-loss or limit orders, and most importantly I didn’t
understand what an OCO order was. It’s a one-cancels-other order.
I had this theory at the time that the crop report was going to be
bullish, the market was going to open higher, maybe two to four
cents, and I would get out. Alternatively, I would have a stop-loss in,
maybe two, three, or four cents below where the market was trading
in case it didn’t move in my direction. But I was worried that day. I
didn’t want to put it in and that was really stupid. I didn’t want to put
the stop-loss order and not take the profits because I was afraid that
it would go as high as my profit target, take me out of my position,
but then I'd get stopped out and end up with a new position. I didn’t
want to just put in the target without the stop and didn’t know what
a one-cancels-other order was and, as a result, I had no orders, just
an open position. So I took my exam, ran out of the exam hall to
the library, and found that coffee had opened two cents higher and
then went limit down after the crop report and I lost like $8,000. I
lost all my money and about $3,000 of my father’s. [Authors’ note:
Indi here refers to a very common trading order used in almost
every financial market—the OCO. One cancel other order allows

166


THE TREASURE HUNTER

the trader to enter the position with both a stop and a limit order
attached. If either one of the price levels (the stop or the limit) is
reached and executed, the other order is automatically cancelled.
His ignorance of the OCO left him unprotected in the market. |
