
A L P H O N S E " B U D D Y " fLFPCHER J R

[By selling options that give buyers the right to buy the stock at a
specified price above the current price, Fletcher gives up part of his
windfall profit in the event the stock price rises sharply. But, in
exchange, he collects premiums (that is, the cost of the options) that
augment his income on the deal regardless of what happens to the
stock price.]
But are there always traded options in the companies you are
financing through these stock purchase agreements?
Well, it's not always possible to get a perfect hedge. But even when
there are no options traded for the specific company, we can sometimes use private "over-the-counter" options. We can also use index
options against a basket of companies in our transactions. The
assumption is that if the stock index rises a lot, then the stocks of the
companies we have invested in are likely to rise sharply as well. In
fact, since we are buying stocks that have been under pressure and
are more speculative in nature, if the market docs well, these stocks
may rise more than the average.
Taking into account the interest income and the option-selling
income, it appears that you are virtually guaranteed to make at
least a moderate profit on every transaction of this kind, and
only lose in the disaster scenario.
Even in the disaster scenario, which again is unlikely because of the
way we select our stocks, we can still sometimes protect ourselves by
buying out-of-the-money puts, which at the strike prices implied by a
bankruptcy are pretty cheap.
How long have you been employing this type of strategy?
For about seven years, and it has now grown to become our single
most important market activity. The strategy actually evolved from
the dividend capture strategy. [The strategy described previously in
Fletcher's example of U.S. investors holding shares in an Italian
computer company.] One variation of the dividend capture strategy
is dividend reinvestment, wherein companies allow shareholders to
reinvest their dividends in the stock at a discounted price. We have
been very active in buying shares from parties who did not want to be
bothered with reinvestment. We would therefore be the recipient of

W I N - W I N INVESTING!

$1 million of dividends and then elect to reinvest it, receiving $1.05
million of newly issued stock.
Why would a company give you more stock than the amount of
the dividend?
Because the companies that provided this offer wanted to conserve
their capital and were willing to grant shareholders a 5 percent discount as an incentive to reinvest their dividends in the stock.
Is it common for companies to offer this type of dividend reinvestment?
It is popular among companies with high dividends who don't want to
cut their dividends but need to preserve capital. For example, it was
particularly prevalent among the banks in the early 1990s when they
were trying to increase their equity.
Eventually, some companies started to offer shareholders the
option to purchase additional discounted shares in an amount equivalent to the dividend reinvestment. Then some companies began
waiving limits, allowing investors to buy virtually any amount of stock
at a discounted price.
In the early 1990s, many banks were actively pursuing this type
of program, and we participated heavily. That experience led us to
going to a major U.S. electronics company in 1992 in what proved to
be our first private equity funding deal. At the time, this company
couldn't raise capital through a stock offering because they'd had a
bad quarter and the prevailing attitude was: "I don't want to buy
newly issued stock from that company." That's probably the best time
to buy newly issued stock. When do you want to buy it—after they've
reported record earnings [he laughs]!1 But that's the way it works, and
it was a perfect opportunity for us to step in and say here's the check.
We told the company that we would buy $15 million worth of
stock from them over a period of time. We stressed that we wanted it
to be a very friendly and supportive deal. Therefore, instead of buying
stock at a discount, we proposed being compensated by an option to
buy more stock in the future. In this way, our incentives were perfectly aligned with the interests of management and shareholders. As
we discussed earlier, in this type of arrangement, our most significant

A L P H O N S E "BUDDY

C H E R JRl

profit opportunity arises when the company does very well, although
because of our hedge, we should be consistently profitable.
We had a wonderful relationship with this company. In fact, their
former CFO ended up joining us. He's the one at Fletcher Asset
Management who explains who we are to the companies we approach
and manages the negotiations and ensuing relationships.
There's no better salesman than a satisfied customer. How did
you sell a major corporation on your financing transaction, since
you had never done anything like that before?
That's a good question. When I first approached them, we were this
tiny firm working out of rented space at Bear Stearns. Their initial
reaction was: Who are you? Merrill Lynch couldn't get us a secondary
offering, Lazard is our adviser, and you are calling out of the blue to
tell us that you can do the deal."
I talked to a neighbor in my apartment building, Steve Rattner,
who was a senior banker at Lazard. 1 told him that I was interested in
doing a deal with a company that his firm was advising. I asked him to
help me. He made a few phone calls, and the next thing I knew, I was
on a flight to Chicago along with a banker from Lazard and our attorney to meet with the company. When the deal was all done, Steve
said to me, "That was an extremely interesting transaction. Have you
thought about taking on outside capital?"
Didn't the idea of raising outside capital to fund your transactions occur to you before this deal?
Sure, the idea had come up a number of times before. However, every
time we considered it, we asked ourselves why we should take money
from investors, and give up the bulk of the profits, when we can borrow money to do the deal, and keep 100 percent of the profits?
Exactly, so why did you start a fund open to outside investors?
The big change was realizing that a friend like Steve could get us in the
door where such a great transaction could happen. Wouldn't it be nice
to have other friends like that who had a vested interest in our success.
So the primary motivation wasn't necessarily raising extra capital, but rather getting investors who would be allies.
Yes, that was the point Steve made that caught my attention. Raising
capital, however, did provide some additional benefits over borrowing

IftMN-WIN I N V E S T I N G

by allowing us to do many more transactions, thereby reducing our
portfolio risk through greater diversification.
Using the U.S. electronics company as an example, I assume
that if Steve had not been there, the deal would never have happened.
Exactly. We have some incredibly insightful people as investors whom

I can call for advice.
It almost sounds as if you have selected your own investors.
Essentially, we have. We have turned away a number of investors, particularly in the U.S. fund.
If someone comes to you and wants to invest a couple of million
dollars, you won't automatically open the account?
Oh no, we have actually researched everyone who wanted to invest
before they invested.
So you actually screen your investors.
Yes, investors are screened by either us or our marketing representatives.
And the reason?
If we were just looking to raise as much money as we could, sure, the
more the merrier. At this point, we just want supportive investors. It is
not worth the trouble having an investor who would be a distraction.
Maybe in the future, with other pools of money, we may be less judgmental, but right now we want investors who will be friends and
allies.
But, surely, not every investor is someone who will have useful
contacts or be a source of advice.
If they are not, though, then they are usually either friends or family. For example, the head trader's mother, who is a retired librarian,
is one of our investors, as is my own mother, who is a retired school
principal. In fact, eight of our mothers and mothers-in-law are investors in the fund. By the way, our mothers are the most demanding
investors.
In what way?
They have no qualms about demanding an explanation for anything,
from the reason for a slow start to the year to the reason for a particularly good month.

A L P H O N S E "JBUDDY'-lraiTCHER

What prevents competitors from coming in and doing private
equity funding deals similar to the ones you did with the U.S.
electronics company and the European software company?
They come in all the time. In each of the strategies we have discussed, competition has increased and will continue to do so. That's
the nature of the market. Our advantage is that we were there first.
What is unique about our firm is that we never imitate someone else's
strategy. Another advantage we enjoy is that we try to construct our
deals so that they are fair to both the company and us. As a result of
our approach, over time we have been able to evolve from doing deals
with companies worth several hundred million dollars to companies
whose market size is measured in billions.

Even though you have an advantage, with this one core strategy
providing most of your profits, what happens if the field becomes
sufficiently crowded to reduce the profit margins meaningfully?
Well, we are always working on developing new strategies. Our thinking is: Let the competition move in, we'll be onto the next thing.

For example?
For example, right now we are deliberately using strategies that are
uncorrelated with the stock market. There is tremendous demand,
however, for an investment program correlated with the stock market
that could consistently outperform the S&P 500. I would love to take
on that challenge.
A lot of people have come up with the idea of S&P enhancement programs. Haven't any of these enhanced S&P funds been
successful?
Even the ones that have come close to doing it haven't quite done it.
These funds have attempted to beat the S&P 500 by 1 percent or a
few percent, but they have not been consistent.

How do they try to do it?
At one extreme, P1MCO buys S&P futures for the stock exposure
and tries to provide the additional 100 basis points return by managing a fixed income portfolio.
Sure, that would work if interest rates are stable or go down. But
if interest rates rise, aren't they taking the risk of a loss on their

bond portfolio?

WIN-WIN INVEST!

Yes, they definitely are. In effect, all they are really doing is taking the
active manager risk in the fixed income market as opposed to the
equity market.
What other approaches have people used to try to consistently
outperform the S&P 500 benchmark?
Some people attempt to beat the S&P 500 by trying to pick the best
stocks in each sector. They will balance their sector investments to match
the S&P 500, but within each sector they will weight certain stocks more
heavily than others. For example, they might weight their portfolio in
favor of GM versus Ford, or vice versa, depending on their analysis.
Have you thought of a way of consistently beating the S&P 500?
Oh, sure.
Then why haven't you started trading it as a model program?
We've been very busy. We will probably start it soon.
How did the idea of an S&P 500 enhancement program come
to you?
I kept reading about the never-ending debate between those who felt
active managers were better and those who felt you couldn't beat the
index, implying passive managers were better. I thought it would be
really exciting to be able to consistently beat the index.
I understand how the idea for the product occurred to you, but
what I am asking is how did you get the idea of how to do it?
I have to be tight-lipped here because we haven't launched this program yet. I was able to talk about our other strategies because the
competition has already figured out what we are doing and has begun
to move in.
So you haven't initiated this S&P 500 enhancement program yet,
but once you do, the competition will know what you're doing.
Then we can talk about it [he laughs].
The strategies you describe sound so well hedged and your risk
numbers are so low that I'm curious if you ever had a trade that
went really bad, and if so, what went wrong?
One of the companies we invested in declared bankruptcy. Our protective strategies worked well, but they can only work up to a limit.
What is the whole story?
Don't make me relive it [he laughs]. This is our worst story by far.

A L P H O N S E " B U D J ) Y " F L E T C H E R JR

The worst story is always more interesting than the best story.
Yes, I always focus on this episode whenever I talk to new investors.
The company, which was a marketer of prepaid phone cards, needed
financing. Although the deal was marginal, we decided to do it. Two
weeks after the deal was completed, the company announced that all
their financial statements were wrong and would be revised for the
past two years. The stock dropped over 70 percent overnight. It happened so quickly that we didn't have time to get our hedges fully in
place. Although the company still had a viable business and assets,
they declared bankruptcy to facilitate the sale of virtually all of their
assets to another company.

How did you extricate yourself from this situation?
Fortunately, part of our deal was secured, placing us first in line in the
bankruptcy proceedings. We have already recovered a large chunk of
our capital and have a claim pending for more. If our due diligence is
done correctly, then the companies we invest in should have significant liquidation value, which was the case here—the acquiring company wrote a check for more than $100 million. Of course, although
the assets are there, we don't know how much more money, if any, we
will recover on our claim.
What did you learn from this whole experience?
The fact that the company negotiated aggressively for granting us less
protection than is the case for our normal deals should have acted as
a warning signal. The blindsiding that came from the financial
restatement was really brutal, but I don't know how that could have
been avoided.
You've grown from a one-man shop to a thirty-plus-person firm.
What have you learned about the process of hiring people since
you started your company?
One of the best things I learned since starting a business was how to
hire the right people. I used to hire anyone who insisted they were
right for the job. If we had an open slot and someone said, "No problem, I could do that job," I would hire that person because I knew that
if / said that, I could do it. Through experience I learned that most
people who try to aggressively talk their way into a position can't do
the job.

JNIN-WIN INVESTING
What have you changed in your hiring practices?
The people who have worked out best are the people that I had done
business with successfully for years before I recruited them to join us.
Literally, I went after them; they didn't come after me. That's been
the big difference.

Fletcher's initial success came from a brilliant insight: Even if the
markets are efficient, if different investors are treated differently, it
implies a profit opportunity. Every strategy he has employed, at its
core, has been based on a discrepancy in the treatment of different
parties. For example, the profit opportunities in his current primary
strategy—private equity funding—are made possible by the fact that
some companies have much greater difficulty attracting investment
funds than other companies with equivalent long-term fundamentals. By identifying these temporarily out-of-favor companies,
Fletcher can structure a financing deal that offers these firms funds
at a lower cost than they can find elsewhere while at the same time
providing him with a high-probability, low-risk profit opportunity.
The two other main themes to Fletcher's trading success are
innovation and risk control. Although the specifics of Fletcher's
approach are not directly applicable to ordinary investors, these two
principles still represent worthy goals for all market participants.

F R O M I S T A N B U L TO W A L L S T R E E T B U L L

AHMET OKUMUS
From Istanbul to
Wall Street Bull
When Ahmet OkumilS was sixteen years old, he visited the trading floor of the
recently opened Istanbul Stock Exchange and was mesmerized. He was
fascinated by trading, which on the Istanbul exchange resembled speculating far more closely than investing. It wasn't long before his initial
enthusiasm became an obsession, and he began cutting classes regularly
to trade stocks on the exchange.
Okumus knew that he wanted to become a money manager and realized that the country that offered the greatest opportunity for achieving
his goal was the United States. In 1989, he immigrated to the United
States, ostensibly to attend college but with the firm conviction that this
was just a stepping-stone to his true career objective. Using a $15,000
stake from his mother, Okumus began trading U.S. stocks in 1992. This
original investment had mushroomed to over $6 million by early 2000, an
average annual compounded return of 107% (gross returns). In 1997, he
launched his first hedge fund, the Okumus Opportunity Fund.
I interviewed Okumus at his Manhattan office, a distinctly unimpressive space. Coming off the elevator, I was greeted by a receptionist who
did not work for Okumus but who clearly was shared by all the tenants
on the floor. Okumus's office was small, badly in need of a paint job, and
outfitted with ugly furniture. The single window offered little visual
relief, providing a claustrophobic view of the side of the adjacent building. The office had one redeeming feature: it was cheap—actually, free (a
perk for commission business). Okumus is evidently proud of this. Talking about how he got great deals on everything from his office space to

148

his accountant, he says, "It's my nature. I love to get good deals. I don't
pay up." It is a comment that is equally fitting as a description of his trading philosophy.

At the time of my interview, Okumus shared his small office with his
college buddy, Ted Coakley III, whom he brought in to do marketing and
assorted administrative tasks. (A subsequent expansion in staff necessitated a move to larger quarters.) Coakley's faith in Okumus is based on
personal experience. In college, he was Okumus's first investor, giving
him $1,000 to invest (in two $500 installments)—an investment that
grew to over $120,000 in seven years.
Prior to 1998, Okumus's worst year was a gain of 61 percent (gross
return). In 1998, a year when the S&P rose by 28 percent, he finished
the year with only a minuscule 5 percent gain. I began my mid-1999
interview by questioning him about his uncharacteristically lackluster
performance in 1998.

