
MARKS

off about 4 or 5 points, and I was really concerned. He told me not to
worry. He assured me that the stock was a bargain and that the sell-off
was a once-in-a-lifetime buying opportunity. He claimed that the company had developed an AIDS drug that was going to get PDA approval.
He actually convinced me to buy more. The stock kept on sinking.
Eventually I couldn't buy any more because I ran out of money. The end
of the story is that the stock fell to under $1, and I lost all my money.
How much did you lose in that trade, and how much had you lost
up till that point?
Altogether, 1 lost about $30,000 to $40,000, with about half the
amount on that trade. Even worse, part of the loss was borrowed
money.
Did that experience cause you to lose any of your zeal for the
stock market?
No, but it was very upsetting and discouraging. I literally cried. What
hurt the most was that I thought 1 had lost my chance because I had
wiped out my trading stake. But no matter what happened, I never
stopped believing that there were great trading opportunities available
every day. It was just a matter of my figuring out how to identify them.
My mistake had been surrendering the decision-making responsibility
to someone else. I was convinced that if I did my own work, 1 would

be successful.
What gave you that conviction? It certainly wasn't your trading
results.
It's just my personality. I don't give up very easily. Perhaps the single
most important factor was that I had a great passion for the game. I
think almost anyone can be net profitable in the stock market given
enough time and effort, but to be a great trader, you have to have a
passion for it. You have to love trading. Michael Jordan didn't become
a great basketball player because he wanted to do product endorsements. Van Gogh didn't become a great painter because he dreamed
that one day his paintings would sell for $50 million.
Was your passion for the market related to the opportunity to

make a lot of money?
Initially 1 might have been attracted to the stock market because of
the money, but once I got involved, making money was not the issue.

STOCK A R O U N D THEXtOCK

What was the issue?

The issue was winning. The issue was being the best at something.
My goal is to be the best trader in the world. If you're the best, you
don't have to worry about money; it comes flying through the window.
What did you learn from your experience in losing all your
money?
I realized that no one was going to do it for me; I had to do it for
myself. My broker still got a commission, but I was sitting there
broke. Incidentally, although I didn't realize it then, I now fully
believe that losing all of your money is one of the best things that can
happen to a beginning trader.

Why?
Because it teaches you respect for the market. It is much better to
learn the lesson that you can lose everything when you don't have that
much money than to learn the same lesson later on.
I guess that implies you are not an advocate of paper trading for
beginners.
Absolutely. I think paper trading is the worst thing you can do. If you
are a beginner, trade with an amount of money that is small enough so
that you can afford to lose it, but large enough so that you will feel the
pain if you do. Otherwise, you're fooling yourself. I have news for you:
If you go from paper trading to real trading, you're going to make
totally different decisions because you're not used to being subjected
to the emotional pressure. Nothing is the same. It's like shadowboxing and then getting in the ring with a professional boxer. What do
you think is going to happen? You're going to crawl up into a turtle
position and get the crap beat out of you because you're not used to
really getting hit. The most important thing to becoming a good trader
is to trade.
How did you make the transition from failure to success?
My results were transformed when I understood that what counts
isn't how often you're right, but how much you profit on your winning
trades versus how much you lose on your losing trades. On average,
I'm only profitable about 50 percent of the time, but I make much
more when I'm right than I lose when I'm wrong.

MARK

I meant at the very beginning. How did you go from losing all
your money following a broker's tip to developing your own successful methodology?
It was a slow, gradual process that took years of research and trading
experience. I also read just about every book I could find on the markets and successful individuals. Out of the hundreds of books that I
read, there were probably no more than ten that had a major influence on me. However, I don't think there is any such thing as a bad
book. Even if you only get one sentence out of a book, it's still worthwhile. Sometimes, one sentence can even change your life.
Okay, tell me a sentence that changed your life.
"The fruits of your success will be in direct ratio to the honesty and
sincerity of your own effort in keeping your own records, doing your
own thinking, and reaching your own conclusions." In other words,
take 100 percent responsibility for your results.
Which book is this quote taken from?
How to Trade in Stocks by Jesse Livermore.

What other lessons did you get out of that book?
There were many important messages. The basic message is not to
have a rigid opinion; the market is never wrong. He also talked about
the need for patience, not only in waiting for the right moment to
enter a position, but also in riding a gain in a winning position. The
message that really hit home with me was the importance of protecting your profits, not just your principal.
What changed for you after reading Livermore's book?
I was astonished at how relevant the book still was to today's market.
It inspired me to go back and look at the stocks of the early 1900s and
even earlier. I found that there is really nothing different in the markets. I was amazed at how many of Livermore's observations matched
my own.
Such as?
The importance of money management.
Of course, Livermore himself didn't exactly excel in that department. [Livermore made and lost several fortunes. He ultimately
committed suicide after wiping out one too many times.]

S T O C K A R O U N D THISCafiCK

On a day-to-day basis Livermore did cut his losses. Unfortunately,
from time to time he would let his urge to gamble get the better of
him. That urge is what destroys many traders.
What else helped you become a successful trader?
Playing poker. I think that anyone who wants to be a trader should
learn how to play poker.
Can you elaborate on that?
The first time I seriously watched a poker game in a casino I noticed
that the average winning hand was over $50, but that it only cost you
50 cents to see the first three cards. I couldn't believe that for half a
buck I could get a pretty good idea of my chances of winning a hundred times that amount. If I folded fifty times and won only once, I
would still win twice as much as I lost. Those seemed like terrific
odds to me. That's how I got started playing poker. My strategy was to
play only super-high-probability hands.
Didn't everyone just fold once you played a hand?
No, and you know why?—because they were not disciplined, and
they wanted to play. The key is to know when to do nothing. Most
people, even if they have a winning strategy, will not follow it because
they lack discipline. For example, everyone knows how to lose
weight: you eat less fat and exercise. So why are most people overweight (assuming they don't have a medical problem)? Because they
lack discipline.
I guess the analogy to the markets is that when you put on a
trade, for a short while you get to see how it works out for limited risk. If it isn't working out, you take a small loss, and if it
goes in your favor, you have the potential for a large gain.
That's right. I have a saying: "Being wrong is acceptable, but staying
wrong is totally unacceptable." Being wrong isn't a choice, but staying
wrong is. To play any game successfully, you have to have some skill,
an edge, but beyond that it's money management. That's true whether
you're playing poker or investing. In either case, the key is managing
the downside. Good traders manage the downside; they don't worry
about the upside.
You can't get beat if you have a great defense. I would always pre-

MAiiWINERVINI

fer to bet on a football team that has a great defense as opposed to
one that has a great offense. If a trade doesn't work out quickly, I take
a small loss, and I may have to take a small loss many times.

What if you get stopped out of a trade five times? Don't you find
it difficult to get back in the sixth time?
Not if it meets my criteria. Again, poker provides a good analogy. Previous hands mean nothing. The current hand determines the probabilities. You have to make the correct decision based on that
information. Whether you lost or won in previous hands is totally
irrelevant. Therefore, I have no problem putting on the same trade
many times.
Early on, when I got stopped out of a position, that was it. I wiped
it out of my mind and started looking for another stock. I began to
notice, however, that many times I would get stopped out of a stock,
then look at it a few months later and see that it had doubled or even
tripled. 1 would exclaim to myself, "God, I was in that stock!" I realized that I needed to develop a plan to get back on board after I was

S T O C K AROUCD THEta-OCK

What do you mean by a setup?
The initial condition is based on the long-term price action. Then
there are confirming fundamental conditions, which may be overridden in certain circumstances. Finally, determining the entry point is
based strictly on the price action.

I assume the type of price action you're using for confirmation to
enter a trade is much shorter term than the type of price action

you initially use to screen for a potential buy candidate?
That's correct.

In other words, you might call your combination of entry conditions a price action sandwich.
That's exactly what it is—a price action sandwich.
One of Minnervini's associates who had been sitting in as an observer
during the interview chuckled at this last remark. Apparently he considered the analogy apt and had certainly never heard the methodology
described this way.

stopped out of a position.

I guess there is a psychological difficulty involved in reentering a
position at a higher price after you've been stopped out.

Were there any other major pivotal points in your transition from
failure to success?

Yes, and even worse, you might get stopped out again. If you are, can
you get in a third time? I can do it as many times as necessary to get
the trade right. Sometimes when a stock stops you out several times,
it sets up as a much higher probability trade.

After I had been trading for several years following my initial wipeout
in the markets, I decided to do an analysis of all my trades. I was particularly interested in seeing what happened to stocks after I sold
them. When I was stopped out of a stock, did it continue to go lower,
or did it rebound? When I took profits on a stock, did it continue to go
higher? I got tremendous information out of that study. My most
important discovery was that I was holding on to my losing positions
too long. After seeing the preliminary results, I checked what would
have happened if I had capped all my losses at 10 percent. I was
shocked by the results: that simple rule would have increased my
profits by 70 percent!

Can you give me a specific example?
Let's say I buy a stock because of a signal by my model and the market dips enough to stop me out. The stock then witnesses a huge
reversal and closes near the high of the day. That price action may be
an indication that there was a shakeout, which knocked out most of
the weak hands, and the stock is ready to go up. Putting the long position back on at that point may well be a higher probability trade than
the original trade.

In that type of situation, do you get in on the close or on the next
opening?
It depends. I have specific setups that must be met before I enter the
trade.

Yes, but did you take into account the fact that by capping your
losses, you were also knocking out some previous winners that
initially went down more than 10 percent and then rebounded?
You're absolutely right, and that was the next thing I checked. I found
that it didn't make too much of a difference. Capping my losses at 10

M A R K MINERVI?

percent only knocked out a few of my winners. I noticed that the winning trades usually worked from the onset. I realized that it was not
only totally unnecessary to go through the pain of holding on to positions with large open losses, but also actually detrimental to do so.
I also realized that by holding on to some of my losing positions for
extended periods of time, I was tying up my capital. Therefore, the
impact of the large losers went beyond the losses themselves, since
holding on to these positions was keeping me from making profits
elsewhere. If I took this impact into account, the benefit of capping
my losses was astronomical.
Based on your earlier comments, you are obviously risking far
less than the 10 percent maximum loss cap you used in this
study. How do you decide where to place your stop-loss points?
Not every trade I put on is the same. I will use much wider stops on
long-term trades than short-term trades. I will also use much wider
stops when I think the market is in the early stages of a bull move
than if I think the market is overdone and due for a correction. The
essential principle is that the stop-loss point should be a function of
the expected gain.
Do any other experiences stand out as important in your transformation into a highly successful trader?
I learned not to impose any artificial restrictions on my upside potential. At one point during the summer of 1995, I was up over 100 percent year to date, which achieved my original goal for the entire year.
I was seriously considering booking the year. A friend of mine asked,
"What makes you think you can't make 200 percent?" I thought about
it for a day or two, and said to myself that he's right. I ended that year
up 407 percent.
I know you use both fundamental and technical analysis. Do you
weight one more than the other?
Roughly speaking, I would say my weighting is fifty-fifty. But there is
an important distinction between the relative importance I assign to
price action versus fundamentals. Although I would never bet on my
fundamental ideas without some confirming price action, I might
consider buying a stock with apparent negative fundamentals if its
relative price performance is in the top 2 percent of the market.

Why is that?
Because the price action may be telling you that the stock is discounting a potential change in the fundamentals that is not yet evident. The combination of strong price action and weak current
fundamentals often occurs in turnaround companies or companies
with a new technology whose potential is not yet widely understood.
How many charts do you review each day?
I run preliminary computer screens on roughly ten thousand companies and narrow the list down to about eight hundred stocks.
Each night, 1 review the charts for all these stocks. My first passthrough is very quick, and on average I'll spot about 30 to 40 stocks
that look interesting. I then review these stocks more closely, scrutinizing the company's fundamentals, if I haven't already done so
recently, and select several that might be considered for purchase
the next day.
What length price charts do you look at?
Anything from ten years down to intraday, but I always look at a five-

year, one-year, and intraday chart.
What kind of price patterns are you looking for when you put on

a trade?
1 don't use the conventional chart patterns. I don't find them particularly useful.
So what do you look for in a chart?
Many of the patterns that I have observed and found useful are more
complex variations of conventional chart patterns. I have a list of patterns that I've named. These are patterns that repeat over and over.
They have repeated since the 1800s, and they will repeat forever.
When I look at charts and see these patterns, I don't know how anyone in the world could miss them. But, of course, they do, just as I
did early in my career.
How many of these patterns are there?
About twenty.
Can you provide one as an example.
I'd rather not.
How did you discover these patterns?
I started with common chart patterns and found that they worked

STOCK A R O U N D THIK3,:OCK

great sometimes and didn't work at all at other times. I spent a lot of
time focusing on when patterns worked.
I constantly try to figure out how the market can trick or frustrate
the majority of investors. Then after the majority have been fooled I
get in at what I call the "point of smooth sailing." A so-called failed signal can actually be the beginning of a more complex pattern that is far
more reliable than the initial signal based on a conventional pattern.
For example.
For example, assume a stock breaks out of a trading range on high
volume. It looks great. People buy it, and then the stock collapses. In
this scenario, most people will view the original breakout as a failed
technical signal. The original breakout, however, may be only the
beginning of a more complex pattern that is far more reliable than the
breakout itself.
Could you detail one of these patterns?
I don't want to do that. It's not that I think revealing them would
make a difference. I could print a description of these patterns in Tlie
Wall Street Journal, and 1 think that 99 percent of the people who
would read the article wouldn't use them or use them the way I do.
Then why not reveal them?
Because it's not what's important to trading successfully. What is
important is controlling your losses and having a plan. Besides, for
someone to be successful, they have to develop their own methodology. 1 developed my method for myself; it wouldn't necessarily be a
good fit for anyone else.
Although I am convinced that Minervini believes this is true, I also think
he doesn't want to divulge any of his original chart analysis because, on
some level, he obviously must think that such a disclosure might
adversely affect the efficacy of the patterns he uses, which is perfectly
reasonable. My further efforts to get him to provide some specifics about
his chart methodology proved futile. He didn't even want to reveal the
names of his chart patterns on the record; he read a list of their names to
me only after I had turned off my tape recorder.

I assume you use these price patterns as triggers to get you into a
trade. Do you also use them to get out of a trade?
Yes.
The same patterns?
Yes and no. The same patterns are interpreted differently, depending on where they occur. For example, if a pattern occurs during a
collapse as opposed to during a runaway bull market, it might have a
precisely opposite interpretation. You can't b l i n d l y interpret a pattern without considering where it occurs within the larger price picture.
When you said earlier that you don't look at conventional chart
patterns, do you mean to imply that you don't attach any significance to breakouts to new highs?
No, a stock going to a new high is typically a bullish event because
the market has eliminated the supply ol: all previous buyers who had a
loss and were waiting to get out at even. That's why stocks often run
up very rapidly once they hit new high ground—at that point, there
are only happy investors; all the miserable people are out.
But don't stocks often break out to new highs and then come
right back into the prior range?
That usually doesn't happen if you buy breakouts to new highs
after a correction to the first leg in a bull trend. In that case, stocks
usually take off like a rocket after they break out to new highs. Less
skilled traders wait to buy the stock on the pullback, which never
comes.
When do you get breakouts that fail?
In the latter stages of a bull market after the stock has already run up
dramatically. Chart patterns are only useful if you know when to
apply them; otherwise, you might as well be throwing darts.
What advice would you have for a novice whose goal was to
become a successful trader?
First and foremost, understand that you will always make mistakes.
The only way to prevent mistakes from turning into disasters is to
accept losses while they are small and then move on.
Concentrate on mastering one style that suits your personality,

S T O C K A R O U N D THTICiOCK

which is a lifetime process. Most people just cannot weather the
learning curve. As soon as it gets difficult, and their approach isn't
working up to their expectations, they begin to look for something
else. As a result, they become slightly efficient in many areas without
ever becoming very good in any single methodology. The reality is
that it takes a very long time to develop a superior approach, and
along the way, you are going to go through periods when you do
poorly. Ironically, those are the periods that give you the most valuable information.
What else?
You need to have a plan for every contingency. When a pilot and copilot are flying a jetliner and something goes wrong with an engine, you
can be sure that they don't have to figure out what to do on the spur
of the moment; they have a contingency plan. The most important
contingency plan is the one that will limit your loss it you are wrong.
Beyond that, you need a plan to get back into the trade if you're
stopped out. Otherwise, you'll often find yourself getting stopped out
of a trade, and then watching the position go up 50 percent or 100
percent while you're on the sidelines.
Don't you then find yourself sometimes getting stopped out and
reentering a trade multiple times?
Sure, but I don't have a problem with that. 1 would rather get stopped
out of a trade five times in a row, taking a small loss each time, than
take one large loss.
What are some other relevant contingency plans?
A plan for getting out of winning trades. There are two ways to liquidate a trade—into strength or into weakness—and you need a plan
for both.
What other advice do you have for novice traders?
Many amateur investors get sloppy after gains because they fall into
the trap of thinking of their winnings as the "market's money," and in
no time, the market takes it back. It's your money as long as you protect it.
Also, you don't have to make all-or-nothing decisions. If a stock is
up and you're unsure what to do, there's nothing wrong with taking
profits on part of it.

What mistakes do people make in trading?
They let their egos get in the way. An investor may put in hours of
careful research building a case for a company. He scours the company's financial reports, checks Value Line, and may even try the
company's products. Then, soon after he buys the stock, his proud
pick takes a price dive. He can't believe it! He makes excuses for the
stock's decline. He calls his broker and searches the Internet, looking
for any favorable opinions to justify his position. Meanwhile, he
ignores the only opinion that counts: the verdict of the market. The
stock keeps sliding, and his loss keeps mounting. Finally, he throws in
the towel and feels completely demoralized—all because he didn't
want to admit he had made a mistake in timing.
Another mistake many investors make is that they allow themselves to be influenced by what other people think. I made this mistake myself when I was still learning how to trade. I became friends
with a broker and opened an account with him. We played this game
called "bust the other guy's chops when his stock is down." When I
had a losing stock position, 1 was embarrassed to call him to sell the
stock because I knew he would he would ride me about it. If a stock I
bought was down 5 or 10 percent, and I thought I should get out of it,
I found myself hoping it would recover so 1 wouldn't have to call him to
sell it while it was down. Before I knew it, the stock would be down 15
or 20 percent, and the more it fell, the harder it became for me to call.
Eventually, I learned that you have to ignore what anybody else thinks.
Many people approach investing too casually. They treat investing
as a hobby instead of like a business; hobbies cost money. They also
don't take the time to do a post-trade analysis on their trades, eliminating the best teacher: their results. Most people prefer to forget
about their failures instead of learning from them, which is a big
mistake.
What are some misconceptions people have about trading?
They think it is a lot easier than it is. Sometimes people will ask me
whether they can spend one weekend with me so I can show them
how I do this stuff. Do you know what a tremendous insult this is? It's
like my saying to a brain surgeon, "If you have a few extra days, I'd like
you to teach me brain surgery."
