3. measures the number of new lows on any given day.
4. tracks the number of the strongest stocks on the exchange.
A. 1 and 3
B. 2 and 4
C. 1, 2, 3, and 4
D. None of the above
Question 6-2
Match the following NH-NL patterns with their market messages.
1. NH-NL is positive; rises to a new high for the move.
2. Stock market falls to a new low; NH-NL traces a higher bottom.
3. NH-NL is negative; declines to a new low for the move.
4. Stock market reaches a new peak; NH-NL traces a lower peak.
A. Bearish leadership is strong; trade from the short side.
B. Bearish divergence shows that bulls are becoming weak; start taking profits on
long positions and look to go short.
C. Bullish divergence shows that bears are becoming weak; start taking profits on
short positions and look to go long.
D. Bullish leadership is strong; trade from the long side.

52

QUESTIONS

Question 6-3

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

FIGURE 6.3â•… S&P 500 with a 22-day EMA, a New High–New Low Index, with a one year look-back period.

(NH-NL data from Barchart.com, chart by TradeStation)

The New High–New Low Index

Identify the following patterns by matching them with the appropriate letters in the
chart of NH-NL in Figure 6.3.
1. Bulls predominate; trade from the long side.
2. Bears predominate; trade from the short side.
3. A bullish divergence; take profits on shorts and get ready to go long.
4. A bearish divergence; take profits on longs and get ready to go short.
Question 6-4
At the right edge of Figure 6.3, NH-NL tells us that
1. NH-NL is overbought; sell short.
2. NH-NL is positive and rising; go long.
3. no bullish divergence is present; stand aside.
4. trading signals are mixed; stand aside.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

53

Question 6-5
Which of the following statements apply to the Advance/Decline line?
1. It tracks the numbers of rising and falling stocks.
2. It indicates strength when it rises to a new high and weakness when it falls to a
new low.
3. The pattern of A/D peaks and valleys is more important than its level.
4. It shows when volume confirms price moves.
A. 1
B. 1 and 2
C. 1, 2, and 3
D. 1, 2, 3, and 4
Question 6-6
When bullish consensus in the stock market rises to a record high, it shows that
1. the market is near a top; start selling and look for potential shorts.
2. the uptrend is strong; go long.
3. there aren’t enough new buyers to support the market.
4. you should double up on long positions.
A. 1
B. 1 and 3
C. 2
D. 2 and 4
Question 6-7
During a powerful uptrend in copper futures, bullish consensus rises to 75 percent.
This means that
A. an average bear has invested three times more money than an average bull.
B. an average bear has invested approximately as much money as an average bull.
C. an average bull has invested three times more money than an average bear.
D. there is not enough information to decide who has invested more money.
Question 6-8
A rich corn harvest increases the supply and sends corn futures into a bear market.
As prices grind their way down, bullish consensus falls to 20 percent.This means that
A. an average bull has invested five times more money than an average bear.
B. an average bull has invested approximately as much money as an average bear.
C. an average bear has invested four times more money than an average bull.
D. an average bull has invested four times more money than an average bear.

54

QUESTIONS

Question 6-9
Your newspaper reports that coffee prices are at their highest level in six years; a TV
news show features snow in coffee-growing Brazil; and your mother-in-law tells you
she bought 10 lbs of instant coffee before prices rise any higher. Your response as a
trader is to plan to
A. go long coffee futures or long calls.
B. go short coffee futures or long puts.
C. go long cocoa futures, as a play on a catch-up move with coffee.
D. buy gold because the rise in coffee is a sign of inflation.
Question 6-10
Match the following statements about traders’ positions.
1. Position limits
2. Reporting requirements
3. Insider trading
4. Hedging
A. The level at which your trade gets reported to a government agency
B. Entering a futures trade in order to offset a position in an actual commodity
C. Can be exceeded by commercials
D. Legal in the futures markets
Question 6-11
Match the following statements about different groups of market participants.
1. Small speculators
2. Large speculators
3. Commercials
4. Company insiders
A. Hold contracts in excess of reporting levels
B. Hedge business risks
C. Officers and large stockholders
D. The group most likely to lose in the market

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

GENERAL MARKET INDICATORS

55

Question 6-12
A bear market is 11 months old; the company whose stock you follow reports lower
quarterly earnings; its two vice presidents and a major shareholder buy its stock; the
stock is $1 above its low for the year. As an investor, you
A. go short immediately (the bear market is in force).
B. go long immediately (insider buying).
C. stay away from the market until the next bull market starts.
D. start building a long position.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

SEVEN

Trading Systems

A

trading system provides a decision-making tree for setting entries, targets, and
stops. It is a useful instrument but not a magic device that can be fine-tuned on
old data and then put on automatic for effortlessly pulling profits out of the markets.
You develop a trading system in the quiet of your office, when the noise of the
markets has quieted down. A carefully crafted system becomes your island of stability and intelligence in the stormy environment of the market. A trusted system will
help you maintain control at a time when the tide of mass emotion sweeps people
off their feet.
This chapter will test your knowledge of several trading systems that have stood
the test of time. While answering questions, consider whether to start trading with
one of these systems or use them as a starting point for developing your own.

57

58
Questions

QUESTIONS

Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

â•⁄1
â•⁄2
â•⁄3
â•⁄4
â•⁄5
â•⁄6
â•⁄7
â•⁄8
â•⁄9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Correct
answers

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

Trial 5

TRADING SYSTEMS

59

Question 7-1
Which of the following statements can be true at the same time in any given market?
I. The trend is up.
II. The trend is down.
III. An indicator gives a buy signal.
IV. An indicator gives a sell signal.
A. I and III
B. II and IV
C. I, II, III, and IV
D. None of the above
Question 7-2
When trying to find a trade on a daily chart,
A. focus all your attention on that chart.
B. identify the trend of the weekly chart and use the daily chart to look only for
trades in the direction of the weekly trend.
C. find a trade on the daily chart and check whether the weekly chart points in the
same direction.
D. identify the trend of the monthly chart and use the daily chart to look only for
trades in that direction.
Question 7-3
When exploring a potential trading system, all of the following steps are essential,
except
A. one-bar-at-a-time backtesting.
B. forward-testing with small amounts of money.
C. looking for feedback from other system users.
D. keeping records of every trade.
Question 7-4
The essential numbers to write down before entering any trade include all of the
following, except
A. the price or a range for your entry.
B. the potential profit in dollars.
C. the target for your trade.
D. the protective stop.

60

QUESTIONS

Question 7-5
If you use the slope of the weekly MACD-Histogram as the first screen of the Triple
Screen trading system and that slope is down, you may
I. Go long.
II. Go short.
III. Stand aside.
IV. All of the above
A. I and III
B. II and III
C. III
D. IV
Question 7-6
The first screen of the Triple Screen trading system points up. If you use a 5-day
Stochastic as your second screen and it rises to 85, you may
A. go long immediately.
B. go short immediately.
C. wait for Stochastic to decline below 40 and then go long.
D. wait for Stochastic to decline below 40 and then go short.
Question 7-7
The weekly trend is up, but the decline of the past few days has pushed the 2-day
EMA of Force Index, which you use as the second screen, below zero.Your next step
is to
A. wait until both screens get in gear.
B. place an order to buy above the previous day’s high.
C. place an order to sell short below the previous day’s low.
D. close out any open positions.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

61

TRADING SYSTEMS

Question 7-8
BBBY weekly

BBBY daily

FIGURE 7.8â•… On the left: BBBY weekly chart with a 13-bar EMA and 12-26-9 MACD-Histogram. On the

right: BBBY daily chart with a 13-bar EMA and 2-bar Force Index. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Triple Screen Trading System

At the right edges of the two charts in Figure 7.8, the Triple Screen trading system
tells us that
A. the weekly trend is up; the daily trend is up; go long immediately.
B. the daily Force Index shows a bearish divergence; go short immediately.
C. the weekly trend is up and the daily Force Index is oversold; place a buy order
above the high of the last daily bar.
D. the weekly and daily trends point in different directions; stand aside.
Question 7-9
Match the following statements about the Triple Screen trading system with the
actions indicated.
1. The weekly trend is up; the daily trend is up.
2. The weekly trend is up; the daily trend is down.
3. The weekly trend is down; the daily trend is up.
4. The weekly trend is down; the daily trend is down.
A. Start placing buy orders.
B. Start placing orders to sell short.
C. Stand aside.

62

QUESTIONS

Question 7-10
Which of the following statements regarding the Impulse system is incorrect?
A. The Impulse system tells traders when to buy or sell.
B. The slope of a fast moving average reflects the direction of market inertia.
C. The slope of the last two bars of MACD-Histogram reflects the direction of market power.
D. The Impulse system removes a prohibition of buying or shorting by changing its
color.
Question 7-11
Match the following indicator readings with the messages of the Impulse system.
1. EMA is rising, MACD-Histogram rising.
2. EMA is rising, MACD-Histogram falling.
3. EMA is falling, MACD-Histogram falling.
4. EMA is falling, MACD-Histogram rising.
A. Impulse system green (bullish)
B. Impulse system red (bearish)
C. Impulse system blue (neutral)
Question 7-12
I

A

C

H

F

B
E
D

G

FIGURE 7.12â•… JCP daily with a 13-bar EMA, a 12-26-9 MACD-Histogram, and the Impulse system.

(Chart by Stockcharts.com)

The Impulse System

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TRADING SYSTEMS

63

Match the lettered bars in the chart in Figure 7.12 with the following statements.
1. Buying or standing aside permitted; shorting forbidden.
2. Shorting or standing aside permitted; buying forbidden.
3. Buying, shorting, or standing aside is permitted.
Question 7-13
Looking at the weekly chart of BBBY in Figure 7.8, what would be the color of its
rightmost bar if we applied the Impulse system?
A. Green
B. Red
C. Blue
D. Not enough information to decide
Question 7-14
The correct width of a channel around a moving average
A. is a closely guarded secret of professional traders.
B. contains all prices for the past 50 to 100 bars.
C. contains about 90 percent of the prices for the past 50 to 100 bars.
D. contains about half of the prices for the past 50 to 100 bars.
Question 7-15
Match statements regarding moving average channels from the following two sets.
1. The market is undervalued.
2. The market is overvalued.
3. Depends on volatility.
4. The market is fairly valued.
A. The upper channel line
B. The moving average
C. The lower channel line
D. Channel coefficient

64

QUESTIONS

Question 7-16
Which statement about channels is incorrect?
A. Going long or short in the middle of a channel always offers attractive trades because you buy or sell at the consensus of value.
B. When a channel rises sharply, an upside penetration of the upper channel line
indicates that the market is strong and should be bought when it returns to its
moving average.
C. When a channel is relatively flat, the market is almost always a good buy near the
bottom of its trading channel and a good sell near the top.
D. A breakout below the lower line of a sharply falling channel indicates that the market is weak and a pullback to the moving average will offer a shorting opportunity.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

EIGHT

Trading Vehicles

S

ome professionals say—“I don’t trade stocks, futures, or options; I trade money
in my account.” â•›They focus on system design and risk management, while what
they trade are just vehicles in which their money goes for a ride, hopefully in the
right direction.1
You have an enormous choice of trading vehicles. Before you focus on a single
class or even a smaller group within that class, it pays to know what other instruments are available to you.
This chapter will test your knowledge of several major classes of trading instruments. While answering questions, think about what you’re currently trading. You
may even decide to broaden your attention and trade another type of instrument,
and of course, you can always trade more than one type.

1

Several years ago, a Bedouin guide in Jordan asked me about my profession, and I told him I traded
on Wall Street. He drove by the local market where his buddies traded goats, which, at about $300
apiece, were a major store of value in the desert. He asked whether I’d like to trade, but I laughed
and said that if we brought his desert traders to Wall Street and showed them how to use computers, they would out-trade many local guys.

65

66
Questions

QUESTIONS

Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

â•⁄1
â•⁄2
â•⁄3
â•⁄4
â•⁄5
â•⁄6
â•⁄7
â•⁄8
â•⁄9
10
11
12
Correct
answers

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

Trial 5

TRADING VEHICLES

67

Question 8-1
In selecting a trading instrument, which of the following is not a key consideration?
A. Liquidity
B. Volatility
C. Popularity
D. Time zones
Question 8-2
When buying a stock, you
A. make a loan to the company.
B. become an insider.
C. will profit if the company makes money.
D. become a part owner of the company.
Question 8-3
How does Warren Buffett suggest dealing with “Mr. Market”?
I. Buy when Mr. Market is happy.
II. Sell when Mr. Market is happy.
III. Sell when Mr. Market is depressed.
IV. Buy when Mr. Market is depressed.
A. I
B. II
C. I and III
D. II and IV
Question 8-4
An exchange-traded fund (ETF) is an asset-holding vehicle, designed to trade like a
stock. Which one of the following statements about ETFs is incorrect?
A. ETFs offer a narrow choice of assets.
B. ETFs loosely track underlying securities.
C. Administrative expenses of ETFs take ‘haircuts’ from profits.
D. ETFs allow you to purchase an asset class or a stock group.

68

QUESTIONS

Question 8-5
Match the following sets of statements regarding stock options.
I. A bet that a stock will drop
II. A bet that a stock will rise
III. A call whose underlying stock is below the exercise price
IV. A call whose underlying stock is above the exercise price
A. Out-of-the-money
B. Put
C. In-the-money
D. Call
Question 8-6
Option prices depend on all of the following, except
A. the closeness to the option expiration date.
B. the closeness to the option exercise price.
C. how closely the underlying stocks follows their industry group.
D. the volatility of the underlying stocks.
Question 8-7
Match the following statements on calls and puts.
I. The price of the underlying stock rises.
II. The price of the underlying stock falls.
III. The price of the underlying stock remains flat.
A. Profitable for a call buyer
B. Profitable for a put buyer
C. Profitable for a call writer
D. Profitable for a put writer
Question 8-8
Which of the following safety-oriented steps is best to avoid when writing options?
A. Aim to write options outside price levels you expect the underlying security to
reach.
B. Place a stop to exit your option position if it moves against you by a certain
amount.
C. Aim to write options with low Deltas.
D. Open an insurance account.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

TRADING VEHICLES

69

Question 8-9
What’s the greatest difference between buying futures and options?
A. The number of long and short positions.
B. Futures are less correlated with each other than stock options.
C. There are thousands of optionable stocks but only dozens of futures.
D. The most an option buyer can lose is the initial premium, but a futures buyer can
lose a lot more.
Question 8-10
The main danger of futures markets is
A. the relatively short life of their contracts, compared to stocks.
B. trading with small margin deposits.
C. the existence of the daily price limits.
D. insider trading by hedgers.
Question 8-11
Match the following statements regarding futures.
I. A contract for the next month’s delivery of a commodity is priced higher than
for more distant deliveries.
II. A trader opens a futures position opposite to his position in the actual commodity.
III. A major weather disturbance threatens cotton harvest.
IV. A cold spell drives up the price of heating oil; a trader shorts heating oil and
goes long crude oil.
A. Supply-driven market
B. Spread trading
C. Inverted market
D. Hedging

70

QUESTIONS

Question 8-12
Which statements regarding the forex market are correct?
I. The forex market has no central location; institutional traders deal directly
with each other.
II. Forex houses tend to accept customer orders without executing any trades.
III. Margins of 1:30 and higher help traders profit.
IV. A retail forex brokerage house earns its income from commissions.
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

NINE

Risk Management

E

ven a brilliant system will not guarantee winning in every trade. This is why every
system must include risk management rules. Many creators of promising trading
systems keep losing money because of poor or absent risk control.
Each and every system has its drawdown periods. That’s when risk management
means the difference between life and death. No system will do you any good if you
don’t manage risk.
Professionals spend much of their time calculating how much money to risk on
any given trade and how to vary trade size, depending on market conditions and
account equity. Risk management is essential for your survival and success.
You owe it to yourself to earn an excellent rating in this section of the Study
Guide—nothing less will do! As traders, we sail on a stormy ocean. Risk management rules are our lifeboats and life preservers. Make sure that your safety gear is in
good order.

71

72
Questions

QUESTIONS

Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

â•⁄1
â•⁄2
â•⁄3
â•⁄4
â•⁄5
â•⁄6
â•⁄7
â•⁄8
â•⁄9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Correct
answers

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

Trial 5

RISK MANAGEMENT

73

Question 9-1
A trader feels overjoyed after a profitable trade and disgusted after a losing trade.
This means that
A. he is on the right track; it is important to listen to your feelings.
B. his mind is clouded by emotions that interfere with making good trading decisions.
C. he should double the size of his position when he feels happy and get out when
he feels hurt.
D. feeling disgusted is a proper reaction to a losing trade.
Question 9-2
Traders hang onto losing trades for all of the following reasons, except
A. they become attached to positions.
B. they hate to admit they are wrong.
C. they follow sound trading plans.
D. taking a loss means giving up hope.
Question 9-3
You buy after indicators turn up. Two days later the market slides, the indicators turn
down, and you have a $200 paper loss.Your initial stop was $300 below the market,
and the next support level is $350 below your entry point. What do you do?
A. Continue in the trade, keep your stop.
B. Take your loss and retreat to the sidelines.
C. Double up your position to lower its average price.
D. Lower your stop to slightly below the next logical support level.
Question 9-4
Two traders decide to spend their coffee break flipping a coin and betting a dollar on
each flip. Trader A brings $3 to the game, trader B brings $10. The chance of trader
A being a winner at the end of that coffee break is
A. near 100 percent.
B. near 50 percent.
C. near 0 percent.
D. Not enought information to answer.

74

QUESTIONS

Question 9-5
Choose the order of importance of the following three money management goals.
I. Earn high profits
II. Ensure survival
III. Earn a steady rate of return
A. I, II, III
B. II, III, I
C. III, II, I
Question 9-6
The usefulness of which of the following rules has been proven by experience?
I. Never meet a margin call.
II. Never average down.
III. The first mistake is the cheapest.
IV. If you must lighten up, liquidate your worst position.
A. I
B. l and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV
Question 9-7
When you find yourself counting money in a trade, you should
I. stop—and if you can’t, close out that trade.
II. Count money to calculate your stops.
III. Count money to calculate your profit targets.
IV. plot a chart of your paper profits.
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

RISK MANAGEMENT

75

Question 9-8
Your trading system indicates a trade with an attractive profit potential and a stop
$0.98 per share below the entry price.You have $28,000 in your account. According
to the 2% Rule, how many shares may you buy?
A. 300
B. 400
C. 500
D. 600
Question 9-9
You buy 300 shares of a rising stock, and it rallies $3. Now you should think about:
I. Where to move your stop
II. Whether to move your target
III. How many dollars you’ve made so far
IV. How much you would have made if you bought 600 shares
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV
Question 9-10
Which of the following statements about stops are true?
I. When you are long, do not move down your stop.
II. When you are short, you may move down your stop.
III. When you are long, you may move up your stop.
IV. When you are short, do not move up your stop.
A. I and IV
B. II and III
C. None of the above
D. All of the above

76

QUESTIONS

Question 9-11
A stop-loss order
I. limits your loss on a bad trade.
II. reduces your stress level.
III. limits the damage from a bad trading system.
IV. guarantees that your loss will not exceed a certain amount.
A. I
B. I and II
C. I, II, and III
D. I, II, III, and IV
Question 9-12
Which of the following traders are in compliance with the 2% Rule?
I. Trader A: $18,000 in the account, bought 200 shares at $20, stop at $18
II. Trader B: $50,000 in the account, bought 400 shares at $20, stop at $18
III. Trader C: $25,000 in the account, bought 400 shares at $20, stop at $19
IV. Trader D: $60,000 in the account, bought 1,500 shares at $20, stop at $19
A. I and II
B. II and III
C. III and IV
D. I, II, III, and IV
Question 9-13
Which two mistakes on this list are most deadly for traders?
I. Trading on rumors and hearsay
II. Trading without stops
III. Forgetting to monitor open trades
IV. Putting on trades whose size is too large for the account
A. I and II
B. II and III
C. I and IV
D. II and IV
