
Tide, Wave, and Ripple
A shore dweller who had no tide table might set about determining the
direction of the tide by driving a stake in the beach at the highest point
reached by an incoming wave. Then if the next wave pushed the water up
beyond his stake he would know the tide was rising. If he shifted his stake
with the peak mark of each wave, a time would come when one wave would
stop and start to recede short of his previous mark; then he would know
that the tide had turned, had started to ebb. That, in effect (and much
simplified), is what the Dow theorist does in defining the trend of the stock
market.
The comparison with tide, wave, and ripple has been used since the
earliest days of the Dow Theory. It is even possible that the movements of
the sea may have suggested the elements of the theory to Dow. But the
analogy cannot be pushed too far. The tides and waves of the stock market
are nothing like as regular as those of the ocean. Tables can be prepared
years in advance to predict accurately the time of every ebb and flow of the
waters, but no timetables are provided by the Dow Theory for the stock
market. We may return to some points of this comparison later, but we must
proceed now to take up the remaining tenets and rules of the Theory.

AU3772_book.fm Page 18 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

18

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Major Trend Phases
6. The Bull Market — Primary Uptrends are usually (but not invariably) divisible into three phases. The first is the phase of accumulation
during which farsighted investors, sensing that business, although
now depressed, is due to turn up, are willing to pick up all the shares
offered by discouraged and distressed sellers, and to raise their bids
gradually as such selling diminishes in volume. Financial reports are
still bad — in fact, often at their worst — during this phase. The
“public” is completely disgusted with the stock market — out of it
entirely. Activity is only moderate but beginning to increase on the
rallies (Minor Advances).
The second phase is one of fairly steady advance and increasing
activity as the improved tone of business and a rising trend in corporate
earnings begin to attract attention. It is during this phase that the “technical” trader normally is able to reap his best harvest of profits.
Finally, comes the third phase when the market boils with activity
as the “public” flocks to the boardrooms. All the financial news is
good, price advances are spectacular and frequently “make the front
page” of the daily papers, and new issues are brought out in increasing numbers. It is during this phase that one of your friends will call
up and blithely remark, “Say, I see the market is going up. What’s a
good buy?” — all oblivious to the fact that it has been going up for
perhaps two years, has already gone up a long ways, and is now
reaching the stage where it might be more appropriate to ask, “What’s
a good thing to sell?” In the last stage of this phase, with speculation
rampant, volume continues to rise, but “air pockets” appear with
increasing frequency; the “cats and dogs” (low-priced stocks of no
investment value) are whirled up, but more and more of the
top-grade issues refuse to follow.
7. The Bear Market — Primary Downtrends are also usually (but again,
not invariably) characterized by three phases. The first is the distribution
period (which really starts in the later stages of the preceding Bull
Market). During this phase, farsighted investors sense the fact that
business earnings have reached an abnormal height and unload their
holdings at an increasing pace. Trading volume is still high, though
tending to diminish on rallies, and the “public” is still active but beginning to show signs of frustration as hoped-for profits fade away.
The second phase is the Panic Phase. Buyers begin to thin out and
sellers become more urgent; the downward trend of prices suddenly
accelerates into an almost vertical drop, while volume mounts to
climactic proportions. After the Panic Phase (which usually runs too
far relative to then-existing business conditions), there may be a fairly
long Secondary Recovery or a sideways movement, and then the
third phase begins.

AU3772_book.fm Page 19 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three:

The Dow Theory

19

This is characterized by discouraged selling on the part of those
investors who held on through the Panic or, perhaps, bought during
it because stocks looked cheap in comparison with prices which had
ruled a few months earlier. The business news now begins to deteriorate. As the third phase proceeds, the downward movement is less
rapid, but is maintained by more and more distress selling from those
who have to raise cash for other needs. The “cats and dogs” may
lose practically all their previous Bull Advance in the first two phases.
Better-grade stocks decline more gradually, because their owners
cling to them to the last. And, the final stage of a Bear Market, in
consequence, is frequently concentrated in such issues. The Bear
Market ends when everything in the way of possible bad news, the
worst to be expected, has been discounted, and it is usually over
before all the bad news is “out.”
The three Bear Market phases described in the preceding paragraph are not the same as those named by others who have discussed
this subject, but the writers of this study feel that they represent a
more accurate and realistic division of the Primary down moves of
the past 30 years. The reader should be warned, however, that no
two Bear Markets are exactly alike, and neither are any two Bull
Markets. Some may lack one or another of the three typical phases.
A few Major Advances have passed from the first to the third stage
with only a very brief and rapid intervening markup. A few short
Bear Markets have developed no marked Panic Phase and others
have ended with it, as in April 1939. No time limits can be set for
any phase; the third stage of a Bull Market, for example, the phase
of excited speculation and great public activity, may last for more
than a year or run out in a month or two. The Panic Phase of a Bear
Market is usually exhausted in a very few weeks if not in days, but
the 1929 through 1932 decline was interspersed with at least five
Panic Waves of major proportions. Nevertheless, the typical characteristics of Primary Trends are well worth keeping in mind. If you
know the symptoms which normally accompany the last stage of a
Bull Market, for example, you are less likely to be deluded by its
exciting atmosphere.

Principle of Confirmation
8. The Two Averages Must Confirm — This is the most-often questioned and the most difficult to rationalize of all the Dow principles.
Yet it has stood the test of time; the fact that it has “worked” is not
disputed by any who have carefully examined the records. Those
who have disregarded it in practice have, more often than not, had
occasion to regret their apostasy. What it means is that no valid signal
of a change in trend can be produced by the action of one Average

AU3772_book.fm Page 20 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

20

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

d

INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
b

c
a

RAIL AVERAGE
b
d

a
c

DIAGRAM 1. A hypothetical daily market chart to show how one average may
fail to confirm the other’s Dow signal. Closing prices, indicated by short horizontal
dashes, are connected with vertical lines to make the day-to-day trend easier to follow.

alone. Take, for example, the hypothetical case shown in Diagram 1.
In this, we assume that a Bear Market has been in effect for several
months and then, starting at a, the Industrial Average rises (along
with the Rails) in a Secondary Recovery to b. On their next decline,
however, the Industrials drop only to c, which is higher than a, and
then turn up to d, which is higher than b. At this point, the Industrials
have “signaled” a change in trend from down to up. But note the
Rails during this period: their decline from b to c carried them lower
than a, and their subsequent advance from c to d has not taken them
above b. They have (so far) refused to confirm the Industrials and,
hence, the Major Trend of the market must be regarded as still down.
Should the Rails go on to rise eventually above their b, then, and
then only, would we have a definite signal of a turn in the tide. Until
such a development, however, the chances remain that the Industrials

AU3772_book.fm Page 21 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three:

The Dow Theory

21

will not be able to continue their upward course alone, that they will
ultimately be dragged down again by the Rails. At best, the direction
of the Primary Trend is still in doubt.
The above illustrates only one of the many ways in which the
principle of Confirmation applies. Note also that at c, it might have
been said that the Industrials had thus far not confirmed the Rails in
continuing the downtrend — but this had to do only with the continuation or reaffirmation of an existing trend. It is not necessary that
the two Averages confirm on the same day. Frequently, both will
move into new high (or low) ground together, but there are plenty
of cases in which one or the other lags behind for days, weeks, or
even a month or two. One must be patient in these doubtful cases
and wait until the market declares itself in definite fashion.
9. “Volume Goes with the Trend” — Those words, which you may
often hear spoken with ritual solemnity but little understanding, are
the colloquial expression for the general truth that trading activity
tends to expand as prices move in the direction of the prevailing
Primary Trend. Thus, in a Bull Market, volume increases when prices
rise and dwindles as prices decline; in Bear Markets, turnover increases when prices drop and dries up as they recover. To a lesser
degree, this holds for Secondary Trends also, especially in the early
stages of an extended Secondary Recovery within a Bear Market,
when activity may show a tendency to pick up on the Minor Rallies
and diminish on the Minor Set-backs. But to this rule, again, there
are exceptions, and useful conclusions can seldom be drawn from
the volume manifestations of a few days, much less a single trading
session; it is only the overall and relative volume trend over a period
of time that may produce helpful indications. Moreover, in Dow
Theory, conclusive signals as to the market’s trend are produced in
the final analysis only by price movement. Volume simply affords
collateral evidence which may aid interpretation of otherwise doubtful situations. (We shall have much more to say in later chapters
about volume in specific relation to other technical phenomena.)
10. “Lines” May Substitute for Secondaries — A Line in Dow Theory
parlance is a sideways movement (as it appears on the charts) in one
or both of the Averages, which lasts for 2 or 3 weeks or, sometimes,
for as many months, in the course of which prices fluctuate within
a range of approximately 5% or less (of their mean figure). The
formation of a Line signifies that pressure of buying and selling is
more or less in balance. Eventually, of course, either the offerings
within that price range are exhausted and those who want to buy
stocks have to raise their bids to induce owners to sell, or else those
who are eager to sell at the “Line” price range find that buyers have
vanished and that, in consequence, they must cut their prices in order
to dispose of their shares. Hence, an advance in prices through the
upper limits of an established Line is a Bullish Signal and, conversely,

AU3772_book.fm Page 22 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

22

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends
a break down through its lower limits is a Bearish Signal. Generally
speaking, the longer the Line (in duration) and the narrower or more
compact its price range, the greater the significance of its ultimate
breakout.
Lines occur often enough to make their recognition essential to
followers of Dow’s principles. They may develop at important Tops
or Bottoms, signaling periods of distribution or of accumulation,
respectively, but they come more frequently as interludes of rest or
Consolidation in the progress of established Major Trends. Under
those circumstances, they take the place of normal Secondary Waves.
A Line may develop in one Average while the other is going through
a typical Secondary Reaction. It is worth noting that a price movement out of a Line, either up or down, is usually followed by a more
extensive additional move in the same direction than can be counted
on to follow the “signal” produced when a new wave pushes beyond
the limits set by a preceding Primary Wave. The direction in which
prices will break out of a Line cannot be determined in advance of
the actual movement. The 5% limit ordinarily assigned to a Line is
arbitrarily based on experience; there have been a few slightly wider
sideways movements which, by virtue of their compactness and welldefined boundaries, could be construed as true Lines. (Further on in
this book, we shall see that the Dow Line is, in many respects, similar
to the more strictly defined patterns known as Rectangles which
appear on the charts of individual stocks.)
11. Only Closing Prices Used — Dow Theory pays no attention to any
extreme highs or lows which may be registered during a day and
before the market closes, but takes into account only the closing
figures, i.e., the average of the day’s final sale prices for the component issues. We have discussed the psychological importance of the
end-of-day prices under the subject of chart construction and need
not deal with it further here, except to say that this is another Dow
rule which has stood the test of time. It works thus: suppose an
Intermediate Advance in a Primary Uptrend reaches its peak on a
certain day at 11 a.m., at which hour the Industrial Average figures
at, say, 152.45, and then falls back to close at 150.70. All that the next
advance will have to do in order to indicate that the Primary Trend
is still up is register a daily close above 150.70. The previous intraday
high of 152.45 does not count. Conversely, using the same figures for
our first advance, if the next upswing carries prices to an intraday
high at, say, 152.60, but fails to register a closing price above 150.70,
the continuation of the Primary Bull Trend is still in doubt.
In recent years, differences of opinion have arisen among market
students as to the extent to which an Average should push beyond
a previous limit (Top or Bottom figure) in order to signal (or confirm
or reaffirm, as the case may be) a market trend. Dow and Hamilton
evidently regarded any penetration, even as little as 0.01, in closing

AU3772_book.fm Page 23 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter three:

The Dow Theory

23

price as a valid signal, but some modern commentators have required
penetration by a full point (1.00). We think that the original view has
the best of the argument, that the record shows little or nothing in
practical results to favor any of the proposed modifications. One
incident in June of 1946, to which we shall refer in the following
chapter, shows a decided advantage for the orthodox “any-penetration-whatever” rule.
12. A Trend Should Be Assumed to Continue in Effect Until Such Time
as Its Reversal Has Been Definitely Signaled — This Dow Theory
tenet is one which, perhaps more than any other, has evoked criticism. Yet, when correctly understood, it, like all the others we have
enumerated, stands up under practical test. What it states is really a
probability. It is a warning against changing one’s market position too
soon, against “jumping the gun.” It does not imply that one should
delay action by one unnecessary minute once a signal of change in
trend has appeared. But it expresses the experience that the odds are
in favor of the man who waits until he is sure, and against the other
fellow who buys (or sells) prematurely. These odds cannot be stated
in mathematical language such as 2–1 or 3–1; as a matter of fact, they
are constantly changing. Bull Markets do not climb forever and Bear
Markets always reach a Bottom sooner or later. When a new Primary
Trend is first definitely signaled by the action of the two Averages,
the odds that it will be continued, despite any near-term reactions or
interruptions, are at their greatest. But as this Primary Trend carries
on, the odds in favor of its further extension grow smaller. Thus, each
successive reaffirmation of a Bull Market (new Intermediate high in
one average confirmed by a new Intermediate high in the other)
carries relatively less weight. The incentive to buy, the prospect of
selling new purchases at a profit, is smaller after a Bull Market has
been in existence for several months than it was when the Primary
Uptrend was first recognized, but this twelfth Dow tenet says, “Hold
your position pending contrary orders.”
A corollary to this tenet, which is not so contradictory as it may
at first seem, is: a Reversal in trend can occur any time after that trend
has been confirmed. This can be taken simply as a warning that the
Dow Theory investor must watch the market constantly if he has any
commitment in it.

EN: Modern Market Importance of Dow Theory and
Necessity for Moving to a New Composite Market Theory
Dow Theory has much to recommend it. Concepts embodied within Dow Theory retain
their validity to the present day, and retain their importance as the foundation thinking
for technical analysis. Concepts of waves, major secondary and minor movements are
absolutely descriptive of the reality of the market. Other constructs within Dow Theory

AU3772_book.fm Page 24 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

24

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

are similarly important — that all information is discounted; that major market movements are like the tide and, as it were, raise all boats; that trends tend to continue.
These are not just theoretical musings, but observations of reality.
In addition to its technical validity the Dow has now taken on a mythic
dimension. It now has a symbolic function which interacts with its originally
intended purpose. Dow and Hamilton saw their measurement of the market as an
economic barometer for the entire economy. Its use as a tool for investing in the
market came later.
In the opinion of this editor, the Dow Theory is no longer adequate to its original
purpose — or even to its secondary purpose. It is a simple theory propounded in a
simple time. Expounders of Dow Theory have implicitly recognized the necessity
for evolutionary changes to the doctrine with the addition of the Rails (now Transportations) and the Utilities ad infinitum. Thirty stocks may have been sufficient
originally to reflect the American economy. No one would deny that simple paradigm
must be changed to reflect an economic structure geometrically more diverse than
that of Dow and Hamilton. Entering the 21st century, the American and Global
economy require more sophisticated econometrics than the Dow alone.
For that reason I now consider that in order to fulfill the functions of the old
Dow we now must consider a variety of averages and indexes to measure the state
of the market — not to mention the economy, which is another question, although
not altogether another question, but at least another question. Magee foreshadowed
some instruments of great value to this end in his writings, specifically on the Magee
Evaluative Index (Chapter 38), which may be used for the entire market, and not
just for one summary index or average. The value and power of this tool are still
little used and understood.
In 21st century markets, there are not just broad tides and markets flowing in
one direction as they might on Magee’s Cape Cod. Instead the currents, rip tides,
and cross currents are like the economy of the country, moved West. They are now
symbolized by the Pacific Ocean roaring in and out of San Francisco Bay. While
the Dow is in a secondary Downtrend, the broader S&P 500 is going to new highs,
and while they are both whipping sideways, the NASDAQ is rocketing into space.
For this reason, I now believe that only a composite of the three indexes can express
the true state of the markets as a whole. And, in addition, to dissect the entrails of
the market, the Magee Evaluative Index should be run across the three indexes.
The Dow Theory required that the Rails and Industrials move in harmony in order
to signal Bull or Bear Markets. In this century, there is a similar need for harmonic
convergence among the averages to indicate to us the state of the markets as a whole.
When all three indexes agree in the direction of their trends, up or down or
sideways, Bulls may assumed to be safe in general, and vice versa for Bears. Failure
of the three to be in harmony is a clear sign of mixed markets and advises one to
arrange his bets and portfolio to correspond with economic uncertainty. Capital
should flow naturally to the area which is most productive. What reason is there to
ride the Dow down when the NASDAQ is raging up? If the investor follows the
philosophy of this book, he will never sit passively through an extended Downtrend.
At the very least, he will be hedged, if not outright short. (As Edwards and Magee
preferred and as this editor prefers.)

AU3772_book.fm Page 25 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter four

The Dow Theory in Practice
EN9: The casual and careless reader will shake his head at this chapter and ask why
on earth the Editor has not excised it from the book. The Editor has not deleted the
chapter because, like old-fashioned cod liver oil, it is good medicine. It will appeal
mainly to the serious student of not just Dow Theory, but of long-term investing.
If the reader has absolutely no interest in Dow Theory or long-term investing he
may skip over this chapter and return to it in his old age, when he is wiser.
At this point, the reader, if he has little previous knowledge of the stock
market, may be suffering a mild attack of mental indigestion. The Dow
Theory is a pretty big dose to swallow at one sitting. We departed deliberately in the foregoing chapter from the order in which its principles are
usually stated in an effort to make it a little easier to follow and understand.
Actually, not all of the 12 tenets we named are of equal import. The essential
rules are contained in 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, and 11. Number 1 is, of course, the
basic assumption, the philosophical justification for these rules. The other
points (6, 7, 9, and 12) furnish “background material,” as the news reporters
might put it, which aid in interpretation. Theoretically, one should, by strict
adherence to the essential rules alone, accomplish just as much as he could
with the added collateral evidence.
But the utilization of Dow Theory is, after all, a matter of interpretation.
You may memorize its principles verbatim and yet be confounded when you
attempt to apply them to an actual market situation. We can better organize
our knowledge of the theory and acquire some understanding of its interpretation by following through a few years of market action and seeing how
it looked at the time through the eyes of a Dow theorist. For this purpose,
we may well take the period from late 1941 to the beginning of 1947, since
this covers the end of one Bear Market, an entire long Bull Market, and part
of another Bear Market, and includes examples of most of the market phenomena with which the Dow Theory has to deal.
