
Great Britain
Great Britain, like other nations, revamped their ERI trade weight index
in 2004 and implemented it in 2005 to reﬂect trade in services. Originally,
its index was based on a ﬁxed weight but has been revised to incorporate

55

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

a chain-linked index, which means that new nation weights had to be recalculated. This also meant a formal review of trading partners.
Any nation with a 1 percent trade over a three-year period with the
United Kingdom earned rights on the narrow ERI, the Effective Exchange
Rate Index. Others fell into the 0. 5 category and were listed on the broader
index. For example, the 2004 review revealed that Poland and Russia met the
new criteria and South Korea did not. Russia has since lost but then regained
its right to be listed in the narrow index (Lynch and Whitaker 2004).
The Bank of England (BOE) updates the ERI annually while the Ofﬁce
of National Statistics calculates Exchange Rates. London is truly the home of
currency trading, so the British pound sterling needs no introduction.
Despite 22 nation’s currencies listed in the ERI, the vast majority of the
index—about 50 percent—comprises trade with the euro zone and 16 percent
with the United States. So the two most important currencies are the British
pound/U.S. dollar and the British pound/euro.
Index weights are published ﬁve times daily by the Bank of England in
two hour intervals from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. London time. The nations’
currencies and trade weights factored in the ERI narrow index according to
2009 updates are:
Country

Weight

Australia

1.4%

Belgium/Luxembourg

5.3%

Canada

1.5%

China

6.4%

Denmark

1.2%

Germany

12.9%

France

7.9%

Hong Kong

1.1%

Japan

4.1%

India

1.8%

Ireland

5.6%

Italy

4.8%

Netherlands

6.2%

Norway

1.1%
(Continued )

56

Inside the Currency Market

Poland

1.5%

Russia

1.3%

South Africa

1.1%

Sweden

2.0%

Singapore

1.7%

Switzerland

3.0%

Turkey

1.5%

Spain

5.2%

United States

16.7%

Nations’ currencies on the Broad Index are:
Country

Weight

Austria

0.8%

Cypress

0.3%

Slovenia

0.2%

Greece

0.8%

Saudi Arabia

0.9%

Portugal

0.8%

Malta

0.1%

Finland

0.9%

Despite the revamp of the ERI, imports and exports in the United
Kingdom had an abysmal record from 2000 to 2009. The United Kingdom
had more imports than exports of oil from 2005 to 2009 while overall
imports exceeded exports from 2000 to 2009. The top export markets, in
order, for 2009 were the United States, Germany, Netherlands, France,
Ireland, Belgium, Spain, Italy, China, and Sweden. The peak importers for 2009
include Germany, the United States, China, Netherlands, France, Norway,
Belgium, Ireland, Italy, and Spain.
The major commodity exported and imported is oil. Exports include oil,
pharmaceuticals, road vehicles, power equipment, and chemicals. Imports
include oil, road vehicles, ofﬁce machines, telecommunications equipment,
ofﬁce machines, clothing, and electrical machinery.

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

57

Not only was a chain linked index included in the new ERI but a whole
new methodology was incorporated. The new index now represents third
nation competition just as the model of the IMF. Third nation competition
models capture competition of UK from imports, factors UK exports and
competition in export markets and catches competition between the UK
and competitors from third markets. It is the direct and indirect approach
to trade.
From Whitaker and Lynch 2004, the formula with new weights has three
locations for ERI weights that represent three locations. The formula is:
Wit  m, t MW it  BX, t Yi BXW ti  TX, t TXW ti
where

MW  UK Imports,
BXW  Bilateral export competition,
TXW  Third market competition,
m  import competition,
BX  Openness of trading partners, and
TX  UK home markets supplied by third markets.

Wit  total competitiveness weight of trade partner, MW  competition in the UK market from imports, BXW  bilateral export market competition weight, TXW  3rd market competition weight,  weights  m
import competition, proportion of UK total contact with trade partners in
home market, BX  trade partners supply competitor home market, TX 
home market supplied by third nation competitor.
Weights are assigned trade shares based on trade ﬂows.  and y are ﬁxed
elements so exchange rates and trade ﬂows are accurately reported.
The new base-year period is 100 from 2005.
An earlier chain-link model by Armington in 1969 looked at the above
formula as:
WJ  (Imports of I/Imports and exports of I)  (Share of I imports from j)
 (Exports of i/Imports and exports of i)  Overall export weight
A number of components exist to ﬁgure exchange rates based on this
model.
The Bank of England releases every month and reports on their web site
a table of effective interest rates thanks to the Bank of England Act of 2001.

58

Inside the Currency Market

It is calculated as a function of average loan/deposit balances and interest payable/receivables on those balances. The formula is:
Interest Flows
 Number of days in a year  100
Average daily balance
Number of days in a month
An effective interest rate is a weighted average of all interest rates across all
the deposit accounts. Viewed another way, this helps to understand England’s
M4 growth rates. Growth rates are equal to the rates of increase or decrease in
a series from one period to the next. For a one-month period,
Y  (Flow periodt/Level periodt – 1)  100
The Monetary Conditions Index (MCI) is a weighted average of changes
in an interest rate and exchange rate relative to their values in a base period.
The MCI is employed as a target by central banks or an actual versus a desired
result. It is an indicator and used many ways. For example, the Bank of
England factors LIBOR to the 10-year gilt effective exchange rate or a threemonth Treasury Bill to an effective exchange rate.
The formula is
MCIt  Ar(Rt – R b )  As(Q t – Q b )
where

R t  the short-term real interest rate,
Q t  the log of the real exchange rate – the rise  appreciation,
R b and Q b  the level of interest rate and exchange rate in a base
period, and
Ar and As  MCI’s weights with the ratio Ar/As reﬂecting the impact
of interest and exchange rates.

Ar percent point rise in Rf has the same impact on the goal As percent
real appreciation of the domestic currency. A ratio of 3 to 1 (Ar  3,
A s  1) says a 1 percent point change in the short-term real interest
rate has the same effect on the policy goal as a 3 percent change in the
real exchange rate.
The ERI is factored in terms of GDP growth, CPI to measure inﬂation,
rates of change, and interest rates. ERI growth rates are then projected three
years into the future. The Bank of England anticipated an 83.2 ERI in 2010,
85.3 in 2011, and 85.3 in 2012.

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

59

Trade Strategy
The most crucial pairs to England are the British pound/U.S. dollar and
British pound/euro due to their abundance of trade.
A fall in the ERI Index is a fall in spot prices while a rise in the ERI is a rise
in spot prices. For example, when the housing crisis hit in August 2008, British
pound/U.S. dollar spot was trading at 2.0500 while the ERI began the month
at 93. By the end of August, spot fell to 1.4536 and the ERI was at 88.58
by the end of August. Spot fell 1.4 percent while the ERI fell 1.04 percent, an
enormous correlation. When the Greek crisis hit, British pound/U.S. dollar
spot traded at 1.5150 on May 4, 2010, and ended 1.4536 with a touch at
4500 on May 14, 2010, while the ERI began at 79.5064 on May 4, 2010, and
ended at 78.8207 on May 13, 2010. May 14 was a Friday and ERI was not yet
reported.
What are the consequences to the ERI and spot prices at these levels?
Notice the correlation in the ﬁrst example. What occurs with prices paid
by British consumers, what occurs with the cost structure to the British
government, what occurs with their ﬁnance cost, what occurs with trade
ﬁgures, and how is the money supply affected are all determinants of the
ERI. The overall question is where does supply equal demand or demand
equal supply?
Matthew Hurd, Mark Salmon, and Christopher Schleicher published a
2005 paper in the Center for Economic Policy Research entitled “Using
Copulas to Construct Bivariate Foreign Exchange Distributions with
Application to ERI” in which they determine ERI exchange rates based on
option risk reversals by factoring Bernstein Copulas. This methodology has
since been adopted and regularly reported in the Quarterly Bulletin every
quarter since 2005.
Sweden

The Danish krona free ﬂoated in November 1992 as they unpegged against
the ECU. Currently, 21 nations are incorporated in their Trade Competitive
Weight Index (TCW). But the Swedish Central Bank, Risbank, factors rates
for 50 nations as well as cross rates. Cross rates are factored for and against
the Swedish krona. Their TCW is factored the same as Great Britain and the
IMF where exports, imports, and third-market competition is included. They
factor their exchange rates as Buy plus Sell divided by two. Exchange rates are
reported at 9:30 a.m. Stockholm time and reported at 10:00 a.m. as mid rates
Stockholm time, 4:00 a.m. New York time.

60

Inside the Currency Market

Canada

Canada revised their old C-6 and G-10 Index in 2006 to reﬂect the change in
trade conditions that reﬂected trade in services as well as new trading partners.
Today that index is called Canada Effective Exchange Rate Index (CERI) and
reﬂects six nations’ currencies based on 2 percent trade or higher with Canada:
U.S. dollar, euro, British pound, Japanese yen, Chinese renminbi, and the
Mexican peso. The weights in the index work like this: U.S. dollar 0.7618,
euro 0.0931, yen 0.0527, renminbi 0.0329, peso 0.0324, and British pound
0.0271. The United States by far holds the largest position in the index due to
the enormous import and export business between the two nations.
The United States accounts for 0.7618 of the index so the Canadian
dollar/U.S. dollar and the spot U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar are by far the
most important pairs for Canada as the Canadian dollar moves almost in lock
step with the U.S. dollar. Because Canada is ranked as the world’s seventhlargest oil exporter, Canadian dollar/Japanese yen is a great oil trade because
this pair tracks so well with the price of oil. Approximately $100 billion in
Canadian dollars are traded on any given trading day.
Canada’s major exports are wheat, petroleum, natural gas, lumber, metals, chemicals, plastics, fertilizers, agricultural machinery, and automotive
products. The effective rates ﬁxing time is between 12:15 and 12:30 eastern
time or New York time. The index is factored against each nation’s CPI except
China, which always receives an approximation. The index formula is the
exact same as England, the IMF, and Sweden as all account for third-market
competition, as can be seen in Exhibit 3.2, a 2007 to 2010 chart of CERI
against Canadian dollar/U.S. dollar.
Switzerland

A minor polemic exists in Switzerland because of their limited translation of
ofﬁcial documents and research publications to English. Most are published
in French and German, reﬂecting historic ties to both nations that date to
the Middle Ages. Most important government documents are published in
German, representing the capital in Zurich in southern Switzerland, while
North Switzerland represents French areas such as Geneva.
Four currencies represent prime economic value for Switzerland because
these currencies comprise the majority of trade with Switzerland. In order of
importance, Swiss franc/euro, Swiss franc/U.S. dollar, Swiss franc/Japanese
yen, and Swiss franc/British pound. Switzerland’s index is titled the TWI.
The ﬁxing time for these currencies is 11:00 a.m. Zurich, 5:00 a.m. New
York. The following effective rates are reported in order of importance: Swiss

61

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices
EXHIBIT 3.2 2007 to 2010 chart of CERI against Canadian Dollar/U.S. Dollar

140

U.S.$
1.10

October Report

130

1.00

120

0.90

110

0.80

100

0.70

90

2007

2008

CERI: Canadian-dollar trade-weighted
index (against U.S. dollar, euro, yen,
U.K. pound. Mexican peso, and
Chinese renminbi) (left scale, 1992 = 100)

2009

2010

0.60

Closing spot exchange rate
for Canadian dollar vis-á-vis
U.S. dollar (right scale)

Note: A rise in the index indicates an appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Source: Bank of Canada

franc/euro, Swiss franc/U.S. dollar, Swiss franc/Japanese yen, and Swiss franc/
British pound.
Notice the relationship Swiss franc/U.S. dollar. This order is by far more
important to the health of Switzerland’s trade with the United States than
the U.S. dollar/Swiss franc pair offered by most brokers. Switzerland would
much prefer to see a rise in Swiss franc/U.S. dollar rather than a rise in U.S.
dollar/Swiss franc, especially during times of market and economic stress.
francs are earned by Swiss franc/U.S. dollar.
When U.S. dollar/Swiss franc rises to levels not acceptable to the Swiss
Central Bank, they will intervene and drive those prices down so any U.S.
dollar/Swiss franc longs should always be treated with caution. Consequently,
Swiss franc/euro for Switzerland is their most important pair due to the overwhelming trade they conduct with the euro zone. Most brokers offer euro/
Swiss franc. Both central banks play a push and pull tug-of-war game as they
vie for the correct pricing mechanism within this pair.
Exports to the euro zone comprise by far a vast majority of trade for
Switzerland. Following is a list of top import and exports nations in 2009
for Switzerland.

62

Inside the Currency Market

Country

Imports

Exports

Germany

65.8

42.5

Italy

21.7

18.8

France

18.6

18.5

United States

11.4

20.7

England

7.2

11.1

Netherlands

9.0

6.3

Austria

7.9

6.0

Spain

3.9

7.4

Japan

4.2

7.1

Belgium

6.6

4.5

Trade Strategy
For all of 2009, the Swiss exported more to the United States than it imported.
On January 1, 2009, the effective rate for the Swiss franc against the U.S. dollar
was 1.0852 and ended December 2009 at 1.0283. Spot U.S. dollar/Swiss
franc began trade January 1, 2009, at 1.2271 and ended the year at 0.9852.
Where the Swiss proﬁted was Swiss franc/U.S. dollar since effective rates are
quoted for the TWI in this manner. Where a spot trader proﬁts goes either
way. The same scenario occurs with the Japanese yen.
On January 1, 2009, the effective rate began the year at 1.1610 and
ended the year at 1.1463. The Swiss franc/Japanese yen began trade January
1, 2009 at 87.144 and ended the year at 90.725. The sell yen and buy Swiss
franc was a proﬁtable strategy throughout 2009. One caveat is that this pair
was never known for its big movements. Another signiﬁcant pair is euro/
Swiss franc or aptly quoted by the Swiss as Swiss franc/euro.

Intervention
An important caveat to consider in any trade strategy is that all central banks
value, and heavily monitor daily, the price of their currencies of interest against
their TWIs to ensure proﬁtable trade ﬂows to earn foreign reserves for the government and to ensure proﬁts for each nation’s export companies. When a currency
pair reaches critical levels unsatisfactory to a central bank’s trade ﬂows, spot-market
intervention is always a possibility to bring prices back to proﬁtable levels.
Central banks intervene in the markets all the time, ready to spend the
necessary amounts, so risk always exists for a bet against the direction of a

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

63

currency pair in which a central bank has an interest. Many can’t compete
with the amount of money central banks are willing to spend to intervene.
Central banks such as New Zealand and Australia usually utter a verbal
warning in some form before intervention with hope that the market will
adhere to the warning so that intervention won’t be necessary. In this instance,
the market corrects itself and in the interim, an easy and proﬁtable trade may
exist. Others such as the Swiss and the Japanese have been known to intervene without warning. Yet the Japanese have not intervened signiﬁcantly in
recent years due to rearrangement of offshore tactics such as the establishment
of Japanese companies in other nations, purchase of commodities in other
nations’ markets, and a new repatriation system that allows companies to now
become proﬁtable so foreign-exchange risk to the yen is reduced.
The Swiss however have intervened many times with signiﬁcant amounts
of money to gear their currencies of interest in their desired direction. Recent
interventions occurred in early morning New York trading before the stock
market opened. Yet they have been known to intervene to adjust euro/Swiss
franc to better reﬂect Swiss franc/euro prices during European trade. The
question for traders must be where is the imbalance in a currency price and in
what market would it be cost effective for central bank intervention? In this
instance, the Swiss will buy francs and sell euros.
Central banks ﬁnd comfort within certain ranges for their pairs of interest
so a ranging market is acceptable. When pairs trend in an unacceptable direction for a central bank, caution is advised. Smaller nations are more prone
toward intervention because the sale of their exported goods is paramount to
the health of their economies, especially Australia and New Zealand who export
commodities and Japan who exports manufactured goods. U.S. dollar/Swiss
franc, Australian dollar/U.S. dollar, New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar, and U.S.
dollar/Japanese yen are the premier pairs to monitor because the United States
is the largest destination for exported goods of these nations.
Canada is the questionable nation because as a commodity nation and
dependent on exports to the United States, they are not prone toward intervention because they rely primarily on oil exports and their present supply
will last for a considerable time in the future. Yet due to its close relationship
with U.S. banks, U.S. markets, and sales to U.S. manufacturers, Canada
can weather any economic storm.
Euro

The European Central Bank (ECB) revamped its TWI in 2004 to reﬂect
trade in services, identify new trading partners, and indicate a clearer picture
of manufacturing. Their index is chain linked to indicate imports, exports,

64

Inside the Currency Market

and competitor nations. They readjust their index every three years so the
new chain link from 2004 is properly reﬂected. The new link occurred in
2010 with completed 2009 trade data.
Due to the size and complexity of euro zone nations, the ECB formulated and categorized many indices in order of importance to euro zone trade.
The standard 12-nation currency index incorporates major trading partners
of the euro zone. The list and their weights are:
Country

Weight

Australia

1.0

United States

19.6

United Kingdom

17.8

Switzerland

6.4

Sweden

4.8

Canada

1.7

Denmark

2.7

Hong Kong

2.0

Japan

8.3

Singapore

1.8

Norway

1.3

South Korea

3.9

The next index, the EER 12, incorporates the 16 nations of the euro zone
against the 12 nations above. Next is the EER 22 (Slovakia drops from 23rd)
that factors the 16 European nations against 22 more trading nations. The
nations of the euro zone do not hold a position in the index since they are
represented by the euro.
This last set of nations includes China with a trade weight of 13.6, Poland
4.8, Hungary 3.1 and the Czech Republic 4.1, Bulgaria, Hungary, Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Croatia, Russia, Turkey, Brazil, Indonesia, India,
Philippines, Mexico, Malaysia, New Zealand, Thailand, South Africa and
Iceland. All nominal indices are calculated against CPI, PPI, and the GDP
deﬂater to form real effective exchange rates. Rates are published as reference
rates at 2:15 a.m. Frankfurt time, 8:00 a.m. New York time.
Most representative currencies for the euro is euro/Canadian dollar, euro/
South Korean won, euro/U.S. dollar, euro/British pound, euro/Japanese yen,
euro/Swiss franc, euro/Swedish krona.

Exchange Rates and Trade Weight Indices

65

United States

The United States holds a unique position in the world due to not only
enormous trade with its trading partners, but the dollar is the foundation
for all world transactions in commodities and other trade. It is the premier
economic barometer so many nations depend on the economic health of the
United States for their own economic welfare.
USDX

As a measure to the world, the United States created a unique situation for its
dollar index. It allowed the dollar index to trade almost as if it were a single
free-ﬂoated currency. But it is actually a compendium of currencies.
The dollar index trades on the New York Board of Trade, now called the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE), as DXY. It trades for 22 hours as a futures
and option contract on the Intercontinental Exchange and is quoted as DX.
It also trades on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). The polemic with
this scenario is this particular dollar is not today’s ofﬁcial trade-weight dollar
index. The DXY index originated in 1973 and formed along with all other
nations’ TWI as currencies began a free ﬂoat. This dollar index is what is
ofﬁcially recognized by the world as the price of the dollar in the markets, the
measure against all other currency prices. A need existed then to keep some
semblance of balance for the dollar due to its paramount importance as the
foundation of exchange throughout the world, as all other traded products on
any exchange are quoted in dollars, such as commodities.
The DXY dollar index incorporates six nations’ currencies. Following is a
list of the six nations’ currencies and their weights: euro 57.6, yen 13.6, British
pound 11.9, Canadian dollar 9.1, Swedish krona 4.2, and Swiss franc 3.6.
The euro, yen, British pound, and Canadian dollar comprise about 92 percent
of the index. The six currencies are calculated as a geometric average. Note
the following formula:
50.14348112  euro/U.S. dollar  0. 576  U.S. dollar/Japanese yen
0.136  British pound/U.S. dollar  0.119  U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar
0.091  U.S. dollar/SEK 0.042  U.S. dollar/Swiss franc 0.036
The base period is equal to 100 from 1973. If the dollar is used as the
base, the value is positive. If the dollar is used as the quote, the value is
negative. What is missing from the USDX as opposed to the ofﬁcial U.S.
