
On the Wednesday afternoon before publication, Williams sent the story to the Associated Press, UPI, the
Omaha World-Herald, and television stations. The next day, March 30, 1972, would be recalled by Buffett
as one of the greatest of his life. The story not only fulfilled his wish to run a business as a church, but the
section opened with a Bible-quoting headline about a favorite concept, stewardship—the lens through which
he now viewed duty, moral obligation, and the responsibility that went along with a position of trust. By the
end of that week, the wire services had broken the Boys Town story across the country and exposed a
national scandal.39 On Saturday, the Boys Town board held an emergency meeting and decided to cancel all
fund-raising, including the spring mailing for which envelopes had already been partly stuffed.40 In a new era
of investigative reporting, the drama was of such magnitude that it gave an immediate push to reforms in the
way nonprofits were governed all over the United States. The story was picked up by Time, Newsweek,
Editor & Publisher, and the LA Times, among others.41 An informal survey of twenty-six boys’ homes
showed that immediately after the exposé, more than a third of them said that their fund-raising efforts were
affected.42
But Monsignor Francis Schmitt, an understudy of Wegner’s who had begun assuming some of his duties,
quickly circulated a letter to Boys Town supporters calling the Sun “a kind of Shopper’s Guide.” It said,
“There can only have been yellow journalism, prejudice, jealousy, and, for all I know, bigotry involved in the
story,” suggesting that the motive was anti-Catholic bias. In fact, the reporters had bent over backward to
avoid such a bias. Moreover, Schmitt said, the story was full of “snide innuendos” that cut into his vitals all
“because of a cheap editor of a cheap paper, whose owner is himself a millionaire many times over.”43
Wegner also remained unrepentant. “Boys Town,” he said, “will still be here when that yellow rag, what’s it
called”—the Sun—“is forgotten.”44 To people who wrote asking about the Boys Town story, Wegner was
sending out a form letter saying the Sun story was spreading “sensational views of local issues,” and that
while at the present time, Boys Town was not seeking donations, as “our properties and facilities have
multiplied in value…SO HAVE OUR COSTS.”45 The letter was printed on the usual stationery, with “your
contribution is an allowable income tax deduction” and “we employ no solicitors or fund-raising
organization—we pay no commissions” at the bottom.
***
A couple of months after the Sun’s coverage appeared, the Omaha Press Club put on its annual show. A team
of singers got up and entertained the Who’s Who of Omaha (and more than a few from out of town). Their
song satirized Monsignor Wegner and Boys Town:
We started up a home for boys,
’Bout fifty years ago;
We asked for contributions
And the dough began to flow.
We asked for all the charity
The traffic would allow;
Our homeless waifs were finally
Quite liberally endowed.
But then we had a tragedy,
Our bankroll was exposed,
And thanks to Warren Buffett
All those pocketbooks were closed.
(chorus)
Who threw the monkey wrench
In Father Wegner’s poor box?
Now we’re as popular
As if we had the smallpox.
It’s a dirty trick, you know,

Why did Warren Buffett throw
The monkey wrench in Father Wegner’s poor box?
Some folks came out from Hollywood,
To make a movie show;
Mickey Rooney showed the people
Where their cash should go.
Spencer Tracy played his part
With Roman piety;
We made enough off popcorn sales
To buy AT&T.
We passed the tin cup all around
To land on Easy Street;
Then Warren Buffett came along
And read our balance sheet.
We built palatial cottages,
To give our boys some class;
Instead of fish on Friday
We had pheasant under glass.
We talk a lot of poor mouth
But we’re never in the red;
It figures out to something
Like 200 grand a head.
Buffett blew the whistle
On a spiteful, jealous whim;
He must have figured we were getting
Just as rich as him!46
Buffett had never had so much fun reading a tax return, and wanted to keep the momentum going to make
sure that, contrary to the monsignor’s prediction, the Sun would not be forgotten. The thought of a Pulitzer,
the grandest prize in journalism, “started my adrenaline flowing,” he said.47 He got Paul Williams working on
the paper’s submission for the prize. Williams prepared a detailed outline for Buffett, who had some strategic
thoughts of his own, drawn from a long history with the newspaper business. “In a country where economics
inevitably lead to one-daily towns,” Buffett wrote, the Sun’s submission should stress “the necessity for
another printing press.” Another paper, even a weekly suburban, adds “value in terms of worrying
Goliaths”—whereas the dominant paper may fear to do so, because it “may look silly.”48
Mick Rood wrote a follow-up piece about Boys Town—a good story that was also meant to keep worrying
the Goliath—that drew on some racially bigoted comments Father Wegner had made in his interview, as well
as certain disclosures he had made about the boys growing marijuana at Boys Town down by the lake. Paul
Williams spiked it, saying the Sun had to take the high road, in part not to jeopardize future stories and in part
to avoid looking anti-Catholic. Also, at this time the Pulitzer was pending. “Too bad,” wrote Rood in a note
to himself.49
The Sun team knew it had strong competition for the Pulitzer. It would be up against the series of articles
penned by Washington Post investigative journalists Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward, who had followed
what appeared to be a minor burglary inside the Watergate offices of the Democratic National Committee
during the 1972 Nixon-McGovern election campaign, and uncovered what turned out to be an enormous
political spying and sabotage operation. But the Sun would fare very well in the prizes awarded for 1972
journalism.
In March 1973, Sigma Delta Chi, the national journalism society, gave the Sun its highest award for public
service; the Washington Post won for investigative reporting. During the cocktail hour before the awards
ceremony, as Stan and Jeannie Lipsey milled among the guests, waiting to catch a glimpse of Woodward and

Bernstein, Jeannie nudged her publisher husband in the ribs and said, “I’ll make you a bet. I’ll bet you a
hundred dollars that you’ll win the Pulitzer.” A few weeks later came the phone call. The Sun had won a
Pulitzer for local investigative specialized reporting, sending the newsroom into a jubilation of cheers and
applause.50 This time it had swapped awards with the Washington Post, which won the Pulitzer for public
service. Susie Buffett threw a party to celebrate, fixing an oversize pretzel that spelled out “Sun Pulitzer” to
the paneling in the family room. In part they were also celebrating some tangible results. Boys Town had
started throwing money at projects and quickly announced a center for the study and treatment of children’s
hearing and speech defects. It was something, and it would do some good. Boys Town from now on would
have a budget and would disclose its financial status publicly.
Instead of the annual Christmas fund-raising letter that year, there was only a Christmas card expressing
thanks, as well as a letter from Archbishop Sheehan, announcing with “deep regret” that Monsignor Wegner
would retire “due to his failing health.” While he was genuinely frail and ill, some cynic at the Sun circled
this before filing it and added, “due to something he read.”51
The following Easter, 1974, Jet Jack Ringwalt sent Warren a copy of the letter he had received from Father
(no longer Monsignor) Wegner. Instead of whining that there would be no joyous Christmas for the homeless,
abandoned boys, the letter talked at length of the costly new projects that Boys Town had just built and was
going to build and the experts who had been hired “to assist us in planning for our future.”52 While down
from previous highs, the contributions that rolled in after the letter was sent came to $3.6 million, never mind
the scandal.
Thus, the story ended as such things usually do: a mixed triumph with a certain amount of ass-covering and
reforms that came about because of public embarrassment rather than an institutional change of heart. While
Boys Town eventually turned over its board of trustees and management, it did not happen easily or
overnight, and the conflicts of interest on the board also did not disappear, at least not immediately.
And even the Sun’s glory proved short-lived. It was failing financially, and its muckraking editor, Paul
Williams, retired not long after the Pulitzer. One by one the investigative reporters dispersed to other papers
and the wire services. Unless Buffett was willing to run it as a money-losing hobby, the economics of the Sun
couldn’t support a future like its past. And the Washington Monthly had already proven that—even for great
journalism—Buffett would not do that. In a sense, the Sun was one of his cigar butts, from which he had been
able to enjoy one huge personal puff.
In another sense, the temporary boost of fame he had gotten from the Sun was a sidebar compared to
something else. Buffett had recently exploded in investors’ minds for a different reason. Under the pen name
Adam Smith, a writer named George Goodman had published Supermoney, a fire-and-brimstone critique of
the 1960s stock-market bubble, which sold more than a million copies.53 It demonized the fund managers
who had ascended to the stratosphere almost overnight and then crashed, in a parabola as dramatic as if their
engines had suddenly run out of rocket fuel. They were featured as devil-horned, pitchfork-bearing tempters
of the ordinary Joe Investor. But when it came to Ben Graham and his protégé Buffett, Goodman knew he
had met a couple of very different characters, and he devoted an entire chapter to the two of them, in which
he captured them brilliantly.
Goodman respected the Latin-and French-spouting Graham and had been highly entertained by him, but
when Graham was quoted in Supermoney, he sounded painfully affected, speaking in a style that bordered on
self-satire. Buffett, however, appeared as a blue-ribbon, All-American, Pepsi-quaffing, investing
fundamentalist, one who plied his trade in glorious solitude, far from the Lucifers of Wall Street. Presented
alongside Graham this way, Buffett came across like a two-inch-thick T-bone next to a dab of goose liver
pâté on a plate. Everyone went for the steak.
One hundred percent of the book’s reviewers mentioned Buffett. John Brooks, dean of the Wall Street
writers, described him as a “Puritan in Babylon” among the “greedy, sideburned young portfolio wizards.”54
Overnight, he was a star.

Even in Omaha, Supermoney created a minor sensation. Buffett had been crowned as the king of investors in
a best-selling book. After fifteen years, the jury had come in. He was now “the Warren Buffett.”

36
Two Drowned Rats
Omaha and Washington, D.C. • 1971

Buffett had craved a niche in the publishing big leagues for quite some time. Since newspapers, which were
mostly family-owned businesses, had recently gone through a spasm of selling themselves and now looked
cheap, he and Charlie Munger had worked ceaselessly to buy one. They had tried, unsuccessfully, to buy the
Cincinnati Enquirer from Scripps Howard,1 and Buffett had tried to buy another Scripps company, the New
Mexico State Tribune Company, which published the Albuquerque Tribune,2 for Blue Chip, but that bid
failed too.
In 1971, Charles Peters, publisher of the Washington Monthly, had gotten a call from Buffett, asking him to
introduce Buffett and Munger to Washington Post publisher Katharine Graham. Buffett said that he and
Munger had bought some stock in the New Yorker and wanted to buy the whole magazine. They had talked
to Peter Fleischmann, chairman of the New Yorker and a large shareholder, who was willing to sell, but they
wanted a partner in the purchase and thought the Washington Post might be the right choice.
Peters wasn’t surprised to get the call. Aha, he thought, Buffett must be interested in the Post stock now that
the Graham family is taking the company public. Perhaps all the recent public offerings of newspapers were
why he continued to own the Washington Monthly. If the Monthly turned out to be an entry point for making
a killing on the Post, then the failed investment could be justified financially.
On the brink of the Post’s initial public offering in 1971,3 Peters set up the meeting to explore a partnership
to buy the New Yorker. Buffett had never bought public offerings, which he felt were overhyped and
overpromoted; they were the opposite of the unloved cigar butts or great-company-at-the-right-price choices
like American Express or See’s Candies that he and Munger sought. So Buffett had no plans to buy Post
stock, but he and Munger flew to Washington and went to meet Kay Graham at the Washington Post
headquarters, a monolithic eight-story 1950s white building with the paper’s name in its distinctive
Gothic-style typeface above the door.
Though publisher of the Post, Kay Graham had come late in life to running a newspaper. When she took it
over eight years earlier, at age forty-six, she was a widow with four children and had never worked in a
business. Now she found herself preparing for the challenge of running a public company under the
unremitting scrutiny of investors and the press.
“Charlie and I met her very, very briefly, for twenty minutes. I had no idea what she was like. The idea that
she’d be frightened of her own business—I didn’t know any of that. It was raining like hell, so we came in
looking like a couple of drowned rats, and you know how we dress anyway.”
As they sat in her office, “She couldn’t have been nicer to us. Then she suggested we go see Fritz Beebe, the
chairman of the board, who was really the guy kind of running the place up in New York, which we did. But
we weren’t going anyplace with it.”
At the time, Graham had no interest in the New Yorker purchase that had prompted the visit—and there was
nothing in the meeting to suggest that she and Buffett would one day be great friends. He made no impression

on her whatsoever. For his part, he did not find her particularly attractive—even though she was a handsome
woman—for she lacked the soft femininity and caretaking qualities of his ideal, Daisy Mae. Moreover, their
backgrounds were worlds apart.
Katharine Graham, born just before the twenties started to roar, was the daughter of a rich father, investor
and Post publisher Eugene Meyer, and a self-absorbed mother, Agnes—“Big Ag,” as the family called her
behind her back because of her imposing stature and, as the years passed, increasing girth. Agnes, who had
married her Jewish husband at least in part for his money, was passionate about Chinese art, music, literature,
and other cultural interests, but indifferent to her husband and their five children. The family shuttled among
their pinkish-gray granite mansion in Mount Kisco, overlooking Westchester County’s Byram Lake; their
full-floor apartment on Fifth Avenue in New York City; and a large, dark, red-brick Victorian house in
Washington, D.C.
Katharine spent her early years under the rule of Agnes at the Mount Kisco estate, which the family referred
to as the “farm” because it contained a large orchard, garden, dairy, and an old farmhouse where the
farmhands lived in bachelor quarters. Every vegetable and piece of fruit on the dining table came from the
surrounding fields and orchards. Kay ate meat from the farm’s own pigs and chickens and drank milk from its
Jersey cows. Lavish bouquets of flowers appeared on the tables of each of the family’s houses every day,
even in Washington, sped there from the Mount Kisco gardens. The Westchester mansion’s walls were
covered with magnificent Chinese paintings; it boasted every status symbol of the era: an indoor swimming
pool, a bowling alley, tennis courts, a massive pipe organ.
Kay chose her riding horses from a stable of steeds handsome enough to draw Cinderella’s carriage and was
taken on incredible vacations, once visiting Albert Einstein himself in Germany. When Agnes took the
children camping to teach them independence, they roughed it accompanied by five ranch hands, eleven
saddle horses, and seventeen packhorses.
But the children had to make an appointment to see their own mother. They gobbled down their meals
because Agnes, served first at the long dining-room table, began eating as the footmen moved around serving
everyone else—and had the others’ plates snatched away the instant that she herself had finished. By her
own admission, she did not love her children. She left them to be raised by nannies, governesses, and riding
instructors; she sent them off to summer camps, boarding schools, and dancing class. Their only playmates
were one another and the servants’ children. Agnes drank heavily, pursued flirtatious and obsessive (although
apparently platonic) relationships with a number of famous men, and treated all other women as inferior, her
own daughters among them. She compared Kay unfavorably to America’s sweetheart, Shirley Temple, the
singing, dancing, smiling child star with golden blond ringlets.4 “If I said I loved The Three Musketeers,”
Graham recalled, “she responded by saying I couldn’t really appreciate it unless I had read it in French as she
had.”5 Kay was trained like a hybrid orchid, beautifully pampered, savagely critiqued for her show potential,
and otherwise largely ignored. Still, by the time she reached the Madeira School in Washington, D.C., she had
somehow managed to learn the skills of popularity and was elected head of her class—most surprising at that
time and in that place because she was half Jewish.
In Protestant Mount Kisco, the family had been socially shunned. Since at Agnes’s insistence the children
were raised as Protestants—albeit nonobservant ones, for the most part—and were not even aware that their
father was Jewish, Graham did not understand the reason for their isolation. Indeed, she would later be
stunned at Vassar when a friend apologized because someone had made a bigoted remark about Jews in front
of her. She reflected with hindsight that this clash in her bloodlines “leaves you either a good survival
capacity or a total mess.”6 Or, perhaps, both.
From her mother, Kay learned to be ungenerous about small things, fearful of being cheated, unable to give
things away, and certain that people were trying to take advantage of her. By her own description, she also
grew up inclined to be bossy.7 Yet others saw in her qualities of naiveté, candor, generosity, and
open-heartedness that she herself seemed unable to acknowledge.
She felt closer to her awkward, distant, yet supportive father. To Eugene Meyer, she attributed her zeal for

tiny economies—compulsively turning out lights, never wasting anything. Her father’s talent for such
economies, along with great infusions of time, money, and energy, had been crucial in keeping the ailing
Washington Post alive while Kay was growing up, when the paper ranked fifth in a field of five in the capital
area, far behind the dominant paper, the Washington Evening Star.8 But when Meyer began thinking of
retiring in 1942, Kay’s brother, Bill, a doctor, had no interest in running an unprofitable newspaper, so the
duty fell to Kay and her new husband, Philip Graham. Kay was besotted with Phil, and so convinced of her
own lowliness that she accepted as a matter of course her father’s decision to sell Phil nearly two-thirds of
the Post’s voting stock, giving him absolute control. Meyer did it because, he said, no man should have to
work for his wife. Kay got the remainder.9
Despite Meyer’s zeal in keeping the paper alive, when Phil Graham took it over, matters were out of hand.
Certain people in the newsroom and the circulation department spent most of the day playing the horses and
drinking. When Meyer was out of town, the first thing the office boy did every morning was bring one man a
half pint of booze and the Daily Racing Form.10
Phil Graham got the place shipshape, gave it an identity by fostering vigorous political coverage, and stamped
its editorial page with a strong liberal voice. He bought Newsweek magazine and several television stations,
and proved to be a brilliant publisher. But over time, drinking binges, a violent temper, unstable moods, and a
cruel sense of humor showed themselves, with particularly devastating effects on his wife. When Katharine
gained weight, he called her “Porky” and bought her a porcelain pig. She thought so little of herself that she
found the joke funny and put the pig on the porch for display.
“I was very shy,” she said. “I was afraid to be left alone with anybody because I’d bore them. I didn’t speak
when we went out; I let him speak…. He was really brilliant and funny. Marvelous combination.”11
Her husband played on her fears. When they were out with friends, Phil would look at her in a certain way
when she was talking. She sensed that he was telling her that she was going on too long and boring people.
She was convinced that she occupied some lesser sphere and could never meet the expected—but impossible
—standard of living up to Shirley Temple. No wonder that, over time, she ceased speaking in public and let
Phil take center stage.12 She grew so insecure that she vomited before parties. And by some accounts, the
way Phil treated her in private was even worse.13 Her four children grew up seeing their father tear their
mother apart. He would drink and build up to a violent rage; then she froze and shut down.
She never confronted Phil, even when he embarked on a series of affairs with other women that supposedly
included swapping mistresses with Jack Kennedy.14 Instead, she defended him, swept away by the force of
his personality, wit, and brains. The more cruelly he behaved, the more she seemed to want to please him.15
“I thought that Phil literally created me,” she said. “My interests were better. I was surer of myself.”16 He
thought she was lucky to have him, and she did too. When he finally left her for Newsweek staffer Robin
Webb, she was stunned by the response of one of her friends, who said, “Good!” It had never occurred to her
that she might be better off without Phil. But then he began trying to take the paper away from her, since he
controlled two-thirds of the stock. Kay was terrified that she would lose her family’s newspaper.
In 1963, in the midst of her battle to keep the paper, Phil Graham suffered a spectacular public breakdown,
was diagnosed with manic depression, and committed himself to a mental institution. Six weeks later, he
talked his way out of the hospital for a weekend leave. He came home to Glen Welby, the Grahams’
sprawling rural Virginia farm retreat. On Saturday, after eating lunch with Kay, he shot himself in a
downstairs bathroom while she was upstairs taking a nap. He was forty-eight.
His suicide left Kay with the paper, no longer threatened with its loss. She dreaded being in charge, but even
though some suggested that she sell, she was absolutely determined to keep it; she saw her stewardship as a
holding action until the next generation was ready to take over. “I didn’t know anything about management,”
she said. “I didn’t know anything about complicated editorial issues. I didn’t know how to use a secretary. I
didn’t know big things and small things and, worse still, I couldn’t tell them apart.”17
