
eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

On Balance Volume (OBV) is a useful predictive tool when signals
are unambiguous and price sits at a key level, testing a swing high/low
or a major moving average. Conversely, avoid the indicator entirely when
you’re lacking one or both of those environmental conditions. The most
actionable data come with a strong OBV breakout or breakdown, while

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

139

price is still stuck at support-resistance. This divergence predicts that
price will surge in an attempt to play catch up to the rising or falling OBV.
OBV lagging a price breakout or breakdown is a divergence that predicts
whipsaws will follow the trend thrust. Once again, this corresponds with
the second phase of the action-reaction-resolution cycle.
As I noted in my first book, price and volume are connected by a
hidden spring that allows one side to stretch away from the other until a
friction point is reached, and the other side surges higher or lower to end
the divergence. The problem, as I’ve just argued, is that this relationship
has become less logical and more complicated in recent years. For this
reason, most traders should just focus their undivided attention on price
structure and avoid the confusion that volume brings to the table.

Fibonacci Plays
Magic numbers, astrological dates, and prayer wheels have all been
enlisted in the search for that elusive trading edge. In fact, Gann, Elliott,
and other cultists spent their entire careers studying the market’s mystical
side and how obscure ideas have the power to tap hidden profits. Many
folks still believe that Fibonacci fits into the category of market witchcraft,
but this arcane science has a basis in real life fact. As we know, a twelfth
century monk (later branded as Fibonacci) discovered a logical sequence
that appears throughout nature. Beginning with 1 + 1, the sum of the last
two numbers that precede it generates another Fibonacci number. For
example: 1 + 1 = 2, 1 + 2 = 3, 2 +3 = 5, 3 + 5 = 8, 5 + 8 = 13, 8 + 13 = 21, 13 +
21 = 34, 21 + 34 = 55, and so on.
Major ratios between Fibonacci numbers identify natural retracement
zones when markets pull back after rallies or selloffs. The most common
retracements—38%, 50%, and 62%—identify price levels where many
traders expect reversals and bounces to occur. For obvious reasons, these
well-known inflection points generate entry and exit signals in many
short-term strategies. As illustrated through numerous examples in The
Master Swing Trader, markets swing reliably off common retracement levels
as they move from support to resistance and back. But these dynamics
have become harder to trade in recent years due to the growing popularity of Fibonacci as a technical tool. Not surprisingly, a growing cadre of
market players take positions against key retracement levels, because they
know weaker hands will jump in mindlessly when these prices get hit.

PART THREE

140

F I G U R E

Rediscovering Profitability

6.7

Cross-verification increases the odds that markets will turn at common Fibonacci retracement levels. FirstEnergy rallies from 58 to 66, lifting through resistance at the December high (1). It pulls back into the 62%
retracement, which now aligns with the 50-day EMA (2) and support from the old high. The stock prints a bullish
double bottom pattern (3) over eight trading days, adding a third level of cross-verification, and then resumes its
strong uptrend.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

For example, they’ll sell short when a rally pulls into the 62% Fibonacci
retracement just because you, I, and a million other traders expect that price
zone to trigger a big bounce.
Despite the diabolical overtones, Fibonacci applications still have
tremendous value as long as we apply a survivalist approach. First, never
trade a Fibonacci retracement level in a vacuum, i.e., look for other forms
of support or resistance to show up at the same price levels. For example,
when you see a 50-day EMA, a swing high, and a six-month trendline

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

141

converge at a 62% retracement, the odds for an important reversal greatly
increase. This cross-verification process identifies narrow levels where
signal becomes louder than noise, making it harder for fading strategies to
take hold. It’s simple to apply this filtering mechanism because it’s defined
by a linear relationship in which each layer of cross-verification increases
the odds that price will behave “as expected” when the Fibonacci level
gets hit.
Second, learn to trade the Fibonacci whipsaw. Stand aside when price
pulls into a deep retracement level. Let other traders take the bait and
get shaken out when the instrument breaks through the magic number.
Then watch until price shifts gears once again and jumps back across the
contested retracement level. Use this crossing as your initial entry signal,

F I G U R E

6.8

MasterCard short sale.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

142

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

adding to positions on subsequent pullbacks. This setup marks yet another
variation of the failure of a failure signal, in which a classic pattern fails
just long enough to shake out weak hands and then magically works once
again. It has a lot in common with the 50-day EMA magnet trade discussed earlier in this chapter.
The Fibonacci whipsaw trade can set up in any time frame, but it
works best within a larger-scale trend, higher or lower. In Figure 6.8,
MasterCard gaps down on May 13 (1) and starts to trend lower. It fills the
gap (2) three weeks later and sells off to a new monthly low (3). The stock
bounces near 162 and starts to retrace the prior downswing. That uptick
lifts above the 62% Fibonacci retracement (4), tags the 78% retracement
(5), and reverses sharply. Price drops back under the 62% retracement (6)
two hours later, triggering the initial short sell signal. It then pauses at the
50% retracement (7) for another four hours, giving the trader an opportunity to add to the short position, with a stop loss just above the 62%
retracement. Healthy profits can be taken when price pulls into support
near 162 (8), the inception point of the prior upswing, or held in anticipation of a resumption of the larger-scale downtrend.
Finally, the survivalist trader can apply less common retracement
strategies in an effort to avoid the crowd. H. M. Gartley described littleknown Fibonacci relationships in his 1935 book Profits in the Stock Market.
The Gartley Pattern relies on a 78% retracement, which offers another way
to capitalize on reactionary traders caught in whipsaws at the 62% level.
This classic setup, first described almost 70 years ago, works just as well
now as it did during the Great Depression. You can also trade Fibonacci
extensions instead of retracements. Gartley uncovered an extension trade
he nicknamed the Butterfly Pattern. This is a complex formation that
carries price 27% past a 100% retracement before it reverses. Got that?
The infinite combinations of ratios and waves can be confusing if
you’re unfamiliar with these old patterns, but that’s exactly the point
here. The real power in applying convoluted Fibonacci mathematics is its
ability to confuse most traders, which is perfect because the markets rarely
reward the majority.

CounterMarket Plays
The most common market strategies trade in the direction of the most
obvious trend, but you also take the less-traveled path and enter positions

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

F I G U R E

143

6.9

Traders have relied on complex Fibonacci patterns for decades, but many of these forgotten gems are still unknown to the majority of traders. The Gartley and Butterfly patterns spin off proportional swings within trading
ranges, predicting subsequent breakouts and breakdowns in the intraday, daily, and weekly time frames. These
patterns work just as well on the long side as the short side. Visually, they’re easy to locate because they look
like Ws and inverted Ws.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

against the trend. In fact, fading the tape has been a very profitable tactic
in the last decade. The challenge lies in entry timing because jumping in
against major order flow without careful planning will cut you to shreds.
The significance of the buy-sell swing can’t be overstated in this regard
because it provides the information you’ll need to establish a profitable
countertrend position. Also consider how pattern failure plays into the
establishment of tradable swing highs and lows. Simply stated, nearly all
reversals begin at a high print just above a notable range or a low print

144

PART THREE

Rediscovering Profitability

just below a notable range. In other words, the trending equity, index, or
futures contract consolidates near a high or low while the crowd waits to
profit from the next move in the same direction as the trend. The breakout
or breakdown finally unfolds, drawing in sidelined cash, but then reverses
and whips back through range support in an uptrend or range resistance
in a downtrend.
This is an especially notorious phenomenon in the index futures,
which rarely embark on a countertrend swing without a final sucker punch
to the guts of trend traders. The near certainty that a swing will print a
final trap before it reverses gives the survivalist trader a powerful edge, as
long as discipline is exercised while the overextended market carves out a
last gasp rally or selloff. It’s tough emotionally because, by that time, our
neurons have been tricked into a simple trend-following mentality by the
sheer persistence of the prevailing swing.
There are three types of countertrend plays. The first involves any
trade that goes against the long-term moving averages. The second is
a high volatility play where you sell short at the extremes of a vertical
rally or catch a falling knife in a plunging market. The last strategy, which
requires fewer antacids, just fades support or resistance within a welldefined trading range. Each of these tactics requires a different mindset
and reward:risk calculation. In particular, trading against high volatility
can be very dangerous without adequate defensive measures. However,
despite the obvious risks, each countertrend strategy has an important
place in the survivalist trader’s playbook.
Newer traders should concentrate on simple rangebound plays
and avoid the more dangerous countertrend tactics. But as experience
grows, moving against the tide will become more and more irresistible.
In fact, some market players are naturally hardwired to play the countertrend more effectively than the trend. However, even these contrary
folks face a steep learning curve that includes ill-advised positions and a
few major catastrophes. This is especially true when shorting big rallies
or knife-catching big selloffs. Simple technical strategies lose their effectiveness in those highly volatile markets, except in longer time frames. In
other words, big rallies may carry well above natural extensions and price
targets, while big selloffs don’t end until the last dip buyer gets crushed
like a bug.
A long trade under the 200-day moving average or a short sale
above it is always a countertrend position that requires a more defensive
approach. Simply stated, bulls live above the 200-day, while bears
live below it. Since the major indices have spent many years of the last
decade grinding under this moving average, we’re all guilty of trading

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

145

countertrend long positions. Not surprisingly, I’ve been forced to adjust
my market scans repeatedly since the 2000 bubble top to include longside scenarios I would have avoided completely back in the 1990s. One of
the most common countertrend plays, which works extremely well after
a bear market, is the breakout from a deep basing pattern and a pullback
to support. Traders bought these patterns without hesitation in 2003 and
2009 while keeping one eye on overhead resistance. Realistically, the
50-day EMA does a better job than the 200-day EMA telling us when to
go with the flow and when to go countertrend. Logically, it makes sense
to take long positions above this intermediate moving average and short
sales below it.
Of course, we’re all attracted to falling knives, but it’s painfully easy
to get clobbered on these volatile trades without a good strategy and solid
risk management. No, it isn’t that difficult to predict where a plunging
stock should stop falling by using support-resistance and retracement
analysis. The problem lies in the explosive tape. In shorter time frames, a
volatile selloff can drop through a major price floor, undercut support by
several points, and then leap higher, leaving behind a long candle shadow
and a graveyard of logical stop losses.
So how can you manage these high-risk, high-reward setups? Two
techniques will keep you out of most trouble and let you catch a profitable
chunk of these violent markets:
• Break up your position into tiered limit orders on both sides of the
expected reversal level. Then place a stop loss just below the last
order, and exit the entire position if price drops that far.
• Place a single order just below the level you think price might
hit in an extreme situation. This outer limit often identifies the
exact turning point because it washes out everyone else, which is
usually a requirement for a major reversal.
Rangebound markets offer classic countertrend swing plays, using
support-resistance boundaries to buy weakness and sell strength. It’s best
to let congestion set up for a while before you trade these patterns, because
most whipsaws come in the early stages of range development. The best
countertrend trades come in the range’s sweet spot, which happens just
before price action gets dull and lifeless, ahead of the next breakout or
breakdown. This type of countertrend entry is always price-sensitive
because there’s a limited amount of reward from one side of the pattern to
the other.
Here are a few tips on this classic countertrend strategy:

PART THREE

146

Rediscovering Profitability

• Set your stop loss just outside support or resistance. Risk is very
small when you enter a trade just behind this intended exit price.
• Focus your entry near a single price level, and then stick to it.
• Don’t chase positions at any time because they need to execute
with minimum slippage in order to keep reward:risk in your
favor.
• Try to get it right the first time because too many reentries,
triggered by poor timing, will eat up the trade’s profitability.

F I G U R E

6.10

Two entry strategies work with falling knives, but aggressive risk management is required in both approaches.
Fuqi International rallies from 4.66 to 7.75, posting a continuation gap below the 50% retracement level. It then
sells off, yielding the falling knife setup outlined in the Massey Energy trade in Chapter 1. The first strategy
enters small positions on either side of the gap (1 and 2), placing a stop loss (3) under the last entry. Ironically,
the stop price is the entry trigger for the second strategy, because it’s located at the level where most traders
have given up.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

CHAPTER 6

Survivalist Trading Strategies

147

• Once established, the position should be held until price pulls into
the other side of the trading range. Then take profits and look for
an entry in the opposite direction.

