
STAYING WITH THE INFORMATION FLOW
I have just described only a few of the more popular economic reports and
indicators released every day. As you can see, there is definitely enough information released to create fuel for the fire that causes volatility in the
markets, emphasizing the importance of staying on top of the daily calendar
of events, especially when you have positions that may be affected by these
reports. Awareness of what is going on around you can help you become a
successful trader.
Market participants change, money flow changes, the world political
scene changes, the market’s focus changes. The reports mentioned and
their significance will probably evolve over time just as they have in the past.
For example, the old NAPM survey is now the ISM Index. And you may remember when money supply M-1 and M-2 figures were a big deal (1984) that
everyone in the market had to follow.

Staying with the Information Flow

31

The times do change, and entrepreneurs and swift students of the markets will rise to the occasion to understand what information will help give
them an edge in an effort to beat the street. This business attracts the savviest and smartest people in the world. Some are extremely well schooled, and
others are naturally gifted with good market sense and, well, sometimes with
just plain luck. You need to be aware that those people are the ones you are
up against as a market participant. If this is going to be your business, at least
knowing what the other team players follow may help you in your own
research.
Of course, even the biggest and smartest players lose sometimes. The
markets do not discriminate. They like to take money away from the large
commodity trading advisor who has an Ivy League degree and a Phi Beta
Kappa plaque on the office wall as well as from the small speculator. As markets change and fundamental shifts in business cycles occur, you need to adjust so you can grasp where the market’s focus is and find the reports and
information that will keep you in tune with the fundamentals of the market.

CHAPTER 3

Technical Analysis
The Art of Charts

The greatest ignorance is to reject something you
know nothing about.
—Anonymous

ormulating a trading plan should include the initial entry position,
the risk management loss objective, and the targeted profit objective—in other words, everything about the trade from start to finish.
The type of analysis you do should lead to a means to determine those three
components of a trade before you ever get into it. For many traders, analyzing price data on a chart—technical analysis—is the solution. The emphasis here is how to understand and apply technical tools without the
syndrome of analysis paralysis—that is, when too many studies are done,
dominating the trader’s time and leading to inaction. It’s true that no one
ever lost money by not trading, but if you are a trader or trying to trade, decisions must be made.
How you proceed with your analysis may depend on your brain. An interesting concept of how the brains of individuals function, whether they
are male or female, comes from research that shows that the left and the
right sides of the brain interpret and process data differently. Determining
which side of your brain is the dominant side may help you understand the
form of market analysis that you might like to use.
The left side of the brain is the logical, methodical reasoning, and rational thinking half. It is the side of the brain that facilitates dealings with
the factual sciences and mathematics. A person who is left-brain dominant
may relate to and place more emphasis and confidence in support and

F

33

34

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: The Art of Charts

resistance levels derived from mathematical formulas such as pivot points
and Fibonacci and technical indicators as well as cold, hard supply/demand
reports or statistical data.
The right side of the brain, according to researchers and doctors, is the
artistic dominating side. If the right side of your brain dominates your
thinking as a technical chart analyst, then you have a strong tendency to remember and recall chart patterns. You may put more confidence in repetitive chart pattern techniques and the ensuing theories of measurement
techniques and methodologies behind these formations. For this kind of
thinker, learning traditional chart patterns and Japanese candlestick formations may evolve to become a reasonable method to interpret and process
data to act on trading decisions.
Chart reading has fascinated traders for hundreds of years, even though
it has never been totally accepted by academics and other market purists.
Using charts to analyze markets and price movement is certainly not an exact
science but, rather, a working form of art that sometimes depends more on
what the eye sees than on a conclusive fact. I believe it is absolutely essential that you develop at least the basic skills in the art of charting price moves
if you want to become an astute trader, even if you are more comfortable
trading based on fundamentals and facts.
There are three main popular charting techniques: bar charts, point-andfigure charts, and candlestick charts. Another technique of charting or
watching price patterns and the behavior of the market is market profiling.
The importance of any type of charting is to help understand where market
prices have been and, based on past historical reactions, to predict where
prices may go in the future.
Determining the trend or direction of prices is one of the main objectives
of chart analysis. Pattern recognition leading up to a chart setup is another
purpose of chart work. The more times you identify the characteristics of a
pattern and the frequency it repeats itself, the more likely you will get the
experience and confidence you need to follow the next similar pattern with
a trading decision. The outcome from doing your work on the charts should
be profits resulting from making the trade. If the pattern fails to produce
the desired results, then you should be able to determine when to cut and
run from the trade to avert a financial disaster.
This chapter covers the basics of bar charts, point-and-figure charting,
and market profiling. Chapter 4 focuses on a more visual method of charting,
candlesticks, and Chapter 5 provides a more extensive explanation of chart
patterns that apply to several types of charts. You’ll also find suggestions in
this chapter on where to access data and where to obtain further educational material and books so you can enhance your trading knowledge in
areas that appeal to you.

35

Bar Charts

BAR CHARTS
Bar charts are the standard means of chart analysis and probably the most
widely used charting form and technique.
The concept of a bar chart is simple. On a graph the horizontal axis represents time, and the vertical axis represents price levels. Within that graph,
a single bar or vertical line will represent the range or the high and low points
that prices reached during a given time period. A small hash line or horizontal mark on the left side of the bar identifies the opening price; another hash
mark or horizontal line on the right side of the bar indicates the closing
price for that time period (Figure 3.1). The time represented by the vertical
bar could be 1 minute, 5 minutes, 60 minutes, a day, a week, a month, or even
a year.
The relationship between the current time frame’s range and the previous time frame’s open, high, low, and close is significant. Here are four classifications of bars that have more significance to analysts:
1. One of the more popular, well-known bars is a key reversal. The bearish

key reversal (Figure 3.2) makes a higher high than the previous time
frame and usually closes below the prior time frame’s close and the
general trend direction. This occurrence is frequently accompanied by
unusually strong volume and indicates the trend is reversing. An S&P
500 index chart shows a good example (Figure 3.3). The exact opposite
occurs for a bullish key reversal in a downtrending market—lower low
than the previous time frame and then a close above the prior time
frame’s close.

High
Open

Close
Low

FIGURE 3.1

The basic bar.

FIGURE 3.2

Key reversal.

36

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: The Art of Charts

Key reversal
down

Short-term trend
is higher

FIGURE 3.3

Shifting into reverse. (Source: Gecko Software, Inc. Reprinted with

permission.)

2. The outside bar (Figure 3.4) occurs when the current range takes out

the previous time frame’s high and low, but the close is consistent with
the current trend. It usually signals the continuation of the market’s
direction.

FIGURE 3.4

Outside bar.

37

Bar Charts

3. The settlement price reversal bar (Figure 3.5) occurs when the bar

moves in the same direction as the previous time frame’s bar—a higher
high and higher low for an uptrending market—but closes lower than
the previous time frame’s settlement price.
4. The inside bar is exactly what it sounds like (Figure 3.6). The current
bar’s high and low are within the previous time frame’s high and low—
that is, the whole current range is within the previous bar’s range. The
close is not considered important by most chartists. What is important is
how the market behaves in the next time frame. A breakout either way of
the inside bar range gives a buy or sell signal, based on the theory that
there is a continued price move in the direction of the breakout.
Figure 3.7 displays all four of the preceding bar examples and shows the ensuing price results.
Of course, one bar usually does not make a chart pattern. However,
training your eyes to quickly spot a bar that may lead to identifying a pattern or formation is what learning chart analysis is all about. Once you see
a formation and study a repetitive result time after time, your confidence
level will increase and, thus, you may be able to pull the trigger quicker to
execute a trade faster.
The analysis of the chart is the same whether each bar represents a
minute, 5 minutes, 12 minutes, 30 minutes, an hour, day, week, or month.
The time frame you choose depends on how close you want to be to the
market and how many trading opportunities you would like to see.

FIGURE 3.5
price reversal.

Settlement

FIGURE 3.6

Inside bar.

38

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: The Art of Charts

March 2003 euro futures

Key reversal
down day

Settlement
reversal day
Inside day

Outside day

FIGURE 3.7

Multiple one-bar signals.

POINT-AND-FIGURE CHARTS
The point-and-figure method of charting has a long history. Author and wellknown technician John Murphy estimates the development of point-andfigure charts goes back to sometime in the 1880s or 1890s, but they have not
been popular with futures traders in recent years.
Point-and-figure charts have one unique difference from other charts:
Time is not a concern; only price action is. The vertical axis represents price,
the same as a bar chart. Instead of bars for a time period on the horizontal
axis, however, the columns on a point-and-figure chart alternate between Xs
for upward price movement and Os for downward price movement, changing from one character to the other when a specified amount of price
movement occurs.
Each box on a point-and-figure chart represents a price unit. If prices are
moving up, an X is placed in a box as each new higher price unit is achieved.
When prices turn lower by a set number of boxes (price units), a new column
of Os begins to the right of the column of Xs, and Os continue to be added
to the bottom of that column as each new lower box (price unit) is reached.
A price reversal equal to one box size may result in the formation of a
new column. A method of smoothing out fluctuations is to only record price
reversals that exceed a set number of boxes. The number of boxes is called

39

Point-and-Figure Charts

the reversal amount, and a new column will not be started until price has
retraced by that amount. Standard plots would usually be stated as something like 10 by 3, that is, 10 points per box with a three-box (30 points) reversal amount. Thus, a new column of Xs or Os would not begin unless the
market reversed by 30 points.
When you update a point-and-figure chart, you’re only concerned with
high and low prices. The closing price is unimportant. You remain in the current column as long as the price action continues in the same direction. If
you are making a column of Xs and the high for the period moves up at least
one more box, then add an X to the column. Of course, if the high is more
than one box higher, then fill in all of the boxes to match that high price. As
long as the market continues to make higher highs, continue filling Xs in the
current column and ignore the lows during the period you are plotting.
If the market does not make a higher high and the low for the session
is not three boxes lower than the highest X (assuming that is your reversal
amount), then there is no update for the chart for that period. In a quiet
market, you may not make a mark on a point-and-figure chart for an extended period of time, whereas you add a bar to a bar chart for every time
period, even when there is minimal price movement.
For more volatile markets such as the stock indexes or bonds, I would
suggest 8 by 3 as parameters, as Figure 3.8, the September 2003 bond futures

September 2003
T-bond futures
(8/32 box size X 3)

FIGURE 3.8

Point-and-figure chart. (Source: eSignal. Reprinted with permission.)

40

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: The Art of Charts

chart, illustrates. Increasing the reversal number will effectively make the
point-and-figure chart less sensitive; decreasing the reversal number will
make it more sensitive to recording price moves.
The important fact to remember is that the price action on a point-andfigure chart may occur over the course of a day, a week, a month, or a year.
The time period is irrelevant for the point-and-figure chartist. I have seen
some floor traders use the point-and-figure method for intraday charts, penciling Xs and Os on the backs of trading cards and on graph paper. For them,
these charts make it easy to see trend lines and breakout points because the
focus is on specific price points.
For a beginning chartist, I would strongly consider starting with bar
charts. Point-and-figure charting needs tweaking or optimizing to determine
the right box size and reversal amounts for each market and for the time
frame and sensitivity that you might want to fit your own trading style. For
those who enjoy a challenge of learning a different charting method, Point &
Figure Charting by Thomas J. Dorsey discusses this type of charting in more
detail.

MARKET PROFILING
Market profiling is a relatively new (1984) and highly sophisticated method
of plotting market action and is a truly unique way of organizing and collecting market-generated time, price, and volume information. This method
converts the data into recognizable structures based on the bell curve and
helps traders decipher and identify where and how buyers and sellers enter
the market.
Market profiling effectively organizes price and time information so that
traders can see which price levels the market accepts or which price areas
the market rejects. Using sophisticated software, market profiling outlines
the market’s assessment of true value, volume analysis by price level and
market participant type, and a long-term overview of the balance and imbalance of buying and selling pressure and its application to long-term and shortterm trading strategies.
The Chicago Board of Trade holds copyrights to the data in the Liquidity Data Bank™ (LDB), which is the basis of its marketprofileSM software.
Using the marketprofile program, time brackets are typically assigned to
each 15-minute period of trading and then cataloged. (The time bracket period was changed from the original 30 minutes to 15 minutes on January 2,
1990.) For example, the “y” bracket may start at 7 a.m. and go to 7:14:59
a.m. A small “y” is placed at each price increment where a trade occurs during the first 15 minutes of trading and identifies the opening range. The

Market Profiling

41

A mini-sized Dow contract chart using marketprofileSM with 30minute time brackets. (Source: eSignal. Reprinted with permission.)

FIGURE 3.9

next time bracket is “z,” from 7:15 a.m. to 7:29:59 a.m., followed by “A” for
7:30 a.m. to 7:44:59 a.m., “B” for 7:45 a.m. to 7:59:59 a.m., and so on. Figure 3.9
shows two marketprofile days for mini-sized Dow futures, but using the 30minute time brackets. As trading action unfolds, you can see where the concentration of prices is taking place and what happens when the market
approaches a higher or lower price plateau.
Retail traders have paid little attention to this technique, but some exchange members and institutional desk traders use this method to develop
a better understanding of market behavior and to find value and trading opportunities. It combines the keys of market analysis—volume and price in
a given period—and analyzes acceptance or rejection of a given price level
as validated by volume.

42

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS: The Art of Charts

While I am on the subject, one reason day traders like intraday charting
periods such as 5, 10, or 15 minutes is because they divide the regular trading
session equally into the same time periods that make up the marketprofile
time brackets on the floor. Even 60-minute charts are just the sum of four
complete 15-minute time brackets. You can use 12, 20, 29, or some other
odd number of minutes, but if the professional traders are not doing that,
then it probably is not a wise decision for you to create some new time
division.
The Chicago Board of Trade offers educational materials on marketprofile. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) also has classes on market profiling as well as on candlesticks and other technical analysis areas.
Dan Gramza is one of the instructors. If you ever have the opportunity to
take a course on trading taught by Gramza, I strongly recommend that you
take it. With all the get-rich-quick, hyped-up fluff being marketed by so-called
experts these days, it is hard to find a class that can impress a 20-year veteran
like myself—you know the expression, “It’s hard to teach old dogs new
tricks.” However, Gramza is more than qualified in market knowledge, and
his demeanor and method of teaching are superb.
For a current schedule of classes and the names of instructors, go to
www.cme.com and click on “education.” In addition to the CME education department, which uses a classroom equipped with unbelievable
state-of-the-art equipment and individual computer workstations for each
student, some data vendors offer marketprofile as a premium service.
CQG (www.cqg.com) and eSignal (www.esignal.com) are among those
companies.

CHAPTER 4

Candle Charts
Lighting the Path

War is such that the supreme consideration is
speed.
—Sun-tzu, The Art of Warfare

any believe that trading is financial warfare. It is either kill or be
killed; the winner is the one who will reap the spoils of war—
namely, financial gain. The futures arena, after all, comprises a
zero-sum game.
It has been stated that, when there is blood in the water, there may be
sharks. In the business of trading, there are many great white sharks lurking in the water. The competition is fierce because this industry attracts the
sharpest minds, highly educated individuals, and men and women of varying degrees of moral scruples.
In this business speed sometimes is the supreme consideration when it
comes to order execution, not only for entering positions but even for exiting the market. Candle charting, in my opinion, can help speed the analytical process and uncover the psychological or emotional makeup of the
market and can give you an edge in seeing the next directional move the
market may make.
Japanese candle charts have been receiving increasing notoriety since
Steve Nison wrote his first book on the subject in 1991, bringing the concept
to the attention of many traders in the West for the first time. I have had the
pleasure of working with Steve in a Webinar for the Chicago Board of Trade
(CBOT) when we did a presentation combining pivot points (discussed in
Chapter 6) and candle charting techniques to help identify market reversals
in the CBOT mini-sized Dow futures contract.

M

43

44

CANDLE CHARTS: Lighting the Path

I also had Steve on my radio show to help shed light on how he first
learned about this advanced and unique method of charting. He explained
that a broker in his office at Merrill Lynch had been receiving a chart
book from Japan, and he became extremely curious about the formations
that the candles made. He took it from there, going to Japan to learn more
about charting and devoting many hours to studying this form of technical analysis.
Candle charting originated in Japan centuries ago. It is a method of looking at data differently than what had been developed in western cultures. The
advantage of using candle charts in place of bar charts is that you can use the
same techniques and analysis as you do on bar charts, and you can enhance
that analysis with the diverse and unique signals that candles generate with
their more sophisticated, graphic style that allows a quick visual analysis of
price action. More and more analysts have turned to candles, so you should
at least become aware of what this three-dimensional approach to charting is
all about.

ANY MARKET, ANY TIME FRAME
Like a bar chart, each time period produces a price bar called a candle. Each
candle has a different characteristic that represents the difference or distance between the high, low, open, and close. Candle charting techniques can
be used on data from whatever time period you choose—minutes, hours,
days, weeks, or months. It lends itself to pattern recognition, trend lines, support and resistance, channel lines, and all the other typical technical analysis
features.
Candle analysis usually is not limited to a single candle but is based on
several bars forming a pattern and on the location of that candle or pattern
within overall market action. First, however, you have to learn how to read
one candle.
The key feature of the candle is the body, the difference between the
open and close prices. Using the conventional way of displaying candles, a
dark body indicates that the closing price was below the opening price (Figure 4.1), and a white or hollow body indicates that the closing price was
higher than the opening price (Figure 4.2). (Note: Some software vendors use
the color red instead of black to designate candles that have a close lower
than the open and the color green instead of white or hollow candles that
have a close higher than the open. Many software programs allow you to adjust these colors and styles yourself. Check with your software provider.)
A single candle does not tell you if the close is higher or lower than the
previous time period, indicating only whether the close is higher or lower
than the open for each candle. The emphasis on the body is based on the belief that the most important price action for the period takes place between
