
1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

125

Under these circumstances, the investor wanting to get his hands
on cash should take his coupon in additional bonds and then immediately sell them. By doing that, he would realize more cash than if
he had taken his coupon directly in cash. Assuming all bonds were
held by rational investors, no one would opt for cash in an era of
5% interest, not even those bondholders needing cash for living
purposes.
If, however, interest rates were 15%, no rational investor
would want his money invested for him at 10%. Instead, the investor would choose to take his coupon in cash, even if his personal
cash needs were nil. The opposite course-reinvestment of the
coupon-would give an investor additional bonds with market
value far less than the cash he could have elected. If he should
want 10% bonds, he can simply take the cash received and buy
them in the market, where they will be available at a large
discount.
An analysis similar to that made by our hypothetical bondholder is appropriate for owners in thinking about whether a company's unrestricted earnings should be retained or paid out. Of
course, the analysis is much more difficult and subject to error because the rate earned on reinvested earnings is not a contractual
figure, as in our bond case, but rather a fluctuating figure. Owners
must guess as to what the rate will average over the intermediate
future. However, once an informed guess is made, the rest of the
analysis is simple: you should wish your earnings to be reinvested if
they can be expected to earn high returns, and you should wish
them paid to you if low returns are the likely outcome of
reinvestment.
Many corporate managers reason very much along these lines
in determining whether subsidiaries should distribute earnings to
their parent company. At that level, the managers have no trouble
thinking like intelligent owners. But payout decisions at the parent
company level often are a different story. Here managers frequently have trouble putting themselves in the shoes of their shareholder-owners.
With this schizoid approach, the CEO of a multi-divisional
company will instruct Subsidiary A, whose earnings on incremental
capital may be expected to average 5%, to distribute all available
earnings in order that they may be invested in Subsidiary B, whose
earnings on incremental capital are expected to be 15 %. The
CEO's business school oath will allow no lesser behavior. But if
his own long-term record with incremental capital is 5%-and

126

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

market rates are lO%-he is likely to impose a dividend policy on
shareholders of the parent company that merely follows some historical or industry-wide payout pattern. Furthermore, he will expect managers of subsidiaries to give him a full account as to why it
makes sense for earnings to be retained in their operations rather
than distributed to the parent-owner. But seldom will he supply
his owners with a similar analysis pertaining to the whole company.
In judging whether managers should retain earnings, shareholders should not simply compare total incremental earnings in
recent years to total incremental capital because that relationship
may be distorted by what is going on in a core business. During an
inflationary period, companies with a core business characterized
by extraordinary economics can use small amounts of incremental
capital in that business at very high rates of return (as was discussed in last year's section on Goodwill).32 But, unless they are
experiencing tremendous unit growth, outstanding businesses by
definition generate large amounts of excess cash. If a company
sinks most of this money in other businesses that earn low returns,
the company's overall return on retained capital may nevertheless
appear excellent because of the extraordinary returns being earned
by the portion of earnings incremental invested in the core business. The situation is analogous to a Pro-Am golf event: even if all
of the amateurs are hopeless duffers, the team's best-ball score will
be respectable because of the dominating skills of the professional.
Many corporations that consistently show good returns both
on equity and on overall incremental capital have, indeed, employed a large portion of their retained earnings on an economically unattractive, even disastrous, basis. Their marvelous core
businesses, however, whose earnings grow year after year, camouflage repeated failures in capital allocation elsewhere (usually involving high-priced acquisition of businesses that have inherently
mediocre economics). The managers at fault periodically report on
the lesson they have learned from the latest disappointment. They
then usually seek out future lessons. (Failure seems to go to their
heads.)
In such cases, shareholders would be far better off if earnings
were retained only to expand the high-return business, with the
balance paid in dividends or used to repurchase stock (an action
that increases the owners' interest in the exceptional business while
sparing them participation in subpar businesses). Managers of
32

[See the essay Economic Goodwill Versus Accounting Goodwill in Part V.c.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

127

high-return businesses who consistently employ much of the cash
thrown off by those businesses in other ventures with low returns
should be held to account for those allocation decisions, regardless
of how profitable the overall enterprise is.
Nothing in this discussion is intended to argue for dividends
that bounce around from quarter to quarter with each wiggle in
earnings or in investment opportunities. Shareholders of public
corporations understandably prefer that dividends be consistent
and predictable. Payments, therefore, should reflect long-term expectations for both earnings and returns on incremental capital.
Since the long-term corporate outlook changes only infrequently,
dividend patterns should change no more often. But over time distributable earnings that have been withheld by managers should
earn their keep. If earnings have been unwisely retained, it is
likely that managers, too, have been unwisely retained.
D.

Stock Splits and Trading Activity?>3

We often are asked why Berkshire does not split its stock. The
assumption behind this question usually appears to be that a split
would be a pro-shareholder action. We disagree. Let me tell you
why.
One of our goals is to have Berkshire Hathaway stock sell at a
price rationally related to its intrinsic business value. (But note
"rationally related," not "identical": if well-regarded companies
are generally selling in the market at large discounts from value,
Berkshire might well be priced similarly.) The key to a rational
stock price is rational shareholders, both current and prospective.
If the holders of a company's stock and/or the prospective
buyers attracted to it are prone to make irrational or emotionbased decisions, some pretty silly stock prices are going to appear
periodically. Manic-depressive personalities produce manic-depressive valuations. Such aberrations may help us in buying and
selling the stocks of other companies. But we think it is in both
your interest and ours to minimize their occurrence in the market
for Berkshire.
To obtain only high quality shareholders is no cinch. Mrs. Astor could select her 400, but anyone can buy any stock. Entering
members of a shareholder "club" cannot be screened for intellectual capacity, emotional stability, moral sensitivity or acceptable
33

[1983.]

128

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

dress. Shareholder eugenics, therefore, might appear to be a hopeless undertaking.
In large part, however, we feel that high quality ownership can
be attracted and maintained if we consistently communicate our
business and ownership philosophy-along with no other conflicting messages-and then let self selection follow its course. For example, self selection will draw a far different crowd to a musical
event advertised as an opera than one advertised as a rock concert-even though anyone can buy a ticket to either.
Through our policies and communications-our "advertisements"-we try to attract investors who will understand our operations, attitudes and expectations. (And, fully as important, we try
to dissuade those who won't.) We want those who think of themselves as business owners and invest in companies with the intention of staying a long time. And, we want those who keep their
eyes focused on business results, not market prices.
Investors possessing those characteristics are in a small minority, but we have an exceptional collection of them. I believe well
over 90%-probably over 95%-of our shares are held by those
who were shareholders of Berkshire or Blue Chip five years ago.
And I would guess that over 95% of our shares are held by investors for whom the holding is at least double the size of their next
largest. Among companies with at least several thousand public
shareholders and more than $1 billion of market value, we are almost certainly the leader in the degree to which our shareholders
think and act like owners. Upgrading a shareholder group that
possesses these characteristics is not easy.
Were we to split the stock or take other actions focusing on
stock price rather than business value, we would attract an entering
class of buyers inferior to the exiting class of sellers. At $1300,
there are very few investors who can't afford a Berkshire share.
Would a potential one-share purchaser be better off if we split 100
for 1 so he could buy 100 shares? Those who think so and who
would buy the stock because of the split or in anticipation of one
would definitely downgrade the quality of our present shareholder
group. (Could we really improve our shareholder group by trading
some of our present dear-thinking members for impressionable
new ones who, preferring paper to value, feel wealthier with nine
$10 bills than with one $100 bill?) People who buy for non-value
reasons are likely to sell for non-value reasons. Their presence in
the picture will accentuate erratic price swings unrelated to underlying business developments.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

129

We will try to avoid policies that attract buyers with a shortterm focus on our stock price and try to allow policies that attract
informed long-term investors focusing on business values. Just as
you purchased your Berkshire shares in a market populated by rational informed investors, you deserve a chance to sell-should you
ever want to-in the same kind of market. We will work to keep it
in existence.
One of the ironies of the stock market is the emphasis on activity. Brokers, using terms such as "marketability" and "liquidity", sing the praises of companies with high share turnover (those
who cannot fill your pocket will confidently fill your ear). But investors should understand that what is good for the croupier is not
good for the customer. A hyperactive stock market is the pickpocket of enterprise.
For example, consider a typical company earning, say, 12% on
equity. Assume a very high turnover rate in its shares of 100% per
year. If a purchase and sale of the stock trades at book value, the
owners of our hypothetical company will pay, in aggregate, 2% of
the company's net worth annually for the privilege of transferring
ownership. This activity does nothing for the earnings of the business, and means that 1/6 of them are lost to the owners through the
"frictional" cost of transfer. (And this calculation does not count
option trading, which would increase frictional costs still further.)
All that makes for a rather expensive game of musical chairs.
Can you imagine the agonized cry that would arise if a governmental unit were to impose a new 162/3% tax on earnings of corporations or investors? By market activity, investors can impose upon
themselves the equivalent of such a tax.
Days when the market trades 100 million shares (and that kind
of volume, when over-the-counter trading is included, is today abnormally low) are a curse for owners, not a blessing-for they
mean that owners are paying twice as much to change chairs as
they are on a SO-million-share day. If 100-million-share days persist for a year and the average cost on each purchase and sale is 1S¢
a share, the chair-changing tax for investors in aggregate would total about $7.5 billion-an amount roughly equal to the combined
1982 profits of Exxon, General Motors, Mobil and Texaco, the four
largest companies in the Fortune 500.
These companies had a combined net worth of $75 billion at
yearend 1982 and accounted for over 12% of both net worth and
net income of the entire Fortune 500 list. Under our assumption
investors, in aggregate, every year forfeit all earnings from this

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

130

[Vol. 19:1

