
For investors only: Momentum-research
systems
Many day traders rely on different research systems to help them identify buy
and sell opportunities in the course of a trading day. These systems usually
don’t work for an investor, simply because investors are less concerned about
short-term movements. They wouldn’t see the value in systems that scan the
market and identify short-term price discrepancies, for example.
However, many investors use their own research services to help identify
good buy and sell opportunities. Two of the more popular ones are Value
Line and the William O’Neil charts.

Value Line
Value Line (www.valueline.com) is one of the oldest investment-research
services. The company’s analysts combine price and trading volume information on stocks with financial data. The numbers are crunched through a
proprietary model to generate two rankings: a stock’s timeliness and its safety.
The higher the stock is on the timeliness ranking, the better it is to buy or hold
it now. Historically, Value Line’s most timely stocks have outperformed the

291

292 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Dow Jones Industrial Average and the S&P 500, so people are willing to pay for
access to the company’s data. In addition, many libraries subscribe to Value
Line’s print service or online database, so you may be able to get access that
way. (Hey, one of the advantages of being an investor is that you have the time
to go to the library to look something up, a marvel to a day trader who’s too
busy to go and get even a cup of coffee.)
Value Line as a company has had some problems, most notably with fraud
related to its mutual-fund business, but the charting system was not part of
those charges.

William O’Neil
William O’Neil (www.williamoneil.com) started a company to distribute his
technical-analysis system on stocks and the stock market, started a newspaper
called Investor’s Business Daily, and wrote a book called How to Make Money in
Stocks (see the appendix for more information about it). The company’s data
services are available only to large institutional investors, such as mutual-fund
and insurance companies, but between the book and the newspaper, individual
investors can learn a lot about identifying momentum to pick good times to
buy or sell a stock.
Many traders — in all securities, not just stocks — find Investor’s Business
Daily to be at least as useful as The Wall Street Journal, because it looks at the
markets from a short-term trading perspective more than from a long-term,
business-management angle.
The company’s ranking system is based on what it calls CAN SLIM, which is
a mnemonic for a list of criteria that a good stock should meet. Note that this
system combines both fundamental and technical indicators:
✓ Current quarterly earnings should be up 25 percent from a year ago.
✓ Annual earnings should be up 25 percent from a year ago.
✓ New products or services should be driving earnings growth, not acquisitions or changes in accounting.
✓ Supply and demand, meaning the number of shares being purchased
each day, is going up.
✓ Leader or laggard? The stock is a leading company in a leading industry
and therefore in the best position to do well.
✓ Institutional sponsorship is in place, meaning that the stock is becoming
more popular with mutual funds, pension funds, and other large
shareowners.
✓ Market indexes, such as the Dow, the NASDAQ, and the S&P 500, should
all be up.

Chapter 17: Day Trading for Investors
Of course, not too many stocks out there meet all the CAN SLIM criteria, but
the indicators can give an investor a way of thinking about better times to
buy (when more criteria are met) or sell (when fewer are being met).
The most serious momentum investors tend to be swing traders, who hold
positions for a few weeks or months. Longer-term investors often rely on some
momentum signals, though, such as those on the CAN SLIM list, to help them
identify good times to buy a stock that has been languishing.

When an Investor Considers Trading
Many day traders are also long-term investors. Sure, they trade for the short
term, but they regularly take some of their profits and put them toward
investments that have a longer time frame. It’s smart risk management for a
business that has a high wash-out rate. After all, even a short-term trader has
long-term goals.
But does it ever make sense for a long-term investor to take up short-term
trading? It may, for three reasons: The idea proves itself to be short-term,
the research shows short-term trading patterns that may be profitable, and
fundamental analysis supports short selling (which usually has a shorter
time horizon than a buy would to an investor). The following sections explain
these reasons in more detail.
Don’t try riskier trading strategies unless your portfolio can handle the risk.
As with full-time day trading, engage in part-time and occasional trading strategies only with risk capital, money that you can afford to lose. Money needed
to pay the mortgage this month or pay for retirement in 30 years is not risk
capital.

The idea has a short shelf life
Certain circumstances turn every long-term investor into a trader once or
twice: He buys a security intending to hold it forever, and within a few days
or weeks, some really bad news comes out. Or he buys only to see two days
later that the company is being sold. That great long-term buy-and-hold idea
no longer fits the original parameters, so it’s time to sell. Despite the goal of
holding forever, the investor decides to get out and move on, even if it’s only
a day later.

293

294 Part III: Necessities and Niceties for Successful Day Trading
Your research shows you some
trading opportunities
Good investors monitor their holdings, and some become intimate with the
nuances of a security’s short-term price movements even though the objective is to hold the position for the long term. An investor who gets a feel for
the trading patterns of a specific holding may want to turn that into swingtrading and day-trading opportunities. Yes, doing so adds risk to the portfolio
(and the risks of day trading are covered extensively throughout this book),
but it can also increase return.
For example, suppose that an investor who is fascinated with technology
stocks notices that the stocks always rise in price right before big industry
conferences and then fall when the conference is over. She may not want to
change any of her portfolio holdings based on this observation, but she may
want a way to profit. So she buys call options on big technology companies
before the conference and then sells them on the meeting’s first day. That
short-term trade allows her to capture benefits of the price run-up without
affecting her portfolio position.

You see some great short opportunities
Short selling allows a trader to profit from a decline in the price of a security.
The trader enters the order, which automatically arranges the loan of a security from the broker followed by a sale in the market. The trader then waits in
hopes that the price will go down. When it does, the trader buys the security
back at the lower price and repays the loan, keeping the difference between
the purchase price and the sale price.
Because the broker charges interest on the loaned securities, short selling
can get expensive. Traders who sell short are usually looking for a relatively
short-term profit, not necessarily over a single day but over months rather
than years.
In addition to the interest, short selling faces another risk, which is that the
security can go up in price while the trader is waiting for it to go down. To
reduce that risk, most short sellers do careful research to make sure that
they’re right about the security being all wrong. And who else does careful
research? Many long-term investors.
For the investor who loves to do research and has some appetite for risk,
short selling is a way to make money from securities that would make terrible long-term holdings because it seems obvious that they aren’t going to
do well. When these investors come across securities that are headed for
trouble, they can short them in the hope of making a nice short-term profit.

Part IV

The Part of Tens

For a list of ten alternatives to day trading, check out www.dummies.com/
extras/daytrading.

In this part…
✓ Discover ten good reasons to day trade and ten good reasons
to avoid day trading. It’s not for everyone, and if you realize that
it isn’t for you, you can save yourself a lot of money and
headaches.
✓ Find out about ten common day-trading mistakes so you don’t
make them.
✓ Consider ten different money-management techniques and find
one that works for you.
✓ But wait, there’s more! Explore the appendix at the end of this
part for lots of resources to help you get started in trading.

Chapter 18

Ten Good Reasons to Day Trade
In This Chapter
▶ Getting ready to be your own boss
▶ Loving the investing business
▶ Figuring out what to expect from the markets
▶ Understanding the importance of financial and personal support systems

D

ay trading is a great career option for the right person in the right
circumstances. It requires a strong, decisive personality who wants to
be running the show every step of the way. And because those profits aren’t
steady, good day traders have some financial cushion and good personal
support systems to get them through the tough times. In this chapter, I list
ten really good reasons to take up day trading. (For balance, I cover ten bad
reasons in Chapter 19.) Think you have what it takes? See how many of these
characteristics fit your life right now.

You Love Being Independent
Day trading is like owning any small business. You’re the boss and you call
the shots. Each day’s successes — and failures — are due to you and you
alone. The market is irrelevant because you can’t control it. Working by
yourself all day, you’re responsible for everything from the temperature in
the office to the functioning of the computers to the accounting for trades.
Good day traders are independent. They don’t want someone to tell them
what to do; they want to figure it out for themselves. They love a challenge,
whether it’s finding a good bargain on office supplies or developing a
profitable way to arbitrage currency prices.
If you would like to work for yourself and control your own destiny, keep
reading. Day trading may be for you.

298 Part IV: The Part of Tens
You Want to Work Anywhere You Like
As a day trader, you have the luxury of setting up shop wherever you please.
All you need is an account with an online brokerage firm and high-speed
Internet access. You don’t even need a computer if you have a smart phone.
Nowadays you can find these tools almost anywhere: at home, at the library,
in a bar, in a big city, in a small town, in the mountains, or in another country.
Day trading offers a lot of geographic flexibility, which few other businesses
do. You can trade while traveling as easily as you would trade at home —
especially as mobile service improves.

You’re Comfortable with Technology
The financial-services industry was one of the first to embrace computer
technology in a big way, back in the 1960s, and it is still a technologyintensive industry. The people in colored cotton jackets running around
the exchange floor, waving their hands and yelling at each other, are
anachronisms.
Day traders use software to develop and refine their trading strategies.
They trade online using programs to monitor and automate their trades.
They track their trades in spreadsheets and other software. They spend
their days in front of a screen, communicating online with other traders all
over the world. They interact with computers, not human beings, during
the trading day.
Day traders are also self-employed, and many work from home. That means
that if their software crashes, they have to fix it. They have to handle the
upgrades, install the firewalls, and back up the data. Sure, you can pay
someone to do these tasks, but the tech consultant probably won’t be able
to drop everything to get you up and trading again immediately. Hence, good
day traders are comfortable with technology. If you like to mess around with
programs, don’t mind maintaining your computer, and understand how to set
up your hardware for maximum efficiency, you’re in good shape for day
trading. (Chapter 12 has some more on this, too.)

You Want to Eat What You Kill
You don’t have to be a self-employed day trader to trade securities.
Brokerage firms, hedge funds, and exchange traders employ people to trade

Chapter 18: Ten Good Reasons to Day Trade
for them. In fact, most securities trading takes place through such larger
organizations. But maybe you don’t want to share your profits with someone
else. Maybe you don’t want someone dictating your strategy, placing limits
on your trades, or determining your bonus based as much on factors such as
teamwork and firm profitability as on what you brought in. You want to “eat
what you kill,” as they say, and day trading is one way you can do that.
When you day trade, you’re responsible for your profits and your losses.
That means that you reap the rewards and you don’t have to share them
with anyone else. It’s a powerful incentive for independent people.

You Love the Markets
Good day traders have always been fascinated with the markets and how
they move. If you watch CNBC for fun and have been following the securities
business for years, no matter what your day jobs have been, then you may
be a good candidate for day trading. Of course, I hope you’ve picked up more
than “some people make a lot of money doing this!” A lengthy immersion
in the cycles and systems that drive securities prices can help you develop
trading strategies and know what you are up against.
And the markets are amazing, aren’t they? All the buyers and sellers with
all their different needs come together and find the price that gets the deal
done. The prices assimilate all kinds of information about the state of the
world, the desires of the people trading, and the future expectations for the
economy. It’s capitalism in its purest form, and watching how it works is
almost magical. If you love how the markets work and want to learn first-hand
what they tell you about making money, then by all means keep reading.

You Have Market Experience
If you have never opened an account with a brokerage firm, purchased a
stock, or invested in a mutual fund, you may not be suited for day trading. It’s
not that those activities alone are adequate preparation for day trading, but
they’re a start. They can help you understand all that can happen to cause
you to make or lose money.
If you haven’t made any trades before, don’t quit your day job to day trade.
Instead, flip back to Chapter 17 for some ideas on how you can use short-term
trading in an investment portfolio. That way, you can learn more and build up
your savings before taking the plunge.

299

300 Part IV: The Part of Tens
You’ve Studied Trading Systems and
Know What Works for You
Much of the work of day trading takes place long before entering the buy or
sell order. You have to define your trading system, see how it would have
worked in the past, and test it to see how it works now. The preparatory work
isn’t as exciting as actually doing the day trading, because you aren’t making
real money, but you’re not losing money, either.
Short-term trading has a huge potential for loss, and many traders are
chasing the exact same ideas. The more you know about how your strategy
works in different market conditions, the better prepared you will be to act
appropriately and profitably.
It can take a long time to find a strategy that works enough of the time to
make it worth your while. Many day traders spend months developing,
testing, and refining their day-trading strategy. You can read more about
the process of strategy testing in Chapter 16.
Because backtesting (which lets you test your trading strategy) uses historic
prices, you can do much of the work on the side, at night, and on weekends,
before you start day trading full time. It’s a good way to get prepared for your
trading business while you save your money and make other preparations for
your new day-trading venture.

You Are Decisive and Persistent
Short-term traders don’t have the luxury of thinking too much about what
they’re doing. Trading has to become intuitive. They have to be able to act
on what they see when they see it. There’s no room for second guessing, for
hesitation, for choking, or for panic attacks.
Good day traders are also persistent. After they find a strategy they trust,
they stick with it no matter how things are going. That’s how they’re able
to buy low and sell high.
Even great traders go through bad periods, but if they trust their system and
continue to stick with it, they usually pull out of the bad period, often with
money ahead. If you’ve been able to stick it out when things went wrong other
times in your life, you know what to expect when day trading.

Chapter 18: Ten Good Reasons to Day Trade

You Can Afford to Lose Money
Obviously, you want to make money. That’s the whole idea of day trading. But
day trading is difficult. Most traders quit in the first year. Some can’t take the
stress, some lose all their money, and some simply don’t make enough money
to make it worth their time.
Like any small business, you’re taking a risk when you set up shop as a day
trader. That risk is easier if you can afford to lose money. I’m not saying you
need to have so much money that you won’t miss it when it’s gone, but you
shouldn’t be day trading with money you need to live on, any more than you
would open a store or start a law practice with money you need to buy
groceries and pay the mortgage.
If your household does not have a second source of income, be sure to set
aside enough money to cover your living expenses while you get started. And
you should keep a second pot of money, your walk-away fund (see Chapter
14), so that you’re free to quit day trading and move on to your next
adventure if you decide it’s not for you.
It’s especially important to have a financial cushion when you’re day trading
for the following reasons:
✓ You can afford to commit to your trading: Having your living expenses
covered, at least at first, isn’t just about dealing with losses. It’s also
about being able to stick with your trading. If you need cash to pay your
bills, you may be tempted to take money out of the market whenever
you’re doing well. Doing so may keep you from reinvesting your profits.
Plus, by not sticking to your strategy, your trading capital won’t grow as
fast. Think of day trading as a way to build a long-term asset, not a way
to generate a steady stream of current income.
✓ You can stay in the market through the rough times: You know the
old saw that the best way to make money is to buy low and sell high,
right? Well, this means that the best time to buy is usually when securities prices have been beaten up and you’ve lost a lot of money. If you
can afford some losses, staying in the game will be easier. Plus, you’ll be
able to stick to your strategy so that you can profit big when the market
finally turns.
✓ You can better handle the stress of losses: Not all your trades are going
to work out. Some days, you’re going to lose money. If you have enough
money that you don’t fear loss, you can make better decisions. And
you’re less likely to panic if you know that you’ll still be able to eat, pay

301

302 Part IV: The Part of Tens
your electric bill, and have a roof to sleep under at night. With sufficient
funds, you’re better able to view the markets clearly and follow a
winning strategy.
Trading is very much a game of psychology. Give yourself an edge by waiting
to do it until you can afford to.

You Have a Support System
Trading is stressful. The markets gyrate from events that no one can foresee.
Things just happen, and no one else who’s trading cares how these events
affect you. It’s enough to make you crazy some days, and unfortunately, some
traders do get crazy. Alcoholism, depression, divorce, and suicide seem to be
occupational hazards for those traders who have trouble separating what’s
happening in the market with who they are as people.
The securities markets are wonderful mechanisms for bringing together
diverse buyers and sellers. They are not wonderful for propping up your ego,
helping you through a rough time in your life, or slipping you a little extra
money when you most need it. The markets are not human. They are ruthless
machines designed to generate the best price for the aggregate of the buyers
and sellers participating that day. Some days, the markets will be in your favor,
and some days, they will go against you.
Good day traders are psychologically strong. They understand how their
weaknesses come out when they are stressed. They have people (good
friends and supportive families) and activities (from exercise routines to
hobbies) that help give their brains a break from trading.
Chapter 14 talks about managing the stress of day trading, and in many ways,
I think it’s the most important chapter in this book.

Chapter 19

Ten or So Good Reasons to Avoid
Day Trading
In This Chapter
▶ Considering other ways to invest that suit you better
▶ Taking into account your personality and preferences
▶ Recognizing the hard work that successful day trading requires
▶ Putting a damper on unrealistic expectations

D

ay trading isn’t right for everyone. In fact, it’s a bad idea for most
people. It requires a strong personality, someone who can face the gyrations of the markets day in and day out. And it also requires someone with
enough attention to detail to run a business. It’s a great career option for
the right person in the right circumstances. But for people who have trouble
keeping cool or who don’t have the patience to learn how to trade, and for
anyone who has a gambling problem, day trading can be a quick road to ruin.
In this chapter, I list eleven signs that may indicate day trading isn’t right for
you right now. Take these signs seriously. Most day traders lose money, in
part because a lot of people who aren’t cut out for day trading try it anyway.

You Want to Learn Investing
by Day Trading
Many people want to manage their own investments. Although doing so is
certainly possible, you first need to take the time to learn about the basics of
finance, such as the relationship between risk and return, proper diversification, and time horizons that are appropriate to your situation. In fact, there’s a
great book called Investing For Dummies, by Eric Tyson (Wiley), that can help.
