thus, the trader does not have to find a specific buyer or seller in order to initiate or liquidate a
position.
2. Liquidity —All of the major futures markets provide excellent liquidity.
3. Ease of going short—The futures markets allow equal ease of going short as well as long. For
example, the short seller in the stock market (who is actually borrowing stock to sell) must wait for
an uptick, before initiating a position; no such restriction exists in the futures markets.
4. Leverage—The futures markets offer tremendous leverage. Roughly speaking, initial margin
requirements are usually equal to 5 to 10 per cent of the contract value. (The use of the term margin
in the futures market is unfortunate because it leads to tremendous confusion with the concept of
margins in stocks. In the futures markets, margins do not imply partial payments, since no actual
physical transaction occurs until the expiration date; rather, margins are basically good-faith
deposits.) Although high leverage is one of the attributes of futures markets for traders, it should be
emphasized that leverage is a two-edged sword. The undisciplined use of leverage is the single
most important reason why most traders lose money in the futures markets. In general, futures
prices are no more volatile than the underlying cash prices or, for that matter, many stocks. The
high-risk reputation of futures is largely a consequence of the leverage factor.
5. Low transaction costs—Futures markets provide very low transaction costs. For example, it is
10

far less expensive for a stock portfolio manager to reduce market exposure by selling the equivalent
dollar amount of stock index futures contracts than by selling individual stocks.
6. Ease of offset—A futures position can be offset at any time during market hours, providing
prices are not locked at limit-up or limitdown. (Some futures markets specify daily maximum price
changes. In cases in which free market forces would normally seek an equilibrium price outside the
range of boundaries implied by price limits, the market will simply move to the limit and virtually
cease to trade.)
7. Guaranteed by exchange—The futures trader does not have to be concerned about the financial
stability of the person on the other side of the trade. All futures transactions are guaranteed by the
clearinghouse of the exchange.
Since by their very structure, futures are closely tied to their underlying markets (the activity of
arbitrageurs assures that deviations are relatively minor and short lived), price moves in futures will
very closely parallel those in the corresponding cash markets. Keeping in mind that the majority of
futures trading activity is concentrated in financial instruments, many futures traders are, in reality,
traders in stocks, bonds, and currencies. In this context, the comments of futures traders
interviewed in the following chapters have direct relevance even to investors who have never
ventured beyond stocks and bonds.

The Interbank Currency Market Defined
The interbank currency market is a twenty-four-hour market which literally follows the sun around
the world, moving from banking centers in the U.S. to Australia, to the Far East, to Europe, and
finally back to the U.S. The market exists to fill the need of companies to hedge exchange risk in a
world of rapidly fluctuating currency values. For example, if a Japanese electronics manufacturer
negotiates an export sale of stereo equipment to the U.S. with payment in dollars to be received six
months hence, that manufacturer is vulnerable to a depreciation of the dollar versus the yen during
the interim. If the manufacturer wants to assure a fixed price in the local currency (yen) in order to
lock in a profit, he can hedge himself by selling the equivalent amount of U.S. dollars in the
interbank market for the anticipated date of payment. The banks will quote the manufacturer an
exchange rate for the precise amount required, for the specific future date.
Speculators trade in the interbank currency market in an effort to profit from their expectations
regarding shifts in exchange rates. For example, a speculator who anticipated a decline in the
British pound against the dollar would simply sell forward British pounds. (All transactions in the
interbank market are denominated in U.S. dollars.) A speculator who expected the British pound to
decline versus the Japanese yen would buy a specific dollar amount of Japanese yen and sell an
equivalent dollar amount of British pounds.

11

Michael Marcus - Blighting Never Strikes Twice
Michael Marcus began his career as a commodity research analyst for a major brokerage house. His
near-compulsive attraction to trading led him to abandon his salaried position to pursue full-time
trading. After a brief, almost comical, stint as a floor trader, he went to work for Commodities
Corporation, a firm that hired professional traders to trade the company's own funds. Marcus
became one of their most successful traders. In a number of years, his profits exceeded the
combined total profit of all the other traders. Over a ten-year period, he multiplied his company
account by an incredible 2,500-fold!
I first met Marcus the day I joined Reynolds Securities as a futures research analyst. Marcus had
accepted a similar job at a competing firm, and I was assuming the position he had just vacated. In
those early years in both our careers, we met regularly. Although I usually found my own analysis
more persuasive when we disagreed, Marcus ultimately proved right about the direction of the
market. Eventually, Marcus accepted a job as a trader, became very successful, and moved out to
the West Coast.
When I first conceived the idea for this book, Marcus was high on my list of interview candidates.
Marcus' initial response to my request was agreeable, but not firm. Several weeks later, he declined,
as his desire to maintain anonymity dominated his natural inclination to participate Ь an endeavor
he found appealing. (Marcus knew and respected many of the other traders I was interviewing.) I
was very disappointed because Marcus is one of the finest traders I have been privileged to know.
Fortunately, some additional persuasion by a mutual friend helped change his mind.
When I met Marcus for this interview, it had been seven years since we had last seen each other.
The interview was conducted in Marcus' home, a two-house complex set on a cliff overlooking a
private beach in Southern California. You enter the complex through a massive gate ("amazing
gate" as described by an assistant who provided me with driving directions) that would probably
have a good chance of holding up through a panzer division attack.
On first greeting, Marcus seemed aloof, almost withdrawn. This quiet side of Marcus' personality
makes his description of his short-lived attempt to be a floor trader particularly striking. He became
animated, however, as soon as he began talking about his trading experiences. Our conversation
focused on his early "roller coaster" years, which he considered to be the most interesting of his
career.
How did you first get interested in trading futures?
I was something of a scholar. In 1969, I graduated from Johns Hopkins, Phi Beta Kappa, near the
top of my class. I had a Ph.D. fellowship in psychology at Clark University, and fully expected to
live the life of a professor. Through a mutual friend, I met this fellow named John, who claimed he
could double my money every two weeks, like clockwork. That sounded very appealing [he
laughs]. I don't think I even asked John how he could do it. It was such an attractive idea that I
didn't want to spoil things by finding out too many facts. I was afraid I would get cold feet.
Weren't you skeptical? Didn't he sound too much like a used car salesman?
No, I had never invested in anything, and I was very naive. I hired John, who was a junior at my
school, to be my commodity trading advisor at $30 a week. Occasionally, I threw in free potato
chips and soda. He had a theory that you could subsist on that diet.
That's all you paid him? Weren't there any profit incentives—extra potato chips if he did
well?
No.
How much money did you allot for trading?
About $1,000 that I had saved up.
Then what happened?
My first trip to a brokerage house was very, very exciting. I got dressed up, putting on my only suit,
and we went to the Reynolds Securities office in Baltimore. It was a big, posh office, suggesting a
lot of old money. There was mahogany all over the place and a hushed, reverential tone permeated
the office. It was all very impressive.
12

The focal point was a big commodity board at the front of the office, the kind that clicked the oldfashioned way. It was really exciting to hear the click, click, click. They had a gallery from which
the traders could watch the board, but it was so far away that we had to use binoculars to see the
prices. That was also very exciting, because it was just like watching a horse race.
My first realization that things might become a little scary was when a voice came over the
loudspeaker recommending the purchase of soybean meal. I looked at John, expecting to see an
expression of confidence and assurance on his face. Instead, he looked at me and asked, "Do you
think we should do it?" [he laughs]. It quickly dawned on me that John didn't know anything at all.
I remember soybean meal was trading quietly: 78.30,78.40,78.30, 78.40. We put the order in, and
as soon as we got the confirmation back, almost mystically, the prices started clicking down. As
soon as it knew that I was in, the market took that as a signal to start descending. I guess I had good
instincts even then, because I immediately said to John, "We're not doing too well, let's get out!"
We lost about $100 on that trade.
The next trade was in corn, and the same thing happened. John asked me whether we should do the
trade. I said, "Well all right, let's try com." The outcome was the same.
Did you know anything at all about what you were doing? Had you read anything about
commodities or trading?
No, nothing.
Did you even know the contract sizes?
No, we didn't.
Did you know how much it was costing you per tick?
Yes.
Apparently, that was about the only thing you knew.
Right. Our next trade, in wheat, didn't work either. After that, we went back to corn and that trade
worked out better, it took us three days to lose our money. We were measuring success by the
number of days it took us to lose.
Were you always getting out after about a $100 loss?
Yes, although one trade lost almost $200.1 was down to about $500 when John came up with an
idea that was "going to save the day." We would buy August pork bellies and sell February pork
bellies because the spread was wider than the carrying charges [the total cost of taking delivery in
August, storing, and redelivering in February]. He said we couldn't lose on that trade.
I vaguely understood the idea and agreed to the trade. That was the first time we decided to go out
to lunch. All the other times we had been too busy scrutinizing the board, but we thought this was a
"can't lose" trade, so it was safe to leave. By the time we came back, I was just about wiped out. I
remember this feeling of shock, dismay, and incredulity.
I will never forget the image of John—he was a very portly guy with thick, opaque glasses—going
up to the quote board, pounding and shaking his fist at it, and shouting, "Doesn't anyone want to
make a guaranteed profit!" Later on, I learned that August pork bellies were not deliverable against
the February contract. The logic of the trade was flawed in the first place.
Had John ever traded before?
No.
So where did he come up with this story about doubling your money every two weeks?
I don't know, but after that trade, I was wiped out. So I told John that, in light of what happened, I
thought I knew as much as he did—which was nothing—and that I was going to fire him. No more
potato chips; no more diet soda. I'll never forget his response. He told me, "You are making the
greatest mistake of your life!" I asked him what he was going to do. He said, "I am going to
Bermuda to wash dishes to make a trading stake. Then I am going to become a millionaire and
retire." The thing that amused me was that he didn't say, "I'm going to Bermuda and take a job to
make a trading stake." He was very specific; he was going to wash dishes to get his trading stake.
What eventually happened to John?
13

To this day, I have no idea. For all I know, he might oe living in Bermuda as a millionaire because
he washed dishes.
After that, I managed to rustle up another $500 and placed a few silver trades. I wiped out that
stake as well. My first eight trades, five with John and three on my own, were all losers.
Did the thought ever enter your mind that maybe trading was not for you?
No. I had always done well at school, so I figured it was just a question of getting the knack of it.
My father, who died when I was fifteen, had left $3,000 in life insurance, which I decided to cash
in, despite my mother's objections.
But I knew I really needed to learn something before trading again. I read Chester Keltner's books
on wheat and soybeans, and I also subscribed to his market letter, which made trading
recommendations. I followed the first recommendation, which was to buy wheat, and it worked. I
think I made 4 cents per bushel [$200] on that trade. It was my first win and very exciting.
Then between letters, the market fell back to my original buying price, so I bought it again and
made another profit on my own. I felt I was beginning to develop a sense for trading. Even in the
beginning, I liked the feeling of doing things on my own. What happened next was just sheer luck.
I bought three contracts of December corn in the summer of 1970, based on a Keltner
recommendation. That was the summer that blight devastated the corn crop.
Was that your first big win?
Yes, that trade combined with buying some more com, wheat, and soybeans, partly on
recommendations in the letter, and partly on my own intuition. When that glorious summer was
over, I had accumulated $30,000, a princely sum to me, having come from a middle class family. I
thought it was the best thing in the world.
How did you decide when to take profits?
I took some on the way up and some when the markets started coming down. Overall, I cashed in
very well.
So instinctively, you were doing the right thing even then?
Yes. Then that fall I attended graduate school in Worcester, Massachusetts, but I found that I didn't
want to think about my thesis. Instead of going to class, I would often sneak down to the Paine
Webber office in Worcester to trade.
I was having a great time. I made a little money, not a lot. I was shocked to find myself cutting
classes frequently, since I had been a dedicated scholar at Johns Hopkins. I realized that the
handwriting was on the wall, and in December 19701 dropped out of school and moved to New
York. I stayed at the Y for a while. When people asked me what I did, I rather pompously told them
that I was a speculator. It had a nice ring to it.
In the spring of 1971, the grains started getting interesting again. There was a theory around that
the blight had wintered over—that is, it had survived the winter and was going to attack the corn
crop again. I decided I would be really positioned for the blight this time.
Was this Keltner's theory, or just a market rumor?
I think Keltner believed it too. I borrowed $20,000 from my mother, added it to my $30,000, and
bet everything on the blight. I bought the maximum number of corn and wheat contracts possible
for $50,000 in margin. Initially, the markets held steady because there was enough fear of the blight
to keep prices up. I wasn't making money, but I wasn't losing it either. Then one day—I will never
forget this—there was an article in the Wall Street Journal with the headline: "More Blight on the
Floor of the Chicago Board of Trade Than in Midwest Cornfields" [he laughs]. The corn market
opened sharply lower and fairly quickly went limit-down.
[hi many futures markets, the maximum daily price change is restricted by a specified limit. Limitdown refers to a decline of this magnitude, while limit-up refers to an equivalent gain. If, as in this
case, the equilibrium price that would result from the interaction of free market forces lies below
the limit-down price, then the market will lock limit-down [i.e., trading will virtually cease.
Reason: there will be an abundance of sellers, but virtually no willing buyers at the restricted limitdown price.]
14

Were you watching the market collapse?
Yes, I was in the brokerage office, watching the board as prices fell.
Did you think of getting out on the way down before the market was locked limit-down?
I felt that I should get out, but I just watched. I was totally paralyzed. I was hoping the market
would turn around. I watched and watched and then after it locked limit-down, I couldn't get out. I
had all night to think about it, but I really had no choice. I didn't have any more money and had to
get out. The next morning, I liquidated my entire position on the opening.
Was the market sharply lower again on the opening?
No, not sharply, just about 2 cents.
How much did you lose on the trade by the time you liquidated?
I lost my own $30,000, plus $ 12,000 of the $20,000 my mother had lent me. That was my lesson in
betting my whole wad.
What did you do then?
I was really upset. I decided I had to go to work. Since there was a recession at the time, I thought I
probably couldn't get a really good job and should try to settle for a lesser position. I found that
even though I interviewed for positions for which I was unusually well qualified, I couldn't seem to
get any job. I finally realized that I couldn't get these jobs because I didn't really want them.
One of the best job openings I found was a commodity research analyst slot at Reynolds Securities.
I discovered that it was easier to get this better position because they could tell I really wanted it. I
learned that if you shoot for what you want, you stand a much better chance of getting it because
you care much more.
Anyway, there was a glass partition betweenmy office and the main office where the brokers sat. I
still had the trading bug and it was very painful to watch them trading and whooping it up.
While you were just doing the research?
Right, because the analysts were strictly forbidden to trade. But I decided I wouldn't let that stop
me. I borrowed from my mother again, my brother, and my girlfriend and opened an account at
another firm. I worked out an intricate code system with my broker to keep people in my office
from knowing that I was violating the rules. For example, if I said, "the sun was out," that meant
one thing, while if I said, "the weather is cloudy," it meant something else.
While I was trying to write my market reports, I kept peering out through the glass partition to see
the prices on the big trading board in the main office. When I was winning, I tried to hide my
elation, and when I was losing, I had to make sure not to let it show on my face. I don't think
anyone ever caught on, but I was in a manic-depressive state throughout that time. I felt tortured
because I wanted to be free to trade without going through this elaborate charade.
Were you making or losing money during this time?
I lost. It was the same old cycle of borrowing money and consistently losing it.
Did you know what you were doing wrong then?
Good question. Basically, I had no real grasp of trading principles; I was doing everything wrong.
Then in October 1971, while at my broker's office, I met one of the people to whom I attribute my
success.
Who was that?
Ed Seykota. He is a genius and a great trader who has been phenomenally successful. When I first
met Ed he had recently graduated from MIT and had developed one of the first computer programs
for testing and trading technical systems. I still don't know how Ed amassed so much knowledge
about trading at such an early age.
Ed told me, "I think you ought to work here. We are starting a research group and you can trade
your own account." It sounded great; the only problem was that the firm's research director refused
to hire me.
Why?
I couldn't imagine why since I wrote well and had experience. When I pressed him for a reason, he
15

told me, "I can't hire you because you already know too much and I want to train somebody." I
said, "Look, I will do anything you want." Eventually, I convinced him to hire me.
It was really great, because I had Ed to learn from, and he was already a very successful trader. He
was basically a trend follower, who utilized classic trading principles. He taught me how to cut my
losses, as well as the importance of riding winners.
Ed provided an excellent role model. For example, one time, he was short silver and the market just
kept eking down, a half penny a day, a penny a day. Everyone else seemed to be bullish, talking
about why silver had to go up because it was so cheap, but Ed just stayed short. Ed said, "The trend
is down, and I'm going to stay short until the trend changes." I learned patience from him in the
way he followed the trend.
Did Ed's example turn you around as a trader?
Not initially. I continued to lose, even with Ed there.
Do you remember what you were still doing wrong at that time?
I think I wasn't patient enough to wait for a clearly defined situation.
Did you think of just tailcoating Ed, because he was so successful?
No, I couldn't bring myself to do that.
Did you ever think of just giving up on trading?
I would sometimes think that maybe I ought to stop trading because it was very painful to keep
losing. In "Fiddler on the Roof," there is a scene where the lead looks up and talks to God. I would
look up and say, "Am I really that stupid?" And I seemed to hear a clear answer saying, "No, you
are not stupid. You just have to keep at it." So I did.
At the time, I was befriended by a very kind, knowledgeable, and successful semiretired broker at
Shearson named Amos Hostetter. He liked my writing, and we used to talk. Amos reinforced a lot
of the things Ed taught me. I was getting the same principles from two people.
Were you making recommendations for the firm at the time?
Yes.
And how did the recommendations work out?
They were better because I was more patient. Anyway, I was totally out of money, and out of
people who would lend me money. But I still had a kind of stubborn confidence that I could
somehow get back on the right track again. I was only making $12,500 a year, but I managed to
save $700. Since that wasn't even enough to open an account, I opened a joint account with a friend
who also put up $700.
Were you totally directing the trading in this joint account?
Yes, my friend didn't know anything about the markets. This was in July 1972 and, at the time, we
were under price controls. The futures market was supposedly also under price controls.
This was Nixon's price freeze?
Yes. As I recall, the plywood price was theoretically frozen at $110 per 1,000 square feet. Plywood
was one of the markets I analyzed for the firm. The price had edged up close to $110, and I put out
a bearish newsletter saying even though supplies were tight, since prices couldn't go beyond $110,
there was nothing to lose by going short at $110.
How did the government keep prices at the set limits? What prevented supply and demand
from dictating a higher price?
It was against the law for prices to go higher.
You mean producers couldn't charge more for it?
Right. What was happening though was that the price was being kept artificially low, and there is
an economic principle that an artificially low price will create a shortage. So shortages developed in
plywood, but supposedly the futures market was also under this guideline. However, no one was
sure; it was sort of a gray area. One day, while I was looking at the quote board, the price hit $110.
Then it hit $110.10; then $110.20. In other words, the futures price was trading 20 cents over the
legal ceiling. So I started calling around to see what was going to happen, but nobody seemed to
16
