
COMBINING TECHNICAL INDICATORS: WHICH
ONES AND HOW MANY?
One of the hardest, most time-consuming aspects of trading is figuring out what trading style(s) and
time frame(s) suit you best. From the technical analysis perspective, that means finding the right
toolbox of indicators you habitually use and learn very well.
As noted earlier, the consensus is that about five indicators is the right balance between enough
information to make informed decisions and not too much so that you suffer from information
overload, aka paralysis by analysis. Practically, that can mean anywhere from three to seven; it's
ultimately your choice. You don't have to stick with the same tools all the time; just limit the number
you're watching at any given time. Those trading longer time frames have more time and can afford to
look at more indicators. They also need to be better informed about the long-term fundamentals of
both:
The underlying economies of the currencies they trade.
The big macroeconomic drivers of the global economy that drive risk appetite and influence all
markets all the time.
This is critical. At minimum it involves following a few good fundamental analysts to read and at
least one big picture indicator like the S&P 500 Index (and what's driving it for your chosen time
frame). I write weekly reviews of the past week's top market drivers and the likely ones for the
coming week, simply because I couldn't find anyone who was already providing the big picture of the
prior and coming weeks' top market drivers (which I generally post both on my own sites, as well as
on SeekingAlpha.com, ForexFactory.com, and others. John Kicklighter at DailyFX.com, and Kathleen

Brooks of Forex.com provide some of my favorite weekly reviews for forex, and there are often
excellent weekly reviews from top banks on FXstreet.com. Joel Kruger of DailyFX.com and Boris
Schlossberg and Kathy Lien of Bkassetmanagement.com are always part of my daily forex reading.
For commodities (closely related to forex, as we'll see later), Oil N' Gold (oilngold.com) usually has
a very good weekly review of what was driving commodity markets. I read these and many others and
try to sort out the big drivers influencing all markets in my weekly articles. For more on my favorite
daily and weekly reads, see Appendix A.

Your Tool Kit Needs a Gang of Four
While your exact choice of indicators can vary with preference, needs, and trading style, the
overriding principle in selecting your tool kit of indicators is to have a balance that gives you a “gang
of four” of different kinds of information you need, specifically:
1. Trend or trading range.
2. Momentum.
3. Support/resistance.
4. Timing or cycles.

Trend or Range
Examples are trend lines, channels, moving averages, and Double Bollinger Bands. DBBs are really a
hybrid trend and momentum indicator. In range-bound markets, DBBs provide support and resistance
(s/r) points. When there's a trend, they show the trend's momentum and likely staying power.

Momentum Indicators
You should strongly consider using Double Bollinger Bands and one or two oscillators of choice,
especially moving average convergence/divergence (MACD). A set of moving average lines like we
saw earlier (10, 20, 50, 100, and 200 period) not only serves as a momentum indicator, it also
provides s/r points, too.

Support/Resistance Points
In addition to obvious price levels that stand out on your chart (and on time frames four to five times
shorter and longer), you should always watch:
The s/r points generated from trend or range indicators.
The s/r points formed by Western-style chart patterns, both their trend lines and implied breakout
targets, as shown in Chapter 4. See Figures 4.14, 4.16, 4.18, 4.19, 4.20, 4.21, 4.23, and 4.24 for
examples.

Timing or Cycle Indicators
Fibonacci, Elliott Wave, Gann, DiNapoli, and similar studies are timing or cycle indicators.
For example, your typical technical tool kit might include, in addition to an awareness of any
obvious s/r points:

A set of moving averages of 10, 20, 50, 100, and 200 periods: Again, these serve as both s/r
points as well as momentum indicators if they show crossing or layering as discussed in Chapter
8.
Trend/channel lines show the trend and provide s/r points.
Double Bollinger Bands and MACD show changes in momentum.
Fibonacci retracements of the most recent trends in each given time frame suggest possible s/r
points. You'd need to redraw these for each time frame that you examine, as the primary trends
may differ dramatically in different time frames.
If you spot any Western-style chart pattern forming, note the implied s/r levels (highs, lows,
necklines, shoulders, etc.). Japanese candlestick patterns provide shorter-term signals of trend
continuation or reversal.

Apply Indicators to Each Time Frame When Screening Trades
You'd then apply this group of indicators to the time frame in which you trade, as well as those four to
five times longer and shorter. For example, if you trade off daily charts, you'd also look at weekly and
two- to four-hour charts (depending on whether you define your trading day as 24 hours or 8 to 10
hours).
A good charting program like that included with MetaTrader 4 will allow you to store any group of
indicators you like as a chart template that can be applied to any chart of any asset or time frame your
broker offers.
As shown in our trading examples in Chapter 7:
The purpose of your first screening on the longer time frame (weekly, in our examples) is to find
longer-term s/r points than you would see on the charts on which you trade, and hopefully, find a
currency pair that looks like it might reach that s/r area and provide a low-risk entry point. That's
the first step in locating low-risk, high-yield trades.
Your second screening would then examine the likely entries and exits on the shorter time frame
chart from which you trade, to see if you can find situations where your entry point is two to three
times farther from your exit than it is from your stop loss. The profit-taking point is usually easy
to spot. It's whether you can get the right stop loss point that usually determines whether you take
the trade. See the description of the second screening in Chapter 7 for a review of the criteria for
a low-risk stop loss that isn't too close to your entry point so that you don't risk getting stopped
out by random price movements.
Your third screening would check your shorter time frame (two- to four-hour charts in our
examples) to look for any short-term s/r points, just so you're aware of temporary s/r points. If
those hold too long or too often, your trade may be showing signs of failing and you might want to
reduce your position size. If, however, these are quickly breached, that's a sign of progress and a
signal to consider adding to your position.

BACK TESTING: LEARNING FROM THE PAST
Those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it.
—Philosopher George Santayana

At some point, any serious trader will develop his or her own sets of rules or conditions for entering
and exiting trades. These sets of rules are called trading systems, and they are of vastly varying
degrees of complexity.
The only way to avoid losing money on bad systems is to test them using prior market data. That's
called back testing, and it is as essential as risk and money management (RAMM) practices and
trading journals for developing good trading rules and habits.
The goal of back testing is to discover a set of rules for a given time frame and currency pair (or
other instrument) for entering and exiting positions so that over time you're consistently profitable.
That profitability can come from a high percentage of winning trades, high profits on fewer winning
trades that outweigh the losses, or anything in between. Typically these rules work only in certain
market conditions. In other words, for a given asset or currency pair, you'll develop different systems
for trending markets, range-bound flat markets, and so on. You may also find that you need different
systems for different kinds of assets.

Back Testing Software: Play It Again, Sam
Today any serious back testing is done via computer software designed for that purpose. It works by
simulating trades when the programmed signals or conditions appear on the historical price data. The
goal is to test the system's potential profitability and maximum drawdown or risk over the given
historical data.
Computerized back testing works for technical trading strategies as long as their rules are clear and
unambiguous enough to be translated into programming code. It can also be applied to fundamental
strategies as long as the strategy can be reduced to a set of clear, quantifiable criteria like interest
rates, growth statistics, or other quantifiable macroeconomic data and/or the logical or mathematical
relationships between them.
A quick online search will yield a wealth of information about various software packages. Online
forex forums will provide a venue to benefit from the experience of others. There are many such
venues. A few off the top of my head include (look under their “forum” tabs or links):
ForexFactory.com: Has a trading systems forum on the homepage.
Currensee.com: Under the Social Network tab of the homepage.
DailyFX.com: Under the Forum tab.
These sites have active forums that should provide a good place to start along with a diligent online
search for information on how to back test and which software to use.
The preceding also applies for researching automated trading systems. More on these in Chapter 10.

A Manual Back Testing Example
Before you're ready to work with back testing software, you should first go through the experience of
manually back testing. You will learn a lot, improve your technical analysis skills, and be a better
testing software user. Manual tests also give you a quick-and-dirty way to play with indicators and
get a sense of what combinations deserve further investigation.
We'll take a deeper look at manual back testing so that you better understand how back testing
works.

Technical Tools
To keep the illustration simple, we'll use:
Double Bollinger Bands (DBBs).
A set of exponential moving averages (EMAs): 10, 20, 50, and 200 period.
Awareness of established s/r price levels.
MACD standard settings (12, 26, 9).
Together these will provide our gang of four indicators: s/r, momentum, trend, and timing/cycle
indicators as discussed earlier.

The Purpose
To see if these provide leading (predictive) and/or lagging (confirming) indications of the start and/or
end of a tradable price move. In other words, you'll want to scroll back in time on the charts and
observe how these interacted with price when trends both began and ended. If you see that they
behaved the same way each time (or most of the time) a trend began and/or ended, you then have a set
of rules to follow for when to enter and exit a trade.
In its simplest form, our overall goal is to develop rules for entering and exiting trades.
Specifically, we want to distinguish the real signals from the false ones; that is:
Entry rules that provide early entry signals only at the start of real trends, yet don't issue entry
signals at the start of false trends.
Exit rules that don't issue exit signals until the trend has fully run its course, do issue exit signals
before you lose profits to a trend stopping or reversing.
The reality is that you'll need to strike a balance between rules that offer higher profits with higher
risk of loss versus those that offer lower profits and lower risk. In other words, you'll probably need
to choose between sets of rules that offer higher reward and risk versus those that offer the lower
reward and risk.
That means you must choose between rules that offer more risk and reward or less risk and reward:
Higher risk/reward versus lower risk/reward entry rules: The former get you in sooner but catch
more false trends; the latter miss more of the trend as they wait for more trend confirmation and
safer entries.
Higher risk/reward versus lower risk/reward exit rules: The former keep you in the trade longer
to both ride the trend longer (for greater profits) and its reversal (for greater losses); the latter get
you out faster, and miss more of the trend (for lower profits) and its reversal (for lower risk).
If all of this sounds abstract, the examples that follow should clarify what you're trying to do with
back testing.

Time Frame
Let's assume we're long-term forex investors looking to develop some rules for trading long-term
trends with the above indicators for the AUDUSD on its monthly chart. Figure 9.1 presents the
AUDUSD monthly chart from September 1, 1996, through September 2008. The same process applies
to any time frame.

FIGURE 9.1 AUDUSD Monthly Chart, September 1, 1996, to September 30, 2008
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The Thought Process
Here's a simple example of how we create a simple set of rules. The following example refers to
Figure 9.1.
First, start looking for the strong, clear trends—defining a strong trend as one that entered and
stayed in the DBB buy zone (between the upper two Bollinger Bands) for at least three to four months.
Alternatively, you could look for well defined trading ranges too, but for this example we'll seek
clear trends.
Then we'll look at how the DBBs and EMAs reacted (and interacted with the candles) both before
and after these started to identify leading and confirming indicators.
To identify leading indicators, look at what tended to happen before the trend started. If we can
identify a pattern of behavior for how these indicators interact with price, we'll know how these may
signal the start of a trend (aka be a leading indicator).
To identify confirming indicators (to help us trade only real trends not false moves), we look at
how these indicators acted (and interacted with the candles) at the start of real trends that lasted
versus those false-start trends that didn't follow through. More specifically:
To find leading indicators, we're looking for what lines were crossed before or at the start of the
trend.
To find confirming indicators, we're looking for what lines were crossed after the successful
trends got started, and want to see that these same crossings didn't occur for trends that failed (the
ones that didn't stay in the DBB buy or sell zones for an extended, tradable period).
So, what do we find with this simple back testing exercise?
In April 2000 (D), the AUDUSD began a nice long dip into the DBB sell zone (lower two Bollinger
Bands), our definition of a tradable downtrend. To find possible leading indicators, let's see if our

indicators would have given us any clues in advance that this downtrend would start.
Starting at the earliest part of the chart to the left, we note that in July 1997 (A) the AUDUSD
entered the DBB sell zone and stayed there for a strong, very tradable long-term downtrend until it
rose out of the sell zone in October 1998 (B). The fact that the AUDUSD was already below its 200-,
50-, 20-, and 10-month EMAs already gave us a clearly bearish sign, but what signaled that the pair
would enter and remain in its DBB sell zone, our definition of a strong downtrend?
From July 1997 to October 1998, note that as long as the 10-month EMA was below the 20-month
EMA and the MACD histogram remained below the signal line (from C to C1), the AUDUSD stayed
within a strong downtrend, defined as the pair being in its DBB sell zone. So the tentative rules for
shorting the AUDUSD from studying this period would be that all three of the following conditions
must be present for us to short the pair:
1. The AUDUSD is in its DBB sell zone.
2. The 10-month EMA is below the 20-month EMA (A to B, D to E).
3. The MACD histogram is below its signal line (C to C1, C2 to C3).
From April 2000 (D and C2) to August 2001 (E and C3), following these same rules would have
worked again, keeping you in a profitable AUDUSD short position at any time you entered until the
final months for most of the downtrend.
Applying these same three criteria for being in long AUDUSD positions also worked. That is, to be
long the AUDUSD we would need the following three conditions in place:
1. The AUDUSD is in its DBB buy zone (F to G): Note this was the first indicator to issue a sell
signal (price falls below buy zone) and to get us out in April 2004 (G) so we would miss the
choppy price action that occurred until October 2006 (H).
2. The 10-month EMA is above the 20-month EMA (F to G).
3. The MACD histogram is above its signal line (C4), which occurred in December 2006.
Waiting for this indicator to give us a bullish signal would have kept us from taking any long
position until then, even though the AUDUSD had entered the DBB buy zone. That's fine; the price
action from October to December of 2006 was choppy even though the pair was in the buy zone,
so it was no big loss.
Again, this example was simplified for illustration purposes. It was also shortened. Normally, we'd
scroll back and look at multiple past examples of what happened with our indicators before and
during major trend changes.
My point was not to give you a complete system for trading the AUDUSD during the time period
covered. Rather it was to show you the kind of thought process you go through when doing simple
back testing. If we had wanted to do a full back testing we'd have looked at a longer period, asked a
lot more questions, and at some point inserted some Fibonacci retracements to see how the pair
would respond at different retracement levels.
Here's a final word about manual back testing. In the example we looked at this 9.5-year period all
at once just to get an initial quick idea of a set of rules that might work and show you the basic thought
process. Part of your further testing would involve scrolling back in time on the chart, then scrolling
forward one candle at a time so that you can't see subsequent price movements, and simulating the
strategy as if you were implementing it in real time. That process helps avoid the temptation to trade
using hindsight that wouldn't be available in real trading. Remember, you can trade only from the far

right side of the chart. You can't trade from its middle.

Back Testing Is a Tool, Not a Solution
History doesn't repeat itself—at best it sometimes rhymes.
—Mark Twain
Back testing is a valuable tool for any serious trader. However, just because a system seems to have
worked in the past doesn't mean it will remain effective in the future. Even if you do design a system
that works, market conditions and the correlations they produce change over time, and because others
will eventually discover a similar system on their own and eliminate your advantage.
So by all means learn more about back testing and how to do it better via software. Just know that
it's only a fallible tool, not a foolproof route to fast riches. Apply full RAMM practices when using
back tested systems.

INTERMARKET ANALYSIS: READING
INTERMARKET CORRELATIONS AND
DIVERGENCES
Another area for further study will be learning how to do intermarket analysis. A full treatment of this
topic alone could cover multiple books, big books. However, we just want to introduce this area of
analysis so you understand what it is, why it's important, and thus why you need to pay attention when
you read analysts talking about what another market may be telling about what could happen in forex.
Specifically, we'll introduce how to use price movements in other markets to predict what could
happen to a given currency pair.

Background
In essence, intermarket analysis is all about
Knowing how different assets, asset classes, and markets correlate—that is, whether they tend to
move in the same direction (positive correlation) or the opposite direction (negative correlation).
Watching for divergences from those correlations: Those divergences are often leading or
coincident indicators of changing market conditions. Over time you'll see how some markets tend
to react before others, and so provide advanced notice of changes from which you can profit.
We noted in Chapter 2 that currencies can be classified as either risk or safe haven, depending on
whether they behave like risk or safe haven assets. That is, currencies have either a positive or a
negative correlation with other risk assets. In fact, virtually every tradable financial instrument can be
classified as a risk or safe haven asset. For a variety of reasons, most global asset markets share
some kind of general correlation. That is, they generally move in either the same direction or
opposite directions, either because:
Causation and thus correlation: One market acts on another. For example, because most
commodities are priced in U.S. dollars, if the dollar gets stronger, that puts pressure on

commodity prices and vice versa. This rule doesn't always hold, because there are a variety of
other forces that influence both commodities and the dollar. Another example, crude oil, is
usually a risk asset that moves in response to the popular risk asset barometers like the S&P 500.
However, when oil prices spike suddenly as they did during the Arab Spring of 2011, those
suddenly much higher prices hurt growth and thus risk assets. Oil was now not only moving in the
opposite direction of other risk assets, but actually directly driving them higher or lower, not
merely reacting to macroeconomic data along with them.
Correlation without causation: Both markets are influenced by the same underlying drivers, either
in similar or in opposite ways, but aren't influencing each other. For example, when markets are
feeling optimistic, the classic risk assets like equities, commodities, and higher-yielding and
commodity-driven currencies all tend to rise together because they're reacting to the same
things in the same way. Meanwhile, classic safe haven assets like the lower-yielding currencies
and bonds fall together. When markets are fearful, the opposite happens. Both groups of assets
are responding to the same good or bad news, just in opposite ways. They are usually not causing
each other to rise or fall.
For example, in recent years the USD and equities tend to move in opposite directions, leading
many ill-informed journalists to blame a rising USD for falling stocks. Typically the flimsy
rationale was that a rising USD made U.S. exports less competitive. The point is true, but not
relevant. By the same reasoning, a rising USD should be accompanied by rising stocks in nations
dependent on exporting to the United States. Yet, in fact, global stock indexes all move together
with those of the United States, invalidating the above rationale. In fact, the real reason that U.S.
stocks and the USD move in opposite directions is that stocks are risk assets and the USD is a
safety asset. By definition they tend to move in opposite directions.
In fact, there are times when news favors both risk assets and the USD, like when the United
States reports strong jobs or consumer spending data. This news not only raises optimism about
U.S. growth (good for stocks), it also raises expectations for U.S. rate increases and reduces the
chances of additional U.S. stimulus (both bullish for the USD).
Just be aware that these relationships can and do change over time, as noted earlier with crude oil
and risk assets.
When the normal relationships don't apply, it could well be a sign of important trend changes
coming. Let's look at a few simple examples.
