
22

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

priced in the 30s but headed to single digits before the year
was out. I started with 100 shares per side, taking every signal on an hourly basis. After three days of trading I was up
nearly $800. Easy money! Encouraged, I added size and
began to trade a basket of four stocks per the system. Two
days later I was up another $2,200. While my colleagues
were out fertilizing their lawns, I had banked a cool three
grand simply by clicking my mouse every couple of hours.
Nor did the fun stop there. Three months of extreme market volatility managed to exploit the MAX system to such
a degree that by the end my account had increased over 500
percent!
Word soon got out about the simple system with the
catchy moniker put together by a religious studies professor who was turning a messy market into a pot of gold. The
Silicon Investor thread shot to the top of the hot list and
stayed there for weeks, and I soon found my phone ringing with requests for interviews. The Wall Street Journal
wanted to know whether I thought the markets would
come back and take out the March 2000 highs. I don’t
remember now what I said, but I’m sure it was something
like this: “It really doesn’t matter. What matters is having
a great system (like BTT-MAX), which can make money
in any kind of market!”
Then U.S. News and World Report did a feature story
on part-time day traders, using me as their poster child.
The story included a full-page color spread of “Dr Stoxx”
sitting in his cramped college ofﬁce. Unbeknownst to me,
the story intended to focus on losing traders, and since I
was coming off a hard week my only quote after a threehour interview was about losing $1,500 on a JNPR trade.

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

23

After that, I wised up to the fact that the media wished to
portray traders negatively (as greedy, irresponsible, sociopathic dropouts), and so I declined all further interviews.
As seasoned traders know well, a system like BTTTMAX, which exploits particular market conditions, works
well only until those conditions change. Sure enough, they
did, and our proﬁts began to dry up. I have since reﬁned
the system to keep us out of the markets when conditions
are not right, but I doubt we will ever see returns with the
system like we saw in that magical summer of 2000.
In the years since the market’s bubble burst, since
those ecstatic days of BTTT-MAX, I’ve been hard at work
expanding the universe of Befriend the Trend Trading systems. In 2002 we launched our Web site, Befriendthetrend.com, along with a free weekly newsletter designed
to highlight one new stock pick each week derived from
whatever system was working best at the time. Today, ﬁve
years on, we are still going strong, with over 7,000 subscribers to that original newsletter. Over the years we have
launched three additional newsletters for paying subscribers and have seen brisk sales on the six trading manuals we have published and two seminars we’ve held. Our
latest venture began in March of 2005, when I incorporated
a capital management company and partnered with RBC
Carlin Equities and Goldman Sachs to oversee the
Befriend the Trend Fund for accredited investors. Yes, I
still teach (and enjoy teaching) undergraduate students at
the college the ﬁner points of philosophy and religion.
Nothing has been easy since the nearly vertical market
ramp-up of the late 1990s. The broader indexes have been
trading within tighter and tighter ranges, as the SEC and

24

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Federal Reserve are quicker to clamp down on excesses.
Currently, as I write this, various markers for market volatility (the VIX, Bollinger Band Width, option premiums, etc.)
are just beginning to rise off historic lows. Global and local
economies have had to discount things like terrorism, rising oil prices, and natural disasters. The current buzzword
among market prognosticators is not valuation or bubble but
geopolitics. Day traders are out, and hedge fund managers—
a far more powerful inﬂuence on market volatility—are in.
Recently, both Merrill Lynch and Goldman Sachs ﬁred
dozens of traders because they were not making any money.
The markets are just that tough!
The good news is that in any market condition, with
the right systems at hand, trading can nicely supplement
your income, and if you have the patience to stick with it
for a while, it can even make you very wealthy. It takes
some work getting up to speed on the terminology. Learning to read a chart is a little bit like learning a foreign language. But the hard part has been done for you. You hold
in your hands the culmination of years of intensive labor,
done on your behalf. Here you have all the information you
need to ﬁnd stocks poised to move, to take positions in
those stocks, and to exit those positions with the greatest
exposure to proﬁt and the least exposure to risk. The trading systems outlined here have been designed to be as close
to 100 percent mechanical as possible. And each system is
complete. You are not taught here a few fundamental principles and then left on your own to apply them to the markets. I’ve done all the necessary applicational steps for you.
All you have to do is copy my work.

FROM PASSION TO PROFESSION

25

All of this is to say: if I can do it, so can you! Regardless of your education, your trading experience, your ﬂuency with numbers, you, too, can trade for a living. Can
you tell whether a line is moving up or down? Can you
click a mouse? Then you, too, can trade for a living. We at
Befriendthetrend.com wish you all the best as you start this
wonderful adventure of trend trading.

This page intentionally left blank

PA R T
ONE

preliminaries

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
1

what you need to
get started

T

REND trading is the ideal home-based business. There

is no inventory to store in warehouses, nothing to ship, no
bothersome customers, no cold calling, no gimmicky marketing. You don’t have to haunt garage sales and ﬂea markets
looking for items to sell on eBay. Unlike real estate investing, traders don’t have to worry about doing any maintenance
work or tracking down renters who are late with their payments. There is no Wal-Mart down the road to undercut
your prices. There are no franchise fees, no staff to employ,
no lawyers to keep on retainer.
Yes, there is a certain amount of starting capital
required, and yes, there are some monthly costs that will
make a small dent in your proﬁts. Compared to most other
home businesses, however, trend trading has as low a set of
barriers to entry as any business could possibly have. Proﬁt
margins run well over 90 percent. It’s hard to beat that!
All you really need to trade proﬁtably and comfortably are a good chair, a newer computer with a wide-screen
monitor, a high-speed Internet connection, some software,
a calculator, and paper and pen. That’s it. I’m guessing that
many of you reading this will already have most if not all
29

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

30

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

of these items, but if you do not yet have them, let me offer
some guidance on the more important ones.

HARDWARE
I recommend using a recent-model desktop PC or Macintosh computer. Between these two formats, the Windowsbased option is the better choice, since most of the software
useful for trading is available only in that format. With the
recent success of newer and faster Mac computers, this may
change in coming years, but for now the widest selection
of trading software can be found only for the Windows
platform.
Regarding the computer, processor speed is not as
important as memory capacity. To be sure, the faster the
processor speed, the better. The fact is, though, that even
the cheapest new PC today is plenty fast enough to handle
what you will need for trading. Memory, however, should
not be skimped on. With a large amount of random-access
memory (RAM), you will be able to run your trading platform, charting software, news feed, and a couple of Web
browsers all at once without running the risk of freezing
your machine due to overload. RAM capacity of 500MB is
sufﬁcient to run most trading platforms and charting packages simultaneously, but a doubling of that would nearly
guarantee a ﬂawless trading experience.
The monitor is also an important piece of your trading arsenal. As a rule, the larger the monitor, the better.
For this reason, laptops are not the best choice for trading.
They are ﬁne for those days you are on the road and need
to keep tabs on your portfolio. I ﬁnd myself frequently

WHAT YOU NEED TO GET STARTED

31

trading from the local Starbucks on a laptop with wireless
broadband connection. But try opening your trading workstation, your real-time charts, a quote streamer, your watch
lists, and your Befriend the Trend newsletters all at once,
and you will soon realize how necessary it is to have as
much desktop space as possible. Some traders use more
than one monitor to trade from, and if you can afford it
this is not a bad idea. You may need to install a dual video
card to handle more than one screen, but the small investment will be worth it.
There are also multiscreen and tiling screen monitors
now that are designed especially for traders. These can give
you up to 100 diagonal inches of desktop space: a genuine
luxury. They are expensive, however, running over $5,000
each for the better models. As for me, I use a single, 24-inch
ﬂat-panel, high-deﬁnition monitor and do not consider this
at all hazardous to my trading. But try to trade every day
on a tiny 14-inch screen? No way!
If you are interested in multiple monitors and can
afford it, take a look at a company called Digital Tigers
(assuming they are still in business). They produce multipanel monitors with as many as seven separate panels,
including a television display. Imagine having CNBC on
one panel and Bloomberg on another panel, with additional
panels devoted to your trading platform, a variety of your
favorite charts, and browsers open to trading chat rooms,
discussion threads, and your Befriend the Trend Newsletters. Now that is trading heaven! They also manufacture a
product called a sidebar, which allows you to plug a multiple monitor into your laptop (though then it is no longer a
laptop, is it?).

32

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

SOFTWARE
Where you go with software will depend greatly on what
kind of capital you are starting with in your trading
account. If you are trading under $10,000, then you will
need to ﬁnd ways to get your streaming data and charts for
as little cost as possible (remember, I started out with only
$5,000). If, however, you can fund your account with up to
$25,000, then you can afford to step up to the next level,
and I’ll show you how. If you are fortunate enough to plunk
over $50,000 of risk capital into your account, then let me
show you the sort of premium services that will serve your
trading well.
The truth is, you really do not need to spend any
money at all on software to have all the tools you need to
trade safely and proﬁtably. There are free services galore
in the trading world. And among the fee-based providers,
many will let you download their basic services without
paying. Of course, they hope you will like their entry format so much that you will be willing to pay for the
upgrade. But in most cases you will have all the information you need to trade the markets proﬁtably without much
in the way of overhead costs.
Among the free services, your ﬁrst stop should be
Stockcharts.com. Stockcharts.com offers a fantastic Webbased technical charting service that you can use for free.
Simply by signing up you will have access to 20-minute
delayed charts with a wide variety of technical indicators,
limited stock scans you can use to ﬁnd setups, sector and
market breadth analysis, and much more. Their candleglance feature allows you to create and save an inﬁnite

WHAT YOU NEED TO GET STARTED

33

number of small charts that you can use as your primary
watch lists (explained later). With low-cost upgrades,
Stockcharts.com will allow you to access real-time charts
and scan for an unlimited number of setups.
Real-time quotes should be available from your broker, but if, like me, you like a freestanding quote streamer,
you should download a copy of Jerry Medved’s awardwinning Quotetracker software. It is free and compatible
with dozens of data sources, including most online brokerages and real-time charting packages. Quotetracker
includes Level II quotes, real-time intraday charts, price
alerts, and a news feed—all for free! The software is adsupported, so you will have to put up with periodic banners and pop-up ads, but for a very small monthly fee
(about the price of one trade commission) you can use a
version without the ads. For further information and to
download the software, just go to Quotetracker.com.
If you wish to take your trading to the next level and
want that extra measure of control over your entries and
exits, then you will need a real-time charting package.
While Quotetracker offers real-time charts for free,
many do not ﬁnd the charting format very user friendly.
The same can be said for the charts offered by most
online brokers. Instead, I would recommend moving up
to IQCharts. As a midpriced service, IQCharts offers a
real-time, stand-alone charting package that includes all
the indicators you will need, intraday charts that automatically update in real time, the ability to store dozens
of watch lists with slide-show capabilities, and both prepackaged and construct-your-own scans with technical
and fundamental parameters. IQCharts is also one of the

34

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

only real-time charting packages currently available for
the Macintosh platform.
Another midpriced option is TC2000. In addition to
a real-time charting system, TC2000 offers stock advisory
guidance from the company’s founders, the Worden brothers. They also have a community feature where stock traders can chat with each other in real time about what they
are trading, and the Worden brothers themselves offer free
daily market commentary to all paying subscribers.
The highest level of trading sophistication comes with
a price tag. If you can afford about $125 per month for your
real-time charts (more if you want futures data), then there
are three packages I can recommend: Quote.com, eSignal,
and RealTick. I’ve used all three services, and while there
are a few minor differences between them, I don’t have a
clear favorite. These services will take some time to get used
to if you have been trading on a more scaled-down format.
Once you get used to it, though, you’ll wonder how you ever
traded on anything less. If you plan on day trading any of
our trend-trading systems, then I strongly recommend
going with either of these two premium services.
There are many other forms of trading software you
can purchase, but I’m convinced that other than your broker’s trading platform, a basic membership with Stockcharts
.com, and a real-time charting package, there is nothing else
you need for trading proﬁtably. However, there are traders for
whom research is half the fun of trading. For them there is
no shortage of software and Web-based services one can
purchase or subscribe to that will seemingly enhance their
ability to investigate every possible technical, economic,
cyclical, and fundamental angle of the markets.

WHAT YOU NEED TO GET STARTED

35

Two such services I can recommend are MetaStock,
which is a high-end package that, among other things, will
allow you to backtest your technical trading systems, and
VectorVest, which analyzes and ranks the universe of stocks
every day according to certain fundamental and technical
parameters. Again, however, to trade well all you really
need to spend is between $10 and $50 per month for the
few basic services listed here.

INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS
When it comes to Internet service providers these days,
you have a lot of choices. There is dial-up, high-speed dialup, HSDN, DSL, satellite broadband, cable broadband,
and T-1 lines. I’ve always used a cable ISP and would not
want to trade on anything slower. But then, I do a fair
amount of day trading where speed and a constant ﬂow of
data are essential.
Many subscribers to our BTTT Newsletters trade
with dial-up and do just ﬁne. To enter your trade orders
and monitor your open positions, dial-up is normally sufﬁcient. Fortunately, trading hours for most U.S. time zones
at least do not coincide with those dreaded “porn hours”
(late evening) when the phone lines get jammed and data
runs slowly. If you are a subscriber to one of our newsletters (or any newsletter service, for that matter), you won’t
need the surﬁng speed required to do all the stock research.
However, if you plan on doing your own research—
running your market scans and checking your watch lists
each day—you will save yourself countless hours of surf
time by switching to a broadband provider of some kind.

36

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

I am on the road a lot during the year and nearly
always stay in hotels that have high-speed Internet access,
but occasionally I have to resort to using dial-up. It works
just ﬁne as long as you don’t need to be lightning fast when
entering and exiting trades. I also recommend keeping a
dial-up service installed and paid for as a backup during
those inevitable times when your cable or other higherspeed service goes on the blink. To this end, I can recommend using NetZero’s high-speed dial-up service. For $15
per month you have the security of knowing that you are
only a phone line away from being able to put on and take
off trades.
One ﬁnal option to look into is a satellite service that
runs through your wireless phone connected by modem to
your laptop. This can be a bit expensive, with monthly
costs running up to near $100, and in the recent past they
were too slow to be cost effective. However, the current
versions are much faster, and with this setup you can take
your laptop nearly anywhere in the world and set up your
trading workstation.

ONLINE BROKERS
Just a few quick words about your online broker: you need
a good one, an inexpensive one, and one whose system for
inputting trades you are comfortable with. In my years of
trading, I’ve used most of the popular online brokerages:
Schwab, Datek, E*Trade, Suretrade, Scottrade, Investrade,
Interactive Brokers, and MB Trading (some of these are no
longer in operation). All offer discount pricing—though

WHAT YOU NEED TO GET STARTED

37

some are more discounted than others—and user-friendly
trading and account management interfaces.
Currently I have a personal account with Interactive
Brokers (IB) and trade the Befriend the Trend Fund through
a prime broker (Goldman Sachs, which uses the REDIPlus
platform). I recommend IB to anyone. I have found them to
be reliable and inexpensive ($1 or less per 100 shares traded),
and their account management system is user friendly. Some
people, however, ﬁnd their Trader Workstation, which is
where you input your trades, cumbersome and confusing.
A recommended alternative is MB Trading. They offer
the same price structure as Interactive Brokers, but they
also offer a $9.95-per-trade option for unlimited shares.
This is an attractive option for larger accounts or those
trading penny stocks. Generally I ﬁnd their MBT Navigator, where trades are inputted, to be slightly more user
friendly than IB’s Trader Workstation, though IB’s recent
upgrades to their system make the differences between the
two formats minimal.

This page intentionally left blank

CHAPTER
2

becoming a
chart reader

I the chapters that follow, I am going to reveal exactly
N

what I look for when I select new trades to be included in
the various Befriend the Trend Trading newsletters. An
important point to remember: selecting stocks to trade is
the easy part. Knowing when to enter and exit is the hardest part, and the most important part, of trading. Both how
to enter and how to exit your positions will be discussed in
detail here.
Before we get to the nuts and bolts of how you can
actually begin to put your money to work in the markets,
however, we ﬁrst need to discuss the most important element of all trading that is based on technical analysis: the
price chart. In this section I will tell you exactly how I set
up and read the charts I use for selecting new trades and
monitoring open positions.

THE INDICATORS
The ﬁrst thing you should do is set up your default chart
with all the indicators and parameters you will need to
make technically sound trading selections. For myself, I use
39

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

40

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

two sets of charts: I make frequent reference to a delayed
charting service offered by Stockcharts.com and consider
their charts to be the best Web-based service available.
With their basic subscription (about $10 per month), you
can set up your charts with all the parameters and indicators I teach here as well as screen for the setups taught later
in the book. Their charts are also easy to read and can be
formatted to suit a variety of aesthetic tastes. Recently,
Stockcharts.com added real-time data to their subscription
service for a small additional monthly charge. While the
charts do not update instantly as they do in the premium
services listed previously, you can set the charts to update
automatically every 15 seconds.
The second package I use is eSignal’s premium charting service with real-time stocks, options, and futures data.
With eSignal you can input an inﬁnite number of watch
lists, and with a simple click of the mouse you can scroll
through these easily in real time. While the package I subscribe to is fairly expensive and constitutes a considerable
overhead cost, the advantages it affords are worth it. With
the eSignal premium package, you can get automatically
updating charts with real time in all time frames, and with
what I consider to be the most readable format available.
If you use eSignal or a similar service, like Quote.com
or RealTick, for your charting needs, you have the opportunity to set up several charts that will simultaneously display different time periods for the same stock symbol. At
the click of the mouse, you can change from stock to stock
as you view weekly, daily, and various intraday charts for
each stock side by side. Less sophisticated charting packages such as IQCharts and TC2000 also allow for multiple
