
63

Understanding Price Action
ther takes out the high nor low of its predecessor. When showing up
next to a tall neighbor, even an inside bar can have a sizable span, but
on the whole they are quite small and thus easily recognizable within
the chart.
Like the powerbar break, the break of an inside bar, too, can have a
serious impact on the price action. Particularly when the bar is situated
at a crucial spot, its break is known to trigger quite a few traders in and
out of position. With this tendency in mind, another way to look at the
inside bar is to regard it as a one-bar buildup progression.
Although the majority of bars in this chart were all of modest span,
there were some interesting inside bars to be detected. How about bar
6, as a prelude to the powerbar breakout at T; and bar 7, from which
downward break the market responded with a pullback to support. And
how about bar 9 , which set up a pullback reversal in the top of the bro­
ken range.
Bar 9 was indeed an interesting bar. It presented itself bullishly next
to bar 8, which had just performed a very telling feat of its own: the low
of bar 8 had put in what we can refer to as a triple. This is a simultane­
ous touch of a pullback on the 25ema, a round number and a technical
test of sorts. Since the low of bar 8 hit upon the high of bar 6, the tech­
nical test here was a ceiling test.
In a bullish chart, a triple represents threefold support, and plenty of
bulls love to buy straight in it. In a bearish chart, a triple is likely to get
shorted. However, it is the element of the technical test more than that
of the 25ema and the round number that earns the triple's true bounce
reputation (principle of support and resistance). This is why we very
often see prices fail to bounce "properly" in a weak double (25ema and
round number) , where the technical test is missing. A double of, say,
a 25ema and a ceiling test may already hold up much better because
of the technical test within (strong double) . But triples are definitely the
most potent of bounce generators. For a recent example of an excellent
triple, check the previous chart, Figure 3.8: the triple is found where the
low of bar 8 hits upon the 25ema, the round number and a technical
test with the highs of the 4-7 cluster.
When there is no round number involved, but instead the pullback

64

Chapter 3

Price Action Principles-Practice

hits upon a 50/60 percent correction of the foregoing swing, that repre­
sents a triple, too (provided it coincides with a touch on the 25ema and
a technical test) . We will see countless more examples in the pages and
chapters to come.
For more inside bars, have a look also at the two little dojis at 1 0 .
Although the second doji was basically an inside bar to the first, they
were both inside bars to the big powerbar on the left (actually, they
stuck out a bit, but that hardly mitigates the implications). Naturally,
if one of them already builds up tension, then two will do so even more.
The break below the second doji represents a popular contrarian entry
to scalp some pip on the way down to support ( 1 0- 1 1 ) .
Although this chart was far from trending, it is still relatively easy
to identify the party in charge. From 07:00 on, the session had printed
nothing but higher lows and higher highs, a clear indication that bulls
were prepared to risk their capital at gradually higher prices. This is
not to suggest that we should simply play along for the ride, but it does
mean that we should be extra cautious when aiming to trade in the op­
posite direction (or best shun it altogether) .
Note how bulls twice used a correction to the top barrier of the box,
in conjunction with the rising 25ema, to buy themselves in.
This concludes our introductory discussions on the core principles
of price action. Throughout all coming chapters, all of the above will
find our attention again, since no chart ever gets printed without these
essential building blocks in place. Our task now is to examine how we
can put our understanding of these principles into a practical trading
method.

65

Chapter 4

Orders, Target and Stop

If you search the internet for information on position sizing and trade
management, chances are you will soon find yourself flooded by an
endless stream of possible techniques, one more exotic than the other.
Some traders prefer to scale in, others jump in fully packed; some scale
out on flexible targets, others strongly advocate preset objectives; many
traders trail their stops for protection, while more others just use a
bracket and be done. In short, there are myriad ways to go about enter­
ing and exiting and most likely there is something to be said in defense
of each and every technique.
This guide will offer some ideas on the matter as well, but do take
note that none of it is ever carved in stone. I firmly believe, though, that
the more a trader adheres to a strict set of entry and exit rules, the less
likely he is to fall prey to challenges of the emotional kind. The first
suggestion, therefore, is a popular management technique specifically
designed to keep things very simple. At a later stage, we will dig a bit
deeper into the finer subtleties of trade management.
Most trading platforms will offer a wide array of order types, but for
our purposes, two standard settings will do: to enter the position, a

market order will be fired by hand. Once in the market, a bracket order
will automatically spring to life to close out the position at preset levels
for either a profit or loss.
The market order is a logical choice. When the chart calls for action,
agility is a must. By firing "at the market" no opportunities will ever be

67

Understanding Price Action
missed due to a limit order not being filled (the limit order has a specific
price attached). The moment we spot our break, one click on the buy or
sell ticket will ensure position in the market.
For exiting purposes, the market order is an option, too, but this would
require a constant tracking of the open position and there is always the
possibility of a connection failure to consider. More user-friendly and
safer also is to use the bracket order option. As the name suggests, the
bracket encloses an open position by having both a target and a stop
automatically attached to the level of entry. Both sides of the bracket can
be set to any desirable distance and each will close out the position when
hit. A nice feature of this order type is that when one side gets hit, the
pending order at the other end instantaneously gets cancelled. Hence
the bracket also being referred to as an OCO (one-cancels-other) .
Following are the suggested settings for a standard bracket on the
eurjusd 5-minute in accordance with the trading method to be dis­
cussed in the next chapter. The target side is set at a distance of 20 pip
from entry, the stop at a distance of 1 0 .
These settings are not merely chosen for their ease of application. In
a normally active eurjusd session, a 20 pip target complies fairly well
with an average double-pressure pop from a buildup situation that is
likely to have our interest. As to the 1 0 pip stop, to some readers this
may seem awfully tight, but it is thoughtfully chosen as well: it allows
a trade some room to breathe, but not to the point of hope-and-pray.
Observation has it that if we position ourselves on a break in line with
dominance, carefully selected and stemming from a buildup situation,
there is usually little to be gained by setting protection at a level further
out. Hundreds of trade examples in the chapters ahead will aim to vali­
date this bold premise.
To ensure a protective exit at all times, the stop-side of the bracket
is a market order too; when hit, this order will close out the position no
matter what. Inherent to the use of a market order is the occasional is­
sue of slippage. This happens when an order gets filled at a price worse
than intended due to the fact that the market moved disadvantageously
in the split second it took the platform to work the order request. This
is best accepted as a little cost of business. In relatively normal condi-

68

Chapter 4

Orders, Target and Stop

tions, slippage will be minimal, maybe one or two pipettes (tenths of a
pip); in faster conditions, it may cost some more to get in or out of a
trade. On occasion, slippage may even work to one's advantage.
In any case, never consider swopping the market order for a limit
order to cheapskate on protection. This could turn out to be a costly
mistake if no counterparty is found to fill your trade at the desired exit
level: prices could march straight through your stop without ever tak­
ing you out. For this reason, most platforms do not even provide a limit
order option at the stop side of the bracket. At the target side, a limit
order will do.
With a 10 pip stop and a 20 pip target in place, spread and/ or com­
missions included, these settings are said to show a ratio between risk
and reward of 1 :2 . In other words, if we get stopped out twice for each
time our target is hit, this will yield a break-even result over time. More
encouragingly, if one winner is pocketed for every one loser incurred,
things are progressing in very promising fashion.
Note: Certain bracket order settings can hold up for ages, but it is
wise to evaluate at regular intervals whether the current market condi­
tions still justify the settings of the past. For example, should intraday
activity significantly pick up, or even go haywire like in the height of the
euro crisis back in 2008/ 2009 , it may very well be that the standard l O
pip stop would no longer suffice. A simple solution could be to set the
distance for protection at a wider level (while taking off some volume to
compensate) . Should we adjust the target level more or less proportion­
ally, we can even maintain a similar risk/ reward ratio as before. (For
instance by setting the stop at 13 pip from entry and the target at 26,
and so on.)
Variations on the bracket order theme are easy to implement. It is
certainly not a requirement to have the target level at all times double
the level of the stop. Should a 20 pip target be deemed acceptable but
a 1 0 pip stop too tight, setting the latter a little wider is always an op­
tion, even on a discretionary basis. Of course, this will affect the risk/
reward ratio.
As an alternative to a preset target, a trader could decide to let the
price action determine when it's time to cash in a profitable trade. Theo-

69

Understanding Price Action
retically, such flexibility makes perfect sense, but it may not serve all
traders equally well. Anyone even vaguely susceptible to spur-of-the­
moment paranoia, or greed for that matter, is probably better off putting
faith in his bracket rather than in his own perceptions. It is not for
nothing that this type of management is so popular among traders of

all levels.
Since we have yet to discuss our entry techniques in the coming
chapter on Trade Setups, let us not busy ourselves too much at this
point with the finer subtleties of exiting. This is not to imply that the
discretionary method does not deserve exploration-quite the contrary.
We will have a closer look at some of these techniques in Chapter 6 on
Manual Exits.
If we embrace the standard bracket order model, we will put on a
full position on entry and take off all units on exit. The actual unit size
(trade volume) with which to enter the market is of course a personal
choice and very much dependent on the current level of competence as
well as the amount of capital in the account. At this stage we need not
bother with it, but the virtues of what is commonly referred to as com­

pounding do deserve the utmost attention from anyone who is serious
about his trading business. In Chapter 10 we will address this matter
of unit sizing in detail.
When it comes to spreads and commissions, in Forex there are two
kinds of broker models to choose from: the first, generally referred to as
the retail model, charges no commissions but adds to the spread; the
other usually offers a lower spread but adds a commission on top. On
the eur/ usd, both models should work out more or less to the same cost
of business per trade (round-turn) . The retail broker will probably offer
a 1 pip spread during the active phases of the session; the commission
broker may offer a 0.5 pip spread, or even less, but on top will charge a
commission of about 0.5 pip round-turn.
When still in the learning stages, it is highly recommended to keep
the volume very low and thus not worry too much about where to find
the tightest spreads. Rather than trying to save a couple of pipettes
on entry, way more effective, in these early stages, is to work on your
price action knowledge and trading techniques. With no less than a 100

70

Chapter 4

Orders, Target and Stop

pipettes in a single 1 0 pip stop, avoiding just one unnecessary loss per
week will more than offset a few extra pipettes paid in the spread.
That being said, as you progress over time and your volume goes
up, and you would like to trade multiple markets as well, a commis­
sion type broker is probably the best way to go; most popular pairs will
be offered at a reasonable spread and commission. Retail brokers may
charge a slightly bigger spread on some of the other pairs; but over the
years, the costs of business have gone down considerably with all par­
ties, and may go down further still. In any case, always do your due
diligence when it comes to choosing brokers and never take for granted
what they offer on their sites. Best to apply for a free trial first, just to
see how their spreads hold up in real-time, particularly in the hours of
your time zone.

71

Chapter 5

Trade Setups

With the bulk of price action essentials now under our belt, it is time to
sharpen the eye for combat. Recognizing the market's lust for repetition
is one thing, it is quite another to take advantage of it. Without some
specific rules of engagement, even the price action specialist is merely
at the mercy of his own perceptions. Especially when coming in with a
tight stop, there can be no such thing as trading on a hunch or shoot­
ing from the hip just because a situation has merit. Every single entry
in the market should always be justifiable from a technical perspective
and defensible in terms of protection as well.
From where we stand, there are three core requirements to meet
on any one trading idea, two of which we have already addressed quite
extensively: to trade in line with dominance and to take position on a
break away from a buildup situation. The third requirement is a func­
tion of the buildup progression itself: within it, we need to look for a
development that sets up the trade.
The interesting thing about trading breakouts is that despite the
endless ways in which price action can manifest itself, there aren't that
many ways for buildup to break. In this chapter we will cover four spe­
cific trade setups, three of which designed to take on a pattern breakout
of sorts, the last to tackle the pullback reversal (which is often a pattern
break variant as well).
The fact that a pattern can "break" implies the presence of a bound­
ary of sorts. On this point, we already took up the benefits of curbing

73

Understanding Price Aaion
a progression of interest with a line or a box; these tools can indeed
provide excellent assistance in detecting the pivotal levels in the chart
from where prices might break or bounce. But let us be mindful not to
clutter our charts, and our view, with all sorts of graphics that bear little
relevance in terms of future purpose. In most instances, a single line or
a box is all it takes to stay focused on the development at hand.
Once we have established a visual on a boundary of interest, our
next task is to monitor how well this barrier holds up when raided. As
we know, a mere perforation may not call for action yet (think tease and
false break traps), but things always get interesting when attackers and
defenders start to battle it in a tight group of alternating bars push­
ing up or down against the barrier. Within this buildup we then need
to identify a crucial bar-the bar from which break to take position. In
a textbook example of a bull-side breakout, this will be a bullish bar
positioned at the end of the current cluster, with a close against the pat­
tern barrier. When a subsequent bar takes out this bar at the top, the
pattern defense is now considered broken and we can enter long at the
market. On a bear-side trade, the situation is simply reversed (shorting
the break of a bearish bar). We can refer to the bar that sets up the trade
as our signal bar, and to the breakout bar in which position is taken as
our entry bar.
Note: Although not an absolute requirement, Forex traders are rec­
ommended to use a chart that prints prices in increments of a full pip.
This way, the highs and lows of neighboring bars, or those within a box
pattern, can line up more neatly, which can only improve clarity on the
barrier in question. Unfortunately, quite a few trading platforms print
prices they way they quote them, in pipettes. In this setting it takes a
mere pipette for a crucial bar to be broken by another, but this break
may not yet surface on the more widely consulted "one-pip" charts,
potentially leading to premature entries. Trading from a pipette chart
is not undoable, but the advantages of the one-pip setting are hard to
dismiss. If this is not available on the charts that come integrated with
your broker platform, renting a standalone charting package for a small
monthly fee solves the issue (highly recommended anyway, if only for
studying purposes). By the way, the one-pip setting should regard the

74

Chapter 5

Trade Setups

chart only, not the way prices are quoted on the order tickets.
In a perfect world, a pattern gets broken in a four-step fashion: ( 1 )
aggressors attack the boundary line, (2) defenders fend off the initial
charge, (3) a little cluster of alternating bars builds up tension in the
boundary region, and (4) prices break out and follow through.
In numerous instances, however, it will take a lot more pulling and
pushing and tricking and trapping to see a pattern boundary give in (if
at all). On the good side, there is no need for the market to behave "per­
fectly" in order to set up a tradable wager.
For example, when forced to retreat from a tease breakout on the
bull side, prices may hit upon a level of support back inside the pattern
from where a new attack on the boundary may be launched (think ceil­
ing test and the re-break follow-up). At other times, a pattern is broken
somewhat sloppy, with the next few bars freezing up outside the barrier;
even though this may not look very promising from a follow-through
perspective, the fact that contrarians can only stem the breakout but
not undo it may ultimately work in favor of continuation. In other cas­
es, we may see a pattern get broken quite substantially without much
buildup, but then prices pull back to put in a technical test with the
broken boundary line. These examples are clearly not representative
of the "ideal" break, which may prompt us to decline the initial event.
But the follow-up action could still set up a playable wager one way or
another.
Pattern breakouts can be very choppy also, with little clue as to the
ultimate resolution. In such cases, we may have to adjust the position
of the pattern barrier, or perhaps erase it completely and take it from
there.
All in all, trading pattern breakouts is a pretty straightforward prac­
tice, but things can get tricky if unaware of the finer mechanics. As far
as our entry techniques are concerned, we will make a threefold distinc­
tion between all variations by either naming the setups a pattern break,
a pattern break pullback or a pattern break combi. Each version will be
introduced below, with detailed explanation on its typical appearance,
accompanied by a number of chart examples to get the idea. Mter we
have addressed one last setup, the pullback reversal, we have all the

75

Understanding Price Action
weapons needed to take on basically any chart from a conservative yet
highly effective breakout perspective. In Chapter 7 we will expand our
range of breakout techniques somewhat further with the powerful but
slightly more advanced trade-for-failure setup.

Pattern Break
Despite the many variations, not to mention the tricks and traps, a very
straightforward pattern break is still a regular occurrence. During the
process of pattern formation, things may start out a bit fuzzy, but usu­
ally not much tweaking is needed to define the "pattern of the moment"
with a respectable line, or box, on a 5-minute chart. Generally speak­
ing, the more touches involved to form a pattern boundary of relevance,
the "harder" this barrier, and the more buildup needed to push the
defenders out of the way.
In a tradable scenario, this buildup materializes as a small cluster
of alternating bars, known also as pre-breakout tension and in some
cases referred to as a squeeze. Within it, there are strong psychological
forces at work. If it is a level of support that is currently attacked, bulls
in position can only hope that their sideline companions will come to
the rescue on this level of last resort. But bears in position face chal­
lenges of their own. To see the bullish defense cracked, they, too, are
in need of assistance, which may not be so easy to come by in a level
of support. Surely many sideline bears would want to short below sup­
port, but who then is to do the dirty work of cracking it first.
Granted, these hopes and fears may be present at any random level
in the chart, but whenever prices build up in an area of support or
resistance, at least we have a clear visual on a particular level under
stress-and plenty of parties, both in and out of the market, are likely
to have their eyes cocked on the very same boundary as well.
Do understand that the way the break is set is only one part of the
total of elements to be consulted prior to taking position. Always de­
manding attention is the chart's overall pressure; equally essential is
to scan for potential obstruction on the way to target, as well as for ad-

76

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

verse magnets that may work to the detriment of the intended stop. All
this will be addressed shortly.
But even when the situation sets up relatively well in terms of gen­
eral conditions, patience is still key. To justify our tight stop, of utmost
importance is to allow the price action the time to set up our trades

properly; we either step in on a break that fully complies with our entry
requirements, or we do nothing at all . It is never our task to meddle with
the forming of the buildup itself, nor to participate in breakouts that
can be deemed premature or otherwise suspect.
Our first discussions on entry technique regard the standard pattern
break setup. A small series of charts will serve to explain the tactics in­
volved, but do realize that in the endless variety of price action patterns,
this can only offer a snapshot of practical implementation. Throughout
all coming chapters, though, we will see countless more examples of
each breakout technique; so whatever is not fully palpable on first in­
troduction will surely fall into place at some later point.
Before exploring the accompanying text, again take a brief moment
to assess the global nature of each chart first. See if you can already
detect the hints and clues of most relevance-like the line of least resis­
tance, round number fights, obstructive elements, cluster progressions,
crucial highs and lows, and so on. This practice will not only playfully
activate your price action senses, it is likely to ease the absorption of the
technical discussions below the charts as well.
