picture. Having a bullish or bearish bias can cloud the obvious signals
that your system will present. Plan accordingly so that you can be
prepared for both sides in any eventuality. Don’t try to find signals
where they are not to justify your particular and subjective point of
view. The market has no feelings.
3. Be flexible. Follow a logical and structured thought pattern instead of
pure intuition and instinct. This will help you in limiting losses over
time based on a plan. Do not cling to your positions; assume the
losses, and move on.
4. Trade with the main trend. Although you can trade against the trend if
you are aware of the probabilities and ratios of pullbacks and
corrections, it is better to trade with the major trend unless you are
just looking for a few pips. You will have more chance of success and
will be able to get more pips in a much safer manner and faster. Do
not chase the market. Let it come to you.
5. Trust your analysis. If you have carefully planned your trading session,
that is all you need to build confidence and operate according to your

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

109

own rules. Design your system, test your strategies, and calculate
your money management with respect to your available balance. If
everything is ready and you feel right with what you have designed,
work with confidence and discipline.
6. Have a plan. Never face the market without having a plan. It has to
be based on a working methodology that you will be developing day
by day, which includes what your working conditions are for that
specific trading day. If you don’t have a plan, you put probabilities
against you.
7. Know “How much” and “When.” Always keep track of and readjust
your money-management rules as needed. You should not change the
percentage or amount of capital that you can afford to risk too much
(“How much”) in each trade. You also have to study carefully
“When” to increment that risk to obtain more benefits, using
leverage in your favor.
8. Keep it simple. Thinking that the more complicated a system is, the
better results you will get is a wrong belief. Simple is always better.
At first, it can seem to you that something is missing if you use only
one or two indicators; you will have the impulse to add another, and
yet another, and can end up with a chart in which the price is no
longer visible under so many lines and signs. Besides, following too
many indicators can lead to trading paralysis because many will
contradict each other, and it will be more difficult to get them to a
consensus, so no trade and no profits.
9. You will not get rich quick. Don’t even try FOREX trading if you
are wishing to become rich in one night: Greed can blind you.
The FOREX is a profession, and as such, it needs to be studied as
thoroughly as any other career. You have to invest time and money to
become a real professional.
10. Keep control. Keep your emotions under control. Keep your trading
under control with a proper plan. Emotions are one of the most
important aspects of FOREX trading; at least they represent 60 to
70 percent of a trader’s activity. Those who succeed understand that
they have to handle their fear and greed and eliminate anxiety and
stress before starting the workday, checking the trading space and
keeping it clear of any negatives, and understanding the daily
impulses and emotions that influence them at the moment. Leave
your ego out of the picture, reeducate your natural impulses, and
add a great deal of healthy discipline.

110

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

BECOME A PRO
FOREX trading has to be treated as a job—with a proper (and limited)
schedule that accommodates in your life the best market hours for your
strategy, as well as the rest of your obligations—family, maybe still a standard job, recreation, friendship, study, and (most important) proper rest
and sleep.
As for a standard job, you should have the proper tools, and these
include not only a good Internet connection but also a good computer and
alternative elements when one of the others falters. You should “build your
office” like you would for any other type of working situation. It should be
free of distractions, have a good and anatomic chair if your strategy asks
for long hours of screen time, and you should plan for frequent short interruptions to relax your eyes if you have been looking at the screen for
an hour, etc.
Never trade if you feel sleepy (imagine that your job involves operating
a very dangerous machine). Indeed, the FOREX won’t cut your hand, nor
will you slip and fall on the factory floor, but you could risk your account
because the risk of committing a mistake is very much higher when you
aren’t able to focus properly (from lack of sleep, too many hours doing the
same thing, physical pain because of improper furniture, a lower attention
capacity because of a drink or two, etc.).
Choose your trading session by carefully taking all these elements
into account. Set yourself a daily goal in pips and in time spent at the
screen. If you do not meet your goal, tomorrow is another day, and the
markets never stop.

TAXES AND LEGAL ISSUES
Individuals and businesses related to securities are classified into three different categories for tax purposes. Those categories are dealers, investors,
and traders. Dealers are defined as market makers. As an individual trader,
your business could fall into any of the two remaining categories.
This is an important thing to plan in advance. Most FOREX traders
consider themselves to be investors because their activity involves obtaining a return on their money. However, the tax benefits are not the same. As
a trader, you can get a series of tax deductions from your income, such as
the costs of your trading education, financial software, books and study
materials, seminars, business-related trips, and meal expenses; accounting,
legal, and tax advice; and brokerage fees and commissions; office equipment such as computers, phones, and Internet connection fees; overnight

CHAPTER 7

MASTERING EMOTIONS

111

interest paid on your trading account; home and automobile expenses;
and others.
You can use your trader status to create a small sole proprietorship.
Your ordinary business expenses would be placed on Schedule C, and your
income or loss would be reported on Schedule D because it is still considered capital.
No self-employment income is calculated on the total income, and your
trading losses are still limited to $3,000 per year but can be carried over
indefinitely.
The benefits of this choice are good, but there is also another way,
which might be better under several points of view, to operate your trading
business. This would be to create your own trade corporation by incorporating your business.
Establishing a trade corporation allows you to possess a new legal
entity from which to conduct your trading. This has short-term advantages,
a better and much wider protection for your assets, and other advantages
for family financial planning. Assuredly, you will be incurring in extra
costs for setting the business up and overall operational costs, but the benefits are clearly more valuable.
What kind of corporation is the best for you? You can find three types
of corporations: One of them is a regular corporation, named the C corporation; then you have the sub-S corporation, which is named after the tax
code section that lists and defines its benefits; and finally, you have the
limited-liability corporation (LLC), a corporate structure that is relatively
new and was designed to overcome some of the structural difficulties of
the sub-S corporation.
The preceding applies to residents of the United States. Different laws
and tax systems apply for other countries. I would recommend that you to
approach a specialized law and taxes service in your location to help you to
define what type of business is more convenient based on your particular
situation.
For me, personally, I use a limited-liability corporation (LLC) whenever possible.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

8

A

P

T

E

R

MIND OVER MATTER
FOR HUGE PROFITS
AFFIRMATIONS
Affirmations can be defined as positive declarations in which the content is
stated as being true. The word positive is the clue because this is the way
affirmations should be phrased, instead of using negative words. For example, instead of affirming, “I am free of debt,” you should say, “I have enough
money to satisfy all my obligations.”
Affirmations are used in a repetitive way to gradually reinforce
their power. They are phrased in the present tense even if the goal to be
reached hasn’t yet manifested (e.g., “I am successful” instead of “I will be
successful”).
When I was in the Marine Corps and still today, although not as much
today, I wake up every morning and say, “Another glorious day.” Ooh-Ra!
This is an affirmation. I start every day off like this, and I am able to build
on that positive mind-set throughout the day.
What is less understood is that even if you think that you don’t use
affirmations (consciously, that is), in fact, you use them continuously, day
after day, but you are not aware of it! Your beliefs and thoughts are constantly running through your mind. They are built over your entire life,
and their content is a heterogeneous mix of other people’s beliefs, old
childhood rules, wrong or right decisions you have made based on life

113

114

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

experience, and external influences from the media, which can be contradictory at some point.
Those unconscious affirmations are running free, out of your control.
However, it is possible to bring them to your awareness and control the flow
and content so as to be more precise about what you really want to manifest
in your life.
Your present is the result of your past affirmations! You will become
what you always tell yourself, whether it is good or bad!
If you are not satisfied with the results you have gotten so far, which
are the by-product of your thoughts and beliefs, you need first of all to
change the content or expression of your thoughts and beliefs. Transforming your thoughts will transform your results, and this is done through conscious affirmations.
Negative thought patterns are repeated unknowingly again and again,
and the cycle has to be broken and brought to the light so that you can examine the contents of your thoughts and discard all that are negative and replace
them with positive affirmations. Examine for a moment, for example, your
deepest thoughts and beliefs about money. Are there any “imposed” beliefs
(e.g., phrases or statements that you were told in childhood) that could be
blocking your attainment of success?
Affirmations can help you to “clean the slate” so that there are no more
hidden obstacles in your path to successful trading. You have control over
your conscious mind, but the unconscious mind operates under the radar,
feeding you automatically all those thoughts and phrases you have been collecting throughout the years. Your unconscious mind is also connected to
emotions, which make you react based on past programming. The subconscious mind even has power over the conscious mind in cases of conflict. For
example, you decide that you want to be a successful trader and make lots of
money, but there’s a hidden belief that tells you that “being rich is evil.”
Even if you understand on a conscious level that this is not so, the power of
your earlier programming will win, and you will find yourself doing counteractions against your primary goal, which is “making lots of money.”
I always tell people in my presentations that to be successful, you have
to have a plan, and before you can build your plan, you have to set goals,
both long and short term. Before you can take this step, you have to recognize that we all have a different set of values and that at different times in
our lives we have to maintain balance. This balance often will shift as our
needs shift in different ways. You simply cannot have a goal that is outside
your values, such as saying that you want to make a million dollars trading

CHAPTER 8

MIND OVER MATTER FOR HUGE PROFITS

115

and subconsciously thinking that being rich is evil. Build your plan around
your goals and values, and then you will start to see a difference. You must
write this down. If you write your plan down with your long- and shortterm goals, your mind will build a mental picture around it, and you will
work subconsciously to accomplish it.
When you repeat positive statements about the changes that you want
to see in your life, you are reprogramming your subconscious mind. It takes
some time to replace the old statements and develop new ones. However, if
you keep repeating the new beliefs, your effort will bring about the desired
results, and they will become a part of your automatic behavior.

HOW DO YOU CREATE A POWERFUL AFFIRMATION?
First of all, the most important part is the wording; it has to be effective and
believable. If you are unable to believe what you are affirming, it will not
have enough power to create the change.
The second part is your mood when repeating the affirmation. If you
don’t believe it, feel doubts, or even have a cynical reaction to it, your feelings about the affirmation will be negative, thus increasing the negative
patterns about the whole subject in your mind. For example, you could
affirm, “I am a successful trader.” However, it might not yet be completely
true, so you can’t relate to the statement, and it even could trigger a contrary reaction. In this case, you could add, “I am becoming a successful
trader, and I am in the process of making lots of money with my trading.”
This would bring the reality much closer and still be positive and dynamic.
The more you add positive emotions to your affirmations, the sooner they
will come to fruition in your life.

COUNT YOUR BLESSINGS!
Another important part is to act as if you have already reached the goal,
expressing gratitude for your blessings. You also can add other affirmations
of positive things that you already have in your life, looking around for all
the great blessings you have and transforming them into positive gratitude
affirmations:
“I am grateful for my health.”
“Thank you for my learning ability.”
This will boost your self-esteem and help in the process of building a positive environment for the affirmations to take root and grow up to your
desired results.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

116

When you open your heart and are grateful for what you already
have, you are telling the universe that you are ready and willing to receive
more! No matter what the circumstances of your actual life, there is
always something to be grateful for. By being grateful, you create a positive state of mind that will attract all that is positive to your life. Similar
attracts similar, either way, so better to do it in the right way to obtain the
right results!
Thoughts that you have frame how you experience things and people
around you. If you are negative, distrustful, and cynical and you are always
looking for the worst, then your feelings and actions will follow the same
path. You need to change the way you think in order to make self-improvements. Thoughts that are gloomy and negative do not come out of thin air.
You have unknowingly been repeating negative thought patterns, and your
actions follow these patterns. Repeated use of positive affirmations will
break your negative thinking.
“I am worthy. I am positive. I am confident.”
“I am intuitive. I am a winner. I am intelligent.”
“I am patient. I am grateful.”

HOW DO YOU AVOID THE COMMON MISTAKES?
First of all, define exactly what you really want. The more precise your goal
is, the more chances it has to develop and be attained faster. It is your job
to find out what you really want in life and in your trading career. How far
do you want to go? Are you prepared for greater success, or will you settle
for a moderate but consistent income?
Then, know that it is perfectly right to want abundance, happiness, and
prosperity in your life. Sometimes it can be difficult to define a precise
goal because all the traditional and religious education and beliefs tend to
diminish your self-worth and your sense of deserving. You deserve to be
happy and prosperous and collect the fruits of your hard and dedicated
work.
How, then, can you define what is that you really want? You could start
by making a list of all the things you don’t want. What would you change?
What do you want to get rid of? Try making your list as complete as possible. You then can start creating the positive affirmations item by item that
will help you to change progressively all the things or situations you definitely don’t want to be a part of your life or your trading.
Choose to experience trading in a positive way every minute. You will
think more clearly, see the market more clearly, and trade better.

CHAPTER 8

MIND OVER MATTER FOR HUGE PROFITS

117

To trade like the pros, you have to learn to think like the pros. Condition
your subconscious to be in line with your desires. Encrypt those affirmations into your brain to achieve lasting success.

POWER OF NETWORKING
Networking includes connecting with different cultures, ages, specialinterests groups, and networks themselves. Strong connections are constantly being made—following up, keeping in touch, identifying and
making contact with spheres of influence, and forming strategic alliances
where everybody wins, as well as brainstorming groups. Networking is a
way of living, a life skill, more than something that you do with a purpose
in mind. This is one of the big reasons that I created the James Dicks
FOREX Network, so that as a FOREX trader, you can connect with other
individual traders who are trying to accomplish the same or similar success
trading in the FOREX. I encourage you to check it out at www.JamesDicks.com. There are three basic and universal rules on which its principles
are grounded: abundance, reciprocity, and generosity.
Abundance. Opportunities are open and plenty for everyone. There
are many alternatives from which to chose, many careers, jobs,
customers, ideas, and so on.
Reciprocity. What you give out comes back to you multiplied. If you
give out help, you get back help; give out love, you get back love;
give out information, you get back information. It might not come
instantly or from the same person to whom it was given, but the
balance is always restored.
Generosity. The fundamental philosophy of all successful networkers
is to treat everyone the way they would like to be treated
themselves. This is the determination to give your time and share
your knowledge with other people, with the sole aim of helping
them to get answers to their questions or reach their goals,
without any expectation of receiving something back from them.

STRATEGIC ALLIANCES
A strategic alliance is the union of two or more people who subscribe to an
agreement to undertake or develop certain activities and share common
goals with the purpose of obtaining benefits for every one of the participants. Such networks can grow with each member’s additional external

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

118

activities, which then can be shared and added to the global diversity of age
groups, cultures, and interests, forming a stronger and much larger network
of networks and bringing to each of them under an enormous sphere of
influence that can be positive or negative.
People who know a lot in one or two areas in which they are usually
specialists are prone to becoming a sphere of influence in the networks in
which they participate. The interaction with other people who are also
spheres of influence in other subjects allows them to acquire a good general
knowledge of many areas.
The important qualities a network should possess are integrity, honesty,
ethics, and sincerity among all its participants because mutual trust is vital
for a network to exert a positive influence on all its members and obtain the
desired results.

BRAINSTORMING GROUPS
Those are formal or informal gatherings where people unite with a common and definite agenda of sharing mutual knowledge or creative ideas and
solutions or studying a particular subject in detail. Networking is basically
about information sharing. Thus every networker should be very well
informed and eager to update regularly the information he or she possesses
through every learning means available—reading books and the press,
using Internet resources, and paying attention to the information that is
shared through their own networks.
Communication in our times is becoming faster every day, thanks to
technology, and we have much less time to share adequate and useful information with our peers. There is too much information to process and
absorb, and there are too many electronic solicitations throughout the day.
Thus, creating or participating in a network is more important than ever.
The following are two of the most important places to engage in
networking in the trading scene:
Forums. Trading forums are a source of invaluable information. There
are various levels and focus in each of them, some specialize in
trading systems, others in general information for newest
participants, and still others in all the different personal
experiences of seasoned traders as well as newcomers. This
sharing enriches each individual’s perception, and it also allows
you to find other people who are working in the same field, going
through similar steps in the evolution of their trading career, and
get some advice from the ones who have already been through the

CHAPTER 8

MIND OVER MATTER FOR HUGE PROFITS

119

pitfalls of the industry. Although trading is mostly a solitary
activity, because of the focus needed, creating relationships with
other traders is very important to have an adequate perspective.
Mentored trading communities. Some of the most experienced traders
can decide to create trading groups, in which they give back to
others in terms of knowledge, techniques, and intuition, all that
they have learned and applied throughout their trading life. Also,
groups of traders who share the same system can gather to trade
together and compare their own results, thus the James Dicks
FOREX Network.

This page intentionally left blank

P

4
A

R

T

FUNDAMENTAL
ANALYSIS

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

9

A

P

T

E

R

ECONOMICS
WHAT DOES ECONOMIC RELEASE MEAN?
An economic news release is a press report issued by central banks, the
Federal Reserve, governments, large financial institutions, and research
and analytical organisms stating economic decisions and data that are
the result of their periodic calculations to gauge performance of an economy. Such releases are usually done rendered public through the main
financial press.
FOREX traders, especially those who directly trade the news, are very
attentive to the results and data offered and apply fundamental analysis to
interpret those figures. Then they act on the market’s reaction to the data.
The main areas of economic releases are divided into balance of payments; gross domestic product (GDP) and output reports; confidence and
sentiment reports; leading indicators; prices, salaries, and wages; spending
figures; monetary policy; and employment and housing.
