A. The world seems slightly different to me.
B. Various sounds and noises start to irritate me.
C. I no longer feel a sense of ease and calm.
18. When I get focused and motivated, I immediately:
A. View things from a brand new and positive perspective.
B. Tell myself that this new state of being is going to open up new doors.
C. Feel my body and mind getting excited.
19. When someone tells me, “I love you,” my first reaction is:
A. To form an image of the two of us being together or of that person loving me.
B. To hear my soul saying something like, “This is amazing.”
C. A feeling of great satisfaction and contentment.
20. Dying, for me, is closest to:
A. Seeing no more or seeing things in a brand new fashion.
B. Hearing nothing ever again or hearing things in a brand new fashion.
C. Feeling nothing ever again or feeling things in a brand new fashion.
Once you have completed this test, add up how many times you answered A, B, or C. For example, you might have A: 6, B: 4, C: 10. These results will give you an
idea about your dominant personality type. People generally react to and interpret the world around them through this filter. Get your scores together and we’ll move
on—you’ll want to have taken the test before we proceed so that your answers aren’t influenced by what you read next. The goal here is to get an honest assessment
of your personality traits and then learn how to best utilize those traits in your trading.

Personality Types and Trading—What You Don’t Know
About Yourself Can Hurt Your Trading
Nearly 60 percent of the population will have “A” as their highest-scoring trait. This indicates that a person’s dominant way of viewing the world is visual. It’s not
really known why this is so, but experts feel that it has to do with sight being our strongest sense, and that the majority of us were taught from birth to depend on our
eyes in order to make our way through life. Also, in today’s world, our input is largely through television, movies, computer screens, and printed copy—all of which
are heavily dependent on the eyes.
497

Visual people like daylight and are extremely mobile, and it’s easy to find them in professions that allow them visual expression. Nowhere is this more observable
than in the entertainment industry. Visual people are generally “movers and shakers” and like to move fast. They are drawn to this industry and its related fields as a
natural expression of who they are. These types of people naturally gravitate to professions such as painting, photography, and design. They also make great
marksmen, firefighters, and pilots.
In terms of trading, visual people adapt most quickly to this profession, as they depend largely on what is happening visually in front of them on the computer
screen to make decisions. This doesn’t mean that they will make the right decisions, but they are most naturally adapted to the world of trading. If they are untrained
in how the markets work, they will make the same mistakes as everyone else. Once they get some experience, however, they tend to be good at waiting for the charts
to set up before taking their entries. Yet, only experience teaches them how to manage their exits. A visual’s biggest weakness is watching the P&L fluctuate
throughout the trading day. It would be better for her to cover that up (a business card taped to the corner of the computer screen works well) and just focus on the
setups. Also, visuals tend to laser in on a price chart and ignore everything else, which can be a detriment to their trading. This is why it is helpful to have auditory
alerts on things like high tick readings and to listen to pit noise in the background so that visuals don’t get sucked into the extreme price action they are seeing on the
charts.
If your highest score was “B,” then your dominant personality trait is auditory. M y accountant is highly auditory, and I’ve noticed that the sounds around the
office occupy most of his attention. Auditory personality types relate to the world through the way things sound and in many respects are more sensitive to sounds
than visual people are to sight. Auditory people can be easily distracted by the most inoffensive sound, which can make it seem as if they are not paying attention to
you during a conversation. In reality, though, they are strong verbal communicators— it’s just that they hear every sound coming their way, and sometimes it distracts
them. They enjoy both talking with others and just talking out loud to themselves. Because of their innate internal ability to put thoughts into dialogue, experts believe
that most loners have this dominant personality type. Because of their heightened sensitivity to sound, auditories don’t tolerate harsh or disharmonic noise as well as
others do. Fire or ambulance sirens are major offenders, and you can spot an auditory easily by observing who on a street corner is holding his ears as an ambulance
screams past. Also, they have an incredible ability to listen so thoroughly and with such intent that data are absorbed and processed in their minds very quickly,
without needing to be translated into pictures. Because of this enhanced ability, auditories tend to gravitate to areas in life that permit the use of such superb listening
and communicative talents.
With regard to trading, this personality type has one strong advantage— the ability to sit alone in front of a computer for days at a time without going crazy. That is
an important part of trading, and this ability to be patient and wait and not feel isolated is a necessary trait to have. The downside of this personality type and trading
is that a chart isn’t really much use to an auditory, and such a person will frequently miss setups simply through not paying attention. Whereas a visual can stare at a
chart for hours because the red and green lights are fascinating, an auditory personality needs additional input. Audio alerts and pit noise are important tools for
auditories, and I know some of these personality types who don’t even look at price charts. They just listen for audio alerts and then place their trades.
If your highest score was “C,” then you relate to the world around you by how you feel. People with this dominant personality trait long to be understood and
respected for being so in touch with their feelings. They tend to like a person because of how they feel when they are around that person, or they like a movie because
of how it made them feel when they were watching it. When they laugh, they let themselves go and really feel the laughter, giving the person they are talking to a sense
that they totally understand and agree with what was so funny. Type C personalities are able to translate visual images and acoustical data into feelings that are
pertinent to them and those around them. Type Cs enjoy conversations, but not for the same reason that visuals or auditories do. They use dialogue to translate words,
sounds, and images into feelings. While visuals and auditories are busy communicating with pictures and sounds, the type C personality is busily running through her
vast storehouse of feelings and attaching sensory meaning to what the other person has just said.
Because of their heightened ability to feel, you would assume that type Cs are introverts. However, the opposite is true. M oreover, because of their superior sense
of touch, type Cs make superior athletes. Any occupation that requires manual tasks is just plain easier for people with this personality type. Typical occupations
that are tailor-made for them usually have hands-on or feeling parameters. Psychologists, woodworkers, potters, surgeons, actors, all types of mechanics, and other
feeling- or sensory-based occupations are common among them.
For traders, people with this type of personality have the biggest struggle, and they usually don’t make it until they figure out how their personality is working
against them. A trader with a type C personality will wait until he senses that things are good or bad, or wait until he gets a sense about whether what he is doing or is
about to do is good or bad. Such a trader will literally get into trades when it feels good to do so, and get out when it feels bad. This almost always puts them in just as
a move is ending, and gets them out just as it is turning. For people with a type C personality, it feels bad to buy a market that is selling off into a pivot level. They
would rather wait to see a bounce so that they can “feel good” that the trade is going to work out. Of course, by the time this happens, they should actually be closing
out a position instead of initiating a new one. The solution to this is hard yet simple. If you are a type C, then just acknowledge that your feelings need to be faded. If
you are excited and feel good about going long, then you should be looking at the short side, and vice versa. If you are a type C, don’t despair. A type C who masters
this will have a distinct advantage over other traders. A type C who is unaware of this will always face an uphill battle when it comes to trading.
In terms of personality, no one is going to be 100 percent anything. I am primarily visual, then “feeling” is not far behind, and finally auditory makes up a small
portion of my overall personality profile. I’ve learned to set up my charts to take the best advantage of my dominant visual personality, listen to my feelings to get an
idea of what the amateur traders are doing and thus “fade my feelings,” and set up audio alerts to make sure my eyes aren’t the only thing that are responsible for my
trading decisions. Learning this about myself made me a better trader.

Trading Really Isn’t That Easy—Alternatives to
Consider for Jump-Starting Progress
The harsh truth is that trading isn’t for everyone, but the problem is, you won’t know whether it’s for you or not until you give it a shot. It takes guts, courage, and
years to become good enough to do it for a living. M y advice is to start out small. Whatever amount you start with is your tuition money—you are going to lose it, and
that is your educational fee for entrance into this world. Do yourself a favor and trade small until you start getting consistent with your setups. If it still isn’t working
out after a few years and you are getting ulcers, or if you figure out that you’d rather be playing golf, there are other options.
First off, learning about trading by reading a book is about like learning about golfing by reading a book. Both require what are called complex execution skills.
Reading will help in the understanding, but not the doing. Other examples of this are:
• Learning a native language or a second language

498

• Driving a car
• Playing a sport (baseball, football, hockey, and so on)
• Snow skiing or water skiing
• Playing a musical instrument
• M ath
• M orality
• Computer programming
• Playing poker or bridge
• Flying a plane and getting a pilot’s license
• Trading and investing
• Tuning a piano or working on a car engine
• Being a doctor or a lawyer
Activities that require complex execution skills are learned by 99 percent of the population in exactly the same way. How is that? They have to have at least one
other human being physically beside them teaching them for an extended period of time.
For trading, this often isn’t practical. It’s easy to practice in isolation. It’s hard to find someone who (1) can really trade and (2) will let you sit next to her for an
extended period of time. This need to have someone with you is why the Stockholm syndrome happens. Physical contact with kidnappers changes the perspective of
those who are held in captivity because the captured feel what their kidnappers feel and end up mimicking their kidnappers’ rules, sentiments, actions, and so forth.
It’s the way human beings learn and operate. Humans see others around them and discover what, why, and how they do things, and this is how humans learn and start
to mimic. Those who don’t have physical contact with kidnappers may read and understand what the cause of the capture is, but that pales in comparison to the
changes that are taking place in the minds of the victims who are being held hostage.
For me, I had to spend time and sit side by side with other traders before I turned the corner to consistency. In sitting beside these traders, it was helpful to hear
them talk about what they were doing and why, but that was only about 40 percent of what I learned. The rest of it had to do with what they weren’t saying or doing.
They weren’t getting upset if they missed a move. They weren’t answering the phone when it rang. Also, there were many things they did and habits they had that
they weren’t even aware of until I pointed it out to them. It was these unconscious trading habits that I picked up that really helped me out as well—just observing
and absorbing how a professional trader spent his day. To that end, if you really want to do this, I would encourage you to find an experienced trader and just spend a
week sitting next to him. That was what turned the corner for me. If you can’t find anyone, there are a few times a year when we will hold weeklong “mentorships” at
my trading office (see Figure 25.1). Traders can sign up to come and spend time side by side with me and some of the other traders I work with and just watch what
we do. After a few days, we will then have the visiting traders start making trades while we observe and make comments. If they do a good job following their own
rules, we’ll let them make some trades in one of the various funds that we run. Part of their homework while they are with us is to develop a full trading plan like the
one I shared earlier. The goal is that when they leave, they will never again have to wonder what they should be doing when they are staring at the charts. They will
have a plan to follow, and they will just wait for specific things to happen “according to plan.”

499

Figure 25.1
John Carter (outset) and Hubert S enters (closest in) showing Bill S hugg (center) how they trade.
If that’s not an option? Then one thing you can do is record your trades while you do them in a program like Camtasia. This allows you to go back and review your
trade “live” as it unfolded. This is like a quarterback watching the game films, trying to better understand what he and his players did and how the other team tried to
work against them. This is great information to have as a trader: to be able to go back, look objectively at your own mistakes, and see ways to improve. Be more
patient? Don’t chase? It’s a great way to get to the next level.
There are also programs available in which specific setups can be auto-traded by a number of brokers. There are brokers who do this with my own setups and
newsletter plays. However, the setups I use are shorter-term in nature, volatile, and not appropriate for everyone.
There is no shame in throwing in the towel when it comes to trading. For many, quitting trading is the best trade they ever made. They are not stressed out, they let
someone else manage their accounts, and best of all, they understand what is going on because they have already been there themselves. Visit
www.tradethemarkets.com/tips for updates and ideas on how to work through this journey called trading.
Practice does not make perfect. Only perfect practice makes perfect.
—VINCE LOMBARDI

500

26
Mastering the Trade
Amateurs Hope; Professionals Steal
Professionals steal money from amateurs because amateurs hope, close their eyes, and unwittingly allow professionals to drain their accounts.
The sum of my trading experience is this: I’ve learned that being a professional is all about maintaining a specific state of mind while trading, and traders are never
going to make consistent money until they achieve that frame of reference from which to operate. All the successful traders I know blew out their account at least once
before they became consistently profitable. Along these lines, I’ve composed a list of 40 “trading tips” for staying in this professional state of mind. These “tips” are
not meant to make a trader conservative or hesitant. On the contrary, trading takes guts, and by following these tips, traders will be given the key that will allow them
to embrace risk and take the necessary chances required in the pursuit of capital gain. That is, traders will feel more compelled to take a chance because they know they
are also going to fight to protect their capital. They won’t freeze and lie helpless as it is whittled away.
This is a list I’ve developed specifically for myself. When I use the term you, I’m referring to “me.” Feel free to add to these tips or modify them to fit your own
personality and trading style.
At home, we have a llama named Shim. (We called the animal “Shim” because when we got it, the beast had so much hair that we couldn’t tell whether it was a “she”
or a “him.” We later discovered that Shim was a she.) I have a photo of myself with Shim up in my office as a reminder about the markets. Shim may seem nice and
docile, but if you stare in her eyes too long or make any sudden movements, she will spit up the nastiest, most vile liquid right into your face. Her aim is deadly
accurate. In the markets, never let your guard down. Otherwise Shim (is the market a he or a she?) will get you right between the eyes.

40 Trading Tips for Maintaining a Professional State of Mind
1. Trading is simple, but it’s not easy. If you want to stay in this business, leave hope at the door, focus on specific setups, and stick to your stops.
2. When you get into a day trade, watch for an 800 reading in the opposite direction from your trade for signs that you are wrong. This might allow you to get out of
your trade before your stop is hit.
3. Trading should be boring, like factory work. If there is one guarantee in trading, it is that thrill seekers and impulse traders get their accounts ground into parking
meter money.
4. Amateur traders turn into professional traders once they stop looking for the “next great technical indicator” and start controlling their risk on each trade.
5. You are trading other traders, not the actual stock or futures contract. Who is taking the other side of your trade? Is it an amateur who is chasing or a professional
who has been patiently waiting for this entry all day? You have to be aware of the psychology and emotions on both sides of the trade.
6. Be very aware of your own emotions. Irrational behavior is every trader’s downfall. If you are yelling at your computer screen, imploring your stocks to move in
your direction, you have to ask yourself, “Is this rational?” Ease in. Ease out. Keep your stops. No yelling. The person who is screaming should be the one on the
other side of your trade.
7. Watch yourself if you get too excited—excitement increases risk because it clouds judgment. If you are feeling peak excitement, it probably means that the move is
just about over. Tighten your stop and look to reverse.
8. Don’t overtrade—be patient and wait for three to five good trades.
9. If you come into trading with the idea of making big money, you are doomed. When accounts are blown out, this mindset is responsible most of the time.
10. Don’t focus on the money. Focus on executing trades well. If you are getting into and out of trades rationally, the money will take care of itself.
11. If you focus on the money, you will start trying to impose your will upon the market in order to meet your financial needs. There is only one outcome for this
scenario: you will hand over all your money to traders who are focused on protecting their risk and letting their winners run.
12. The best way to minimize risk is not to trade. This is especially true during the doldrums, between 11:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. eastern. If your stocks or other
markets aren’t acting right, then don’t trade them. Just sit and watch them and try to learn something. By doing this, you are being proactive in reducing your risk
and protecting your capital. The most common problem with losing traders is that they feel that they always have to be in a trade.
13. There is no need to trade five days a week. Trade four days a week, and you will be sharper during the actual time you are trading.
14. Refuse to damage your capital. This means sticking to your stops and sometimes staying out of the market.
15. Stay relaxed. Place a trade and set a stop. If you get stopped out, that means that you are doing your job. You are actively protecting your capital. Professional
traders actively take small losses. Amateurs resort to hope and sometimes prayer to save their trade. In life, hope is a powerful and positive thing. In trading,
resorting to hope is like placing acid on your skin—the longer you leave it there, the worse the situation will get.
16. Never let a day trade turn into an overnight trade. An overnight trade should be planned as an overnight trade before the trade is ever entered.

501

17. Keep winners as long as they are moving your way. Let the market take you out at your target or with a trailing stop. Don’t use impulse exits. Every exit is taken
for a specific reason based on parameters that have been clearly defined.
18. Don’t overweight your trades. The more you overweight a trade, the more hope comes into play when the trade goes against you. Remember, hope in trading is like
acid on skin.
19. There is no logical reason to hesitate in taking a stop. Reentry is only a commission away.
20. Professional traders take losses. Being wrong and not taking a loss damages your own belief in yourself and your abilities. If you can’t trust yourself to stick to
your stops, whom can you trust?
21. Once you take a loss, you naturally forget about the trade and move on. Do yourself a favor and take advantage of any opportunity to clear your head by taking a
small loss.
22. In general, you should never let one position go against you by more than 2 percent of your account equity. M any setups work out better if you can use a larger
stop. Instead of trading 20 E-mini contracts with a 1-point stop, trade 10 contracts with a 2-point stop or 5 contracts with a 4-point stop. The monetary loss is
exactly the same, but one set of these parameters will work better on a particular setup than all the others. Find out what works best for your setup and adjust
your parameters accordingly.
23. Get a feel for market direction by “drilling down.” Look at the monthly charts, then the weekly, daily, 60-minute, 15-minute, and 5-minute charts to get the best
