
other scenario. We'll assume Biomet can grow faster starting in year six, and


BIOMET 173

Assumptions for Biomet

Current stack price: $29.00
Shares outstanding {mil} 258.0
Next year's free cash flaw {mil} $180.00
Perpetuity growth rate (g) 3.0%
Discount rate (R) 9.0%

10-Year Valuation Model for Biomet

Step 1: Forecast free cash flow (FCF) for the next 10 years.
Assumes 15% growth rate for years 1-5; 10% growth rate for years 6-10. Free cash flows in $ millions.

Yr Yr? Yr3. Yr Yr Yr 6 YW? Yr 8 Yr Yr 10
Free cash flow > 180.0 207.0 238.1 273.8 3148 362.0 398.3 438.1 460.0 483.0

Step 2: Discount these free cash flaws to reflect the present value.
Discount Factor = (1 + A)" (where R = discount rate and N = year being discounted)

Yrd Yr2 Yr3 Yr4 WS = Yr 6 YW?  YrB Yr9 Yr 10

Free cash flow 180.0 207.0 238.1 2738 3148 362.0 398.3 438.1 460.0 483.0
= Discount factor 1.09 1.08 1.09 1.09" 1,09 1.09 1.09" 1.09" 1.09" 1.09"
= Discounted FCF + 165.1 174.2 1838 193.9 2046 2159 217.9 2199 211.8 204.0

Step 3: Calculate the perpetuity value and discount it to the present.
Perpetuity Value = Yr 10 FOF X {1 +9) (RA — g) (where g = perpetuity growth rate and A = discount rate)

Perpetuity value > (483.0 x 1.03) + (.09—.03) = $8,291.16
Discounted > $8,291.16 + 1.0910 = $3,602.27

Step 4: Calculate total equity value.
Add the discounted perpetuity value (above) to the sum of the 10 discounted cash flows (see step 2)

Total equity value > $1,991.13 + $3,502.27 = $5,493.40

Step 5: Calculate per share value.
Divide total equity value by shares outstanding

Persharevalue + $5,493.40 + 258 = $21.29

Figure 11.14 Valuing Biomet using discounted cash flaw. Source: Morningstar, Inc.


174

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER

Biomet Yr 6 W7 ¥r8 WO Yr10) Yr 140 Yr 12, Yr 138 Yr 14 Yr 15

Freecash flow($mil} 362 406 454 509 570 638 702 772 849 934
Growth rate (%} 12 12 12 12 12 10 10 10 10 10
Present value($mil) 216 222 228 234 241 247-250-252, 2A 2?

Figure 11.15 Biamet’s free cash flow estimates from year 6 anward.

we'll push our forecast horizon out to 15 years, at which time we assume that
Biomet’s growth rate declines to a steady state of 3 percent (see Figure 11.15).

This set of assumptions results in an estimated intrinsic value per share of
about $30, which is right around where the shares are trading as of this writing.
Assuming this is a reasonable scenario, I'd start getting interested in the stock
at around $24, which would be a 20 percent discount to my estimated intrinsic
value. I’m not looking for much of a margin of safety because Biomet's strong
balance sheet, excellent industry prospects, and solid profitability all make it
less likely that something will go horribly wrong with my assumptions.

However, this process has taught us something very important: For us to
believe that Biomet’s shares are worth $30, rather than $20, we have to believe
that the firm can hold off its competition and grow at an above-average rate
for a long period of time. Companies that can increase free cash flow at an av-
erage annual rate of 12 percent for a lengthy period of time—which is what
our second scenario assumes—are few and far between, after all.

This is the key benefit of a discounted cash flow approach to valuation.
Having thought through a couple of possible scenarios for Biomet, we now
know exactly what assumptions are incorporated in our estimated intrinsic
value of $30 per share. Armed with that knowledge, we can make a more in-
formed investment decision—we wouldn't know as much about the assump-
tions needed to believe that the stock is reasonably valued if we'd just looked at
the current P/E relative to the historical average P/E. For example, we should
probably pay very close attention to Biomet’s competitive position relative to
other firms in the industry, as well as to any signs that the long-term demand
for orthopedic devices might be slowing, because those two factors are what

moved our value estimate from $20 to $30.


CONCLUSION

Conclusion
There you have it—real-world application of the tools of fundamental analy-
sis, in a simplified form, is exactly what we do at Morningstar every day.
This is some pretty painstaking stuff, and it’s not reasonable to do a super-
thorough analysis of every single company you investigate. In the real world,
time is short, so even the pros use shortcuts to help separate the companies that
really are worth a great deal of analytical time from the ones that are unlikely
to be good investments. In the next chapter, I show you exactly how to sepa-
rate the wheat from the chaff when you're trying to narrow down a list of in-

vestment candidates to the ones that are really worth a thorough investigation.

175




I2

The 10-Minute Test

WITH LITERALLY THOUSANDS of companies available to invest in, one of
the toughest challenges for any investor is figuring out which ones are worth
detailed examination and which ones aren't. Now that you know the tools of
in-depth fundamental analysis, | want to give you some tips on narrowing
down the field. Apply the following tests to any stock that you think might
be a worthwhile investment, and you should be able to decide in 10 minutes
whether it warrants much of your time.

In fact, I'll bet that asking the questions in this chapter will allow you to
eliminate at least half—if not more—of the stocks you run across from con-
sideration. Throwing out less-promising stocks early in the process will
leave you more time to investigate and value the ones that really might be
great investments.

Two caveats before we start: First, these rules of thumb are starting
points, no more and no less. There are exceptions to every guideline I list in
this chapter. These shortcuts aren't designed to cover every possible situa-
tion—but if you apply them, they will eliminate poor investments more

often than not.


THE IO-MINUTE TEST

Second, although the following list of questions might seem daunting
at first, you can answer all of them using a compilation of 10 years’ worth of

financial data that’s available on Morningstar.com.

Does the Firm Pass a Minimum Quality Hurdle?

Avoiding the junk that litters the investment landscape is the first step in our
10-minute test. Companies with miniscule market capitalizations and firms
that trade on the bulletin boards (or pink sheets) are the first ones to rule out.
Also avoid foreign firms that don’t file regular financials with the SEC—even
some large foreign firms issue only brief press releases each quarter and pub-
lish full financials only once per year.

Finally, recent initial public offerings (IPOs) are usually not worth your
time. Companies sell shares to the public only when they think they're getting
a high price, so [POs are rarely bargains. Moreover, most IPOs are young, un-
seasoned firms with short track records. The big exception to this rule is firms
that are spun off from larger parent companies. Spinoffs are often solid com-
panies with long operating histories that the larger firm no longer wants to

manage, and the stocks can often be attractively valued as well.

Has the Company Ever Made an Operating Profit?

This test sounds simple, but it'll keep you out of a lot of trouble. Very often,
companies that are still in the money-losing stage sound the most exciting —
they're investigating a novel treatment for some rare disease, or they're about
to offer some exciting new product or service, the likes of which the world
has never seen.

Unfortunately, stocks like this will also blow up your portfolio more often
than not. They usually have only a single product or service in the pipeline,
and the eventual viability of the product or service will make or break the
company. (Going by the statistics of how many start-ups fail, break is a more
likely occurrence than make.) Unless you're looking for an alternative to lot-

tery tickets, take a pass on any firm that hasn't yet proven it can carn a buck.

Does the Company Generate Consistent Cash Flow from Operations?
Fast-growing firms can sometimes report profits before they generate cash—but

every company has to generate cash eventually. Companies with negative cash


HOW CLEAN IS THE BALANCE SHEET?

flow from operations will eventually have to seek additional financing by selling
bonds or issuing more shares. The former will likely increase the riskiness of the

firm, whereas the latter will dilute your ownership stake as a shareholder.

Are Returns on Equity Consistently above 10 Percent,
with Reasonable Leverage?
Use 10 percent as a minimum hurdle. Ifa nonfinancial firm can’t post ROEs
over 10 percent for four years out of every five, for example, odds are good
that it’s not worth your time. For financial firms, raise your ROE bar to 12
percent. Don’t forget to check leverage to make sure that it’s in line with in-
dustry norms. A 15 percent ROE generated with minimal leverage is a much
higher quality result than one generated using lots of leverage.

One exception is that cyclical firms—companies whose results vary
strongly with the general economy—may have wildly varying results from
year to year. However, the best will make money and post decent ROEs even

when times are tough.

Is Earnings Growth Consistent or Erratic?

The best companies post reasonably consistent growth rates. If a firm’s earn-
ings bounce all over the place, it’s either in an extremely volatile industry or
it’s regularly getting shellacked by competitors. The former is not necessarily
bad as long as the long-term industry outlook is good and the shares are
cheap, but the latter is potentially a big problem.

How Clean Is the Balance Sheet?

Firms with a lot of debt require extra care because their capital structures are
often very complicated. If a nonbank firm has a financial leverage ratio
above about 4—or a debt-to-equity ratio over 1.0—ask yourself the follow-

ing questions:

> Is the firm in a stable business? Firms in industries such as consumer prod-
ucts and food can withstand more leverage than economically sensitive
firms with volatile earnings.

> Has debt been going down or up as a percentage of total assets? One thing you

don't want to see in a highly leveraged firm is even more debt.

179


180 THE IO-MINUTE TEST

> Do you understand the debt? Ifa quick glance at the 10-K reveals question-
able debt and quasi-debt instruments that you can't wrap your head
around, move on. There are many fine companies out there with simpler

capital structures.

Does the Firm Generate Free Cash Flow?

As we know, free cash flow is the holy grail—cash generated after capital ex-
penditures that truly increases the value of the firm. Generally, you should
prefer firms that create free cash to ones that don't and firms that create more
free cash to ones that create less. As I discussed in Chapter 6, divide free cash
flow by sales, and use 5 percent asa rough benchmark.

The one exception—and it’s a big one—is that it’s fine for a firm to be
generating negative free cash flow #f it’s investing that cash wisely in projects
that are likely to pay off well in the future. For example, neither Starbucks
nor Home Depot generated meaningful free cash flow until 2001—yet there’s
no question that they had been creating economic value (and shareholder
wealth) for many years before 2001. That’s because they were plowing every
cent they earned right back into their businesses because their management
teams believed that they still had many high-return investment opportunities
for the cash they were generating.

So don’t automatically write off firms with negative free cash flow if they
have solid ROEs and pass the other tests in this chapter. Just be sure you be-
lieve that the firm really is reinvesting the cash wisely.

How Much “Other” Is There?

Companies can hide many bad decisions in supposedly one-time charges, so
if firm is already questionable on some other front and has a history of tak-
ing big charges, take a pass. Not only are charge-happy firms more difficult to
analyze because of their complicated financials, but numerous charges hint at

a management team that may be trying to burnish poor results.

Has the Number of Shares Outstanding Increased
Markedly over the Past Several Years?
If so, the firm is either issuing new shares to buy other companies or granting

numerous options to employees and executives. The former is a red flag because


BEYOND THE 10 MINUTES

most acquisitions fail, and the latter is not something you want to see because
it means that your ownership stake in the firm is slowly shrinking as employees
exercise their options. If shares outstanding are consistently increasing by more
than around 2 percent per year—assuming no big acquisitions—think long
and hard before investing in the firm.

However, if the number of shares is actually shrinking, the company po-
tentially gets a big gold star. Firms that buy back many shares are returning
excess cash to shareholders, which is generally a responsible thing to do. Just
be careful that the company isn’t going hog-wild with share repurchases even
as their shares keep zooming ever upward because stock repurchases are a
good use of capital only when the company’s shares are trading for a reason-
able valuation. You don’t want to see a company buying its own overvalued

stock any more than you want to invest in overvalued shares yourself.

Beyond the 10 Minutes
If the firm does pass these tests and it looks as though it’s worth a detailed
examination, here’s how to proceed. This research process will take much

longer than 10 minutes, but it’s worth the effort for an idea that passes the

initial hurdles:

> Look over the 10-year summary balance sheet, income statement, and
statement of cash flows on Morningstar.com or another Web site. Look
for trends, and make notes of anything that raises an eyebrow and de-
serves further investigation. This process should give you an initial road
map for investigation.

> Read the most recent 10-K filing front to back. Pay special attention to
the sections that describe the company and its industry, the sections
about risks and competition, any mention of legal issues (sometimes la-
beled “commitments and contingencies”), and the “management's discus-
sion and analysis” section. The latter is where the firm explains, in
reasonably plain English, why the most recent year’s financial results were
what they were. Write down anything you don't understand or which you
want to investigate further. You don’t necessarily need to read every page
of the 10-k—sometimes firms include scores of pages of mind-numbing

detail about leases, for example—but you should at least skim every page

181


182

THE IO-MINUTE TEST

to make sure there’s nothing buried in the text that you do need to know.
Be on the watch for any sections that describe loans, guarantees, contrac-
tual obligations, or the like. If the firm is going to owe someone a large
amount of money in a few years, you need to know about it.

Read the two most recent proxies (form DEF-14A, in the SEC’s jargon).
Look for reasonable compensation that varies with corporate financial
performance and a reasonable options-granting policy. Check to make
sure the board of directors isn’t packed with individuals with close ties to
management.

Read the most recent annual report, as well as the past two years’ reports, if
possible, to get a feel for the company. Is the letter to shareholders candid
and frank, or does management gloss over problems with jargon? Ignoring
problems won't make them go away, after all. In addition, does the firm
present industry information to give you context for evaluating it? Does
the report look as though the firm spent way too much money on it?
Look at the two most recent quarterly earnings reports and 10-Q filings to
see whether anything has changed recently. Look for signs that business is
getting better—or worse—as well as for anything major that has changed
since the last 10-x. If it’s still available, listen to the most recent quarterly
conference call. (Companies often archive these on their Web sites for
some time after the quarter is over.) Does management get defensive or
evasive when analysts ask tough questions, or does it respond with
straightforward answers?

Start valuing the stock. Look at the stock’s valuation multiples relative to
the market, the industry, and the stock’s historical valuation ranges. If the
firm has low reinvestment needs, low risk, high returns on capital, or a
high growth rate, be prepared to accept a higher price-to-earnings ratio.
Do at least a very rough discounted cash flow valuation—think about
how much free cash flow the firm is likely to generate next year, how fast
it will grow, and add the discounted value of these cash flows to a perpe-
tuity value. If your estimated intrinsic value is very different from the
market price, check your assumptions. Are you being too pessimistic or
too optimistic? If you recheck your assumptions, the stock still looks un-
dervalued, and your multiple-based analysis didn’t scream “sell,” you

might just have uncovered a great investment.


13

A Guided Tour of the Market

IN THE PREVIOUS chapter, I discussed easy ways to home in on companies
that will be worth your while. In the next section of the book, we'll focus on
tools for understanding different areas of the market.

As I said in Chapter 3, it’s easier for companies to make money in some
industries than in others. Moreover, some industries lend themselves to the
creation of economic moats more so than others, and these are the industries
where you'll want to spend most of your time. Although we don’t advocate a
top-down investment strategy—in which you select areas of the market that
you think will perform better than others and invest heavily in your top-rated
industries—the economics of some industries are superior to others. Hence,
you should spend more time learning about attractive industries than unat-
tractive ones.

Every industry has its own unique dynamics and set of jargon—and some
industries (such as financial services) even have financial statements that look
very different from the ones we discussed in Chapter 5. I asked Morningstar's
staff of 30 equity analysts to put together a series of chapters covering just
about every corner of the market. These chapters should help you wade

through the different economics of each industry and understand how


184 A GUIDED TOUR OF THE MARKET

companies in each industry can create economic moats—which strategies

work and how you can identify companies pursuing those strategies.

Where to Look
Because you're likely as pressed for time as every other person with a day job
who also manages his or her own investments, let me try to briefly steer you

toward some areas of the market that are definitely worth more of your time.

Banks and Financial Services

In general, most financial services firms are in excellent economic positions as
middlemen for money. Banks in particular enjoy the enviable position of
paying very little to hold on to depositors’ money (when you consider the
low rates on checking accounts and all of the fee income that such accounts
generate), which they then turn around and lend out at substantially higher
interest rates than they're paying to depositors. In fact, some banks do so well
at levying fees and cross-selling financial products that depositors literally pay
the bank to hold their money. Moreover, because banks have somewhat con-
fusing financial statements, many investors simply pass them by or look at
only the biggest and most well-known firms. By learning what makes banks
and other financial services firms tick, you'll be ahead of most investors, and
because this ground is less picked-over, you'll likely find some solid invest-
ment ideas as well. (Financial services is such a broad area of the market that
we've devoted two chapters to the area—one on banks and one on asset man-

agers and insurance companies.)

Business Services

This is the ultimate catchall area of the market, so many investors pass it by.
That's a shame because it contains some very attractive firms. In addition to
larger industries such as data processing—which is boring but profitable as
can be—business services is packed with niche firms that dominate their cor-
ner of the economy. Cintas, for example, has generated an enormous amount
of shareholder wealth by convincing companies that it can design and main-
tain employee uniforms better than employers can. Who would have thought
that renting uniforms could be so profitable? Moody's (which rates bonds)

and Equifax (which maintains a credit-scoring database) are other examples


CONCLUSION

of highly profitable but not-so-well-known firms with strong positions in
niche industries.

Business services firms often fly beneath the market’s radar because they
don’t fit neatly into the industry-oriented coverage lists of Wall Street analysts—
there are usually only a few public companies in any one niche, so the industry
specialists on Wall Street tend to pass them by. Asa result, the stocks don’t get
hyped as much to institutional investors. (The other reason companies in this
area tend to get less attention from Wall Street is that they're usually self
funding, which means they don’t need many investment banking services.) Less
attention from Wall Street can mean more opportunity for smart investors, so

don't ignore business services.

Health Care

This area of the market is similar to financial services because the long-term
demand outlook is very strong, and companies tend to be highly profitable.
As our Biomet analysis in Chapter 11 showed, even smaller firms can build
lasting economic moats. Tread carefully with biotechs and some managed-
care firms, though. Most biotechs are single-product lottery tickets, and most
managed-care firms are affected by truly arcane regulatory issues—seemingly
minor changes in Medicare rules can have a huge impact.

Media

Finally, spend some time getting to know the media business. Many media
companies build moats around themselves through natural oligopolies or
monopolies—there’s little demand for more than a couple of daily news-
papers in any one city, for example. Moreover, media is one of the few indus-
tries in which product vendors are paid before they have to deliver anything,
because a large amount of media is sold via subscription. Can you imagine
getting paid on January 1 for the coming year’s work? That’s how many media
