
182

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

C
B

A

Figure 6.10 The Chandelier Exit
In an uptrend, the Chandelier Exit hangs from its uppermost point, 3
Average True Ranges below the extreme. It does a good job of helping
catch the bulk of the uptrend, stopping traders out and protecting profits
at points A, B, and C. Notice that as volatility increases the Chandelier
gives a stock a little wider stop, receding from prices.
At the right edge of the chart, the Chandelier Exit has taken profits just
as the decline got under way. Wait until your system gives you a new buy
signal, and when it does, hang a new Chandelier on that trend.

Experienced traders sometimes joke that bear markets have no support and bull markets no resistance. A runaway trend can overshoot all
rational expectations. The Chandelier deals with that by tying its stops
to the price extreme as well as volatility.
The negative side of Chandelier Exits is that they give up a great deal
of profit. Three Average True Ranges can amount to a lot of money in
a volatile market. A beginning trader is better off taking his profits at
the channel wall. A more advanced trader whose market is hitting its
channel wall while showing great strength is more likely to switch to
a Chandelier Exit. If he holds a large position, he may take partial profits at the channel wall and carry the rest using the Chandelier. The
Chandelier Exit may act a backup exit strategy for experienced traders.
Gamblers lose fortunes trying to nail tops and bottoms. A good trader
is a realist who wants to grab a chunk from the body of a trend, leaving

TRADING

183

top- and bottom-fishing to people on an ego trip. The Chandelier Exit
helps take care of that chunk.

CHOOSING WHAT TO TRADE
Open a newspaper, and thousands of listings leap at you from the
pages—stocks, mutual funds, futures, options, bonds, currencies. Your
data provider may offer a menu of 20,000 items or more. Were you to
download and review all of them, spending just two seconds on each,
that process would take 11 hours.
Beginners worry about missing opportunities and try to look at as
many markets as possible. They often ask for advice on scanning software. They want to sift through thousands of stocks for something
like a bullish divergence in MACD-Histogram. First of all, divergences,
so visible to the naked eye, are notoriously hard to program. The best
programmer I know tells me he’s done it—it is the pinnacle of his
success—using the most expensive software. Even if a beginner could
get hold of his program, that expense would be wasted because he
wouldn’t know what to do with the stocks he found in that search.
He wouldn’t know how to trade them correctly. A beginner is better
off focusing on a handful of markets, learning all about them, and trading them with care and attention.
You are better off limiting yourself to as many markets as you can
realistically follow each day. Professionals study their markets daily to
detect transitions from sleepy trading ranges to new trends. The best
time to profit from a trend is before it becomes overpriced and volatile.
Markets that make headlines tend to be overpriced and volatile. If
you read an article on the front page of a financial newspaper about
a bull market in biotech stocks or see a report on the evening news
about the high price of coffee, those trends are probably nearer the
end than the beginning, and buying biotech stocks or coffee futures is
probably very dangerous.
To understand a person or a group, it pays to know what they want
and what they fear. Journalists and editors most fear making a mistake
that will make them look foolish. They report trends only after anyone
can see them because that way there is no mistake. Even if they knew
how to catch trends early, which they don’t, they wouldn’t dare print
their findings for fear of being wrong and appearing ignorant. Traders
aren’t afraid of mistakes as long as they use money management, but
journalists cannot afford such risks. By the time they write up a trend,

184

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

it has been going on for a while, volatility is high, risk management is
difficult, and a major reversal is probably in the cards.
Should you trade stocks or futures, currencies or options? Options
are rough for beginners, who should learn to trade the underlying securities first, whether stocks or futures. People outside the United States
are often drawn to currencies, forgetting that those are truly global
markets, and when you trade them, you go against banks that have
traders in all time zones. The choice between stocks or futures is seldom made on a rational basis. Trading stocks seems more respectable,
while futures have more of a swashbuckling reputation. Futures get
their wild image from their enormous leverage. If you scrupulously
observe money management rules, they become much safer and less
nerve-racking.

Stocks
Stocks tend to move more slowly than futures, thus reducing risks for
beginners, especially those who avoid margin. It is one of the mysteries
of markets that cash traders are more likely to win, and margin traders
to lose. Why? Interest rates on margin loans are a serious expense, raising a barrier to winning, but there’s more. People who buy stocks for
cash tend to feel more relaxed, buying as much or as little as they
want. Margin traders are more likely to feel stressed. An anxious trader
is a troubled trader. It is better to buy only what you can afford, polish your skills, and the money will follow.
The sheer number of stocks drives people to distraction. Beginners
throw their arms in the air and beg for a list of stocks to follow. A disciplined trader makes several choices that help him concentrate. He
begins by selecting an industry group or groups and then zeros in on
individual stocks.
A beginner should start with one or two groups, an intermediate
trader can go up to four or five, and an expert knows how many he
can handle. Chances are, he sticks to the few groups he knows well.
Begin by choosing a group that you think has a great future or one in
which you have a personal interest. For example, you may decide to
concentrate on biotechnology because of its promise or the hospitality
industry because that’s where you work.
Select a broad rather than a narrow group. For example, if you
decide to track autos, look not just at car manufacturers, but also at
companies that make auto parts, tires, etc. The disadvantage of focusing

TRADING

185

on a single group is that you miss spectacular moves in others, but
there are several advantages. You learn which stocks tend to lead or
follow. When leaders start to move, they give you an advance signal
to trade the laggards. You can use relative strength, that is, buy the
strongest stocks when the group moves up and short the weakest on
the way down. You can create an index that includes all the stocks you
follow in your industry group, and then analyze that index. This analytic tool is not available to any other trader. If you use fundamental
analysis, then having your finger on the pulse of a single industry, such
as software, puts you miles ahead of competitors who trade Microsoft
today and McDonald’s tomorrow.
A broadly defined industry group may include over a hundred stocks,
but an intelligent beginner should not follow more than a dozen. We
can divide all stocks into blue chips and speculative “cats and dogs.”
Blue chips are the stocks of large, well-established companies, held by
many institutions and followed by many researchers. They have a fairly
well-established consensus of value around which they more or less
gently oscillate. If you design a system for catching their swings
several times each year, the potential gains can be very attractive. Don’t
ignore the big Dow-type stocks. Their orderly swings from the moving
average to the channel wall create good trading opportunities.
The so-called cats and dogs may spend months, if not years, flat at the
bottom, in a speculative doghouse, until a fundamental change, or even
a rumor of change, propels them to a breakout and a new uptrend.
Other cats and dogs may go nowhere or expire. Those stocks offer much
higher percentage gains than blue chips, but the risks are greater and
you must spend a great deal of time waiting for them to move. It makes
sense to trade a large portion of your account in blue chips, while keeping a smaller portion in longer-term speculative positions.
What if you’ve paid your dues, learned to trade a few stocks in a
few groups, and now want to forage in wider pastures? After all, technical patterns and signals are not all that different in various markets.
What if you want to scan a larger number of stocks for MACD divergences, Impulse breakouts, or other patterns that you learned to recognize, trust, and trade?
Go on the Internet and find a website that gives you the 100 most
active stocks on the NASDAQ (and if you do not know how to find
such a website, you haven’t got what it takes to trade them). Keep
an eye on any stock that floats by you. A newspaper article mentions
several companies—look up their stocks. People at a party talk about

186

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

stocks—jot them down, drop them into your system, and see how
they look on your screen. Many tips call for an exercise of contrary
thinking. In summer 2001, Lucent (LU) was in the news with another
earnings disappointment, having slid from 80 to 6. The journalists
were aghast, but that stock has completed its bear market, traced an
attractive bullish divergence, and was poised for a rally. A rise from 6
to 9 is a 50% increase. Stocks that people tout at parties are often good
candidates for shorting. By the time outsiders become interested, the
rise tends to be over. The idea is to maintain your curiosity and use
tips not on their face value but only as invitations to look at this or
that stock. I find that my yield, the percentage of tips that I end up
trading in either direction, is about 5%—I end up trading one out of 20.
I have a friend, a brilliant trader, who often calls me asking to take a
look at this or that stock. My yield on her tips is 10%—she is the best.
The Turnover Ratio The Turnover Ratio (TRO) predicts expected
volatility of any stock by comparing its average daily volume with the
available float. This formula was brought to my attention by Roger Perry
of The RightLine Report (www.rightline.net):
TRO = monthly volume divided by the available float
Volume for the past month is easy to calculate. The available float refers
to the total float, or number of shares issued, minus the holdings of institutions and insiders. Those groups tend to hold positions more tightly
than private traders, who are more likely to sell if the price is right. All
of the above figures are widely available from financial databases.
You can calculate the average monthly volume by multiplying the
daily volume by 22, the number of trading days in a month. Using
the daily volume makes the TRO more responsive to changes in volume
as a stock rolls into or out of favor with traders.
TRO shows how many times the float trades in a month. For example, if a stock’s monthly volume is 200 million shares and its available
float 100 million, its TRO is 2%. If monthly volume of another stock is
also 200 million, but its available float is 50 million, its TRO is 4.
If the average volume is much lower than the float, that stock has a
low turnover rate and an onrush of buyers is unlikely to move the
price much. However, if the volume is high relative to the float, then
a lot of people compete for few available shares, and a sudden rush of
buyers can move the price dramatically.

TRADING

187

High-TRO stocks tend to be more volatile. Whoever wants to buy
them has to pay a premium to pry them out of the hands of relatively
few holders. When a selling wave hits the markets, the stocks with high
TROs tend to go down harder because they do not have a large pool
of institutional holders looking to pick up extra shares at a discount.
All other factors being equal, the stock with a higher TRO will make a
bigger percentage move.
For example, at the time of this writing, the monthly volume in GE
was 355.9 million, with the available float of 9,809 million, resulting in
a turnover ratio of 4%. The figures for JNPR were 387.2 million, 155.6
million, and 249%. No wonder; GE is a slow-moving blue chip, whereas
JNPR is a high-flyer. Check these numbers once a month, as they keep
changing. Stock splits reduce TROs by increasing the float. One split
too many in DELL has oversaturated the market to the point where the
stock has become unattractive for day-traders.
Blue chips, such as General Electric and IBM, are widely held by
institutions and individuals. Their daily volume, no matter how high, is
but a tiny percentage of their float. New unseasoned stocks often have
very small floats, but when they catch the public’s eye, their daily volumes go sky-high, lifting the TRO.
You can keep close tabs on the TROs of stocks you track. Whenever
the market is active and running, switch into high-TRO stocks. Whenever the market goes into a choppy stage, switch to low-TRO stocks
and trade their swings. TRO can help you switch between aggressive
and defensive positions.
Trading Swings or Trends Whenever you glance at a chart, your eye
is immediately drawn to major rallies and declines. Big moves attract
us with their promise of a killing. Exactly who gets killed is a question
that seldom crosses beginners’ minds. The trouble with major rallies
and declines is that they are clearly visible in the middle of the chart,
but the closer you get to the right edge, the murkier they become.
Big uptrends are punctuated by drops, while downtrends are interrupted by rallies. Emotionally, it is extremely hard to hold a position
through a countertrend move. As profits melt away, we begin to wonder whether this is a temporary interruption or a full-blown reversal.
There is a strong temptation to grab what little money is left and run.
Shorter swings are easier to catch because price targets are closer and
stops are tighter.

188

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Should you trade long-term trends or short-term swings? Be sure to
decide before you put on a trade; it is easier to be objective when no
money is at risk. Different stocks have different personalities, which is
why trend traders and swing traders tend to follow different stocks.
Traders have three choices. Trend traders identify major trends
which run for months. Swing traders catch short-term swings between
optimism and pessimism, which last from a few days to a few weeks.
Day-traders enter and exit during the same trading session, with trades
lasting only minutes or hours.
Successful trend trades that catch large moves bring in more money
per trade. Other advantages include having more time to decide when
to enter or exit, not being tied to the screen, and having the emotional
satisfaction of calling major moves. Trend trading does, however, have
its drawbacks. The stops are farther from the market—when they get
hit, you lose more. Also, you have to sit through long periods of inactivity, which many people find hard to tolerate, and you miss many
short-term trading opportunities.
Swing traders have more opportunities than trend traders, gaining
more experience from frequent trades. The dollar risk is lower thanks
to closer stops, and quick rewards provide emotional satisfaction.
Swing trading also has its drawbacks. Expenses for commissions and
slippage are higher, due to more frequent trading. You must work
every day, actively managing trades. Also, you are likely to miss major
moves—you can’t catch big fish on a small hook.
Trend trading—buying and holding in a major bull market—works
best with the type of stocks that Peter Lynch calls 10-baggers, those
that go up by a factor of 10. They are usually newer, cheaper, less seasoned issues. An Internet or a biotech company with a hot new invention, a new patent, or a new idea is more likely to go up by a huge
percentage than the stock of an old established firm. A small company
may bet its future on a single idea or product, and its stock will soar
if the public buys that bet or stay in the doghouse if it doesn’t. Had
a large multinational company come up with the same invention, its
stock would have barely budged because one more product makes
little difference for a huge firm.
The lure of big trends makes stocks of small companies in promising new industries attractive to trend traders. Swing traders should
select their candidates from among the most actively traded stocks on
major exchanges. Look for large-cap stocks which swing within broad,
well-defined channels.

TRADING

189

Once you choose a stock, don’t assume it will continue to behave
the same way forever. Companies change, and you must stay on top
of your picks. For example, DELL, started by Michael Dell in his college dorm room, used to be a tiny public company, but grew into one
of the largest computer firms in the world. A friend of mine bought
$50,000 worth of Dell in the early 1990s and cashed out three years
later at $2.3 million, but DELL’s days of spiking through the roof and
doubling twice a year are gone. Instead, this widely held stock has
become a vehicle for swing traders, and not a very active one at that.
A beginning trader is better off learning to catch swings, because
profit targets and stops are clearer, feedback comes faster, and money
management is easier. The choice between trend trading and swing
trading is partly objective and partly subjective. Should you trade trends
or swings? My impression, after meeting thousands of traders and
investors, is that the elite tend to trade the big moves and ride major
trends, but people who can do it successfully are few and far between.
There are many more traders who make money—sometimes very serious money—by trading swings. The principles of Triple Screen work
for both, even though the entries and especially the exits are different.
TREND TRADING Trend trading means holding your positions for a long
time, sometimes for months. It requires holding while your stocks react
against the main trend. Bull and bear markets are driven by shifts in
the fundamentals, such as new technologies and discoveries in the case
of stocks, weather patterns in the case of agricultural markets, political
shifts in the case of currencies, and so on. Fundamental factors are
behind bull and bear markets, but prices move only in response to
actions by traders and investors. When your fundamental information
forecasts a major move, you need to analyze the charts to see whether
the technicals confirm the fundamentals.
A market doesn’t send you an invitation before it takes off. When a
trend first climbs out of the cellar, few people pay attention. Amateurs
are fast asleep, while professionals monitor their markets and scan for
breakouts and divergences. Active markets get into the news because
the lows and especially the highs attract journalists. One of the key differences between the pros and the outsiders is that the pros always
track their markets, while amateurs wake up and look at charts only
after a market hits the news. By that time the train has already left the
station. The ABC Rating System, described on page 255, can help you
handle the challenge of tracking stocks through inactive periods.

190

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

A new breakout is easy to recognize but hard to trade and even
harder to hold. As a trend speeds up, more and more people pray for
a pullback. The stronger the trend, the less likely it is to accommodate
bargain hunters. It takes a lot of patience and confidence to hold a
position in a trend. Traders tend to be active men with the attitude of
“don’t just sit there, do something.” Learning to be passive comes hard
to them. One reason women tend to trade better is that they are more
likely to be patient.
How can you teach yourself to trade trends? You may begin by
studying historical charts, but remember, there is no substitute for
experience. The idea is to learn by doing. Start by putting on positions
so small that you can be relaxed and not tie your mind into a knot.
Trade only a few hundred shares or a single futures contract while
you’re learning.
To apply Triple Screen to trend trading, monitor long-term charts for
breakouts or look for well-established moves, identified by a weekly EMA.
When the weeklies tell you to be bullish or bearish, return to the dailies
and use oscillators to find entry points. Put on long positions in uptrends when prices touch their rising daily EMA and keep adding on
pullbacks. You can also add when daily oscillators, such as MACDHistogram or Force Index, give buy signals, especially when they coincide
with pullbacks. Reverse the procedure in downtrends. When the
weekly trend is down and daily oscillators rally and reach overbought
levels, they signal to sell short, especially when they coincide with rallies to the EMA.
The idea is to position yourself in the direction of the market tide
and use the waves that go against that tide to build up your initial position. As a beginner, learn to trade a single small position, but once you
start making money, the size of your positions and the number of additions become a function of money management.
Once you recognize a new trend, get in! New trends, springing
out of trading ranges, are notoriously fast, with few or no pullbacks.
If you think you have identified a new trend, hop aboard. You can
reduce your risk by trading a smaller size, but do not wait for a
deep pullback. Those may come later, and you will be able to add to
your position. Jumping aboard a new trend feels counterintuitive, but
being in the market makes you more alert to its behavior. The great
George Soros was only half-joking when he said, “Buy first, investigate later.”

TRADING

191

Place your initial stop at the breakout level, where the new trend
erupted from the range. A rocket that takes off from its launching pad
has no business sinking back to the ground. Do not hurry to move
your initial stop. Wait for a reaction and then a new move before moving your stop to the bottom of that reaction. The SafeZone stops, which
work so well for swings, are much too tight for big trends. While riding a tide, you must expect the waves to swing against you and still
hold your position.
Trend trading means retaining your initial position through thick and
thin. You are fishing for very big fish, and you need plenty of room. One
of the reasons so few people make big money from big trends is that
they become anxious and hyperactive and forget to hang on. Trends
are unlike swings, where you must take profits and run fast. Stay with
the trend unless weekly trend-following indicators go flat or reverse.
Amateurs often outsmart themselves by trying to pick the end of a
trend—a notoriously hard task. As Peter Lynch aptly put it, trying to
catch a bottom is like trying to catch a falling knife—you invariably
grab it in the wrong spot. Trends tend to overshoot rational expectations. News, daily chart patterns, and other distractions try to throw
you off the saddle. Hang on! Consider trading a core position and supplementary positions. You may put on a core position with a wide stop
and no definite profit target, while swinging in and out of additional
positions—buying on declines to the EMA or selling on rallies to the
upper channel line. Consider using two different accounts for easier
record keeping.
Markets spend most of their time going nowhere.
They rally a few days, pause, decline a few days, and rally again. Small
swings—weekly, daily, or hourly—are more common than big trends.
By the end of the month the market may be higher or lower, but it has
traveled up and down several times. Newcomers get shaken out, while
professionals enjoy the short rides.
Markets’ tendency to swing above and below value has been statistically confirmed by several researchers. Swing trading means buying
normalcy and selling mania (buy near the rising moving average, sell
near the upper channel line) or shorting normalcy and covering
depression (sell short near the falling moving average and cover at the
lower channel line). The best swing-trading candidates are among
the most active stocks and blue chips that tend to rock, more or less
