
T HE N E W S M E D I A

111

overlooked in the hectic sessions of last week.” The New York Times attributed
the drop only to a “general loss of confidence.” The Wall Street Journal reported
that “business in general shows no signs of disintegration” and that the decline
was due to “necessitous liquidation of impaired accounts.”12
What else was in the news on those days? As of Monday morning, there
was news that the Interstate Commerce Commission would proceed with its
plan to recapture some excess railroad income. There was a favorable report
on the earnings of U.S. Steel. New information was reported on charges that
the Connecticut Manufacturer’s Association had succeeded in introducing into
a tariff bill provisions favoring Connecticut. Mussolini had made a speech
saying that the “men and institutions of fascism can face any crisis, even if it
is sudden.” A new aspirant to the French premiership, Edouard Daladier, had
announced the foreign minister of his prospective cabinet. A British airliner
was lost at sea with seven aboard. The Graf Zeppelin planned a trip to explore
the Arctic. Richard Byrd’s party was making progress toward the South Pole.
After Black Monday, early on Tuesday morning, the second day of the crash,
it was reported that prominent financiers had asserted that heavy banking
support would come into the market that day, in search of bargains. If this
was significant news at all, one would think it was good news. Other news
on Tuesday morning was that two senators had called on President Hoover
to declare his position on duties on agricultural and industrial products, that
Senator Hiram Bingham had complained that the Lobby Inquiry had treated
him unfairly, that a Hungarian count and countess had been given the right
to enter the country, and that another airliner had been lost with five aboard.
All of these stories sound very typical. If there really was a good reason for
the drop in the market, then certainly there must have been something happening at the time that people knew about. And one would think that such
concerns would have made it into the news in some form. Perhaps one must
read the papers more carefully. One author, Jude Wanniski, indeed claimed
that there was a story in the New York Times on the morning of Monday,
October 28, 1929, that might conceivably account for such a decline. This
front‑page story was an optimistic report on the likelihood of passage of the
Smoot‑Hawley tariff, then still in committee. The story was picked up by the
Associated Press and United News the following day and given front‑page
treatment around the country on Tuesday, October 29.13
It has been argued by some that the Smoot‑Hawley tariff might have been
expected to hurt the outlook for U.S. corporate profits. This may seem surprising: one might have thought that it would generally benefit corporations,
since so many of them actively sought the tariff. But it has been argued by
historians of the 1929 crash that the tariff might have been expected to have
the opposite effect, given the retaliation from other countries that it would
engender. Allan Meltzer in fact argued that the tariff could be the reason “why

112

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

the 1929 recession did not follow the path of previous monetary contractions
but became the Great Depression.”14 However, other economists, including
Rudiger Dornbusch and Stanley Fischer, pointed out that exports were only
7% of the gross national product (GNP) in 1929 and that between 1929 and
1931 they fell by only 1.5% of 1929 GNP. This hardly seems like the cause of
the Great Depression. Moreover, they pointed out that it is not clear that the
Smoot‑Hawley tariff was responsible for the decline in exports. The depression itself might be held responsible for part of the decline. Dornbusch and
Fischer showed that the 1922 Fordney‑McCumber tariff increased tariff rates
as much as the Smoot‑Hawley tariff, and the Fordney‑McCumber tariff was
of course followed by no such recession.15
Even if we were to allow that the possibility of passage of the Smoot‑Hawley
tariff was important enough to account for a decline in share values of this
magnitude, one must still ask whether there was any news over the weekend
that would substantially alter one’s estimation of the likelihood that the tariff
would be passed. Just what was the content of the story in the New York Times?
On Saturday, October 26, Senator David Reed declared that the Smoot‑Hawley
tariff bill was “dead” in committee. This provoked denials by Senators Reed
Smoot and William Borah. The Times quoted Senator Smoot as saying, “If that
is Senator Reed’s opinion, I suppose he has a right to express it. But it isn’t the
view of the Finance Committee.” Senator Borah said, “My opinion is that the
tariff bill is not going to die.” The next morning, October 29, the Times reported
that Senator Reed had reiterated his conviction that the bill was dead and
went on to cite other opinions on both sides of the issue. Although the original
Times story had sounded optimistic for the bill, the United News version of
the story published on October 29 was pessimistic. The Atlanta Constitution,
when it ran the story on October 29, carried the headline “Senate Gives Up
Hope of Enacting New Tariff Bill.”
Nonetheless, it is hard to see that this interchange among senators, so
typical of political wrangling, amounts to important news. The same sort of
news accounts had been coming out all along with regard to the tariff bill.
A week earlier, on October 21, the Times had quoted Senator James Watson,
Republican leader of the Senate, offering his view that the Senate would pass
the bill within another month. On October 13, Senator Smoot was reported
as telling President Hoover that there was a chance the bill would pass by
November 20. Alternately optimistic and pessimistic news on the tariff bill
had been coming in since Hoover’s election.
Far more significant than news about fundamentals among the newspaper
stories on Monday, October 28, 1929, are clues to the importance attached
in people’s minds to the events of just a few days earlier, when the stock
exchange had seen a record decline in share prices. That was the so‑called
Black Thursday, October 24, 1929, when the Dow had fallen 12.9% within the

T HE N E W S M E D I A

113

day but recovered substantially before the end of trading, so that the closing
average was down only 2.1% from the preceding close. This event was no
longer news, but the memory of the emotions it had generated was very much
part of the ambience on Monday. The New York Times noted in its Monday
morning edition that Wall Street, “normally deserted and quiet on Sunday as
a country graveyard, hummed with activity as bankers and brokers strove to
put their houses in order after the most strenuous week in history. . . . When
the bell clangs at 10 o’clock this morning for the resumption of trading, most
houses will be abreast of their work and ready for what may come.” The
atmosphere of that Sunday on Wall Street was described: “Sightseers strolled
from street to street, gazing curiously at the Stock Exchange Building and
the Morgan banking offices across the way, centers of last week’s dramatic
financial happenings. Here and there a sightseer picked up from the street a
vagrant slip of ticker tape, as visitors seize upon spent bullets on a battlefield
as souvenirs. Sightseeing buses made special trips through the district.”16
Indeed, on that Monday morning of the crash, the Wall Street Journal saw fit
to run a front‑page editorial stating that “everybody in responsible positions
says that business conditions are sound.”17 The editorial staff of the Journal
must have had reasons to suspect that reassurance was needed if the market
was to remain stable. Presumably they had heard snippets of popular conversation, or could at least guess how people might react following the weekend,
given the huge debacle on Thursday.
So perhaps what happened on Monday, October 28, 1929, was just an echo,
albeit a very exaggerated one, of what had happened the previous week. What
had the media said about this? Again, the newspapers seemed to think that
there was no important news. The Chicago Tribune wrote, on Sunday, October
27, 1929, “It has been the collapse of a vastly inflated bubble of speculation,
with little or no cause in the country’s general situation. A top‑heavy structure
has collapsed of its own weight—there has been no earthquake.” The New
York Times said, “The market smash has been caused by technical rather than
fundamental considerations.” The Guaranty Survey, published by the Guaranty
Trust Company, remarked that “to suppose that the selling wave of the last
few weeks was due to adverse developments of corresponding importance in
the general business situation would be a fundamental error.”18
Let us go back in time and look at the news on the morning of Black
Thursday, October 24, 1929. Once again, the news does not seem to have been
very significant. President Hoover had announced a plan to develop inland
waterways. Atlantic Refinings’ earnings for the year were reported to be its
highest ever. The president of a sugar company had told a Senate committee
investigating lobbying that $75,000 had been spent by the sugar lobby since
December in a campaign to reduce duties on sugar. Negotiators had reported
a setback in efforts to establish the Bank for International Settlements. A

114

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

Carnegie Fund report decried the subsidization of college athletes. The
America’s Cup committee had announced the rules for the next running of
the yacht race. An amateur pilot attempting a solo flight across the Atlantic
was reported lost. President Hoover had taken a trip on a picturesque river
boat down the Ohio River.
Nothing here seems remotely to suggest anything fundamental about
the outlook for the stock market. But let us look back yet another day. There
was news on the Wednesday before Black Thursday of a major drop in the
market (the Dow closed on Wednesday down 6.3% from Tuesday’s close) and
that total transactions had had their second highest day in history. Should
we then look for the cause in the news of October 23, 1929? Again there was
no national news of any apparent significance, but again there were references to past market moves. The most significant concrete news stories in
the newspapers seem consistently to have been about previous moves of
the market itself. The most prominent content in the news appears to have
been interpretations of the reasons for these previous moves, often in terms
of investor psychology.
There is no way that the events of the stock market crash of 1929 can be
considered a response to any real news stories. We see instead a negative bubble,
operating through feedback effects of price changes, and an attention cascade,
with a series of heightened public fixations on the market. This sequence of
events appears to be fundamentally no different from those of other market
debacles—including the notorious crash of 1987, to which we now turn.

News during the Crash of 1987
When the stock market crashed on October 19, 1987—setting a new record
one‑day decline that nearly doubled that of either October 28 or October 29,
1929 (to this day it is the all‑time record one‑day price drop)—I considered it
a unique opportunity to inquire directly of investors what they considered
to be the significant news on that day. It was no longer necessary, as it had
been for those who studied the 1929 crash, to rely on media interpretations
suggesting what was the important news on investors’ minds. As far as I
have been able to determine, no one else took advantage of this opportunity.
The results of my questionnaire survey, sent out to a sample of institutional
investors and a sample of individual investors the week of the crash, were the
only published findings of a survey asking investors what they were thinking
on the day of the crash.19
In my 1987 survey, I listed all the news stories published in the few days
preceding the crash that seemed at all relevant to the changing opinions of
the market, ending with news that had appeared in the papers on the morning of the crash. I asked the investors:

T HE N E W S M E D I A

115

Please tell us how important each of the following news items was to you
personally on October 19, 1987, in your evaluation of stock market prospects.
Please rate them on a one‑to‑seven scale, with 1 indicating that the news item
was completely unimportant, 4 indicating that it was of moderate importance,
7 indicating that it was very important. Please tell how important you then felt
these were, and not how others thought about them.

I included ten news stories, and, in the eleventh position, a space marked
“Other” where respondents could write in their own choices.
The results were broadly similar between institutional and individual
investors, and between those who had actually bought or sold on October 19.
Respondents rated everything as relevant. They thought that most of the news
stories rated at least a 4, that is, they were of moderate importance. The only
news story that merited an average score less than 3 was the sell signal that
investment guru Robert Prechter was reported to have given on October 14,
and even that received a score of around 2. Even the news that the United States
had attacked an Iranian oil station, a minor skirmish reported on October
19, received a rating of over 3. Respondents were not very forthcoming with
other news stories in the “Other” category. They tended to mention concerns,
rather than news stories that broke at the time of the crash. The most common write‑in answer was a concern about too much indebtedness, referring
variously to the federal deficit, the national debt, or taxes. Such a response
was offered by a third of the individual investors who wrote in answers and
a fifth of the institutional investors.
But the striking result was that the most highly rated news stories among
those I listed were those about past price declines themselves. The most important
news story, according to the respondents, was the 200‑point drop in the Dow
on the morning of October 19, a news story that yielded an average score of 6.54
among individual sellers on October 19 and of 6.05 among institutional sellers
on October 19. The preceding week’s news of the record (in terms of points
lost) stock market declines was considered the second most important story.
One of the questions asked respondents to give their recollections of
the interpretations they had attached to the price declines on the day of the
crash: “Can you remember any specific theory you had about the causes
for the price declines October 14–19, 1987?” Respondents were given space
to write answers in their own words, which I read and categorized. The
most common theme in the 1987 answers to this open‑ended question was
that the market had been overpriced before the crash. Overpricing was
mentioned by 33.9% of the individual investors and 32.6% of the institutional investors. Although this response accounts for fewer than half the
answers, it is noteworthy that so many thought to mention this in answer
to an open‑ended question. (I also asked them directly elsewhere on the
questionnaire whether they thought, just before the crash, that the market

116

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

was overpriced, and 71.7% of the individual investors [91.0% of those who
had sold on October 19] and 84.3% of the institutional investors [88.5% of
those who had sold on October 19] said yes.)20 Another important theme in
answer to the open‑ended question was one of institutional stop‑loss, identified by the presence of the words institutional selling, program trading, stop‑loss,
or computer trading: 22.8% of the individuals and 33.1% of the institutional
investors mentioned such a theme. There was also an investor irrationality
theme, identified by statements to the effect that investors were crazy or that
the fall was due to investor panic or capricious changes in opinion: 25.4%
of the individuals and 24.4% of the institutional investors touched on this
theme. None of these major themes had anything to do with breaking news
events other than the crash itself.
Immediately after this question, I asked on the questionnaire, “Which of
the following better describes your theory about the declines: a theory about
investor psychology [or] a theory about fundamentals such as profits or interest
rates?” Most—67.5% of the institutional investors and 64.0% of the individual
investors—picked a theory about investor psychology.
Thus, it appears that the stock market crash had substantially to do with
a psychological feedback loop among the general investing public from price
declines to selling and thus to further price declines, along the lines of a negative bubble, as discussed in Chapter 5. The crash apparently had nothing in
particular to do with any news story other than that of the crash itself, but
rather with theories about other investors’ reasons for selling and about their
psychology.
President Ronald Reagan, reacting to the crash, set up a study commission
headed by former Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady. He asked the Brady
Commission to tell him what had caused the crash and what should be done
about it. Investment professionals are generally uncomfortable going on record
to explain the causes of such events, and many reports about the crash tended
to focus the inquiry away from its ultimate causes. But the members of the
Brady Commission were under orders from the president of the United States
to face the matter head on. As a result, we have in their report the only major
effort to collect all the relevant facts and explain the crash of 1987. They wrote
in their summary the following explanation for the crash:
The precipitous market decline of mid‑October was “triggered” by specific
events: an unexpectedly high merchandise trade deficit which pushed interest
rates to new high levels, and proposed tax legislation which led to the collapse
of the stocks of a number of takeover candidates. This initial decline ignited
mechanical, price‑insensitive selling by a number of institutions employing
portfolio insurance strategies and a small number of mutual fund groups
re­­acting to redemptions. The selling by these investors, and the prospect of
further selling by them, encouraged a number of aggressive trading‑oriented

T HE N E W S M E D I A

117

institutions to sell in anticipation of further market declines. These institutions included, in addition to hedge funds, a small number of pension and
endowment funds, money management firms and investment banking houses.
This selling, in turn, stimulated further reactive selling by portfolio insurers
and mutual funds.21

This conclusion by the Brady Commission sounds in some ways very
much like the one I drew from my own survey‑based study of the crash. By
“price‑insensitive selling” they mean selling that comes in response to a price
drop but is insensitive to how low the price goes before the sale is concluded—
selling at any price. The commission was saying here, most prominently, that
the crash was caused by what I have called a feedback loop, with initial price
declines influencing more investors to exit the market, thereby creating further
price declines. The Brady Commission was saying, in effect, that the crash of
1987 was a negative bubble.
A strength of the Brady Commission’s study of the crash relative to my
own was their unparalleled access to major investing institutions. Their study
complements my own in reaching the conclusion that a feedback loop was at
work in the crash. However, their conclusion sounds a bit different from mine
in that it gives prominence to the substantive content of news stories. In addition, theirs suggests that much of the selling was “mechanical” or “reactive,”
rather than psychological or herd-like.
Based on the results of my study, the news stories that the Brady Commission
mentions about the merchandise trade deficit and about new highs in interest rates cannot be considered central to investors’ thinking. In my survey,
I included these in my list of news stories and got a lukewarm response from
respondents (mostly 4s). Moreover, if one looks at long‑term plots of both
the trade deficit and interest rates, it is very clear that there was no sudden
break in either of these series that could possibly be seen as standing out in a
historical perspective. Virtually nothing happened to either the trade deficit
or interest rates.
The proposed tax legislation that the Brady Commission mentions had
completely escaped my notice as an important news story to include on my
list. The news had broken on October 14, five days before the crash, and it
had not seemed to me to be the subject of significant public comment in the
days leading up to the crash. Representative Dan Rostenkowski’s House Ways
and Means Committee was considering tax changes that would have had the
effect of discouraging corporate takeovers. Changing capital gains tax provisions struck many would‑be interpreters of the crash after the fact as having
fundamental importance for stock prices in an efficient market.
When I learned of the potential importance of this news story, I went back
over the questionnaires I had received to see how many respondents had
mentioned it in their answers under “Other.” I found no mention at all among

118

C ULT UR AL FAC T OR S

the 605 individual responses, and only three mentions among the 284 institutional responses. Clearly, this news story does not deserve to be singled out
as a major cause of the crash.22
The Brady Commission put quite a bit of stress on a tool of institutional
investors called “portfolio insurance.” Portfolio insurance is a strategy for
limiting losses that was invented by Professors Hayne Leland and Mark
Rubinstein at the University of California at Berkeley and was successfully
marketed by them to many institutional investors in the 1980s. Portfolio insurance is really a misnomer; the strategy is merely a plan for selling stocks. It
involves impressive mathematical models, but in fact it is nothing more than
a formalized procedure for getting out of the market by selling stocks when
they start to go down. Leland himself, in his classic 1980 article on portfolio
insurance, admits as much: “Some ‘rules of thumb’ such as ‘run with your
winners, cut your losses’ and ‘sell at a new high, buy at a new low,’ will be
shown to approximate the optimal dynamic trading strategies for certain
types of investors.”23 So, by using portfolio insurance, investors are merely
doing what has always come naturally, only with a little more mathematical
precision and careful planning. But with the fancy new name “portfolio insurance,” which suggests that the strategy is prudent and sensible, and with its
high‑tech image, the advent of this strategy quite likely made many investors
more reactive to past price changes.
The adoption of portfolio insurance by many institutional investors was a
sort of fad—a sophisticated fad, but a fad nonetheless. Since it has a distinctive name (the term portfolio insurance had essentially not been used before
1980), it is possible to trace the course of this investor fad by means of word
