
What Are Options, and Should You Invest in Them?
Options are an investment vehicle where you purchase rights (contracts) to
buy (“call”) or sell (“put”) a stock, stock index, or commodity at a specified
price before a specified future time, known as the option expiration date.
Options are very speculative and involve substantially greater risks and price
volatility than common stocks. Therefore, most investors should not buy or
sell options. Winning investors should first learn how to minimize the
investment risks they take, not increase them. After a person has proved
that she is able to make money in common stocks and has sufficient investment understanding and actual experience, then the limited use of options
could be intelligently considered.
Options are like making “all or nothing” bets. If you buy a three-month
call option on McDonald’s, the premium you pay gives you the right to purchase 100 shares of MCD at a certain price at any time during the next three
months. When you purchase calls, you expect the price of the stock to go up,
so if a stock is currently trading at $120, you might buy a call at $125. If the
stock rises to $150 after three months (and you have not sold your call
option), you can exercise it and pocket the $25 profit less the premium you
paid. Conversely, if three months go by and your stock is down and didn’t
perform as expected, you would not exercise the option; it expires worthless,
and you lose the premium you paid. As you might expect, puts are handled
in a similar manner, except that you’re making a bet that the price of the
stock will decrease instead of increase.
Limiting Your Risk when It Comes to Options

If you do consider options, you should definitely limit the percentage of
your total portfolio committed to them. A prudent limit might be no more
than 10% to 15%. You should also adopt a rule about where you intend to
cut and limit all of your losses. The percentage will naturally have to be
more than 8%, since options are much more volatile than stocks. If an

289

290 BE SMART FROM THE START
option fluctuates three times as rapidly as the underlying stock, then perhaps 20% or 25% might be a possible absolute limit. On the profit side, you
might consider adopting a rule that you’ll take many of your gains when they
hit 50% to 75%.
Some aspects of options present challenges. Buying options whose price
can be significantly influenced by supply and demand changes as a result of
a thin or illiquid market for that particular option is problematic. Also problematic is the fact that options can be artificially and temporarily overpriced
simply because of a short-lived increase in price volatility in the underlying
stock or the general market.
Buy Only the Best

When I buy options, which is rarely, I prefer to buy them for the most
aggressive and outstanding stocks with the biggest earnings estimates, those
where the premium you have to pay for the option is higher. Once again,
you want options on the best stocks, not the cheapest. The secret to making
money in options doesn’t have much to do with options. You have to analyze
and be right on the selection and timing of the underlying stock. Therefore,
you should apply your CAN SLIM system and select the best possible stock
at the best possible time.
If you do this and you are right, the option will go up along with the stock,
except that the option should move up much faster because of the leverage.
By buying only options on the best stocks, you also minimize slippage
caused by illiquidity. (Slippage is the difference between the price you
wanted to pay and the price you actually paid at the time the order was executed. The more liquid the stock, the less slippage you should experience.)
With illiquid (small-capitalization) stocks, the slippage can be more severe,
and this ultimately could cost you money. Buying options on lower-priced,
illiquid stocks is similar to the carnival game where you’re trying to knock
down all the milk bottles. The game may be rigged. Selling your options can
be equally tricky in a thin (small-capitalization) stock.
In a major bear market, you might consider buying put options on certain
individual stocks or on a major stock index like the S&P, along with selling
shares of common stock short. The inability of your broker to borrow a stock
may make selling short more difficult than buying a put. It is generally not
wise to buy puts during a bull market. Why be a fish trying to swim
upstream?
If you think a stock is going up and it’s the right time to buy, then buy it,
or purchase a long-term option and place your order at the market. If it’s
time to sell, sell at the market. Option markets are usually thinner and not
as liquid as the markets for the underlying stock itself.

Money Management

Many amateur option traders constantly place price limits on their
orders. Once they get into the habit of placing limits, they are forever
changing their price restraints as prices edge away from their limits. It is difficult to maintain sound judgment and perspective when you are worrying
about changing your limits. In the end, you’ll get some executions after
tremendous excess effort and frustration.
When you finally pick the big winner for the year, the one that will triple
in price, you’ll lose out because you placed your order with a ¼-point limit
below the actual market price. You never make big money in the stock market by eighths and quarters.
You could also lose your shirt if your security is in trouble and you fail to
sell and get out because you put a price limit on your sell order. Your objective is to be right on the big moves, not on the minor fluctuations.
Short-Term Options Are More Risky

If you buy options, you’re better off with longer time periods, say, six
months or so. This will minimize the chance your option will run out of time
before your stock has had a chance to perform. Now that I’ve told you this,
what do you think most investors do? Of course, they buy shorter-term
option—30 to 90 days—because these options are cheaper and move faster
in both directions, up and down!
The problem with short-term options is that you could be right on your
stock, but the general market may slip into an intermediate correction, with
the result that all stocks are down at the end of the short time period. You
will then lose on all your options because of the general market. This is also
why you should spread your option buying and option expiration dates over
several different months.
Keep Option Trading Simple

One thing to keep in mind is that you should always keep your investments
as simple as possible. Don’t let someone talk you into speculating in such
seemingly sophisticated packages as strips, straddles, and spreads.
A strip is a form of conventional option that couples one call and two puts
on the same security at the same exercise price with the same expiration
date. The premium is less than it would be if the options were purchased
separately.
A straddle can be either long or short. A long straddle is a long call and a long
put on the same underlying security at the same exercise price and with the
same expiration month. A short straddle is a short call and a short put on the
same security at the same exercise price and with the same expiration month.
A spread is a purchase and sale of options with the same expiration dates.

291

292 BE SMART FROM THE START
It’s difficult enough to just pick a stock or an option that is going up. If you
confuse the issue and start hedging (being both long and short at the same
time), you could, believe it or not, wind up losing on both sides. For
instance, if a stock goes up, you might be tempted to sell your put early to
minimize the loss, and later find that the stock has turned downward and
you’re losing money on your call. The reverse could also happen. It’s a dangerous psychological game that you should avoid.
Should You Write Options?

Writing options is a completely different story from buying options. I am not
overly impressed with the strategy of writing options on stocks.
A person who writes a call option receives a small fee or premium in
return for giving someone else (the buyer) the right to “call” away and buy
the stock from the writer at a specified price, up to a certain date. In a bull
market, I would rather be a buyer of calls than a writer (seller) of calls. In
bad markets, just stay out or go short.
The writer of calls pockets a small fee and is, in effect, usually locked in
for the time period of the call. What if the stock you own and wrote the call
against gets into trouble and plummets? The small fee won’t cover your loss.
Of course, there are maneuvers the writer can take, such as buying a put to
hedge and cover himself, but then situation gets too complicated and the
writer could get whipsawed back and forth.
What happens if the stock doubles? The writer gets the stock called away,
and for a relatively small fee loses all chance for a major profit. Why take
risks in stocks for only meager gains with no chance for large gains? This is
not the reasoning you will hear from most people, but then again, what most
people are saying and doing in the stock market isn’t usually worth knowing.
Writing “naked calls” is even more foolish, in my opinion. Naked call writers receive a fee for writing a call on a stock they do not own, so they are
unprotected if the stock moves against them.
It’s possible that large investors who have trouble making decent returns
on their portfolio may find some minor added value in writing short-term
options on stocks that they own and feel are overpriced. However, I am
always somewhat skeptical of new methods of making money that seem so
easy. There are few free lunches in the stock market or in real estate.

Great Opportunities in Nasdaq Stocks
Nasdaq stocks are not traded on a listed stock exchange, but instead are
traded through over-the-counter dealers. The over-the-counter dealer market has been enhanced in recent years by a wide range of ECNs (electronic

Money Management

communication networks), such as Instinet, SelectNet, Redibook, and
Archipelago, which bring buyers and sellers together within each network,
and through which orders can be routed and executed. The Nasdaq is a specialized field, and in many cases the stocks traded are those of newer, lessestablished companies. But now even NYSE firms have large Nasdaq
operations. In addition, reforms during the 1990s have removed any lingering stigma that once dogged the Nasdaq.
There are usually hundreds of intriguing new growth stocks on the Nasdaq. It’s also the home of some of the biggest companies in the United
States. You should definitely consider buying better-quality Nasdaq stocks
that have institutional sponsorship and fit the CAN SLIM rules.
For maximum flexibility and safety, it’s vital that you maintain marketability in all your investments, regardless of whether they’re traded on
the NYSE or on the Nasdaq. An institutional-quality common stock with
larger average daily volume is one defense against an unruly market.

Should You Buy Initial Public Offerings (IPOs)?
An initial public offering is a company’s first offering of stock to the public.
I usually don’t recommend that investors purchase IPOs. There are several
reasons for this.
Among the numerous IPOs that occur each year, there are a few outstanding ones. However, those that are outstanding are going to be in such
hot demand by institutions (who get first crack at them) that if you are able
to buy them at all, you may receive only a tiny allotment. Logic dictates that
if you, as an individual investor, can acquire all the shares you want, they are
possibly not worth having.
The Internet and some discount brokerages have made IPOs more accessible to individual investors, although some brokers place limits on your
ability to sell soon after a company comes public. This is a dangerous position to be in, since you may not be able to get out when you want to. You
may recall that during the IPO craze of 1999 and early 2000, there were
some new stocks that rocketed on their first day or two of trading, only to
collapse and never recover.
Many IPOs are deliberately underpriced and therefore shoot up on the
first day of trading, but more than a few could be overpriced and drop.
Because IPOs have no trading history, you can’t be sure whether they’re
overpriced. In most cases, this speculative area should be left to experienced institutional investors who have access to the necessary in-depth
research and who are able to spread their new issue risks among many different equities.

293

294 BE SMART FROM THE START
This is not to say that you can’t purchase a new issue after the IPO when
the stock is up in its infancy. Google should have been bought in mid-September 2004, in the fifth week after its new issue, when it made a new high
at 114. The safest time to buy an IPO is on the breakout from its first correction and base-building area. Once a new issue has been trading in the
market for one, two, or three months or more, you have valuable price and
volume data that you can use to better judge the situation.
Within the broad list of new issues of the previous three months to three
years, there are always standout companies with superior new products and
excellent current and recent quarterly earnings and sales that you should
consider. (Investor’s Business Daily’s “The New America” page explores
most of them. Past articles on a company may be available.) CB Richard
Ellis formed a perfect flat base after its IPO in the summer of 2004 and
then rose 500%.
Experienced investors who understand correct selection and timing techniques should definitely consider buying new issues that show good positive
earnings and exceptional sales growth, and also have formed sound price
bases. They can be a great source of new ideas if they are dealt with in this
fashion. Most big stock winners in recent years had an IPO at some point in
the prior one to eight or ten years. Even so, new issues can be more volatile
and occasionally suffer massive corrections during difficult bear markets.
This usually happens after a period of wild excess in the IPO market, where
any and every offering seems to be a “hot issue.” For example, the new issue
booms that developed in the early 1960s and the beginning of 1983, as well
as that in late 1999 and early 2000, were almost always followed by a bear
market period.
Congress, at this writing in early 2009, should consider lowering the capital gains tax to create a powerful incentive for thousands of new entrepreneurs to start up innovative new companies. Our historical research proved
that 80% of the stocks that had outstanding price performance and job creation in the 1980s and 1990s had been brought public in the prior eight to
ten years, as mentioned earlier. America now badly needs a renewed flow of
new companies to spark new inventions and new industries . . . and a
stronger economy, millions more jobs, and millions more taxpayers. It has
always paid for Washington to lower capital gains taxes. This will be needed
to reignite the IPO market and the American economy after the economic
collapse that the subprime real estate program and the credit crisis caused
in 2008. I learned many years ago that if rates are raised, many investors will
simply not sell their stock because they don’t want to pay the tax and then
have significantly less money to reinvest. Washington can’t seem to understand this simple fact. Fewer people will sell their stocks, and the govern-

Money Management

ment will always get less revenue, not more. I’ve had many older, retired
people tell me they will keep their stock until they die so they won’t have to
pay the tax.

What Are Convertible Bonds, and Should You Invest in Them?
A convertible bond is one that you can exchange (convert) for another
investment category, typically common stock, at a predetermined price.
Convertible bonds provide a little higher income to the owner than the
common stock typically does, along with the potential for some possible
profits.
The theory goes that a convertible bond will rise almost as fast as the
common stock rises, but will decline less during downturns. As so often happens with theories, the reality can be different. There is also a liquidity
question to consider, since convertible bond markets may dry up during
extremely difficult periods.
Sometimes investors are attracted to this medium because they can borrow heavily and leverage their commitment (obtain more buying power).
This simply increases your risk. Excessive leverage can be dangerous, as
Wall Street and Washington learned in 2008.
It is for these several reasons that I do not recommend that most
investors buy convertible bonds. I have also never bought a corporate bond.
They are poor inflation hedges, and, ironically, you can also lose a lot of
money in the bond market if you make what ultimately turns out to be a
higher-risk investment in stretching for a higher yield.

Should You Invest in Tax-Free Securities and Tax Shelters?
The typical investor should not use these investment vehicles (IRAs, 401(k)
plans, and Keoghs excepted), the most common of which are municipal
bonds. Overconcern about taxes can confuse and cloud investors’ normally
sound judgment. Common sense should also tell you that if you invest in tax
shelters, there is a much greater chance the IRS may decide to audit your
tax return.
Don’t kid yourself. You can lose money in munis if you buy them at the
wrong time or if the local or state government makes bad management decisions and gets into real financial trouble, which some of them have done in
the past.
People who seek too many tax benefits or tax dodges frequently end up
investing in questionable or risky ventures. The investment decision should
always be considered first, with tax considerations a distant second.

295

296 BE SMART FROM THE START
This is America, where anyone who really works at it can become successful at saving and investing. Learn how to make a net profit and, when
you do, be happy about it rather than complaining about having to pay taxes
because you made a profit. Would you rather hold on until you have a loss
so you have no tax to pay? Recognize at the start that Uncle Sam will always
be your partner, and he will receive his normal share of your wages and
investment gains.
I have never bought a tax-free security or a tax shelter. This has left me
free to concentrate on finding the best investments possible. When these
investments work out, I pay my taxes just like everybody else. Always
remember . . . the U.S. system of freedom and opportunity is the greatest in
the world. Learn to use, protect, and appreciate it.

Should You Invest in Income Stocks?
Income stocks are stocks that have high and regular dividend yields, providing
taxable income to the owner. These stocks are typically found in supposedly
more conservative industries, such as utilities and banks. Most people should
not buy common stocks for their dividends or income, yet many people do.
People think that income stocks are conservative and that you can just sit
and hold them because you are getting your dividends. Talk to any investor
who lost big on Continental Illinois Bank in 1984 when the stock plunged
from $25 to $2, or on Bank of America when it crashed from $55 to $5 as of
the beginning of 2009, or on the electric utilities caught up in the past with
nuclear power plants. (Ironically, 17 major nations now get or for years have
gotten more of their electricity from nuclear power plants than the United
States does. France gets 78% of its electricity from nuclear power.)
Investors also got hurt when electric utilities nosedived in 1994, and the
same was true when certain California utilities collapsed in 2001. In theory,
income stocks should be safer, but don’t be lulled into believing that
they can’t decline sharply. In 1999–2000, AT&T dropped from over $60 to
below $20.
And how about the aforementioned Citigroup, the New York City bank
that so many institutional investors owned? I don’t care how much it paid in
dividends; if you owned Citigroup at $50 and watched it nosedive to $2,
when it was in the process of going bankrupt until the government bailed it
out, you lost an enormous amount of money. Incidentally, even if you do
invest in income stocks, you should use charts. In October of 2007, Citigroup
stock broke wide open on the largest volume month that it ever traded, so
that even an amateur chartist could have recognized this and easily sold it in
the $40s, avoiding a serious loss.

Money Management

If you do buy income stocks, never strain to buy the highest dividend
yield available. That will typically entail much greater risk and lower quality.
Trying to get an extra 2% or 3% yield can significantly expose your capital to
larger losses. That’s what a lot of Wall Street firms did in the real estate bubble, and look what happened to their investments. A company can also cut
its dividends if its earnings per share are not adequately covering those payouts, leaving you without the income you expected to receive. This too has
happened.
If you need income, my advice is to concentrate on the very best-quality
stocks and simply withdraw 6% of your investments each year for living
expenses. You could sell off a few shares and withdraw 11⁄2% per quarter.
Higher rates of withdrawal are not usually advisable, since in time they
might lead to some depletion of your principal.

What Are Warrants, and Are They Safe Investments?
Warrants are an investment vehicle that allows you to purchase a specific
amount of stock at a specific price. Sometimes warrants are good for a certain period of time, but it’s common for them not to have time limits. Many
of them are cheap in price and therefore seem appealing.
However, most investors should shy away from low-priced warrants. This
is another complex, specialized field that sounds fine in concept but that few
investors truly understand. The real question comes down to whether the
common stock is correct to buy. Most investors will be better off if they forget the field of warrants.

Should You Invest in Merger Candidates?
Merger candidates can often behave erratically, so I don’t recommend
investing in them. Some merger candidates run up substantially in price on
rumors of a possible sale, only to have the price drop suddenly when a
potential deal falls through or other unforeseen circumstances occur. In
other words, this can be a risky, volatile business, and it should generally be
left to experienced professionals who specialize in this field. It is usually better to buy sound companies, based on your basic CAN SLIM evaluation,
than to try to guess whether a company will be sold or merged with another.
