TRADE YOUR WAY
TO FINANCIAL FREEDOM

VAN K. THARP

Foreword by David Mob& Sr.
Acknowledgements xvii

xiii

Preface xxi

PART ONE

THE MOST IMPORTANT FACTOR
IN YOUR SUCCESS: YOU!
The Legend of the Holy Grail 3
The Holy Grail Metaphor 6
What’s Really Important to Trading
Modeling Market Geniuses 11
Summary 14

9

chapter 2
Judgmental Biases: Why Mastering the Markets Is So Difficult
for Most People 17
Biases That Affect Trading System Development 2 0
Biases That Affect How You Test Trading Systems 3 5
Biases That Affect How You Trade Your System 3 8
Summary 41
Chapter 3
__-

Setting Your Objectives 45
Designing Objectives Is a Major Part of Your System Work

47

Tom Basso on Objectives
Setting Your Own Objectives

Chapter 6
Understanding Expectancy and Other Keys
to Trading Success 130
The Six Keys to Investment Success 130

48

57

PART TWO:

CONCEPTUALIZATION OF YOUR SYSTEM
Chapter 4
Steps to Developing a System

61

1. Take an Inventory 61
2. Develop an Open Mind and Gather Market Information 63
3. Determine Your Objectives 66
4. Determine Your Time Frame for Trading 66
5. Determine the Best Historical Moves in That Time Frame and
Notice What Those Moves Have in Common 69
6. What’s the Concept behind Those Moves and How Can You
Objectively Measure Your Concept? 70
7. Add Your Stops and Transaction Costs 72
8. Add Your Profit-Exits and Determine Your Expectancy 73
9. Look for Huge Reward Trades 74
10. Optimize with Position Sizing 76
11. Determine How You Can Improve Your System 77
12. Worst-Case Scenari-Mental Planning 78
Chapter 5

The Snow Fight Metaphor 133
Looking at Expectancy under a Magnifying Glass 137
Expectancy and R Multiples 143
Expectancy Applied to the Market 148
Using Expectancy to Evaluate Different Systems 152
A Review of How to Use Expectancy 158

PART THREE:

UNDERSTANDING THE KEY PARTS
OF YOUR SYSTEM
Chapter 7
__-

Using Setups 165
The Four Phases of Entry 167
Setups for Stalking the Market 172
Filters versus Setups 179
Setups Used by Well-Known Systems
hnmary of Setups 196

184

Selecting a Concept That Works 81
Trend Following 82
Fundamental Analysis 86
Seasonal Tendencies 91
Spreading 99
Arbitrage 103
Neural Networks 110
There’s am Order to the Universe
Summary of Key Points 126

Chapter 8

Entry or Market Timing 198

120

Trying to Beat Random Entry 200
Common Entry Techniques 202
Designing Your Own Entry Signal 220
An Evaluation of Entry Used in Some Common Systems 224
Sunmary 2 2 9

chapter 13

Chapter 9

Know When to Fold ‘Em: How to Protect Your Capital

233

What Your Stop Does 2 3 5
Using a Stop That Makes Sense 2 4 3
Summary: Preserving Capital 248
Stops Used by Common Systems 249

APPENDICES

Appendix I: Recommended Readings 325
Appendix II: Key Words Defined 328

Chapter 10

How to Take Profits 254

Index 337

Purpose behind Profit-Taking Exits 2 5 5
Just Using Your Stop and a Profit Objective
Simplicity and Multiple Exits 2 6 4
What to Avoid 265
Summary 266
Exits Used by Common Systems 266

263

Chauter 11

The Opportunity and Cost Factors 270
Several Approaches to Take 2 7 0
Factoring in Opportunity 273
The Cost of Trading Opportunity

Summary 278

Conclusion! 314

275

Chapter 12

What Do You Mean Position Sizing? I Only Have $10,000
in My Account! 280
Position-Sizing Strategies 284
Model 1: One Unit per Fixed Amount of Money 2 8 6
Model 2: Equal Value Units for Stock Traders 2 9 0
Model 3: The Percent Risk Model 2 9 2
Model 4: The Percent Volatility Model 2 9 6
The Models Summarized 298
Examples of the Impact of Position Sizing

Summary 306
Position Sizing Used by Other Systems

300

307

FOREWORD

The title of Chapter 1 of this book is: “The Legend of the Holy
Grail.” “The Holy Grail” is a phrase you often hear in some trading
and investment circles. Most people believe that it refers to some
mysterious trading system out there that is going to make them
millions with little or no risk. It’s not that at all.
But before I tell you about the Holy Grail, let me tell you a little about who I am and why Dr. Tharp asked me to write the
Foreword to his book. I started managing other peoples’ money in
1992 and in just 5 years those assets have grown from about $3 million to about $50 million. That has happened partially because my
hedge fund has compounded by better than 40 percent per year, net
to investors, over the last 5 years. We were up 61 percent net to
investors in 1996 and 53 percent net to investors in 1997. Since I met
Dr. Tharp, my net worth has grown many times over, and I do
believe that it comes from adopting many of the Holy Grail secrets
contained in this book. I think that Dr. Tharp understands and
teaches those,secrets better than anyone else I have ever met. Let
me tell you why:
When I was a young boy, I remember dreaming that I would
become a millionaire by the time I reached 25 years of age. I reached
that goal through real estate development in 1981, but only briefly
and then it all came tumbling down around me. I was devastated,
but I picked myself up and started again. My next attempt at real
success was in the investment field.
Yet I almost had a similar type of crash in my fortunes. I
remember the day clearly. I was sitting in my office in Naples,
Florida, in late 1992. It was a typical south Florida autumn day. I
was watching the palm trees sway in the breeze outside my window, wondering why my trading had become more difficult since
I began managing money for others. I wasn’t about to crash at the
xiii

time, but I had the same sort of feeling in my gut that I had had
before my first crash.
My interests in investing began in 1967, when I would make
regular trips to the local public library to devour every book I could
find on investing. I’d also study biographies of successful businesspeople. I certainly wish I had been aware of Dr. Tharp’s modeling work back then, because it would have saved me so much
time and so many heartaches.
In 1969, at the age of 13, I talked my reluctant parents into
opening a brokerage account for me at the local Merrill Lynch office
in Toledo, Ohio. The conditions of the account: I had to fund the
account myself from lawn mowing and odd jobs, and every trade
had to be confirmed by my mother since it was a Unified Gift to
Minors Act account. Once open, my father would occasionally give
me a little money to put into the account, as long as I didn’t tell my
mom.
As I looked out the window, I realized how fortunate I was. I
now lived in a tropical climate. I had probably again achieved my
childhood dream of success doing something I loved to do.
Twenty-two years had gone by since I made my first trade; only
now I was doing it successfully. Yet, somehow, I was now beginning to find trading difficult.
That nervous feeling helped me open up to whole new levels
of success-way beyond those of my first childhood dreams. That
feeling was the key to what was going on, and the key to my success, but I didn’t know what that key was- not yet at least.
A few days later, I notice a magazine ad about Dr. Van Tharp.
I had read about him in Jack Schwager’s book Market Wizards, so I
decided to give him a call. That call was the start of a close professional and personal relationship that would end up affecting my
life, my family, and even my business interests and associates. I
already understood many of the secrets contained in this book.
However, through my association with Dr. Tharp, I now understood the ultimate aspect of the Holy Grail secret-the part that Dr.
Tharp so eloquently describes in Chapter 1.
The Holy Grail is not what you would expect it to be. It is
something that is different for each person. It’s a hidden secret that
you have to discover for ydurself, but it is obvious ~once it is realized.

I must admit that when I first learned what Dr. Tharp was
going to write about in this book, I was concerned. He was giving
away too many of our secrets! However, I’m not concerned any
more because I now realize that those secrets are so personal. My
Holy Grail is not the same as your Holy Grail. In addition, many of
you will just let those secrets pass by you, so I urge you to be careful. Read this book carefully. Indeed, pay particular attention to:
. Understanding the psychological biases against good
system development (Chapter 2)
. Setting objectives for what you are trying to accomplish
(Chapter 3)
. Understanding expectancy and R multiples
(Chapters 6 through 10)
. Realizing that the golden rule of trading is created by how
you get out of the markets, not by picking some magic
stock (Chapters 9 and 10)
. Understanding the importance of position sizing
(Chapter 12)
And pay special attention to the meaning of the Holy Grail as
described in Chapter 1. Until you’ve mastered yourself, you’ll
always struggle with the market. I wish all of you could integrate
that meaning into your being and then truly apply it to your trading.
The material that Dr. Tharp presents in this book, in his Market
Mastery newsletter, in his home-study courses, and in his seminars
will change your life if you are open to them. I urge you to take the
first step today and open yourself up to the material found in this
book. Enjoy the journey It’s a great one!

David Mobley, Sr.
Naples, Florida
February 2998

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This book is a product of 15 years of thinking about markets, studying hundreds of great traders and investors, and coaching many
more to greatness by helping them apply some of the principles
you’ll find in this book. If this book helps hundreds more, even if I
never meet you, it will have been worth the effort.
During those 15 years, numerous people have helped shape
the thinking that has gone into this book. I can only acknowledge a
few of those people by name. However, everyone who contributed
in any way has my deepest thanks and appreciation.
I’d like to acknowledge Ed Seykota for showing me very early
on the importance of simplicity and creative money management.
Ed has presented at three of my early seminars, and I’m deeply
indebted to his wisdom.
Tom Basso has been a great contributor to my thinking and my
life. Tom was a guest speaker at more than a dozen of my seminars
and several of our professional trader schools. Tom has also contributed several sections to this book. Thank you, Tom.
Ray Kelly was one of my earliest clients. I’ve watched him
evolve from a tough floor trader-whose favorite saying used to be
“My way or the highway!“-into someone who would freely give
his time to inner-city high school kids just to convince them to start
to take responsibility for their lives. Ray is one of the best traders I
know and a great teacher as well. He’s presented at many of my
seminars and has written the arbitrage section of this book.
Chuck LeBeau helped me make the link from the famous
trader’s axiom-“Cut your losses short and let your profits run”to the importance of exits. Think about it. Cutting losses short is all
about aborting losses--exits. Letting profits run is all about exits
as well. The entire axiom is all about exits. Chuck’s persistence in
driving home this point has been very valuable to me. Chuck is
xvii

xviii

Ac!aomledgments

now a guest speaker at my advanced systems seminar and has also
contributed a section to this book on fundamental analysis.
I would also like to acknowledge a very special person in my
life--David Mobley, Sr. I’ve probably done more consulting with
David than any other trader. I’ve also worked with most of his family. I’ve watched them all grow tremendously over the last 6 years
since we’ve been close, but especially David. Thus, it is with great
pleasure that I asked David to write the Foreword to this book.
David’s company, Maricopa, was one of our first graduating companies.
Kevin Thomas, Jerry Toepke, and Louis Mendelsohn all contributed great sections to the concepts chapter (Chapter 5). Their
work is very insightful and helpful I deeply appreciate your contributions.
I’d also like to acknowledge our first graduates-Webster
Management. Three key people at Webster met at my school for
professional traders. They have achieved tremendous success by
understanding the key components necessary for investment and
trading success+xpectancy
and money management. I’d particularly like to acknowledge the contributions to my thinking from
Paul Emery, Rob Friedl, Parker Sroufe, and Paul Rusnock.
Chuck Branscomb has been a great model for me of how to
adopt these principles. When he first came to my seminars, he
thought he had a great system-when he really had no system at
all, just some entry signals. He’s attended all my system seminars
(except for one held in London) and most of the other seminars.
I’ve watched him evolve into a very knowledgeable systems trader.
He’s also a great example of how solid “intuition” about the market evolves out of solid systems trading. Chuck is the editor of our
newsletter, Market Mastery, and several excerpts from Chuck’s
work were put into this book. In addition, Chuck helped tremendously in generating some of the graphics in this book.
John Humphreys is the senior developer of Athena Money
Management software used in this book. John has incorporated all
my suggestions about money management into the software to the
point where one can now begin to see the millions of possibilities
that exist in money management, which I call “position sizing”
throughout this book. I knew position sizing was critical when the

project started, but now that I can actually see the results of using
the software I know that its importance is beyond anything that I
had imagined.
I’d like to thank everyone in my supertrader program. Several
of them-William Curtiss and Rolf Sigrist-who continually
bounce their great, creative ideas off me, have helped shape my
thinking tremendously through their education process. I’d also
like to thank Loyd Massey and Frank Gallucci for their tremendous
suggestions in reviewing the manuscript. I’d also like to thank
Bruce Feingold, Sir Mark Thomson, Dennis Ullom, Willard
(“Buddy”) Harper, Andreas Pfister, Corky Dobbs, and Jim
Hetherington for the tremendous insights I’ve gained from working with them.
Some very special teachers in my life deserve a special mention. These include Connierae Andreas, Deepak Chopra, Robert
Dilts, Todd Epstein, John Grinder, Tad James, Robert Kivosaki,
John Overdurf, James Sloman, Enid Vien, and Wyatt Woo&mall.
Your contribution to my personal evolution has been tremendous.
I’d like to thank my editors at McGraw-Hill for their wonderful help. Stephen Isaacs miraculously appeared when I needed a
publisher and John Morriss was very helpful throughout the production process.
Lastly, but not least, I’d like to thank my staff at I.I.T.M., Inc.
for their support in completing this book. Cathy Hasty has been a
great help in laying out the book and with the graphics. Annette
French has always “been there” to assist me with whatever was
necessary.
My deepest thanks go to all of you and to the many people
who also contributed, but were too numerous to mention.

xix

PREFACE

A number of my clients have asked me not to include certain sections in this book, with the admonishment of “You’re giving away
too much.” Yet my job is to coach traders and investors to achieve
peak performance. Every available tool is important in attempting
to do that, because so much misinformation is available in the literature that the average person will constantly be led astray
Most of the misinformation is not deliberate. People want to
be led astray. They constantly ask the wrong questions, and those
selling information get rewarded by giving them the answers they
want. For example:
. What’s the market going to do now?
. What should I buy now?
. I own XYZ stock. Do you think it’s going to go up? (If you
say no, then they’ll ask someone else until they find a
person who agrees with their opinion.)
. Tell me how I can get into the market and be “right” most
of the time.
In April 1997, I did a Z-day seminar in Germany. Toward the end of
the seminar, I gave the participants the choice of doing an exercise
dealing with self-sabotage (which all of them needed) or asking me
questions. They took a vote on what to do. Guess what the first
question asked of me was? “Dr. Tharp, what’s your opinion about
what the U.S. stock market will do for the rest of 1997?” This was
despite my best efforts over the past two days to explain to them
why such questions were unimportant.
When people move beyond questions of “what” to buy into
questions about “how,” they still ask the wrong questions. Now the
question becomes something like:
What criteria should I use to enter the market in order to be right
most of the time?
ui

xxii

Preface

There is a large industry available to give you the answer to such
questions. Hot investment books are filled with entry strategies
that the authors claim to be 80 percent reliable or to have the
promise of big gains. A picture tends to be worth a thousand words,
so each strategy is accompanied by a graph in which the market
just took off. Such “best-case” pictures can sway a lot of people and
sell a lot of books.
At an investment conference in 1995, a well-known speaker on
the futures markets talked about his high-probability entry signals.
The room was packed as he carefully explained what to do. Toward
the end of the talk, one person raised his hand and asked, “How do
you exit the market?” His response, albeit facetiously, was, “You
want to know all my secrets, don’t you?”
At another conference about a year later, the keynote speaker
gave an hour talk before 600 people on high-probability entry techniques. Everyone listened eagerly at every word. Nothing was said
about exits except that one should keep a tight stop and pay close
attention to money management. After the talk, this particular
speaker sold $10,000 worth of books in about a half-hour period,
because people were so excited that such high-probability entry
techniques were the answer.
At the same conference, another speaker talked about money
management-the key factor in determining one’s profits. Thirty
people listened to the talk, and about four of them purchased a
book having to do with that particular topic.
People gravitate toward the things that don’t work. It’s
human nature. You’ll learn why this occurs and what to do about it
in this book.
Such stories could be told about conference after conference.
Everyone will flock to a talk on high-probability entry signals, and
less than 1 percent will learn anything significant. However, talks
featuring the most important keys to making real money will have
few people in attendance.
Even the software products dealing with the markets have
the same biases built into them. These products typically are
loaded with indicators that can help you perfectly understand
why markets did what they did in the past. Why wouldn’t they?
Those indicators are formed from the same past data about which
they are predicting prices. If you could do that with future prices,

Preface

xxiii

the software would be wonderful. However, the reality is that you
cannot predict prices in this manner. But it does sell a lot of software.
I have over 15 years of experience as a coach for traders. I
have worked with some of the top traders and investors in the
world and have completed thousands of psychological evaluations on all sorts of traders and investors. As a result of my background and experience, I have filled this book with the kind of
information that will help you really improve your performance as
a trader or investor.
During that research period, many of my own beliefs about
the market have been shattered. I expect many of your most
“sacred” beliefs about trading or the market (or perhaps even your
beliefs about yourself) will be shattered before you finish this book.
The reason is that you can learn the real “secrets” to the market
only if you pay attention to what really works. If your attention is
elsewhere, you are not likely to find any secrets. However, this
book simply contains my beliefs and opinions. Explore its contents
with an open mind and you will take a giant leap forward in your
ability to make money consistently.
I have divided this book into three primary parts: Part One is
about self-discovery and moving yourself to a point where it’s possible for you to do market research. I’ve included a chapter on the
essence of successful trading, a chapter on judgmental heuristics,
and a chapter on setting your personal objectives in this section.
I’ve deliberately made this a short section, so you won’t get too
impatient with me for not giving you what you probably think is
the “meat” of the topic of system development. However, this
material is critical to your success!
Part Two deals with my model for system development. It
covers concepts behind trading or market systems, and I’ve invited
various experts to write the sections behind those concepts. Part
'ho also deals with expectancy-ne of the key ideas that everyone should understand. Few people who are actively involved in
the markets even know what expectancy means. Even fewer people understand the implications of designing a system around
expectancy. Thus, you may find it important to study this section
carefully.
Part Three involves the various parts of a system. These

xxiv

Reface

include setups, entry or timing techniques, stop-loss exits, profittaking exits, and one of the most critical chapters in the book, position sizing. I’ve also included a concluding chapter on all the other
important topics that had not yet been addressed.

PART

ONE

The Most Important
Factor in Your Success:
YOU!

Vats K. Thnrp, Ph.D.
fune 1998

The objectives of this book are twofold:
1. To help you in your search for the secrets of the “Holy
Grail”
And at the same time,
2. To help you in your search for a winning trading system
that’s right for you
There is a critical assumption in both of those objectives: that you
are the most important factor in your performance. Jack Schwager,
after writing two books in which he interviewed some of the
world’s top traders, concluded that the most important factor in
their success was that they each had a trading system that was right
for them. I’d like to take that assumption one step further: You cannot design a system that is right for you unless you know something about yourself.
As a result, the first part of this book is about self-discovery
and moving yourself to a point where it’s possible for you to do
market research. I’ve included a chapter on the psychological
essence of successful trading, what the Holy Grail is really all
about; a chapter on judgmental heuristics; and a chapter on setting
Your personal objectives.
