Millionaire

TRADERo

How Everyday People
Are Beating Wall Street

at Its Own Game

KATHY LIEN
BORIS SCHLOSSBERG



Millionaire
Traders

HOW EVERYDAY
PEOPLE ARE BEATING
WALL STREET AT ITS
OWN GAME

KATHY LIEN
BORIS SCHLOSSBERG

J18s07 (|:
‘| @ WILEY |:
2007)

BTCENTENNIAL

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


Copyright © 2007 by Kathy Lien and Boris Schlossberg, Alll rights reserved

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.

Wiley Bicentennial Logo: Richard J. Pacifico

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of
the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at
wwwcopyright.com. Requests tothe Publisher for permission should be addressed tothe Permissions Department,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing
this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents
of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages,
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax
(317) 572-4002.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our Web site at www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Lien, Kathy, 1980-
Millionaire traders : how everyday people are beating Wall Street at its own
game / Kathy Lien, Boris Schlossberg.
pcm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-470-04947-1 (cloth)
1. Investment analysis. 2. Portfolio management. 3. Electronic trading of
securities. 4. Speculation. I. Schlossberg, Boris. II. Title.
HG4529.L546 2007
332.64-de22 2007008852

Printed in the United States of America
10987654321


PREFACE

CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6

THEART OF TRADING

THE MAN WHO BUYS CRASHES
Dena “Dan™ Allen

THE100-PIP TRADER
Rob Booker

THE COOLEST GUY IN THE ROOM
Chack Hays

RAGS TO RICHES
Hoosain Harneker

THE WISDOM OF EXPERIENCE
Franid Law

Y¥II
IX

11

141


CHAPTER7

CHAPTER 8

CHAPTER 9

CHAPTER 10

CHAPTER 11

CHAPTER 12

CHAPTER 13

CHAPTER 14

INDEX

CONTENTS
THE TREASURE HUNTER
Indi Jones

THE NEWS JUNKIE
Roland Campbell

THE GREAT ADAPTER
Tyrone Ball

SURFING FOR PROFITS
Ashkan Bolour

THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER
Paul Willette

FX FAMILY VALUES
Marcelino Livian

MAN VERSUS MACHINE
Steven Ickow

GETTING STARTED IN TRADING

163

213

243

279

307

341

359

381

391


PREFACE

How many times have you heard the often-quoted statistic that 90
percent of all traders fail? Yet everyday, millions of ordinary people
around the world wake up, turn on their computer, and try to make a
living by trading the financial markets electronically. As in every profes-
sion, there are successes and failures. The same statistic of failure exists in
the restaurant business, especially in our hometown, New York City.
New restaurants spring up on a near daily basis, some are successful, most
fail, but the possibility of hitting it big never deters people from trying.
We have found 12 people who have hit it big trading for them-selves.
‘These are not hedge fund managers or employees of big money center
banks, but regular people who started with as little as $1,000 and turned
their small initial stakes into a six- to seven-figure fortunes. These people
come from all walks of life, live all over the world and trade a variety of
electronic markets. Some of the traders focus on equities, others on
futures or foreign ex-change. Each has a very different style of trading,
some that are even in direct conflict with each other, highlighting the
fact that there are many paths to success in the financial markets. How-
ever,

VII


PREFACE

all of these traders practice discipline, stick with their strategy, and
always cut their losses. None of our interviewees were successful
from the start. Several have blown up at least one trading account.
But instead of walking away from the markets, they learned from
their early failures and used that experience to improve and ulti-
mately succeed. We convinced them to share their stories and tell
us how they got started, their best and worst trades, their number
one rule of trading, and the many lessons that they have learned
through their experience. We hope these stories inspire you to be-
lieve that success is possible and that everyday people can beat Wall
Street at its own game.

Kathy and Boris

New York
September 2007

VIII


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We want to thank everyone who has participated in our book as

well as the following people who have helped with the transcription
and translations:

Sally Ann Barnes
David Rodriguez
Benjamin Chun Lap Chang




CHAPTER 1

THE ART OF
TRADING

It ain’t about how hard you hit, it’s about how hard you can get
hit and keep moving forward. That’s how winning is done!

—Rocky Balboa

‘Trading is a battle between you and the market. The traders we
interviewed for this book have offered a wealth of insight into the
art of trading. We have distilled their most important ideas into
this short summary highlighting one unique idea from each trader
that can help you succeed in your battle with the markets.

1. IF THE NEWS IS GOOD BUT THE STOCK
PLUMMETS, BUY THE CRASH

Buying crashes is not for the faint of heart. For many traders, the
experience is akin to jumping out of a plane without a parachute.
Yet Dana Allen has made his living doing just that. How does he
profit from other trader’s losses? By looking for tell-tale signs of
divergence. Technical divergence setups where price makes a new


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

high but momentum indicators do not is one of the bread-and-
butter routines of many successful traders. However, Dana Allen
takes the idea one step further by trading fundamental divergence.
He likes to buy stocks that sell off on good news speculating that
the initial reaction is often simply due to short-term profit taking.
Once the sellers are done, Dana likes to scoop in and buy value
at a cheap price and then quickly resell it higher once demand
reappears. By making sure that he only buys quality companies
with good news, Dana has the fundamental support for his trades
and more often than not is able to bank gains in the process.

2. KNOW YOURSELF, KNOW YOUR TRADE

In trading, knowing yourself is more important than any particular
trading strategy that you may choose. Your personality needs to
be in syne with your methodology, otherwise you will not be able
to follow the rules of the setup. Knowing your strengths as well
as your limitations is rule one of becoming a successful trader. As
Rob Booker points out in his interview:

Tam a50- to 100-pip-a-week trader. Meaning I have pretty much
decided that that’s about the limits of my human capacity and
over 50 to 100, I start getting a little bit crazy. I become a little bit
less disciplined and a little bit more euphoric to put it mildly. So,
I have not generally done a lot to increase that pip target over
time, even though systems that I build might produce bigger
gains.

If you have a short attention span and seek instant gratifica-
tion, long-term swing trading strategies will not work well for you,
no matter how robust they may be because you will not have
the patience to successfully see them through. Conversely, forc-
ing oneself to become a scalper is sheer suicide for a trader who
may be much more analytically, rather than instinctually, inclined.
Therefore, it is imperative that you know what type of trader you
are and trade within your comfort zone. There are many ways to
succeed in trading but they must be aligned with your personality.

2


THE ART OF TRADING

3. REVENGE IS NEVER SWEET

The most dangerous time for any trader occurs right after a major
loss. The instinct for revenge trading (the desire to get it all back at
once) can be far more damaging than the initial loss, leading many
traders to make impulsive, irrational decisions that often lead to
complete destruction of the account. Therefore, traders would do
well to heed Chuck Hays’ advice, which could save them from
needless ruin:

Revenge trades are the most costly trades. If you have a bad
trade and you try to make it all back at one time, you're going
to lose more money. I think I learned from experience that the
best thing to do is to try and get back and get even a little bit
at a time. It’s a whole lot easier to make a half point on a 100
contracts than it is to make 10 points on 10 contracts. I just try
to focus on making good trades, do the same thing over and over
again ... and string together some singles.

By chipping away at his losses, Chuck focuses on reestablishing
control over his trading by assuming less and less risk until he has
slowly recovered his losses. This strategy stands in sharp contrast
to what many novice traders do, which is to create even more risk
by trying to hit homeruns after a large loss, and shows why Chuck
is one of the premier traders in the game.

4. TRIPLE YOUR DEMO TWICE BEFORE
TRADING FOR REAL

This insight from Hoosain Harneker is perhaps the most practi-
cal piece of advice from any of our super star traders. Nobody can
master a professional skill right away. Doctors practice on cadavers,
lawyers spend countless hours in moot court, and mechanics toil
for months in classroom garages. Practice does not guarantee suc-
cess but lack of practice almost always ensures failure. In foreign
exchange, which is Hoosain’s market of choice, every dealer of-
fers a practice platform allowing traders to experiment with virtual
money rather than real capital. In other financial markets plenty of
software tools exist to allow the trader to “paper” trade in realistic
market environments. For example, our other interviewee, Paul

3


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Willette, who was already a successful equity trader, spent three
months paper trading his account when he decided to make a
switch to electronic stock index futures.

What makes Hoosain’s advice even more valuable—albeit
much harder to follow—is that one has to achieve substantial suc-
cess on the demo before moving to a live account. By mandat-
ing that you triple the demo, Hoosain requires that your trading
methodology has a discernable edge that should serve you well
in the real market. While his rules of trade are difficult, they are
well worth following because they instill the discipline necessary
to succeed in the real market.

5. DON’T LOSE YOUR COOL—ALWAYS USE A STOP

Although this rule is practiced by every professional trader to con-
trol risk, Franki Law, the Forex (FX) trader from Hong Kong,
offers additional insight into why it is so valuable. In his interview,
he states:

There are many people who will go longa currency pair and keep
injecting money into their accounts if they get margin calls to buy
at even lower prices in hopes that a rally will help them to recover
their entire account. For example, if you are long 10 lots, and the
price falls, you add 20, if it falls again, you add 30 etc. Although
the ability to recover quickly may seem extremely attractive, it is
very dangerous and it is something I will rarely use. The reason is
because I feel that if I keep on posting money into my account to
meet a margin call and adding into a losing position, I am essen-
tially at the whim of the market. I can only hope that the trade
moves in my desired direction, but I am essentially stripped of
my decision making power. Perhaps the price movement would
have called for a short, but since I am buried so deep in the long
position, I can only let the market take me where it wants to. So
what would I do if I got a margin call? I would close my position
and wait for the next clear opportunity or setup to get into the
market because it avoids letting the market dictate my profits
and losses and allows me to be the decision maker once again—I
get to choose when to get into the market, what product, and
what size and this control is very important to me.

4


THE ART OF TRADING

If you do not use a stop, you are at the mercy of the market and
lose all control over your trade. Since trading at its core is ultimately
an exercise in control over the chaotic and often unpredictable
markets, a stop is a must for any long-term trading success

6. PROTECT YOUR CAPITAL—PROTECT YOURSELF

This is perhaps the most basic but often the most overlooked aspect
of trading. According to Indi Jones:

Clint Eastwood would be a great commodity trader because he
told the Million Dollar Baby that rule number one in boxing is to
protect yourself. And I think the same is true in trading. If you
want to trade, your capital is everything. So, if you want to be a
great trader, you have got to protect that capital. No capital, no
trading, no life and its the same whether you want to be a Million
Dollar Baby in boxing or a Million Dollar Baby in commodity
trading, I think it’s the same thing—protect your capital.

The market will forgive many things including bad, even stupid
trades, but it will not forgive the loss of capital. Once all of your
capital is gone there is no opportunity to recover. That’s why capital
preservation is always the foremost concern of every trader we
interview.

7. AVERAGING DOWN IS FOR LOSERS, BUT
AVERAGING IN CAN BE THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN SUCCESS AND FAILURE

Most traders will tell you that averaging down into a trade is a mug’s
game. However averaging in is a strategy employed by a number
of our interview subjects to a great success. What’s the difference?
Intent. Traders who average into the positions expect to be initially
wrong on price and size their trades accordingly. Roland Campbell
is one such trader:

That to me is absolutely the key to my success. I average in on
every trade | make and I average out whenever I exit. I have a
tendency where, as soon as I buy a currency, it will dip 10 pips.

5


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Before I would get upset, but now I love it because I feel like I
can get in at a better price, so I hope it dips another 10 pips. I
know the price I want, so I will average into that price.

Roland allows himself about four average ins before he calls it
quits. “If it goes much further than four average downs, I have to
start considering whether this is the right trade to be in,” he notes,
“but nine times out of ten that strategy works for me.” Roland
always knows his “uncle point” and unlike novice traders who are
never willing to pull the plug on a bad idea, Roland will always
stop himself out when a trade goes bad. However, in the majority
of the cases, he will succeed in turning a profit on most of his scale
in strategies, showing once again that all rules of trading can be
broken as long as they are done so for a good reason.

8. TOPS OR BOTTOMS ARE ONLY EVIDENT
IN HINDSIGHT

There is an old trading adage that goes like this, “They don’t ring
a bell at the top.” While tops and bottoms may seem obvious in
retrospect, in the heat of the battle they are rarely clear. That is why
Tyrone Ball’s point is so valuable. He said, “I came to understand
that you can’t pick the top and the bottoms of your trades, you just
got to be willing to take money while it’s still in your favor and cut
your losers small. I mean it sounds too simple, but most can’t do
that.” Market profits can be very elusive. Like ice cubes in your
hand. Therefore, banking at least some profits when you get them
is a cornerstone to most of our traders’ success.

9. TURN HAPPENS ONLY ONCE BUT TREND
IS CONTINUOUS

For anyone who is a fade trader trying constantly to pick tops or
bottoms, Ashkan Balour’s deceptively simple observation should
provide a moment of pause. He states, “Basically Tam continuation
trader. When the trend is going in that direction, I don’t see any
point in trying to find the turn. It will tell you when it’s reversed. If

6


THE ART OF TRADING

you look at any chart pattern where the market’s reversed, you'll see
a daily reversal. Reversal only happens once, but the continuations
happen all the time until the moment the reversal is hit.” In a sense,
Ashkan argues rather persuasively that the higher probability trades
occur with the trend since, like in physics, price will stay in motion
until it is counteracted by a stronger opposing force. Until such
time comes, Ashkan believes, it is much more productive to trade
in the direction of the major trend.

10. THE LAST 25 PERCENT OF THE POSITION CAN
MAKE A DISPROPORTIONATE CONTRIBUTION
TO YOUR OVERALL PROFIT

Everyone wants to be able to let their profits run, but in real
life financial instruments rarely follow a smooth straight path to
riches. Instead prices often retrace the majority and sometimes all
of their gains leaving many inexperienced traders empty handed.
Paul Willette, however, has come up with a method to harvest
some profits right away while ensuring that he can still benefit
from an occasional extension run in his favor. What’s noteworthy
about his insight is that even leaving a small proportion of his
original position on could contribute significant profits to his overall
account.

How does this work? Let’s assume that we trade like Paul does
with a position of 20 contracts. The stop on the position is 1.00
ER (a mini-Russell 2000 stock index future) point. At +1.00 points
in his favor, Paul would sell five contracts and move the stop to
breakeven. At +2.00 points he would sell another five contracts.
At +3.00 points he may sell an additional 5 contracts. At +5.00 he
may sell two more contracts and at +7.00 he may finally sell the
last three remaining contracts. In total the trade would have netted
+61 points, but note that fully 31 of those points—or more than
50 percent—came from the last five contracts or just 25 percent of
the original amount of the trade.

Paul teaches us that we do not need to make money on more
than a small portion of our position in order for the whole trade to
be substantially profitable.



MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

11. MAKE YOUR MONEY WORK FOR YOU

In arush for capital appreciation, many traders often overlook the
immense power of compound interest. Marcelino Livian is not
such a man. Instead, much like the largest money center banks
and the savviest hedge funds in the world, Marcelino always looks
to get paid while holding a position. This is the reason he trades FX
exclusively on the side of the carry, letting the positive interest rate
differential between the currencies work to improve his average
entry price while he waits for his trades to become profitable. While
his method may be far less glamorous than the swashbuckling style
of the scalpers it is no less profitable and should be taken just as
seriously.

12. BEAT COMPUTERS AT THEIR OWN GAME BY
USING PROBATIVE ORDERS

Almost 70 percent of trading on Nasdaq is now done through
automated order-entry programs. Many traders have bemoaned
the onset of computerized trading robots as the end of face-to-
face markets, but Steve Ickow has not only adjusted but prospered
under the new regime by probing out the logic behind the software
algorithms. Steve says, “A high percentage of Nasdaq volume is now
composed of black box trading. So a lot of times I will test price just
to see where the market is. Let’s say I am long and I start bidding
up and bids come with me then I know I am good. Let’s say I offer
and now no one joins me, no one is an aggressive seller. That’s how
I get information on the stock by constantly bidding and offering.”
Whether you are a machine or a human being, when it comes to
financial markets ultimately you are either a buyer or a seller. By
constantly probing the logic of the machines, Steve Ickow is able
to figure out their true intentions and turn that information into
profitable trades.


CHAPTER 2

THE MAN WHO
BUYS CRASHES

DANA “DAN” ALLEN

Eve since he was a little boy Dana “Dan” Allen was fascinated
with trading. He started reading the Wall Street Journal at 9 and
opened his own commodity trading account by the time he was 21.
Dana’s trading career has been characterized by one overarching
theme—the uncanny ability to buy a dollar’s worth of value for a
nickel. Be it commodities, stocks, or options, Dana has succeeded
in finding deep value in whatever instrument he traded, often in-
creasing his initial investment tenfold. The man who buys crashes,
Dana Allen, thrives on making bids when most other market par-
ticipants are running for the exits. Although his trading style is
not for the faint of heart and can be seemingly chaotic, Dana has
managed to face the risks and walk away with returns that most
retail traders can only dream about. We had a chance to interview
Dana from his home in Nevada.


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Were you always fascinated with trading? Did you read the
Wall Street Journal when you were in high school?

A : Oh younger than that, I started reading it when I was eight
or nine years old. I’d look at the commodities section and at the
charts and I always thought, gee, you know, I can make money in
this. Of course, I was too young. But when I was 21, I think right
on my birthday, I started trading commodities. So I guess at that
point I had to be the youngest commodity trader in the United
States at that time.
