
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

29

hands are dealt with more people. Fewer hands slows down the potential
for loss. With fewer hands and a more drawn-out game, I will have less fear.
Most retail traders when they start trading—and even after they have
done it for a while—are not ready for the frequent price action, and their
lack of preparedness manifests itself through increased fear. What does
fear do to your trading? It often leads to trading errors.
Think of the initial and largest hill on a roller coaster. It causes the
most fear. Each “tic-tic-tic” as the rollercoaster climbs intensifies that fear.
It is the same when the currency market is “tic-tic-ticking,” or more appropriately, “pip-pip-pipping.” Fear intensifies. You need to control it.

Know What Causes Your Fear
Fear is an emotion that traders need to control but most cannot or don’t
know how to. Most traders do not understand fully what causes the fear.
Not knowing what causes fear makes figuring out ways to control it difficult, if not impossible.
Understanding that currency trading is like roulette on steroids is a
step in the direction of understanding, facing, and controlling one aspect
of traders’ fear. If you know that the market will fluctuate and not just go
up in a straight line or down in a straight line, you are more able to face
those gyrations with less fear. In other words, you will not be as scared of
the first hill on the roller coaster.
The fact is that most retail traders have fear, and that fear will lead to
closing out positions too quickly. It will lead to overleveraged positions. It
will lead to ignoring stop levels. It will lead to losses.
In this book, I will look to show how fear can be defined and, more
importantly, controlled. Hopefully by the end, you will be able to look at
yourself and honestly say “Fear? What fear?” rather than pretend you don’t
have any.

THEY LOSE MONEY
I like to tell retail traders that there tends to be a bell curve of results when
it comes to trading, just like there is a bell curve when it comes to other
businesses or skills.
For example, most people know that opening a restaurant is risky.
Common benchmark studies show that 60 percent fail within three years
from opening. That number may be rising as a result of the harsh recession
of 2009 and the tighter credit conditions from banks.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

30

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

For demonstration purposes, let’s assume 68 percent of restaurants fail
over a certain time period (say three years). For those who have a rudimentary knowledge of statistics, that percentage represents a single standard
deviation of a normal distribution.
The second standard deviation encompasses those restaurants that
stay in business with some just barely surviving, while others do better.
That pool of restaurants, if it is a normal distribution, makes up the next
27 percent, with 13.5 percent making, as an example, 1 to 8 percent profit
and the other 13.5 percent making 8 to 15 percent.
Finally, the third standard deviation of the bell curve consists of
2.5 percent who make 15 to 25 percent and 2.5 percent who make more
than 25 percent on average over three years. This pool contains the restaurants that hit the home runs in the culinary world, get four and five stars,
and are packed night in and night out, recession or no recession.
The restaurants get to their respective buckets on the bell curve not
by luck, not by hit-or-miss, but by running their business like a business in
all aspects. This includes things like the restaurant’s location, the decorations, the kitchen facilities, the personnel and customer service, the menu
choices, the food suppliers, the pricing, and of course the most important
aspect, the expertise in food preparation. All of the pieces come together
to make the restaurant a success.
A similar story and distribution can be made with currency traders. It
should be no secret that the biggest group of traders will not be able to
make money trading currencies. The reasons can vary, but in Chapter 2, I
will outline the “Six Attributes of Successful Traders.” Lacking any one of
the attributes is reason enough for potential failure.
If I were to bucket retail currency traders over the course of one
month, there is likely a group of 68 percent or so who lose money. The
next 27 percent of traders could be broken into 13.5 percent who make 1
to 3 percent and 13.5 percent who make 3 to 6 percent. On the far extremes
are the 2.5 percent who make 6 to 10 percent and finally 2.5 percent who
hit the home runs and make more than 10 percent.
The buckets are likely to include different traders each month. This
will tend to make the numbers skew even more to the negative over an
extended period of time. That is, someone who made a small percentage
one month could lose a greater percentage the next month and be down
overall.
I know I am not being too positive, but just like facing the fear of trading will make you aware of it, knowing the challenge of the profit/loss curve
should be an encouragement to make yourself better.
What part of the bell curve of traders did you fit into last month? Were
you in the fat part that lost money or were you in a group that made money?
How about the month before? Can you consistently be in the groups that

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

Printer: Yet to come

31

make money? Do you have an idea of how to get there, like your favorite
restaurant knows how to survive through the worst recession in decades?
Knowing that traders in the fat part of the bell curve lose money trading
currencies gives you two choices right now. One is to put the book down,
close your trading account, and find something else to do with your time
and money. I do thank you for buying the book, however.
The second option is to not give up, but at the very least complete
this book, take heed of what it has to say, and put the effort toward becoming successful by paying attention to the details, like the successful
restaurant owner pays attention to all those things that make her restaurant a success.
This includes knowing the attributes of successful traders, having a
mission statement, having a game plan to succeed in the mission statement,
following the rules of the game, picking the right tools to be successful with
the game plan, and finally, and most importantly, finding the ways to attack
currency trends as they ultimately will make you the most money. If you
can attack the trends and avoid trading on the wrong side of the trends,
which causes the people in the fat part of the bell curve to Fail—fail with
a capital F—you will move forward with a good chance of being one of the
four- or five-star traders.
Can I guarantee you success? No. No one can give a 100 percent guarantee of success. However, you will take steps forward, be more aware of
what needs to be done, and hopefully by the end of the book, you will have
the skills and knowledge to be able to trade with more of a purpose and
with the chance for greater success.
Most retail currency traders lose money, but so do most restaurants.
Do you want to do the things like your favorite restaurant owner does, or
do you want to quit or be satisfied with failure? That is what you are facing.
The choice is yours.

THEY ARE TOO FUNDAMENTAL (NOT
TECHNICAL ENOUGH)
In the world of trading there are two types of trading analysis. The first is
fundamental analysis, and the second is technical analysis. Fundamental
analysis for currencies involves the study of influences that affect the price
of a currency pair over a time period. The main fundamental influences
include:

r Economic statistics
r Political policy and influences

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

32

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

r Central bank policy
r Intermarket relationships and influences
r Natural currency influences or uses
Fundamental analysis takes a collection of influences and throws them
in a pot, and through cause and effect analysis, the trader creates a bias for
the directional move of a security, or in our case a currency price.
For example, a currency trader might take a fundamental view that the
price of the Australian dollar versus the U.S. dollar (AUDUSD) would go up
because Australia’s recent economic data is strong, central bank policy is
being tightened, the country is running a trade surplus, and fiscal policy is
under control. All of these fundamental reasons should cause a currency to
be in demand and therefore rise. In comparison, the United States is mired
in a recession with sluggish economic data, is running an increasing trade
deficit, has rates at or near zero, and has a deteriorating fiscal position. All
these fundamental influences should lessen the demand for the U.S. dollar.
The divergence of the fundamental news should improve the value of the
AUDUSD.
The other type of analysis used by currency traders is technical analysis. Technical analysis is the study of the historic prices of a traded instrument, in the form of a chart. Trend lines that connect lows and/or highs in
a chart are one technical tool traders use to determine a bullish or bearish
bias. Technical analysis also involves the study of mathematically derived
indicators using historical prices. Calculated values such as Fibonacci retracements, moving averages, and the Relative Strength Index give directional bullish or bearish biases for traded instruments such as currencies.
Technical traders use technical analysis to predict or anticipate price direction, to reaffirm a price trend, and to define risk.
Most traders have a bias toward using either fundamental analysis or
technical analysis. To say that it is not good to have knowledge of both
would be wrong. I use both fundamental and technical analysis each and
every day. However, the one I will always base trading decisions on is technical analysis.
I tend to use fundamental analysis to support technical analysis and
quite frankly I (and everyone) sound smarter when talking about the fundamentals that effect currency rates. This is why the people you will see
on business television will talk fundamental analysis 99 percent of the
time.
Can you imagine if CNBC’s Larry Kudlow stopped talking about free
market capitalism and instead spoke about the how the price broke a Fibonacci level? What if Ben Bernanke went in front of Congress and said
how the stock market was oversold on a RSI basis and was due for a correction. Better yet, imagine if you and your spouse were invited to a dinner

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

33

party with new neighbors. After the host asked you what you thought of
“the market,” you went into a monologue on how the price moved above
the Ichimoku Cloud, or how the hammer formation on the candlestick
chart points toward a strong rebound—both technical tools. Most dinner
hosts would think twice about the next invite. People sound smart knowing
why the market did what it did from a fundamental perspective.
However, when trading, the fact is that if I had to do without either
technical analysis or fundamental analysis, I would gladly rid myself of all
fundamental analysis—and learn to keep my mouth shut at the dinner parties. The majority of retail currency traders are not willing to make this
leap. There is something in the mind that says to retail traders “I need to
sound smart” and find and use the fundamental reason before trading. Do
me and yourself a favor and change.
Why do I use technical analysis over fundamental analysis? There is
one simple reason. Technical analysis can always tell you what the “full”
fundamental story is saying, whereas someone’s specific fundamental analysis can run counter to what the technical charts are saying.
For example, if the dollar falls, oil prices should rise. The fundamental
reason is that oil is denominated in U.S. dollars, so oil producers will need
to demand a higher price to achieve the same revenue. As a result, the market will price in less supply in order to push up the price. Yet there are instances when the dollar can rise with higher oil prices. Government budget
deficits in the United States can be surging, which should also be bearish
for the U.S. dollar, yet the currency can instead appreciate. Unemployment
can decrease in Canada, which from a fundamental perspective should lead
to higher rates and a higher Canadian dollar, yet the Canadian dollar can
instead decline. Portugal, Ireland, and Greece might be in the midst of a
sovereign debt crisis that should lessen the demand for capital inflows into
those European Union (EU) countries and therefore decrease the value of
the euro, yet the EURUSD can instead strengthen. The U.K. election of 2009
ended in a hung parliament, which fundamental analysis would suggest
would cause a lower pound, yet the GBPUSD rose. Australia may tighten
rates, which from a fundamental perspective would be bullish for the
Australian dollar, yet the AUDUSD can trade in a trading range or correct
lower.
These fundamental events all have occurred in recent trading history,
yet the fundamental story did not follow the expected price movement—at
least for a time period. Sure, they may right themselves eventually, but
they may not before you take a trading loss and exit your position. Most
retail traders cannot stand the fear of waiting for “eventually” to happen,
and this often leads to the retail trader panicking. In addition, there is also
the chance that the fundamental analysis is wrong and the price simply
trends the other way. What I like to say is that fundamental analysis can be

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

34

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

ambiguous at times. That is, the market price can go in the opposite direction of what is fundamentally expected from the news or events.
By using the proper technical tools, however, the fear of waiting for
the market to turn likely can be avoided. We will learn what tools to use,
why, and how to take the clues from them, so you don’t have to wait for
the market price (if it does) to support your fundamental analysis.
Making the technicals king, with the ultimate say in your positions, will
allow you to trade the fundamentals only when the technical charts say you
should trade—and not before it’s time. It will also allow you to avoid the
ambiguity that fundamental analysis can cause.
Are there technical tools that I do not recommend? Yes! Quite frankly
there are some technical tools—and widely accepted technical tools as
well—that I will not use or suggest you use. The reason is that they can
be as ambiguous as fundamentals at times. Ambiguity begets fear. I will
warn you of those technical tools as the book progresses.
Admittedly, technical analysis can be boring and a buzz-kill at dinner
parties. However, if the goal is to make the most money you can as a retail
currency trader and keep fear to a minimum, save the Larry Kudlow story
for the dinner party, and focus on the technicals for your trading. Too many
retail traders focus too much on the fundamental analysis and not enough
on the technicals. Make a change!
There is a saying in golf that you “drive for show but putt for dough,”
meaning that those who are great putters on the greens will often beat
those who can pound the ball 300 yards down the fairway. The fact is,
99 percent of the golfers out there would choose a 300-yard drive over
five fewer three-putts per round. In the world of trading, the analogy is the
same. That is, 99 percent of the traders out there will justify a losing position by talking about the fundamentals, when if they simply focused on the
technical charts, they would beat the heck out of the fundamental trader.
So start believing in “fundamentals for show and technicals for dough.”
It will save you money and also make you more money.

THEY DON’T KNOW ENOUGH ABOUT KEY
FUNDAMENTAL REQUIREMENTS
How can I say retail traders are too fundamental and then say they don’t
know enough about fundamentals? Hear me out before you close the
book.
The distinction is that I firmly believe traders should not base trading decisions on the fundamentals, but they should not be totally blind to
fundamentals, either. For example, not knowing that U.S. unemployment
figures are due for release at 8:30 AM EST is an example of being totally

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

35

blind to the fundamentals and irresponsible as a trader. If risk is increased,
traders should be aware of that risk and, if need be, refrain from trading
until more normal risk levels return.
Technicals will tell the true market bias story all the time, but there are
fundamentals that certainly can help the retail currency trader judge risk,
prevent stupid trades, and give a bullish or bearish bias for a trend type
move. In the next section I will give a broad stroke lesson on fundamental influences and point out some influences that retail traders should be
aware of and prepared for.

Economic Statistics
Each month a collection of economic statistics are compiled by each country or region (such as the Eurozone). The values, which are normally published on a month on month (MoM) and year on year (YoY) basis, are released according to a specific schedule. The important thing to note is there
is a calendar of economic releases.
In the United States, economic statistics are generally released at
8:30 AM, 9:15 AM, or 10:00 AM EST. There can be some minor exceptions. In
other countries and the Eurozone the releases are also generally released
at set times. In the U.K. and Eurozone, for instance, the normal times for
release are at 9:00 to 10:00 AM GMT.
The statistics are compiled from various sources. For example, the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov) compiles the weekly and
monthly U.S. Unemployment statistics. The U.S. Commerce Department
(www.commerce.gov) will release statistics like Retail Sales, Durable
Goods Orders, GDP, and the U.S. Trade Balance.
In the Eurozone, Eurostat (http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu) releases
most of the statistics for the EU.
Each country’s statistics can be found online. Some can be found at
the central bank’s site. Others are found elsewhere. Below are the main
country websites that show key economic statistics. Bookmark them on
your computer and visit them. They are good sources to see how macroeconomic trends for a country are shaping up. However, do not base trading decisions solely on the data.

r Japan: www.stat.go.jp/english/index.htm
r U.K.: www.statistics.gov.uk
r Switzerland: www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/portal/en/index.html
r Canada: www.statcan.gc.ca
r Australia: www.abs.gov.au/
r New Zealand: www.treasury.govt.nz/
r United States: www.bls.gov and www.commerce.gov
r Eurozone: http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

36

January 20, 2011

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

Daily Economic Releases
The majority of the global economic releases are compiled on a monthly
basis, but there are some that are quarterly releases, like GDP, and a few
that are weekly, like the U.S. Initial Claims for Unemployment.
Most of the releases are lagged. For example, the U.S. Retail Sales
release would be the change for the month preceding the release date.
Most of the releases are revised and seasonally adjusted. The seasonal
adjustments can also be revised each year, which can make the original
number a shadow of its original self. Does that matter for your trading?
Not really, as trading is about what we know now versus expectations. If
the fundamentals paint a different picture of today six months from now,
it does not matter.
It’s important for retail traders to know that major news services will
often have an estimate of the daily releases compiled from surveys of chief
economists from global banks. The economists employ statistical modeling
in their analysis and are well versed in the nuances of the data.
Most traders will use the estimates as the benchmark to base bullish or
bearish sentiment after data is released. That is, if the U.S. Nonfarm Payroll change in jobs is expected or forecast to show a gain of 100,000 jobs
and the actual data shows a gain of 150,000 jobs, that number is stronger
than expectations and the market should act accordingly. I would anticipate that the dollar should get stronger. The fundamentals from the data
don’t necessarily guarantee a move in the anticipated direction as there are
other influences for direction other than the economic number. Plus, one
never knows if the number was fully discounted by the market already.
Most retail currency brokers will review the key economic events and
releases each day on their websites (I know I do). In addition, most will
also have a calendar of economic releases along with the estimates from a
survey of economists.
There is often also a level of importance noted for each release. Some
use colors with red being most important, orange being next in importance,
to yellow being not important at all. Others may use a number system or
other symbol designation that determines a rank of importance. Figure 1.1
is an example of such a web site, www.fxddondemand.com.
In Figure 1.1, take note of the level of “Importance.” The importance
is a proxy for risk. The greater the importance, the greater the risk, both
before (as positions are squared) and after the release.
The “Forecast” in Figure 1.1 is the next most important piece in an
economic calendar. The forecast is generally what the market will base the
relative strength or weakness on after the fundamental data is known.
The bigger the deviation of the “Actual” value from the “Forecast,” and
the greater the importance, the larger the likely jump or fall in price. This

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c01

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

Stereotyping the Retail Currency Trader

21:29

Printer: Yet to come

37

FIGURE 1.1 Example of Economic Calendar
Source: www.fxddondemand.com.

is termed event risk. In addition, the volatility generally increases after an
important economic release. That is, the price can move sharply higher,
then come down sharply, before rising again. This is what I term volatility
risk. The bid-to-ask spreads for the currency pairs can also widen due to a
reluctance to quote with the increased uncertainty. This is called liquidity
risk. Finally, it is not unusual for the price to gap. When a gap occurs, the
trader is often exposed to slippage. The term slippage refers to the difference between an order price—like a stop loss order—and the actual fill or
trade execution price. Traders, not brokers, are responsible for slippage
risk because a stop order simply triggers a market order. If the price gaps
through a stop order, the next price where the market trades is the fill price.
It can be materially different from the order price, especially if the data is
a surprise. This is another risk that traders should be aware of through the
more important economic releases such as GDP, unemployment, and inflation. With all these added risks, doesn’t it make sense to be aware of those
that are most important? I would think so.
Should traders be paranoid about all economic releases? I think there
are times when taking on the risk is justified and other times when it is not.
For example, if you have an unrealized gain on a position and the economic
and technical bias is in the direction of your position, it can make good
sense to keep the position through the increased risk.
