
Index ....................................................................... 317

www.pdfdummies.com

Introduction

T

iming is everything.

Timing is critical in cooking, romance, music, politics, farming, and a hundred
other aspects of life on this planet. Putting money into a securities market is
no different — you need good timing to get the best results.
Technical traders all over the world, amateur and professional alike, earn a
living by using technical analysis to time their trades in many different markets. They not only earn a living, but are also still standing after a market crash.
In this book, I try to explain how they do that, and how you can do it, too.

About This Book
The technical analysis industry is positively blooming. Go to an Internet
search engine and type in technical analysis, and you get over 45 million
responses. The phrase support and resistance results in over 10 million hits.
Okay, everyone knows the limitations of Web searches, but even after weeding out the mismatches, that’s still a huge amount of material. Don’t be intimidated. In this book, I include core concepts, some of which you can apply
today with no further research.
I want you to grasp the mindset of the technical trader or investor: To think
independently, to take responsibility for actions, and most of all, to act on
observation rather than conventional wisdom. Try to leave your preconceptions about trading and investing behind. For example, a core technical concept is that the technical trader cuts losses and lets the winning trades run.
Chances are you think that, after taking a loss, you should continue to hold
the security, because if it’s a true value investment, it’ll come back.
But try to think like a 10-year-old as you read this book. In fact, go find a
10-year-old, if you have one handy, and ask him, “Which is better to hang on
to: a thing that has already let you down (losses) or a different thing that’s
delivering exactly what you wanted (profits)?” See? Technical analysis is subversive that way.
Beating the system is fun and rewarding. The market doesn’t know you, your
age, gender, ethnicity, good looks or lack of them, singing talent, or anything
else about you except whether you’re a successful trader. The market is
blind. In fact, the market is indifferent. It’s the one place you can go to be
judged solely on your merits. Use this book to help you find your way.

www.pdfdummies.com

2

Technical Analysis For Dummies, 2nd Edition
The good news is that For Dummies books are designed so that you can jump
in anywhere and get the information you need. Don’t feel that you have to
read every chapter — or even the entire chapter. Take advantage of the table
of contents and index to find what you’re looking for, and check it out.

Conventions Used in This Book
To help you navigate this book, I use the following conventions:
✓ Italic is used for emphasis and to highlight new words or terms that are
defined.
✓ Boldfaced text is used to indicate keywords in bulleted lists or the
action part of numbered steps.
✓ Monofont is used for Web addresses.

What You’re Not to Read
I intend for this book to be a pleasant and practical read so that you can
quickly find and absorb the information you want. However, I sometimes
couldn’t help going a little bit deeper or relaying information that expands on
the basics. You might find this information interesting, but you don’t need it
to understand what you came to that section to find.
When you see a sidebar (a gray-shaded box of text) or text flagged with the
Technical Stuff icon, know that the information is optional. You can lead a full
and happy life without giving it a glance. (But aren’t you curious? A little?)

Foolish Assumptions
Every author must make assumptions about her audience, and I’ve made a
few assumptions that may apply to you:
✓ You’ve never put a dime into a security but you plan to; and when you
do, you intend not to lose it.
✓ You’re reasonably well versed in the trading game, but you’re looking for
new tools to become a more effective trader and improve your profits.
✓ You’re tired of the buy-and-hold approach in which your returns seem
unrelated to the supposed quality of the security you bought.
✓ You want to find out how to sell. You know how to buy, but timing your
sales ties you up in knots.

www.pdfdummies.com

Introduction
✓ You’ve experienced some setbacks in the market, and you need an
approach to make that money back.
✓ You want to know whether technical analysis has any basis in reason
and logic — or whether all technical analysts are crackpots.
If any of these descriptions fits the bill, then you’ve picked up the right book.

How This Book Is Organized
I’ve arranged Technical Analysis For Dummies into six parts. Parts I and II
introduce you to the field of technical analysis, and Parts III through V introduce you to nuts and bolts — the indicators. What’s that leave? The famous
For Dummies Part of Tens — Part VI.

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
The point of technical analysis is to help you observe prices in a new way
and to make trading decisions based on reasonable expectations about
where “the market” is going to take the price. This part shows you how to
view security prices as the outcome of crowd psychology.

Part II: Preparing Your Mind
for Technical Analysis
Before you plunge into risking hard-earned cash on securities trading, you have
to realize that it’s not the security that counts; it’s the trade. Each trade has two
parts — the price analysis and you. Price analysis tools are called indicators, and
you have to select the indicators that match your personality and preference
for risk. But most people don’t know their risk preference when they start out
in securities trading (which changes over time, anyway), so you have a chickenand-egg situation. By studying the kinds of profit and loss outcomes that each
type of indicator delivers, you can figure out your risk preferences.

Part III: Observing Market Behavior
The price bar and its placement on the chart deliver a ton of information
about market sentiment. It doesn’t take much practice to start reading the
mind of the market by looking at bars and small patterns. The payoff is cold,
hard cash, but you have to be patient, imaginative, and thoughtful.

www.pdfdummies.com

3

4

Technical Analysis For Dummies, 2nd Edition

Part IV: Finding Patterns
If all you can see on a security’s price chart at first are meaningless squiggles,
this section shows you core tools for organizing your vision. With a little
practice, you can quickly start throwing around technical jargon like support
and resistance with the best of them. Better yet, this part provides the concepts you need to start making informed decisions.

Part V: Flying with Dynamic Analysis
This part deals (mostly) with math-based indicators. Relax — it’s only arithmetic. Math indicators are the workhorses of technical analysis. They help
you identify whether your price is trending, the strength of the trend, and
when the trend is at a reversal point. Applying these indicators carefully and
consistently is the key to trading success. If you’re mathematically competent, you can take a giant leap into system building, and remove most of the
day-to-day judgmental decision making that trading involves.

Part VI: The Part of Tens
As I say in Part I, there’s the trade, and then there’s you. You can be merely
competent at using indicators and still achieve excellence as a trader. I show
you how in this part, by sharing ten rules that every top trader follows, ten
technical things you can do that will help you make money trading, and ten
ways in which the market has changed. Finally, I include a brief listing of the
top resources to follow up on.

Icons Used in This Book
Icons are small pictures in the margins of this book that flag certain material
for you. The following icons highlight information you want to pay special
attention to.
When you see this icon, you don’t want to forget the accompanying info —
pretty subtle, huh?
This icon clues you in on hands-on time- and hassle-saving advice that you can
put into practice. In many cases, this icon tells you directly how to conduct a
trade on a technical principle, usually an indicator crossing something, breaking something, or dancing a jig.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Introduction
Ignore this information at your own financial peril. I use this icon to warn
you about mistakes, missteps, and traps that can sink even the best trading
professional.

This icon flags places where I get really technical about technical analysis.
Although it’s great info, you can skip it and not miss out on the subject at hand.

Where to Go from Here
If you’re new to technical analysis, take a close look at Parts I and II for the
scoop on the field. If you are already a good chart reader, what you probably need is help on managing the trade (Chapter 5). Applying indicators is
better than willy-nilly trading decisions, but to get The Traders’ Edge, you
also need the discipline of a winner. How do you become a winner? The same
way you get to Carnegie Hall — practice, practice, practice, and hanging out
with other winners. Figuring out how to trade technically is a journey of selfdiscovery, corny as that sounds. Luckily, it’s a journey with a lot of fellow
travelers to keep you company. I hope you enjoy the road.

www.pdfdummies.com

5

6

Technical Analysis For Dummies, 2nd Edition

www.pdfdummies.com

Part I

Defining Technical
Analysis

www.pdfdummies.com

G

In this part . . .

et ready to set aside everything you think you know
about trading and investing. In technical analysis,
you look only at what prices are doing, not at fundamentals or what some theory says they “should” do. In this
part, I explain how the price behavior of securities is the
outcome of crowd psychology. Technical analysis is all
about observing how prices actually move and trying to
use past regularities in price movements to predict future
regularities.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 1

Opening the Technical
Analysis Toolbox
In This Chapter
▶ Defining technical analysis
▶ Getting acquainted with the trend
▶ Figuring out your definition of trendedness
▶ Getting the many names for technical analysis straight
▶ Beginning your technical analysis journey

W

elcome to technical analysis, which may be a new way of looking at
stocks and other securities for you. Simply put, technical analysis is a
set of forecasting methods that can help you make better trading decisions.
In this chapter, I take you on a quick tour of key technical concepts and
review why technical analysis works (and why sometimes it doesn’t). You
may think that technical analysis is all about reading charts full of squiggles
and lines, and although I give you plenty of material about squiggles and lines
in this book, technical analysis is also about managing market risk.
Does that sound a bit too grand? Well, building a house isn’t chiefly about
hammers and nails, although you need them. Squiggles and lines are just
tools. Think of tackling technical analysis as a project to build better trading
practices. Yes, you need the squiggles and lines, but your goal is to use those
tools to make money.

Introducing Technical Analysis
Technical analysis is the study of how securities prices behave and how to
exploit that information to make money while avoiding losses. The technical
style of trading is opportunistic. Your immediate goal is to forecast the price
of the security over some future time horizon in order to buy and sell the
security to make a cash profit. The emphasis in technical analysis is to make

www.pdfdummies.com

10

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
profits from trading, not to consider owning a security as some kind of savings
vehicle. Therefore, technical analysis dictates a more active trading style than
you may be used to.

Trading or investing: The many
faces of technical analysis
Both traders and investors use technical analysis. So what’s the difference
between a trader and an investor? Most people consider that a trader is
someone who holds securities for only a short period of time, anywhere from
a minute to a year. An investor is someone who holds securities anywhere
from many months to forever, depending on whom you ask. Holding period
is not the only factor, though. You may think of an investor as someone who
also seeks income from dividends or bond coupon payments, and the timing
of those payments influences the investor’s holding period, too.
Actually, the dividing line between trader and investor isn’t fixed (except for
purposes of taxation). Be careful not to fall into the semantic trap of thinking
that a trader is a wild-eyed speculator while an investor is a respectable guy
in a pinstriped suit. I use the word trader in this book, but don’t let it distract
you. People who consider themselves investors use technical methods, too.
You can use technical methods over any investment horizon, including the
long term. If you’re an expert in Blue Widget stock, for example, you can
add to your holdings when the price is relatively low, take some partial
profit when the price is relatively high, and dump it all if the stock crashes.
Technical analysis has tools for identifying each of these situations. You can
also use technical tools to rotate your capital among several securities, allocating more capital to the ones delivering the highest gains. At the other end
of the investment horizon spectrum, you can use technical analysis to spot a
high-probability trade and execute the purchase and sale in one hour.

Setting new rules
You may have the preconceived notion that because technical analysis
entails an active trading style, you’re about to embark on a wild and riskladen adventure — like the one-hour trade, for example. Nothing is further
from the truth. Executing the one-hour trade has less inherent risk of loss
than buying and holding a security indefinitely without an exit plan. The existence of an exit plan is what defines and limits the risk.
The one-hour trade entails risk management, whereas holding a security
without an end in mind on some concept of hypothetical “value” is to take
100 percent risk. That supposedly “valuable” security can quickly tank and go
to zero. Think of Enron, WorldCom, Lehman Brothers, or Bear Stearns — all

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 1: Opening the Technical Analysis Toolbox
failed companies whose stock price went to zero, even though “experts” said
that these names were buying opportunities right up to the last minute.
Preventing and controlling losses is more important than outright profit seeking
to practically every technical trader you meet. The technical analysis approach
is demonstrably more risk averse than the value-investing approach.
To embrace technical analysis is to embrace a way of thinking that’s always
sensitive to risk. Technical trading means to trade with a plan that identifies
the potential gain and the potential loss of every trade ahead of time. The
technical trader devises rules for dealing with price developments as they
occur in order to realize the plan. In fact, you select your technical tools
(from the many available) specifically to match your trading style with your
sensitivity to risk. I talk about this in Chapter 4.
Using rules is the key feature of lasting success in trading. Anybody can get
lucky — once. To make profits consistently requires that you not only identify the trading opportunity, but also manage the risk of the trade. Most of
the “trading rules” that you hear about, such as “Cut your losses and let your
winners run,” arise from the experience of technical traders. (I come back the
subject of managing the trade in Chapter 5.)

Making the case for managing the trade
To buy and hold securities for a very long period of time is a well-documented
path to accumulating capital, but only if your timing is good and you got in at
the best time. Consider the following:
✓ If you had bought U.S. stocks at the price peak just ahead of the 1929
Crash, it would’ve taken you over 20 years to recover your initial capital.
✓ Since the end of World War II, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has
fallen by more than 20 percent (a bear market — see the “Keeping your
bulls and bears straight: A word about words” sidebar in this chapter)
on 12 occasions.
✓ From January 2000 to October 2002, the S&P 500 fell by 50 percent. If
you owned all the stocks in the S&P 500 and held them throughout the
entire period, you lost 50 percent of your stake, which means you now
need to make a gain equivalent to 100 percent of your remaining capital
to get your money back, as Table 1-1 shows. Ask yourself how often
anyone makes a 100 percent return on investment.
✓ Oil rose from $18.03 a barrel in November 2001 to $147.27 a barrel
in July 2008, a gain of 720 percent. But if you bought at the high and
expected the gravy train to keep flowing, you faced a humungous loss as
oil fell to $33.87 by December 2008 — unless you exited.

www.pdfdummies.com

11

12

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis

Table 1-1

Recovering a Loss

Loss

Gain Needed to Recover Loss

10%

11.1%

20%

25.0%

30%

42.9%

40%

66.7%

50%

100.0%

60%

150.0%

75%

300.0%

Timing your entry and exit from the market is critical to making money and
controlling losses. The central part of the book, Chapters 6 through 17, covers
technical methods that aim to improve the timing of your entries and exits.

Making the Trend Your Friend
You can look at most charts and see that in some time frame, securities prices
tend to move in trends, and trends often persist for long periods of time. A
trend is a discernible directional bias in the price — upwards, downwards, or
sideways. If you can’t see a trend, widen the time frame from a few days to
many months or narrow the time frame from a few days to an hourly basis.
The trend is your friend. If you identify trends and trade with them, you can
make more money trading securities than if you ignore trendedness. Trend
identification gives you an advantage and helps you perform two functions
near and dear to the heart:
✓ Create capital: As a general rule, you want to buy securities only when
their prices are rising, called an uptrend. Buying into an uptrend usually
improves the probability of making money, providing you can figure out
at what price point to sell.
✓ Preserve capital: You tend to make fewer mistakes and preserve capital
by not buying a security when the price is falling (a downtrend) — no
matter how charming the salesman or fascinating the story. In addition,
you preserve capital by selling your security when it starts downtrending. You don’t know where or when a downtrend might end.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 1: Opening the Technical Analysis Toolbox

Focusing on the price is
right(and respectable)
Securities prices are the product of the collective decision making of buyers
and sellers. Prices incorporate (or discount) all known information, including assumptions, about the security, and prices change as new information
becomes available. All known information consists of hundreds of factors
ranging from accurate facts to opinions, guesses, and emotions — and previous prices. They all go into the supply and demand for a security and result
in its price. I talk about supply and demand in Chapter 2 and environmental
factors that affect the price in Chapter 3 as well as in Chapter 10.
Charles Dow, one of the founders of The Wall Street Journal, observed around
the turn of the 20th century that no matter what the true facts are about a
security and what people are saying about it, the price neatly cuts through all
the clutter of words and is the one piece of hard information you can trust.
Nowadays traders have to qualify that statement with the caveat “unless the
computers made an error.”
Note, however, that prices on a chart don’t tell you anything about the underlying value of the security. Where the price “should” be is a totally different
subject, named fundamental analysis. Most technical traders use both forms
of analysis, because technical analysis isn’t antithetical to fundamental analysis, as some critics think. The two can be used together. You can choose to
trade only the highest-quality securities on a fundamental basis, but time
your purchases and sales according to technical criteria.
Technical analysis and fundamental analysis are compatible. The core ideas of
technical analysis aren’t some new and crackpot flash in the pan, but rather,
they came into being over 100 years ago. Technical ideas have a respectable
origin and have been embraced and explored by some very brainy and successful figures in American finance.
Check out the following basic observations underlying technical analysis that
are attributed to Dow himself:
✓ Securities prices move in trends much of the time.
✓ Trends can be identified with patterns that you see repeatedly (which I cover
in Chapter 9) and with support and resistance trendlines (see Chapter 10).
✓ Primary trends (lasting months or years) are punctuated by secondary
movements (lasting weeks or months) in the opposite direction of the
primary trend. Secondary trends, today called retracements, are the very
devil to deal with as a trader. (See Chapter 2 for more on retracements.)
✓ Trends remain in place until some major event comes along to stop them.

www.pdfdummies.com

13

14

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
These ideas and many more attributed to Dow (sometimes wrongly) are
called Dow Theory, although he never called it that as far as anyone knows.
An Internet search of the phrase Dow theory yields over a quarter of a million
hits. A key point to take away from knowing about Dow is that traders were
using technical ideas long before the advent of electronic communication and
software programs — technical analysis is hardly a new-fangled fad that will
have a short shelf life. It has already survived over 100 years.

Charting your path
Prices and trends rule, so you have to be able to track and identify them. And
to identify prices and trends, you have to see them. After you become proficient, you can order your software to “see” trends, but if you are a beginner,
you need to become familiar with the price chart (see Figure 1-1). This chart
shows a classic uptrend following a downtrend.
