Trading Binary
Options

The Bloomberg Financial Series provides both core reference knowledge and
actionable information for financial professionals. The books are written by
experts familiar with the work flows, challenges, and demands of investment
professionals who trade the markets, manage money, and analyze investments
in their capacity of growing and protecting wealth, hedging risk, and generating revenue.
Since 1996, Bloomberg Press has published books for financial professionals on investing, economics, and policy affecting investors. Titles are written by leading practitioners and authorities, and have been translated into
more than 20 languages.
For a list of available titles, please visit our website at www.wiley.com/go/
bloombergpress.

Trading Binary
Options
Strategies and Tactics
Second Edition

Abe Cofnas

Cover image: © styleTTT/istockphoto
Cover design: Wiley
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
The first edition was published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. in November 2011.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited
to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993, or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-ondemand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you
purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information
about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Names: Cofnas, Abe, 1950- author.
Title: Trading binary options : strategies and tactics / Abe Cofnas.
Description: Second edition. | Hoboken, New Jersey : John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
| Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016014537| ISBN 978-1-119-19417-0 (cloth) |
ISBN 978-1-119-19419-4 (epub) | ISBN 978-1-119-19418-7 (ePDF)
Subjects: LCSH: Options (Finance) | Prices—Forecasting.
Classification: LCC HG6024.A3 C635 2016 | DDC 332.64/53—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016014537
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents
Preface

vii

Acknowledgments

ix

About the Author

xi

Introduction
What Are Binary Options and Why Are They Important?

1

Chapter 1
Key Features of Binary Option Types

7

Chapter 2
Identifying Profit Return Potential in Binary
Option Trading

19

Chapter 3
Sentiment Analysis: New Predictive Tools

27

Chapter 4
Tracking Fundamental Forces That Impact Markets

43

A Primer for Binary Traders

Chapter 5
Basic Technical Analysis

69

Chapter 6
Advanced Technical Analysis: Volatility Tools

97

Chapter 7
Binary Option Trading Strategies

127

Chapter 8
Analyzing NFP Data for Binary Trading

163
v

vi

Contents

Chapter 9
Risk Management in Theory and Practice

179

Chapter 10
Metrics for Improving Binary Trading Performance

185

Chapter 11
Performance Tools and Training for Improving
Binary Option Trading

199

Afterword

205

Appendix A: Test Your Knowledge

207

Appendix B: More Training Tools and Tests

217

Index

219

Preface
Are you interested in trading, but don’t like to wait weeks and months for a
return? Are you following news events and want to financially benefit from
your knowledge? Are you new to trading and want to participate but avoid
the long learning curve for mastering trading skills? If these questions are on
your mind, this book is for you.
Binary option trading provides excitement and opportunity for achieving
unusually large returns in less than a week! While there are many variations
to this type of trading, this book focuses on the regulatory-approved weekly
binary option trades of the North American Derivative Exchange (Nadex).
Trades have limited risk to the cost of a position. There is no margin. The
trade is a bet on the direction of a market by the end of the week. If the trade
is correct, the payoff is $100 per lot. If it is wrong, the payoff is $0. Simply
put, it’s a yes-or-no proposition. One can open an account with as little as
$100 and start trading. This simple structure allows anyone to trade in over
20 different underlying markets, from currencies to indexes to commodities.
This book takes the reader through the basic features of the binary option
instrument. But it does more. It provides a detailed review of fundamental
and technical analysis useful to making trading decisions. Beginners, as well
as more experienced traders, will be able to build upon their core trading
knowledge. More importantly, new online tools and techniques for detecting
market sentiment are presented, because trading can no longer be separated
from the Internet and the social media it has generated. The web itself is a
force on trading decisions and outcomes, as emotions are propagated through
the web. This phenomenon has made sentiment analysis a major challenge for
traders. For the binary option trader who is shaping a decision for a weekly
outcome, or even an intraday outcome, the critical factor will be the actionable knowledge that is applied.
This book provides real-world examples of how to scan the political and economic news and formulate appropriate binary option trading strategies. Key trading strategies are reviewed with examples. These
vii

viii

Preface

include: at-the-money; out-of-the-money; in-the-money; deep-in-the-money;
and deep-out-of-the-money. Also reviewed are case studies of binary option
trading in relationship to key news events that we have lived through.
These include: The U.S. congressional elections; the Greek sovereign risk
crises; turmoil in the Middle East; and the Japanese earthquake. The reader
will see exactly how these events shaped trading strategies that worked.
This book is also designed to provide a self-directed performance audit
capability to the trader. Specific training challenges are provided, including a
test of your knowledge (see Appendix A).
No other book provides a comprehensive get-started approach to trading binary options. It is my hope that Trading Binary Options: Strategies and
Tactics makes a difference and improves your ability to get started in binary
option trading, but most importantly, to do it the right way!

Acknowledgments
This book would not have been possible without the support of many people. First, I want to thank Agora Financial Inc., and, in particular, Addison
Wiggin, for his support in my development of binary options analysis and
alerts for the Binary Dimensions newsletter. The experience of a weekly provision of real-time alerts and analysis of binary options has provided an invaluable base of knowledge that made this book possible. Joseph Shriefer and
Rick Barnard of the Agora Financial team have also provided valuable input
on my analyses. The North American Derivative Exchange (Nadex) has been
of great assistance in providing access to technical information and data used
in this book. None of the opinions or alerts in this book has been subject to
any prior review or approval by Agora Financial Inc. or Nadex. Dean Reese,
Bryant Lie, Zach Tyvand, and Bill Egan provided important research support. Finally, thanks go to my wife, Paula, who provided the support and
goodwill at home that sustained me during the intense writing period.
A.C.

ix

About the Author
Abe Cofnas is considered a leader in the field of currency trading, analysis,
and training. He founded learn4x.com (www.learn4x.com) in 2001 as one of
the first online training programs for currency trading. He has been the Forex
trader columnist for Modern Trader magazine since 2001, writing over 100
columns on Forex events.
He has authored three previous books on trading: The Forex Trading
Course: A Self-Study Guide to Becoming a Successful Currency Trader (now in
its second edition); The Forex Options Course: A Self-Study Guide to Trading
Currency Options; and Sentiment Indicators—Renko, Price Break, Kagi, Point
and Figure: What They Are and How to Use Them to Trade. He is also the editor
of Binary Dimensions newsletter, which specializes in binary option alerts.
He brings extensive understanding of trading from all perspectives,
including advanced fundamental and political analysis. Cofnas holds two
master’s degrees from the University of California at Berkeley—a master’s in
political science and a master’s in public policy analysis. He is Senior Fundamental Strategist for the Market Trader’s Institute.
Cofnas can be reached at abecofnas@gmail.com.

xi

Trading Binary Options: Strategies and Tactics, Second Edition
By Abe Cofnas
Copyright © 2016 by Abe Cofnas

Chapter 1

Key Features of Binary
Option Types

This chapter covers the key features of a binary option contract available
­globally and in the United States. There are two basic types of binary option
trades. The first is the laddered binary options offered at the Nadex Exchange,
part of the IG Markets, the Cantor Exchange, the CBOE, the CBOT, and the
NYSE binaries, also known as Byrds. The NYSE binaries launched in 2016
and offer binaries on equities. The NYSE entry into binaries allows traders
to trade weekly binaries on major equities. The CBOE offers binaries on the
VIX and announced binaries on the China A50 index. These are potential
game changers for traders who look to use binaries as part of their total trading toolbox.
Nadex and the Cantor Exchange are CFTC approved. Nadex is owned
by IG Markets. The Cantor Exchange, owned by Cantor Fitzgerald, is a
true exchange and does not make a market in the binaries. In other words,
they don’t take the other side of a trade placed by a customer. Instead,
liquidity is supplied by independent market makers. The second type of
binary option trades is the non-laddered platform, simply offering the
opportunity to bet on the whether the price will be higher or lower at
expiration. These are not currently allowed in the United States, but are
popular around the world.
Later in the chapter, I also discuss the four basic strategies of trading—
at-the-money, in-the-money, out-of-the-money, and deep-in/out-the-money—
as well as the role of the market maker in the process. The chapter will end
with a sample bid/ask scenario.
7

8

Trading Binary Options

Defining the Key Features

Let’s start by defining the features that shape most of the laddered binary
option selection and trading. These terms will be used time and again
throughout this book, so commit these definitions to memory. You’ll come
to know them well.
Expiration date: The time that the option expires.
Settlement value: The value of the option on expiration. It will be $0 or
a $100-fixed payout.
Underlying market price: This is the actual real-time market price of the
underlying contract.
Contract: This is the basic unit of a trade of one lot. The value of a lot
varies among firms. For example, one lot at Cantor is $1. One lot at
Nadex is $100. At IG, 0.01 lots is $100.
Bid: The premium price that a trader receives for opening to sell a contract.
Buy: This refers to betting the underlying market will go up. A trader opens
a trade and pays the ask price associated with a strike price. If the price
settles above the strike price, then the trader wins the $100 ask price.
Sell: This refers to betting the underlying market will go down. A trader
puts on an open sell order. The trader pays for an open sell order
($100 – bid). It is $100 – (bid). This is equal to putting on a position,
anticipating a decrease in the price of the underlying market. It is also
the premium price that a trade pays for closing a position that was
bought. The sell is also labeled as the put tab at the Cantor Exchange
Spread: The difference between the bid and the ask. With any new
market, the spread will tend to be narrow as more volume increases.
Bid size/offer size: This is the number of positions being bought or sold.
You will find that the bid and offer size is not useful as an indicator
of sentiment.
Commission fee: The trader may pay a commission fee per transaction.
Nadex charges $1 per transaction. Firms offering Nadex binaries
may be offering different commissions.
Start time: At the Nadex, IG markets, and Cantor Exchanges, the start
time for a binary trader is fixed at the beginning of an interval. A
five-minute trade interval starts, for example, at 05:00 and ends at
05:05. A trader can enter the trade before the expiration, but the
time to expiration is not triggered by the entry. In other platforms
(discussed later), a rolling start is featured. This means whenever the
trader puts on a trade, the trade duration clock starts at that point
and ends at the designated duration.

Key Features of Binary Option Types

9

Settlement value: This is the price the binary firm uses to determine
whether the trade is a winner or loser. Notice that there is no
agreement between different firms on what is the settlement value.
There are different formulas among different firms for determining
settlement value. Of particular importance is that settlement
value of binary option underlying markets among offshore firms
(not regulated in United States, London, or Australia) are often
manipulated to reduce winners.
Expiration duration: Binary expirations refer to the duration of the
option. Among global platforms, durations run the board from
one-minute to one-week expirations.
Note: The principles of trading binaries apply to all time frames. The short
time frames involve more timing skills, and require a focus on momentum
indicators and pattern breaks. Longer time frames, such as one day and more,
allow fundamentals to influence the price patterns.
Notice that missing here are the option features known as the Greeks—
Delta, Theta, Vega, Volga, and so on. They are not really missing. It’s just that
they are not necessary to trading weekly or intraday binary options that offer
fixed payouts.

Strike Price versus Underlying Market Price

Binary options featuring a laddered approach have several features that need
to be thoroughly understood. Some of these features will be familiar to option
traders and are common to all options.
The first feature to understand is the strike price. This is the price target
a trader anticipates the price will hit at expiration time: at the target, above
the target, or below the target. It is important to note that there can be up to
14 strike prices listed by the Nadex Exchange for each underlying contract.
When you have a set of strike prices to trade, they are called a ladder.
For example, at Nadex and IG, the weekly binary option ladders are
statements in which the trader decides to buy the binary option if he agrees
it will be greater than the associated strike price. If the trader believes the
­settlement will be lower than the associated strike price, the trade that is put
on is a sell. See Table 1.1 for examples of binary option ladders. Notice that
the strike price closest to the indicative price (which is the market price of the
underlying contract) has an ask value near 50. It is always the case that the
market price closest to the ask price will be valued near 50.

10

Trading Binary Options

Table 1.1 Snapshot of Binary Contract and Strike Prices

Contract Strike Price

Expiration

Bid

Offer

Indicative

Gold (Feb16) > 1094.5

18-Dec-15

9.50

17.50

1066.7

Gold (Feb16) > 1084.5

18-Dec-15

19.50

27.75

1066.7

Gold (Feb16) > 1074.5

18-Dec-15

33.25

41.50

1066.7

Gold (Feb16) > 1064.5

18-Dec-15

48.75

57.00

1066.7

Gold (Feb16) > 1054.5

18-Dec-15

64.00

72.25

1066.7

Gold (Feb16) > 1044.5

18-Dec-15

77.00

85.00

1066.7

Gold (Feb16) > 1034.5

18-Dec-15

86.00

94.25

1066.7

Another component to understand is the underlying market. The binary
option specifically tracks a particular market known as the underlying ­market.
The underlying market for index-related binary strike prices are, except for
the currency pairs, the near-term futures contracts. For example, a trader
wanting to put on a position on gold would be watching not only the gold
spot market, but the gold futures contract that is trading on the Commodity
Exchange, Inc. (Comex). Similarly, if a trader wants to trade the S&P 500
binary at Nadex, the actual underlying market is the active future contract.
The fact that the underlying markets may be a futures contract on the markets does not pose difficulties. The fact is that the spot and near-term futures
contract for these markets move in close tandem to each other. But the exact
settlement price is in the futures contract and not the underlying spot market,
except for the currencies.
The updated list of what markets can be traded at these exchanges can be
easily tracked at their respective websites (Table 1.2).
Table 1.2 Binary Platforms

Firm

Website

North American Derivative
Exchange (Nadex)

www.nadex.com

IG

www.igmarkets.com

NYSE ByRDs

https://www.nyse.com/products/options-byrds

CBOE

https://www.cboe.com/micro/binaries/introduction.aspx

Cantor Exchange

www.cantorexchange.com

Key Features of Binary Option Types

11

Currency Pairs as an Underlying Market

At Nadex IG and the Cantor Exchange, binary options are available on the
majors and many cross pairs. USD/JPY, USD/CAD, USD/CHF, EUR/USD,
GBP/USD, EUR/JPY, GBP/JPY, AUD/JPY, and the AUD/USD. This is a
broad enough range of currency pairs to enable the trader to play almost any
strategy and correlate that strategy with global market events. The underlying
market to track for trading weekly binary currency options is the spot currency market (see Tables 1.2 and 1.3).
Beginning binary traders should consider the weekly expirations. Trading
goes from Monday morning at approximately 3 a.m. EST to 3 p.m. EST on
Friday. The weekly expirations give the trader time to be right, and time for
fundamentals to work on markets. In recent years, Nadex and IG have added
20-minute and 5-minute expirations to their binary option platforms. All
the features of the longer daily and weekly durations are present in the short
expiration binaries.
Moneyness

One of the most salient relationships to thoroughly understand is where the
binary strike price is in relationship to the underlying market. This feature is
known in the field of option trading as moneyness. Understanding moneyness
of the binary option contract generates the ability to gauge market sentiment
and, along with it, the expected probability of success of a particular binary
option. There are three key metrics to evaluate.
• At-the-money (ATM): When the strike price is equal to the underlying market price (the spot). For non-laddered binaries, putting a high-low trade on
is in effect an at-the-money trade!
• In-the-money (ITM): When the underlying market is greater than the strike
price. This occurs when a trader is buying the position. When the trader is
opening a position to sell, the option is in-the-money when the underlying
market is less than the strike price.
• Out-of-the-money (OTM): This occurs when a trader is opening the position to buy and when the underlying market is less than the strike price
and the strike price is above the spot market price. This also occurs when
a trader is opening a position to sell and the underlying market is greater
than the strike price.

12

Trading Binary Options

We can add two more important variations of the binary option strike
price condition: deep-out-of-the-money and deep-in-the-money. These refer to
the outer strike prices or ladders. A good way to think about where they
are located from a price point of view is to define deepness in regard to the
spot price as a 10 percent probability for out-of-the-money and a 90 percent
probability for in-the-money. Few traders would argue that those levels are
not deep.
The condition of being near-the-money is also a credible way of characterizing the relationship between the binary option strike price and its
moneyness.
When the binary strike price is roughly at-the-money, the cost of
buying that strike price will be close to $50 per unit because the market
interprets an ATM strike price as having an equal probability of going up
or down. This means that a scan of actual binary strike price ask prices
that are near $50 can, in fact, serve as quick guide to where the underlying spot market is at, without even looking at a chart. It’s a good idea
to routinely check ATM prices and see the relationship it has with the
underlying market.
Moneyness and Trader Direction

When a binary option strike price is in-the-money (ITM), its meaning, as
to its profitability, depends on whether the trader has gone long or short.
For example, if the trader is putting on a long position, he is expecting the
underlying spot market to go up (Table 1.3). In-the-money means that
the spot underlying market has already moved above the binary option
strike price—the underlying market is greater than the strike price. This
is exactly what the trader wants to see happen for profits to be realized.
The effect is that the market begins to price higher the cost of buying that
contract. The crowd becomes optimistic for the price to remain above the
binary strike price.
Table 1.3 Moneyness and the Spot Price When Buying Binaries
