percent were down, and vice versa for a fund that loses 20 percent. [Assuming 250 trading days per year
and an average 1 percent price change per day, a net 20 percent return would imply 135 up days and 115
down days, and 135 is 54 percent of 250.] For my strategies, the difference between trading a fund that's up
54 percent of the time and one that's up 46 percent of the time is not that significant.
==== Any trades that are particularly memorable? ====
When I was just starting out, there was one day when I didn't get the closing price over the phone. I knew
it had been a pretty good day, but I didn't know to what extent. I woke up in the middle of the night and
remembered that I hadn't checked the closing price. I called and found that it had been a huge up day-twice
what I had expected. I think I made a few thousand dollars. You have to remember this was back when I had
just started. I was so excited that I couldn't sleep. I was like a kid at Christmas. I'll always remember that
feeling.
==== Are there any other trades that stand out for one reason or another? ====
On July 7, 1986, the stock market fell 62 points (a record then, I think). I knew that morning that I would
be out of my positions at the close. However, since this was before hourly switching was available, there was
nothing I could do in the interim. That afternoon I had a windsurfing lesson. I thought that I would be able to
get back well before four o'clock to place a call to liquidate my positions. Unfortunately, I hadn't mastered the
sport well enough and got blown to the other side of the lake. 1 knew time was running out, and I paddled
back as hard as I could to try to beat the close. I didn't make it, and it cost me.
==== Any other trades come to mind? ====
In August 1987 I took a position in the gold sector fund. The day after I entered the trade, the fund
dropped, giving me a red light, but I stayed in.
==== Why did you stay in? ====
I honestly don't remember. Anyway, the next day, the gold stocks were down big, while a bright green
light in technology was staring me in the face. I remember that I found it extremely difficult to exit all my
clients from the gold sector at a big loss-a loss that I knew I shouldn't have taken in the first place-and
immediately place them at risk again in the technology fund, which was already up sharply. I think the thing
that made it so difficult was that I had violated my rule. As it turned out, the subsequent gain in technology
more than made up for the loss in gold.
==== So in the end yon did follow your system. ====
Yes, but I almost didn't. The lesson for me was that if you break a discipline once, the next transgression
becomes much easier. Breaking a diet provides an appropriate analogy-once you do it, it becomes much easier to make further exceptions.
==== Have the markets changed in the past decade? ====
In a micro sense-yes; in a macro sense-no. Opportunities change, strategies change, but people and
psychology do not change. If trend-following systems don't work as well, something else will. There's always

96

97
money being lost, so someone out there has to win.
==== What do you believe are the major myths about markets? ====
A prevailing myth on Wall Street is that no one can consistently beat the market year in, year out, with
steady returns of 20 or 30 percent a year. On the other hand, the sales side would have you believe that it
can be done by anyone. Neither is really the truth.
==== Why do traders lose? ====
First of all, most traders don't have a winning strategy. Second, even among those traders who do, many
don't follow their strategy. Trading puts pressure on weaker human traits and seems to seek out each individual's Achilles' heel.
==== What makes a good trader? ====
A critical ingredient is a maverick mind. It's also important to have a blend between an artistic side and a
scientific side. You need the artistic side to imagine, discover, and create trading strategies. You need the
scientific side to translate those ideas into firm trading rules and to execute those rules.
==== Can people be successful using a purchased system? ====
I believe that systems tend to be more useful or successful for the originator than for someone else. It's
important that an approach be personalized; otherwise, you won't have the confidence to follow it. It's
unlikely that someone else's approach will be consistent with your own personality. It's also possible that
individuals who become successful traders are not the type to use someone else's approach and that successful traders don't sell their systems.
==== How would you respond to Burton Malkiel [the author of A Random Walk Down Wall Street ====
Well, I'm more in agreement than in disagreement with him. The markets are mostly random, and most
people can't beat or "time" the market. One hundred money managers each believe that they can consistently outperform the market. My feeling is that the number is a lot closer to zero than one hundred. Trading
is probably more of an art than most people want to believe. I guess I'd also be tempted to show him my
numbers.
==== What advice would you give to a novice trader? ====
There are five basic steps to becoming a successful trader. First, focus on trading vehicles, strategies, and
time horizons that suit your personality. Second, identify nonrandom price behavior, while recognizing that
markets are random most of the time. Third, absolutely convince yourself that what you have found is
statistically valid. Fourth, set up trading rules. Fifth, follow the rules. In a nutshell, it all comes down to: Do
your own thing (independence); and do the right thing (discipline).
At the core, the quality of open-mindedness is responsible for Blake's success and, for that matter, his
entire career. For many years, Blake sincerely believed that the markets were random. When confronted with
contradictory evidence, he didn't dig in his heels and argue his position-the reflexive response most people
would have in such a situation. Instead, he researched the question, and when the evidence suggested that
his prior views had been wrong, he changed his mind. The ability to change one's mind is probably a key
characteristic of the successful trader. Dogmatic and rigid personalities rarely, if ever, succeed in the
markets.
Another attribute that has allowed Blake to excel is his adaptability. The markets are a dynamic process,
and sustained trading success requires the ability to modify and even change strategies as markets evolve.
Blake began by trading municipal bond funds. However, when the reliability and profitability of his approach
in that sector started to diminish, he didn't just blindly keep repeating the same strategy that had worked for
him in the past. Instead, he used the changing market conditions as a spur to start an intensive research
project, which eventually yielded an entirely new and even more effective approach. When hourly switching
became available in the Fidelity sector funds, he altered his methods accordingly. Then, when Fidelity made it
virtually impossible to use its funds for switching strategies (by imposing prohibitively high fees), Blake
switched to different fund families and different strategies. Blake's ability to adapt has allowed him to
maintain a remarkable consistency of performance, despite profound changes in his trading environment.
Perhaps Blake's most important message lies in his amazingly consistent track record, which provides
compelling empirical evidence that the markets are indeed nonrandom. Of course, this nonrandomness is
hardly blatant. If it were, we would all be millionaires. However, Blake's ability to win in an astounding
twenty-five months for every month he loses, allows us to say "Yes, Virginia, the markets can be beat."
How can the markets be beat? Certainly not by buying the answer. Even if the answer were for sale, the
odds are that it wouldn't fit your personality and that you wouldn't have the confidence to follow it.
Essentially, there are no shortcuts. Each trader must find his or her own solution to the market puzzle. Of
course, most such research efforts will end in failure. If, however, you are able to uncover nonrandom market
patterns and can convincingly demonstrate their validity, only two steps remain to achieve trading success:
Devise your trading rules and then follow your trading rules.

97

98
Victor Sperandeo: Markets Grow Old Too
Victor Sperandeo started his career on Wall Street straight out of high school. It was certainly an
unglamorous beginning, working first as a minimum-wage quote boy and then switching to a slightly higher
paying job as a statistical clerk for Standard & Poor's. Sperandeo found this work, which basically involved
copying and transferring columns of numbers, "stupifyingly boring." He had a difficult time keeping his mind
on his work. To his relief, he was eventually fired for making too many errors.
After a stint at another nontrading job in a Wall Street accounting department, Sperandeo talked his way
into an option trading position. Over the next two years, he was a dealer in the over-the-counter (OTC)
options market, matching up buyers and sellers and "making the middle." In the midst of the 1969 bear
market, Sperandeo switched firms in a search for greater autonomy in his trading decisions. At this new firm,
he was offered a percentage of the spread he earned on each option transaction, as opposed to the flat fee
compensation structure at his former company. The new firm, however, would not commit to a salary
because of a cautious posture fostered by the ongoing bear market. Sperandeo gladly accepted the offer,
confident that he could substantially increase his income by sharing in a percentage of his transaction
earnings.
After six months on the job, Sperandeo had earned $50,000 in commissions. His boss, who earned an
annual salary of $50,000, called him hi for a talk. "Victor," he said, "you're doing such a good job, we decided
to put you on a salary." Somehow, the offer of a $20,000 salary and an ambiguous commitment to some sort
of bonus in lieu of his existing compensation arrangement just didn't sound like good news. Three weeks later
Sperandeo switched jobs. Unfortunately, he found that his new firm played the same song only in a different
key-when he received his monthly profit/loss statements, he discovered that his profits were being eaten
away by enormous expense allocations.
After about six months, Sperandeo finally decided that if he were going to get a fair deal, he would have
to make it himself. After finding a partner to finance the operation, Sperandeo launched his own firm, Ragnar
Options, in 1971. Sperandeo claims that Ragnar was the first option dealer to offer guaranteed quotes on
options without charging exceptionally high premiums. If they couldn't find an existing option contract in the
market to meet a buyer's request (which they could purchase and resell at a premium), they wrote the option
themselves. (At the time, options were tailor-made to the customer's specifications, as opposed to being
traded as uniform instruments on an exchange.) As a result of this policy of offering reasonable firm quotes,
according to Sperandeo, within six months Ragnar was the largest OTC option dealer in the world.
Ragnar was eventually merged with another Wall Street firm. Sperandeo stayed on for a while but then
joined Interstate Securities in 1978. At Interstate, Sperandeo was given a company account and a few
private accounts to manage at a 50/50 split (expenses as well as profits). Sperandeo had finally landed the
perfect job: complete independence to trade any markets in any way he desired, capital backing, and a
meaningful split of profits (and losses). This ideal arrangement finally came to an end in 1986 when
Interstate went public and decided to dissolve its trading group. Sperandeo traded his personal account for a
little over a year before deciding to start his own money management firm-Rand Management Corporation.
Throughout his entire career, Sperandeo has placed a greater emphasis on loss avoidance than on scoring
large gains. He was largely successful at this objective, stringing together eighteen consecutive winning years
before registering his first loss in 1990. Over this period,
his average annual gain was 72 percent, with results ranging from a single loss of 35 percent in 1990 to
five years of triple-digit gains.
Although Sperandeo never bothered to finish the credits for his nighttime college degree, over the years
he has done an enormous amount of reading. In addition to books about the market, Sperandeo has read
widely in the somewhat related fields of economics, psychology, and philosophy. Overall, he estimates that
he has read approximately twenty-five hundred books on these subjects.
The interview was conducted at Sperandeo's "office," which is located in the basement of his house, the
main section of which he has converted to a lounge, complete with a fifteen-foot bar, seating for seventyfive, and an elaborate sound system. You almost expect Bill Murray to pop up and do his "Saturday Night
Live" lounge singer act. I couldn't help but smile at the image of a starchy pension fund trustee doing an onsite inspection of Sperandeo's operations in considering him as a prospective manager for its funds. I found
Sperandeo very relaxed and friendly-the type of person who is instantaneously likable.
==== After nearly two decades as an independent or quasi-independent trader, why did you finally decide
to start a money management firm? ====
In 1987 I did enormously well catching the huge break in the stock market. My success in this market led
to unsolicited offers to manage some large sums of money. I realized that if I had been managing money, as
opposed to simply trading my own account, my profit potential would have been enormously greater.
==== How have you done in your trading since you started your own management company? ====
I did well in 1989, which was the first year of the firm's existence, but I lost money in 1990. Actually, I
found it somewhat ironic that my first losing year in the markets occurred after having gained more knowledge than ever.
==== How do you explain that? ====
That's what you call being a human being. [He laughs loudly and long.]
==== How did you become a trader? ====

98

99
I think my first related interest was an enthusiasm for poker. As a teenager, I literally earned
a living by playing poker. When I first started playing, I read every book I could find on the game and quickly
learned that winning was a matter of managing the odds. In other words, if you played only the hands in
which the odds were in your favor and folded when they were not, you would end up winning more times
than you lost. I memorized the odds of every important card combination, and I was very successful at the
game.
Although I did quite well, I realized that being a professional card player was not what I wanted to do with
my life. When I was twenty years old, I made a complete survey of the New York Times employment section
and discovered that three professions offered more than $25,000 per year as a starting salary: physicist,
biologist, and OTC trader. Now, I didn't even know exactly what an OTC trader did, but, since I obviously
didn't have the educational background for being a physicist or biologist and OTC trading sounded a little bit
like playing cards-they both involved odds-1 decided to try for a career on Wall Street. I landed a job as a
quote boy for Pershing & Company.
==== How did you learn about trading and markets? Did you have a
mentor? ====
No. At the time, Milton Leeds, who was a legendary tape reader and trader of his day, worked at Pershing.
I found observing him inspirational, but I didn't work directly for him. Basically, I learned about the markets
by reading everything on the subject that I could get my hands on.
==== When did you actually first become a trader? ====
After working on Wall Street for almost three years, first at Pershing and then some other short-lived jobs,
I decided mat I wanted to try trading. I considered the different areas of trading that I could go into.
There was stocks-kind of boring. There was bonds-really boring. Then there was options-very
sophisticated. In the late 1960s, probably only about 1 percent of all stockbrokers even understood options. I
thought that if I undertook the most esoteric form of trading and mastered it, then I would have to make a
lot of money. So I applied for a job as an options trader.
==== What did you know about options trading at the time? ====
Nothing, but I knew that was what I wanted to do. I tried to make an impression on the senior partner
who interviewed me by telling him that I was a genius.
He said, "What do you mean?"
I told him that I had a photographic memory-which, incidentally, I don't.
He said, "Prove it."
I told him that I had memorized all the stock symbols-which I had. I had taken a memory course years
before. This fellow had been on Wall Street for thirty-five years and didn't know all the symbols. He tested
me, and I knew them all. He offered me the job.
==== You said earlier that you were drawn to a trading career because of the analogy to playing cards. Do
you then see trading as a form of gambling? ====
I'd say that gambling is the wrong term. Gambling involves taking a risk when the odds are against you.
For example, betting on a lottery or playing a slot machine are forms of gambling. I think successful trading,
or poker playing for that matter, involves speculating rather than gambling. Successful speculation implies
taking risks when the odds are in your favor. Just like in poker, where you have to know which hands to bet
on, in trading you have to know when the odds are in your favor.
==== How do you define the odds in trading? ====
In 19741 missed the huge October-November rally in the stock market-That error served as a catalyst for
an intensive two-year study. I wanted to know the answer to questions like: How long do bull and bear markets last? What are the normal percentage price moves a market makes before it forms a top or a bottom?
As a result of that research project, I found that market price movements are like people-they have
statistically significant life-expectancy profiles that can be used to measure risk exposure. For example, the
median extent for an intermediate swing in the Dow during a bull market is 20 percent. This doesn't mean
that when the market is up 20 percent, it's going to top; sometimes it will top earlier, sometimes later.
However, what it does mean is that when the market is up more than 20 percent, the odds for further
appreciation begin to decline significantly. Thus, if the market has been up more than 20 percent and you
begin to see other evidence of a possible top, it's important to pay close attention to that information.
As an analogy, consider life insurance, which deals with the life expectancy of people instead of price
moves. If you're writing life insurance policies, it's going to make a great deal of difference whether the
applicant is twenty years old or eighty years old. If you're approached by an out-of-condition twenty-yearold, you might judge that the odds of his survival are pretty good. However, you'd be a lot less anxious to
write a policy on an eighty-year-old. If the eighty-year-old is the Jack LaLanne of eighty-year-olds-he can do
two hundred push-ups; he can swim the English Channel-men fine, you can write him a policy. But let's say
the same eighty-year-old smokes three packs of Camels a day, drinks a quart of scotch a day, and has
pneumonia- then you probably wouldn't want to write him a policy. The older the individual, the more
significant the symptoms become.
Similarly, in a market that is in a stage of old age, it is particularly important to be attuned to symptoms
of a potential end to the current trend. To use the life insurance analogy, most people who become involved
in the stock market don't know the difference between a twenty-year-old and an eighty-year-old.
In my opinion, one reason why many types of technical analysis don't work too well is because such
methods are often applied indiscriminately. For example, if you see a head-and-shoulders pattern form in

99

100
what is the market equivalent of a twenty-year-old,
the odds are that the market is not likely to die so
quickly. However, if you see the same chart formation in the market equivalent of an eighty-year-old, there's
a much better
chance of that pattern being an accurate indicator of a price top. Trading the market without knowing
what stage it is in is like selling life insurance to twenty-year-olds and eighty-year-olds at the same premium.
==== When you say that the historical median length of a hull move has been 20 percent, how are you
defining a bull move? ====
I'm talking about intermediate upmoves in a long-term bull market. With very rare exceptions, I define
"intermediate" as a price move lasting a minimum of three weeks to a maximum of six months. Of course,
there are analogous figures for all other types of market movements categorized by type of market (bull or
bear), length of move (short term, intermediate term, or long term), and location within market cycle (first
swing, second swing, and so on).
Incidentally, there's remarkable consistency in the 20 percent median upmove figure, which I based on a
study of all years since 1896. When I looked only at markets up through 1945,1 found that the corresponding
figure was virtually identical at 19 percent. I think there are two reasons that help explain the stability of this
approximate 20 percent figure. The first factor is related to value. Roger Ibbotson did a study spanning sixty
years of data in which he compared the returns of different forms of investment. He found that, over the
survey period, the stock market returned an average of 9.2 percent annually, including dividends. Therefore,
if the market rises 20 percent in, say, 107 days-which happens to be the median time duration of an
intermediate upmove-then you've squeezed out a lot of value in a very short amount of time. The market as
a whole has become much less of a value.
The second factor is psychological. Let's say you go to the supermarket to buy ingredients for a salad. A
head of lettuce is selling for $1.00, and a pound of tomatoes is selling for $1.00. You go back two weeks later
and lettuce is still selling for $1.00, but tomatoes are now $1.50. In that situation, a lot of people will look for
a substitute for tomatoes. They're going to say, "I'm just not paying that much for tomatoes." Does the fifty
cents really matter? I've done the same thing when my income was in the seven figures. It really doesn't
matter, but you don't want to pay up beyond a certain number.
==== And you're saying that 20 percent is that type of number? ====
That's my hypothesis. Obviously, I can't really prove it.
==== Do you use your statistical studies of the normal duration and magnitude of price moves to set
targets either in terms of price or time? ====
Absolutely not. To use extent and duration profiles to predict exact market turning points would be like an
insurance company telling you when and how you will die on the day you buy your policy. They don't have to
do that to make a profit. All they need to do to make a profit is to know what the odds are.
==== How then do you analyze a situation in which a market has reached the median age of historical
upmoves? ====
Once a price move exceeds its median historical age, any method you use to analyze the market, whether
it be fundamental or technical, is likely to be far more accurate. For example, if a chartist interprets a particular pattern as a top formation, but the market is only up 10 percent from the last relative low, the odds
are high that the projection will be incorrect. However, if the market is up 25 to 30 percent, then the same
type of formation should be given a great deal more weight.
==== When you miss a major turning point, such as the October 1974 low you mentioned before (which
was the low point of the market since that time), how do you eventually get back into the market? ====
Markets go up in stepwise fashion. I wait until a situation arises that looks like there's another major
relative low. In the case of 1974,1 went long the world on December 6. That day proved to be the exact
bottom of the market. Ironically, I actually ended up losing money on the trade.
==== Before I ask you to explain that apparent paradox, first tell me what made you so sure that it was the
bottom of the market. ====
To begin, there was a Dow Theory buy signal-the Dow Jones Industrial index had made a new low, but the
Transportation index and the S&P 500 had not. In addition, the volume on the break to new lows was
relatively light. Also, we had been in a bear market for a long time, and
bearish sentiment was pervasive. Finally, bad news was starting to lose its impact on the market-bearish
news stories would come out, and stocks would essentially lie flat.
==== Now tell me how you managed to lose money buying the December 1974 low. ====
I had an incredibly profitable year up to that point. I took one-third of my profits for the year and bought
out-of-the-money calls expiring in January. As one example, at the time, Kodak was trading at 64, and I
bought the January 70 calls, which were trading near 1. On January 27, which was the expiration day of the
January option series, Kodak had rebounded to 69. The calls obviously went out worthless. One week later,
Kodak was trading at 80. The same type of experience was repeated in a dozen other positions.
==== So your mistake was buying options that were too far out of the money and too short in duration?
====
They weren't too far out of the money. My mistake was that I didn't allow enough time until expiration.
This episode preceded my study on the duration and magnitude of historical price moves, which we discussed
earlier. After I completed my study in 1976,1 realized that the second legs of bull markets tend to be
relatively extended. I'm certain that if I encountered a similar situation after 1976,1 would have bought the
