
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

285

positions. Their supply will limit the rally, and their selling, added to the shorting
by aggressive bears and the profit taking by bulls who saw the sell-off as a buying
opportunity, will create a second leg down.
These persistent bulls will each have a price level on the downside that, if
reached, will make them want to exit on the next rally. As the market keeps working
lower, more and more of these bulls will decide that the bull trend will not resume
anytime soon and that the trend might have reversed into a bear trend. These remaining die-hard longs will wait patiently for a pullback in the bear swing to exit
their longs, and their positions represent a supply that is overhanging the market.
They sell below the most recent swing high because they doubt that the market will
be able to get above a prior swing high, and are happy to get out at any price above
the most recent low. Bears will also look for a pullback from each new low to add
to their shorts and place new shorts. The result is a series of lower highs and lows,
which is the definition of a bear trend.
If the market enters a bear trend, the process will reverse. When the bear trend
is strong, traders will short below prior lows. As the trend weakens, the bears will
take profits at new lows and the market will likely enter a trading range. After a
strong rally above the bull trend line and the moving average, the bears will take
profits at a new low and strong bulls will aggressively buy and try to take control
of the market. The result will be a larger bear rally or possibly a reversal into a
bull trend.
A similar situation occurs when there is a pullback that is large enough to make
traders wonder if the trend has reversed. For example, if there is a deep, sharp
pullback in a bull trend, traders will begin to look at moves below prior swing lows,
but this is in the context of a pullback in a bull trend instead of as part of a bear
trend. They will watch what happens as the market falls below a prior swing low.
Will the market fall far enough for bears, who entered on a sell stop below that
swing low, to make a profit? Did the new low find more sellers than buyers? If it
did, that is a sign that the bears are strong and that the pullback will probably go
further. The trend might even have reversed to down.
Another possibility on the breakout to a new low is that the market enters a
trading range, which is evidence that the shorts took profits and that there was
unimpressive buying by the bulls. The final alternative is that the market reverses
up after the breakout to a new low. This means that there were strong bulls below
that swing low just waiting for the market to test there. This is a sign that the sell-off
is more likely just a big pullback in an ongoing bull trend. The shorts from higher
up took profits on the breakout to the new low because they believed that the trend
was still upward. The strong bulls bought aggressively because they believed that
the market would not fall further and that it would rally to test the bull high.
Whenever there is any breakout below a swing low, traders will watch carefully
for evidence that the bulls have returned or that the bears have taken control. They

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

286

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

need to decide what influence is greatest at the new low, and they use the market’s
behavior to make that decision. If there is a strong breakout, then new selling is
dominant. If the market’s movement is uncertain, then profit taking by the shorts
and weak buying by the bulls is taking place, and the market will likely enter a
trading range. If there is a strong reversal up, then aggressive buying by the longs
is the most important factor.
This part of the book describes many common trend patterns that you should
look for every day. Although a trend can begin with any bar during the day, the
majority of trend days begin within the first hour or so. If you see a trend pattern
setting up within the first hour or two of the day, there will likely be several highprobability with-trend trades that you can then make. You need to decide many
times every day if the day resembles any of the types of trends described later in
this chapter, and if it does, force yourself to take the with-trend trades.
However, if none of these patterns is present, the day is a trading range day and
you need to look for opportunities to fade new extremes. Also, if the market makes
a run for a couple of hours and the day appears to be a trading range day, be aware
that the opposite extreme might get taken out over the course of the next couple of
hours, so do not be too eager to take profits on the swing portion of your reversal
trade. The odds are very high that the reversal will at least test the midpoint of the
day’s range.
After a substantial decline in a bear market on the daily chart, people begin to
become very concerned about the money that they’ve lost and they do not want to
lose any more money. This makes them sell, regardless of the fundamentals. There
was an added problem in the bear market of 2008. Baby boomers were on the verge
of retiring and were shocked by what they saw as comfortable nest eggs quickly
falling 40 percent in value. So what will they do? They will continue to sell every
rally as they try to preserve what they have left. Also, all that money that they are
taking out of the market will never return to lift prices again. They will take their
money at all the “Thank you, God” points along the way. This will be just below the
prior swing high, where they exit and promise God that they will never buy again
in return for Him letting them recoup some of their losses. This creates a series of
lower highs and lows until the last bear has sold. Once that happens, the market
will then be able to rally above the prior swing highs.
The result of people selling regardless of fundamentals is that the market often
falls in huge bear trend days, dropping much further than what the fundamentals
warrant, and often there is a huge plunge in the final 30 minutes as funds are forced
to sell because of redemption orders. There will be vicious rallies along the way
as people become convinced that the bottom is in and they panic to get back long.
Also, because the trend is so clearly down, there will be many who are short. They
may cover aggressively on any reversal, resulting in huge bull trend bars on the
daily chart, even though it is still a bear market. The end result is a collection of

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

287

very large range days once the bear trend is well underway. The huge ranges offer
great price action day trading opportunities but you might have to increase your
stop size and therefore reduce your position size. While many people following the
daily charts are selling at the low and buying at the high of each trap (every strong
short covering rally), trading off emotion more than reason, a good price action
trader can do very well just looking for standard price action setups.
This kind of mentality is not restricted to unsophisticated investors. In the fall
of 2008, most hedge funds were down on the year and their sophisticated investors
aggressively pulled their money out as the market continued to sell off. The hedge
funds had to continue to liquidate on every small rally to meet redemptions and
anticipated redemptions. This continued to drive the market down, independent of
fundamentals, and just like with less sophisticated investors, the selling will continue until all that’s left are positions that investors will hold until they fall to zero.
Also, for many hedge fund managers a big part of their income is incentive
based. For example, every quarter that the fund closes at a new high, they might
take 20 percent of that profit above the old equity high. If the fund instead is down
30 percent on the year, it will need to earn about 50 percent to get up to that incentive level again. Rather than working for free for several years, it might make more
sense to close the fund and start over with a new fund. However, when they close
the fund, they have to liquidate and since there is no incentive for them, they can
liquidate at any price, no matter how low. This adds to selling that is independent
of the intrinsic value of stocks. If they had a $1 billion fund, their new fund is starting from scratch and it will take a few years before they have enough equity and
own as much stock as they did in the old fund, so buying by the new funds doesn’t
immediately lift the market.
When the volatility reaches an extremely high level, the end of the bear trend
is often near as traders give up responding to the whipsaws and decide that there
is nothing left that they will sell at any price. When there are no more sellers and
the market is overdone on the basis of fundamentals, a good rally should follow.
And just how far can a big-name stock fall in a bear market? Much farther than you
might think, even for the bluest of the blue chips. Cisco (CSCO) lost 90 percent
of its value in three years after the tech wreck of 2000, and Apple (AAPL) lost
95 percent of its value during the six years starting in 1991. General Motors (GM)
lost 90 percent in the seven years after 2001. So don’t be eager to buy just because
a stock is down a Fibonacci 38 percent, 50 percent, or even 62 percent. Wait until
there is a price action setup, and it must include a prior break of the bear trend line.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 18

Example of How
to Trade a Trend

hen the market is in a trend, traders should look for any reason to enter.
The simple existence of a trend is reason enough to enter at least a small
position at the market. Here are some other reasonable approaches that
use stop entry orders:

W

r Buying a high 2 pullback to the moving average in a bull trend.
r Selling a low 2 pullback to the moving average in a bear trend.
r Buying a wedge bull flag pullback in a bull trend.
r Selling a wedge bear flag pullback in a bear trend.
r Buying a breakout pullback after a breakout from a bull flag in a bull trend.
r Selling a breakout pullback after a breakout from a bear flag in a bear trend.
r Buying a high 1 pullback in a strong bull spike in a bull trend, but not after a
buy climax.

r Selling a low 1 pullback in a strong bear spike in a bear trend, but not after a
sell climax.

r When a bull trend is very strong, buying on a stop above a prior swing high.
r When a bear trend is very strong, selling on a stop below a prior swing low.
Entering using a limit order requires more experience reading charts, because
the trader is entering in a market that is going in the opposite direction to the trade.
However, experienced traders can reliably use limit or market orders with these
potential setups:

r Buying a bull spike in a strong bull breakout at the market, at the close of every
bull trend bar in the spike, or on a limit order at or below the low of the prior
289

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

290

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

bar (entering in spikes requires a wider stop and the spike happens quickly, so
this combination is difficult for many traders).
r Selling a bear spike in a strong bear breakout at the market, at the close of
every bear trend bar in the spike, or on a limit order at or above the high of the
prior bar (entering in spikes is difficult for many traders).
r Buying the close of the first bear bar in a bull spike.
r Selling the close of the first bull bar in a bear spike.
r In a bull trend, buying at a bull trend line or at a prior swing low (a potential
double bottom bull flag).
r In a bear trend, selling at a bear trend line or at a prior swing high (a potential
double top bear flag).
r Buying at or below a low 1 or 2 weak signal bar on a limit order in a possible
new bull trend after a strong reversal up or at the bottom of a trading range.
r Shorting at or above a high 1 or 2 weak signal bar on a limit order in a possible
new bear trend after a strong reversal down or at the top of a trading range.
r Buying at or below the prior bar on a limit order in a quiet bull flag at the moving
average.
r Shorting at or above the prior bar on a limit order in a quiet bear flag at the
moving average.
r Buying below a bull bar that breaks above a bull flag, anticipating a breakout
pullback.
r Selling above a bear bar that breaks below a bear flag, anticipating a breakout
pullback.
r When trying for a swing in a bull trend, buy or buy more on a breakout test,
which is an attempt to run breakeven stops from an earlier long entry.
r When trying for a swing in a bear trend, sell or sell more on a breakout test,
which is an attempt to hit breakeven stops from an earlier short entry.
r Buying at a fixed number of ticks down from the high in a bull trend. For example, buying a two-, three-, or four-point pullback in a bull trend in the Emini
when the average daily range has been about 12 points. Also, if the biggest pullback in the first couple of hours was 10 ticks, buying about an eight- to 12-tick
pullback.
r Selling at a fixed number ticks up from the low in a bear trend. For example,
selling a 50 cent bear rally in GS when the average daily range has been about
$2.00. If the largest pullback in the first couple of hours was 60 cents, selling
about a 50 to 70 cent pullback.
r Scaling into the direction of the trend as the market moves against you. If you
scale in, plan out in advance what size each order has to be to keep your total
risk the same as with a typical trade. It is easy to find yourself with too large a
position and a protective stop that is too far away, so be very careful.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

291

r In a bull trend that has not pulled back to the moving average in 20 or more bars,
buy at the moving average on a limit order, and scale in lower. For example, if
there is a strong bull trend in the Emini where the market has been above the
moving average for 20 or more bars, buy with a limit order at one tick above the
moving average. Buy more one, two, and maybe three points lower. If scaling
in, consider exiting the entire position at the first entry price, but if the bull
trend is strong, look to exit on a test of the high.
r In a bear trend that has not pulled back to the moving average in 20 or more
bars, sell at the moving average on a limit order and scale in higher. For example, if there is a strong bear trend in the Emini where the market has been
below the moving average for 20 or more bars, sell with a limit order at one tick
below the moving average. Sell more one, two, and maybe three points higher.
If scaling in, consider exiting the entire position at the first entry price, but if
the bear trend is strong, look to exit on a test of the low.
r In a strong bull trend, buy on the close of the first bear trend bar that has a
close below the moving average.
r In a strong bear trend, sell on the close of the first bull trend bar that has a close
above the moving average.
r In a strong bull trend, a pullback is a small bear trend. The bulls will expect
that a breakout below a prior swing low in this small bear trend will fail, and
they will buy there with a limit order.
r In a strong bear trend, a pullback is a small bull trend. The bears will expect
that a breakout above a prior swing high in this small bull trend will fail, and
they will short there with a limit order.
r A trader can always be long, short, or flat. At any moment during a trend, only
two of those choices are compatible with being a successful trader. If the market is in a bull trend, successful traders are only long or flat. If it is in a bear
trend, they are either short or flat. A tiny fraction of traders have the ability to
consistently make money by trading against a trend, and you should assume
that you are not part of that group. Unfortunately, most traders starting out go
for years believing that they are, and they consistently lose money month after
month and wonder why. You now know the answer.
Every type of market does something to make trading difficult. The market
is filled with very smart people who are trying as hard to take money from your
account as you are trying to take money from theirs, so nothing is ever easy. This
includes making profits in a strong trend. When the market is trending strongly with
large trend bars, the risk is great because the stop often belongs beyond the start
of the spike. Also, the spike grows quickly, and many traders are so shocked by the
size and speed of the breakout that they are unable to quickly reduce their position

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

292

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

TRENDS

size and increase their stop size, and instead watch the trend move rapidly as they
hope for a pullback. Once the trend enters its channel phase, it always looks like
it is reversing. For example, in a bull trend, there will be many reversal attempts,
but almost all quickly evolve into bull flags. Most bull channels will have weak buy
signal bars and the signals will force bulls to buy at the top of the weak channel. This is a low probability long trade, even though the market is continuing up.
Swing traders who are comfortable taking low probability buy setups near the top
of weak bull channels love this kind of price action, because they can make many
times what they are risking, and this more than makes up for the relatively low
probability of success. However, it is difficult for most traders to buy low probability setups near the top of a weak bull channel. Traders who only want to take high
probability trades often sit back and watch the trend grind higher for many bars,
because there may not be a high probability entry for 20 or more bars. The result
is that they see the market going up and want to be long, but miss the entire trend.
They only want a high probability trade, like a high 2 pullback to the moving average. If they do not get an acceptable pullback, they will continue to wait and miss
the trend. This is acceptable because traders should always stay in their comfort
one. If they are only comfortable taking high probability stop entries, then they are
correct in waiting. The channel will not last forever, and they will soon find acceptable setups. Experienced traders buy on limit orders around and below the lows
of prior bars, and they will sometimes take some short scalps during the bull channel. Both can be high probability trades, including the shorts, if there is a strong
bear reversal bar at a resistance level, and some reason to think that a pullback
is imminent.
With so many great ways to make money, why do most traders lose? It is because there are even more ways to make mistakes. One of the most common is that
a trader begins with one plan and, once in the trade, manages it based on a different
plan. For example, if a trader just lost on his past two long swing trades and now
buys a third, he might be so afraid of losing again that he scalps out, only to watch
the trade turn into a huge trend. Swing traders need these big wins to make up for
the losses, since swing trading often is less than 50 percent successful. If traders
do not hold on for the swing, they will not be getting the big wins that they need,
and they will lose money. Something opposite to this can happen to scalpers. They
might have taken a profitable scalp, but became sad when the trade turned into
a huge trend and they watched from the sidelines. When they see another scalp,
they take it, but once it reaches their profit target, they decide that the trade could
turn into a swing trade, just like last time, and they do not exit. A few minutes
later, the market comes back, hits their stop, and they take a loss. This is because
most scalps are high-probability trades, and when the edge is large and obvious,
the move is usually small and brief, and not the start of a big swing. The best way

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 14, 2011

17:33

Printer: Donnelly

EXAMPLE OF HOW TO TRADE A TREND

293

to make money is to have a sound strategy, and then stick to the plan. For most beginning traders, the plan should be some kind of swing trade, because the winning
percentage needed to be a successful scalper is much higher than most traders can
maintain for the long term.
Once traders take a position, they then have to decide how to manage it. The
most important decision that they have to make is whether they are looking for
a scalp or for a swing, both of which are discussed in detail in the second book,
as is trade management. Only the most experienced traders should consider scalping, because the risk is sometimes greater than the potential reward. This means
that they have to win about 70 percent of the time, which is impossible for anyone
except an extremely good trader. You should assume that you will never be that
good, because that is the reality. However, you can still be a very profitable trader.
If traders are trading the Eminis at a time when the average daily range is about 10
to 15 points, they generally have to risk about two points. For example, if they are
buying in a bull trend, their protective stop should be about two points below their
entry price. Alternatively, their stop can be one tick below the low of the signal bar,
which usually is still about two points. Some traders will risk five points or more on
a swing trade if they feel confident that the trend will eventually resume. This can
be a profitable approach for traders who understand the trader’s equation: trade
only when the chance of success times the potential reward is significantly greater
than the chance of failure times the risk.
If a trader is scalping, then he is trying to make between one and three points
on the trade. However, some scalpers think that two- and three-point trades are
small swings, and consider a scalp to be a one-point trade. Although there are many
trades every day where a trader can risk two points to make one point and have an
80 percent chance of success, there are many other setups that look similar but
have only a 50 percent chance of success. The problem that most traders have is
distinguishing between the two, and even a couple of mistakes a day can mean the
difference between making money and losing money. Most traders simply cannot
draw the distinction in real time, and end up losing money if they scalp. A trader
who scalps only the two or three best setups a day and trades enough volume might
be able to make a living as a scalper, but he might also find it difficult to watch the
market for hours and be ready to quickly place a trade when one of the rare, brief
setups unfolds.
The better way for beginning traders to make money is to swing their trades.
They can enter all at once, or can press their trades by scaling in as the market continues in their direction. This means that they are adding to their positions as their
earlier entries have growing profits. They can either exit all at once, or scale out
as the trade goes their way. For example, if they buy early in a bull trend, their initial stop is two points, and they are confident that the trade will work, they should
