
[148]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

funds are not guaranteed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.) As a result, money market funds
hold portfolios with generally similar quality (though a
bit of “stretching” for yield often goes on) and very
short maturity (usually averaging about 40 days). As a
result, they tend to earn substantially identical gross
yields on their portfolios.
With their short maturities, extremely high credit
quality, and broadly diversified portfolios, money market funds essentially become commodities. Thus, when
all else is equal (as it is here), relative performance is
determined by relative cost. So, even more than in stock
index funds and bond index funds, cost tells virtually
the entire story in money market funds.
If we rank the records of all 190 money market funds
in terms of the returns they have delivered to investors
over the past 10 years (highest first) and then compare
their expense ratio (lowest first), the relationship is almost
perfect. Exhibit 13.4 echoes the cost versus return analysis of Exhibits 13.1 to 13.3. The Vanguard Prime Money
Market Fund, close cousin to our hypothetical index
fund, was among the leaders, producing a net annual return of 3.77 percent for the past decade, some 15 percent
above the return on the average money market fund. Cumulatively, a $10,000 initial investment in the Vanguard
Prime Money Market Fund grew to $14,478 over the

BOND FUNDS AND MONEY MARKET FUNDS
EXHIBIT 13.4

[149]

Money Market Funds: Returns, Costs, and Risks,
1996 –2006
Gross
Return

Expense
Ratio

Net
Return

Final
Value (Investment
of $10,000)

Vanguard Prime Money
Market Fund

4.07%

0.30%

3.77%

$14,478

A1/P1 Commercial
Paper Index*

4.07

0.20*

3.87

14,618

Average Prime Money
Market Fund

4.05

0.82

3.25

13,785

* Estimated return and expense ratio on a hypothetical index fund.

past decade, versus $13,785 for its average peer. Among
190 comparable funds, it ranked number 7.
Remarkably, while the data are not shown in Exhibit
13.4, money market funds in the high-cost quartile earned
a gross return of 4.10 percent (about equal to the average).
But with a shocking annual expense ratio of 1.39 percent,
these high-cost funds delivered a net return of just 2.71
percent to their owners. Why would investors pay more
than a 0.50 percent annual cost for a money market fund?
The answer is beyond me. (They should probably have
their heads examined.) How the supposedly independent
directors of these 45 money funds with expense ratios at or
above the 1.00 percent level could vote to approve such
fees is an even bigger question. Their job is to represent
the interests of the fund shareholders, and they have failed.
But intelligent investors don’t need to fail. If you avoid

[150]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

these high-cost money market funds in favor of low-cost
funds, you inevitably earn superior returns.
* * *
Summing up, I realize full well that investors are far
more focused on equity funds and the stock market than on
fixed-income funds. Nonetheless, smart investors will save
themselves lots of money—and substantially improve their
returns—if they apply the same principles of broad diversification, low-cost, no-load, minimal turnover, and long-term
investing when they select fixed income funds. These are
the very commonsense characteristics that enable index
funds to guarantee your fair share of the returns in the bond
and money markets, even as they do in all financial markets.
Don’t Take My Word for It
While not a lot has been written about the remarkable
(and remarkably obvious) value of index funds that invest in bonds, the convictions expressed in this chapter
have been strongly reinforced by Walter R. Good,
CFA and Roy W. Hermansen, CFA, in Index Your
Way to Investment Success. “Comparison of expenses,
transaction costs, and, where applicable, sales loads
identify the cost advantage for bond index funds.
For the purposes of projecting returns, let’s assume
(continued)

BOND FUNDS AND MONEY MARKET FUNDS

that the actively managed fund and the benchmark
index fund each hold bonds that, overall, yield the
same 7 percent annual rate of return. For the activelymanaged load funds, the index fund advantage
amounts to 1.2 percentage points per year. The data
provide a sobering glimpse of the challenge encountered by the active bond fund manager . . . and suggest
how much additional return active management may
have to add—on average over an extended period—
just to break even! . . . Near-index bond mutual funds
provide an alternative to indexing the bond market.
While the funds do not completely conform to the
index fund model, they share key characteristics: very
high degree of diversification [in the specified market
segment], very low expense ratio, very low transaction
costs, and absence of sales loads.”
Once again, further confirmation comes from
across the pond. England’s Timothy Hale, author
of Smarter Investing—Simpler Decisions for Better Results, writes, “You should not overlook the efficacy
of index investing for bonds, which up to now has
been whispered rather than shouted from the
rooftops. The evidence is compelling and comes
down firmly in favor of investing in index
funds. . . . Over the ten-year period 1988–1998,
US bond index funds returned 8.9 per cent a year
against 8.2 per cent for actively managed bond
funds (with) index funds beating 85 per cent of all
active funds. This differential is largely due to fees.”

[151]

Ch

te r Fo u rte

en

ap

Index Funds
That Promise to Beat
the Market


The New Paradigm?

SINCE THE INCEPTION OF the first index mutual fund in
1975, indexing—investing in passively managed, broadly
diversified, low-cost, stock and bond index funds—has
proved to be both a remarkable artistic success and a remarkable commercial success. In previous chapters,
we’ve evaluated the success of index funds in providing
returns to investors that have vastly surpassed the returns
achieved by investors in actively managed mutual funds.

I N D E X F U N D S T H AT P RO M I S E TO B E AT T H E M A R K E T

[153]

Given that artistic success, the commercial success of
indexing is hardly surprising. Today, most indexed assets
are concentrated in classic index funds representing the
broad U.S. stock market (the S&P 500 or the Dow Jones
Wilshire 5000) the broad international stock market (the
Morgan Stanley EAFE [Europe, Australia, and Far East]
Index); and the broad U.S. bond market. Assets of these
traditional classic stock index funds have grown from $16
million in 1976 to $445 million in 1986, to $68 billion in
1996, to $369 billion in 2006—7 percent of the assets of
all equity mutual funds. Assets of bond index funds have
also soared—from $132 million in 1986, to $6 billion in
1996, to $62 billion in 2006—7 percent of the assets of all
taxable bond funds.
Indexing has become a competitive field. The largest
managers of the classic index funds are engaged in a
fiercely competitive price war, cutting their expense ratios
to draw the assets of investors who are smart enough to
realize the price is the difference. This trend is great for
index fund investors. But it slashes profits to index fund
managers and discourages entrepreneurs who start new
fund ventures in the hopes of enriching themselves by
building fund empires.
So how can promoters take advantage of the proven
attributes that underlie the success of the traditional index
fund? Why, create new indexes! Then claim that they will

[154]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

consistently outpace the broad market indexes that up
until now have pretty much defined how we think of indexing. And then charge a higher fee for that higher potential reward, whether or not it is ever actually delivered.
Traditional indexes, as noted in Chapter 3, are capweighted. That is, the weight of each stock (or bond) in
the index portfolio is determined by its market capitalization. The total U.S. stock market, with a value of $15
trillion, represents the collective investment of all stockholders of U.S. equities. So it follows that, together, all
investors as a group earn precisely the market’s return.
(Remember the Gotrocks family, in Chapter 1.)
If the market rises by 10 percent, all investors as a group
earn 10 percent (before costs). So the miracle, as it were, of
the index fund, is simple arithmetic. By minimizing all those
costs of investing, it guarantees that its participants will earn
higher net returns than all the other participants in stock
ownership as a group. This is the only approach to equity investing that can guarantee such an outcome.

The only way to beat the market portfolio
is to depart from the market portfolio.

The only way to beat the market portfolio is to depart
from the market portfolio. And this is what active managers

I N D E X F U N D S T H AT P RO M I S E TO B E AT T H E M A R K E T

[155]

strive to do, individually. But collectively, they can’t succeed. For their trading merely shifts ownership from one
holder to another. All that swapping of stock certificates
back and forth, however it may work out for a given buyer
or seller, enriches only our financial intermediaries.
The active money manager, in effect, puts forth this argument. “I’m smarter than the others in the market. I can
discover undervalued stocks, and when the market discovers
them and they rise in price I’ll sell them. Then I’ll discover
other undervalued stocks and repeat the process all over
again. I know that the stock market is highly efficient, but
through my intelligence, my expert analysts, my computer
programs, and my trading strategies, I can spot temporary
inefficiencies and capture them, over and over again.”
As we have seen in Chapter 8, some fund managers
have actually succeeded in this task. But they are precious
few in number—over the past 36 years, just three funds
out of 355—8⁄10 of 1 percent—have consistently distinguished themselves. Nonetheless, hope springs eternal
among money managers, and they strive for excellence.
Of course, they believe in themselves. (This field has few
shrinking violets!) But they also have a vested financial interest in persuading investors that if they have done well
in the past they will continue to do so in the future. And
if they haven’t done well in the past, well, better days are
always ahead.

[156]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

In recent years, something new has been added to the
mix. There are now financial entrepreneurs who believe,
I’m sure, sincerely (if with a heavy dollop of self-interest),
that they can create indexes that will beat the market. Interesting! They have developed new methods of weighting
portfolio holdings that they vow will outperform the traditional market-cap-weighted portfolio that represents the
holdings of investors as a group.
This new breed of indexers—not, in fact, indexers,
but active strategists—focuses on weighting portfolios by
so-called fundamental factors. Rather than weighting by
market cap, they use a combination of factors such as corporate revenues, cash flows, profits, or dividends (for example, the portfolio may be weighted by the dollar
amount of dividends distributed by each corporation,
rather than the dollar amount of its market capitalization). They argue, fairly enough, that in a cap-weighted
portfolio, half of the stocks are overvalued to a greater or
lesser extent, and half are undervalued.

No one would have the temerity to promote a
new strategy that has lagged in the past.

The traditional indexer responds: “Of course. But who
really knows which half is which?” The new fundamental

I N D E X F U N D S T H AT P RO M I S E TO B E AT T H E M A R K E T

[157]

indexers unabashedly answer, “We do.” They actually claim
to know which is which. And—this will not surprise you—
the fundamental factors they have identified as the basis for
their portfolio selections actually have outpaced the traditional indexes in the past. (We call this data mining. For you
can be sure that no one would have the temerity to promote
a new strategy that has lagged the traditional index fund in
the past.)
The members of this new breed are not shy about their
prescience. They claim variously, if a tad grandiosely, that
they represent a “new wave” in indexing, a “revolution”
that will offer investors better returns and lower volatility,
and a “new paradigm.” Indeed, they describe themselves
as the new Copernicans, after the man who concluded that
the center of the solar system was not the earth, but the
sun. They compare the traditional market-cap weighted indexers with ancient astronomers who attempted to perpetuate the Ptolemaic view of an earth-centered universe.
And they assure the world that we’re at the brink of a
“huge paradigm shift” in indexing.
They come armed with vast statistical studies that
prove how well their methodologies have worked in the past
(or at least since 1962, when their back-tested studies
began). But think for a moment about the message of
Chapter 8: in mutual fund investing, the past is not prologue. These new paradigmists casually ignore that truism.

[158]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

For example: “Dividend indexes outperform capitalizedweighted indexes.” (Not, “have outperformed in the
past.”) “The fundamental index adds more than twice as
much incremental return.” (Not, “has added in the past.”)
Investors (and managers, too) love to believe that
the past is prologue. It would make life so easy. But
it is no accident that these new index funds are being
introduced only after their strategies have seen their
best days. Following the stock market bubble burst in
2000, value stocks outpaced growth stocks (the market-cap index holds both) over the subsequent five
years; and for dividend-paying stocks, the pattern is
about the same.
Even including this recent advantage, the long-term
margins of superiority achieved by these theoretically
constructed back-tested portfolios are not large—between
1 percent and 2 percent per year. How much of that edge
would have been confiscated by their expense ratios?
(The lowest is 0.28 percent; the average is about 0.50
percent; the highest that I’ve seen is 1.89 percent.) How
much would have been confiscated by their extra portfolio
turnover costs compared with the classic index funds?
How much would have been confiscated by extra taxes
paid by shareholders when that turnover resulted in
gains? Even if the modest margins claimed in the past
were to repeat—which, I believe, is highly unlikely—these

I N D E X F U N D S T H AT P RO M I S E TO B E AT T H E M A R K E T

[159]

back-tested hypothetical returns would be significantly
eroded, if not totally erased, by those costs.

If these paradigms actually have been right in the
past, won’t they therefore be wrong in the future?

But the central issue remains: how can one claim that the
past will be prologue without a scintilla of apparent doubt?
The new paradigmists have never explained why these fundamental factors have been systematically underpriced by the
market in the past. And, if they have been underpriced, why
investors, hungry to capitalize on that apparent past inefficiency, won’t bid up prices until the undervaluation no longer
remains. Put another way, if these promoters of the purported new paradigms actually have been right in the past,
won’t they therefore be wrong in the future?
When active managers of equity funds claim to have a
way of uncovering extra value in our highly (but not perfectly) efficient U.S. stock market, investors will look at
their past record, consider the manager’s strategies, and invest or not. These new index managers are in fact active
managers. But they not only claim prescience, but a prescience that gives them confidence that certain sectors of
the market (such as dividend-paying stocks) will remain undervalued as far ahead as the eye can see.

[160]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

I recommend skepticism. I have always been impressed
by the inexorable tendency for reversion to the mean in security returns. For example, mutual funds with a value mandate have generally outperformed those with a growth
mandate since the late 1960s. But since 1977—indeed since
1937—there has been little to choose between the two. In
fact, from 1937 through 1967, growth mutual funds rather
consistently trumped value mutual funds. Never think you
know more than the market. Nobody does.
We never know when that reversion to the mean will
come to the various sectors of the stock market. But we
do know that such changes in style leadership have invariably occurred in the past. With so much of the stock market’s volatility based on expectations (emotions) rather
than business (economics), what else could we expect?
Before we too easily accept that fundamental indexing—
relying on style tilts toward dividends, value, or smallness—is the new paradigm, we need a longer sense of
history. We also need to call on our own common sense
that warns us that hindsight plays tricks on our minds.
There have been many new paradigms over the years.
None has persisted. The “concept” stocks of the Go-Go
years in the 1960s came and went. So did the “Nifty Fifty”
era that soon followed. The “January effect” of small-cap
superiority came and went. Option-income funds and “Government plus” funds came and went. In the late 1990s,

I N D E X F U N D S T H AT P RO M I S E TO B E AT T H E M A R K E T

[161]

high-tech stocks and “new economy” funds came and went
as well. Today, the asset values of the survivors remain far
below their peaks. Intelligent investors should approach
with extreme caution a claim that any new paradigm is here
to stay. That’s not the way financial markets work.

“The greatest enemy of a good plan is the dream
of a perfect plan.” Stick to the good plan.

Traditional all-market-cap-weighted index funds guarantee that you will receive your fair share of stock market
returns, and virtually assure that you will outperform, over
the long term, 90 percent or more of the other investors in
the marketplace. Maybe this new paradigm of fundamental
indexing—unlike all the other new paradigms I’ve seen—will
work. But maybe it won’t. I urge investors not to be
tempted by the siren song of paradigms that promise the accumulation of wealth that will be far beyond the rewards of
the classic index fund. Don’t forget the prophetic warning
of Carl von Clausewitz, military theorist and Prussian general of the early nineteenth century, “The greatest enemy of
a good plan is the dream of a perfect plan.” Put your
dreaming away, pull out your common sense, and stick to
the good plan represented by the classic index fund.

[162]

THE LITTLE BOOK OF COMMON SENSE INVESTING

Don’t Take My Word for It
While I feel strongly on this point, I am not alone.
First hear these words from Gregory Mankiw, Harvard professor and former chairman of the President’s
Council of Economic Advisers. “I am placing my
bets with Bogle on this one.” Then listen to William
Sharpe, professor of finance at Stanford and Nobel
Laureate in Economics: “It is quite remarkable that
people think that somehow a scheme that weights
stocks differently than capitalization can dominate a
capitalization-weighted index. . . . New paradigms
come and go. Betting against the market (and spending a considerable amount of money to do so) is indeed likely to be a hazardous undertaking.”
Consider, too, this caution from John R. Minahan, director of research at New England Pension
Consultants: “I am amazed by all the managers that
make an assertion of the type: ‘In the long run X always wins,’ where X could be dividend yield, earnings
growth, quality of management, a quantitative factor
or mix of factors, etc.—yet are unable cite a reason
why X should be systematically underpriced by the
market. The managers may be able to point to data
suggesting that X has been associated with excess returns in the past, but without a plausible explanation
(continued)

I N D E X F U N D S T H AT P RO M I S E TO B E AT T H E M A R K E T

of why X should outperform. Such data do not convince me that X is likely to outperform in the future.”
Finally, consider this affirmation of classic indexing from Wharton School Professor Jeremy J.
Siegel, author of Stocks for the Long Run and adviser
to WisdomTree Investments, the promoter of the dividend-driven fundamental model. “It can be shown
that maximum diversification is achieved by holding
each stock in proportion to its value to the entire market
(italics added). . . . Hindsight plays tricks on our
minds . . . often distorts the past and encourages us to
play hunches and outguess other investors, who in
turn are playing the same game. For most of us, trying
to beat the market leads to disastrous results . . . our
actions lead to much lower returns than can be
achieved by just staying in the market . . . matching
the market year after year with index funds (such as)
the Vanguard 500 Portfolio . . . and Vanguard’s Total
Stock Market Index Fund.” (This quotation is from
the first edition of Dr. Siegel’s book in 1994. I understand that he has every right to change his mind.)

[163]

C

er Fif te

e
n

pt
ha

The Exchange
Traded Fund


A Trader to the Cause

EVEN BEFORE THE RISE of the so-called new paradigm of
fundamental indexing described in Chapter 14, traditional
indexing was being challenged by a sort of wolf-in-sheep’s
clothing, the exchange traded fund (ETF). Simply put,
the ETF is a fund designed to facilitate trading in its
shares, dressed in the guise of the traditional index fund.
If long-term investing was the original paradigm
for the classic index fund designed 31 years ago, surely
using index funds as trading vehicles can only be described as short-term speculation. If the broadest possible diversification was the original paradigm, surely

THE EXCHANGE TRADED FUND

[165]

holding discrete—even widely-diversified—sectors of
the market offers less diversification and commensurately more risk. If the original paradigm was minimal
cost, then holding market sector index funds that
are themselves low-cost obviates neither the brokerage
commissions entailed in trading them nor the tax
burdens incurred if one has the good fortune to do so
successfully.

Typical ETF investors have absolutely no idea
what relationship their investment return will
have to the return earned by the stock market.
