
Burniske 03.indd 221

9/9/17 2:41 PM

222 CRYPTOASSETS

For both hot and cold storage, there are two options for controlling the
private key that the innovative investor can choose from, creating a quadrant
of four options in total (Figure 14.1). Most exchanges, for example, take care
of the private key for the customer, so that all the customer has to do is log
into the exchange as with any typical website. These exchanges qualify as a hot
wallet where a third party controls the private key. Services such as Coinbase
provide cold storage where a third party still controls the private key. In situations where a third party controls the private key, often the service doesn’t
have a private key for each customer’s assets. Instead, the service will have a
few private keys that secure a large number of clients’ assets, and those keys
are guarded very carefully.

 Hot Wallet
 Investor Controls
Private Key

 Hot Wallet
 Third Party Controls
Private Key

 Cold Storage
 Investor Controls
Private Key

 Cold Storage
 Third Party Controls
Private Key

Figure 14.1 n The four quadrants of securing cryptoassets

If the innovative investor is reluctant to trust a third party, the other option
is to take control of the private keys directly. While this comes with its own
risks, like losing the private key, if the proper precautions are taken, it ensures
autonomy and puts security directly in the owner’s hands.

CUSTODY VIA EXCHANGES
By default, exchanges must store a customer’s cryptoassets, most commonly
done by handling the private keys. We’ll repeat, many exchanges don’t even
have separate private keys for different customers. The exchange has its own

Burniske 03.indd 222

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

223

private keys to the cryptoassets it is responsible for on the respective blockchain
and then has internal books that record the customer balances. Depending on
the exchange, there are varying levels of security hygiene and different proportions of the exchange’s assets that are kept in hot or cold storage. Over time,
these security distinctions have proven critical. For a clearer understanding,
we’ll cover a few big hacks that occurred on bitcoin exchanges that stored 100
percent of their bitcoin in hot wallets.
Let’s begin with the infamous Mt. Gox. While this exchange did much to
expand the usage and recognition of bitcoin throughout the world, it met its
end in early 201425 when the company declared bankruptcy after over $450
million26 of client bitcoin holdings went missing. Although the company was a
pioneer in providing investors and enthusiasts the opportunity to gain access
more easily to bitcoin, Mt. Gox also had weak management involved in an
asset class that was still in its infancy—never a good combination.
Jed McCaleb was the original owner of Mt. Gox. Early on he learned that
matching buyers and sellers of bitcoin was more than he bargained for when
wires for tens of thousands of dollars started to pour in. McCaleb sold the site,
and its growing activity, to Mark Karpeles, who was known in chat rooms as
MagicalTux and enjoyed posting kitten videos online. To his credit, Karpeles
rewrote the site to address the increased interest and activity, and he survived
through the early days when other bitcoin exchanges quickly folded.27
Although he exhibited a level of coding competence, Karpeles soon found
himself out of his league when it came to business. He was not investing in
his company’s growth, and his coding expertise soon showed cracks as well. A
more experienced technology shop would have implemented a test environment and version control software for its code, which was the backbone of Mt.
Gox’s operation. Karpeles didn’t do either, and all code changes were routed
through him directly, which created bottlenecks when changes were needed
quickly.
While Karpeles may have been negligent in many facets of the Mt. Gox business, he did understand the difference between hot and cold storage of bitcoin.
He put himself in charge of all the private keys for the bitcoin the exchange
stored. After a hack in 2011, Karpeles decided to move the majority of bitcoin
offline into cold storage, which required him to write down the private keys
and place them in safety deposit boxes throughout Tokyo, where the company was located. This required a huge amount of paperwork and accounting,
which was clearly not a strong point for Karpeles.28 While the keys were in cold
storage, Karpeles claims that a hacker manipulated him through a transaction

Burniske 03.indd 223

9/9/17 2:41 PM

224 CRYPTOASSETS

malleability bug in the core Bitcoin software.29 While Karpeles’s claims have
been called into question by many in the bitcoin community, there’s no denying that the major reason for this hack was due to poor security hygiene with
weak operational protocols put into place by the company for the movement
of bitcoin. Such negligence cost investors $450 million in bitcoin.
More recently, a hack of Bitfinex’s exchange cost investors $72 million.30
The hack was a result of Bitfinex storing 100 percent of its client assets in hot
wallets. There is debate on why Bitfinex did this. Possibly it was for purposes of
liquidity, as Bitfinex is one of the most liquid and active exchanges, or it could
have been a result of regulations put in place. Prior to the hack, Bitfinex had
settled with the CFTC for $75,000 primarily because its cold storage of bitcoin
ran afoul of CFTC regulations. The move to place all clients’ assets into hot
wallets is cited by many as due to the fine and CFTC regulations.31 Either way,
this hack proved that no matter the security protocols put in place, hot wallets
are always more insecure than properly executed cold storage because the hot
wallet can be accessed from afar by anyone with an Internet connection. Only
a physical break-in would allow a thief to gain access to assets in cold storage.
At the time of the Mt. Gox hack, bitcoin and its underlying technology was
still in its infancy and experiencing growing pains, like any other new technology. Famous venture capitalist Fred Wilson wrote soon after the incident, “We
are witnessing the maturation of a sector and part of that will inevitably be
failures, crashes, and other messes. Almost every technology that I’ve watched
come into a mass adoption has gone through these sorts of growing pains.”32
Innovators and early adopters of any new technology are taking risks, but the
exchanges are professionalizing over time. Mt. Gox is no more; Bitfinex has
restructured itself and is humming along. These hacks have taught lessons not
only to existing and new cryptoasset exchanges, but to clients as well.
The exchanges that run the highest risk of being hacked are those that have
the largest amount of assets in hot wallets. Cold storage might impact the ability
to access assets quickly, but what you lose in accessibility you gain in security.

THE WORLD OF CRYPTOASSET WALLETS
Storing cryptoassets on an exchange may not always be the safest option. The
risk is lower for those exchanges that have insurance, keep the majority of their
assets in cold storage, and employ other best-in-class security measures like
penetration testing and regular audits. For other exchanges, the risk should
only be tolerated if the innovative investor is trading regularly and making use

Burniske 03.indd 224

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

225

of the exchange’s capabilities, such as offering newer cryptoassets. If not trading regularly, investors should consider one of the following wallet options to
store their assets safely.
Broadly speaking, there are five kinds of wallets: web (cloud), desktop,
mobile, hardware, and paper. For the sake of brevity, we use bitcoin to illustrate these examples as it provides the scaffolding necessary to investigate similar options for other cryptoassets.
The best resource for learning more about different kinds of bitcoin wallets is bitcoin.org,33 and we include additional information sources in the
Resources section of this book. Recognize that as interest and access to more
cryptoassets continues to grow, the list of wallets to secure these assets will
grow, too.

Web Wallets
Most web wallets are not much different from exchanges. The keys are often
outside the investor’s control and in the hands of a centralized third party. If
the third party doesn’t employ the proper security techniques, then the crypto­
assets may be at risk. As with an exchange, the web wallet can be accessed
from anywhere, which is one of the main benefits. Popular web wallets include
Blockchain.info and Coinbase. Some web wallets do provide the option of
controlling the private key, which makes them like a lightweight desktop wallet (covered below) that can be accessed remotely.
An increasingly prevalent feature in web wallets is vaulting. A vault delays
the withdrawal process of any cryptoasset so that the holder has time to negate
any attempted withdrawal. This is primarily a tactic to thwart hackers who may
have compromised the user’s password and are trying to move cryptoassets to
another address. Coinbase has the most well-known vaulting service within
its web wallet.
CRYPTOASSET VAULTS
One of the nice features of Coinbase is that it allows a customer to maintain
an easily accessible balance of bitcoin, as well as a more illiquid but highly
secure form of storage known as its Vault. Although placing bitcoin balances
into the Vault enhances security, it does require two-factor authentication and
time delays before withdrawal. This means that moving funds from the Vault

Burniske 03.indd 225

9/9/17 2:41 PM

226 CRYPTOASSETS

takes 48 hours. Coinbase’s dual functionality is like having a checking and
a savings account at a bank. Bitcoin that investors need to access quickly
can be kept in a regular Coinbase account (the checking account), and for
added security additional bitcoin can be held in a Vault account (the savings
account).

Desktop Wallets
With a desktop wallet, the private keys are stored directly on the computer
where the software is downloaded. The user has full control, and no one else
can lose, spend, or send his or her bitcoin. There are two kinds of desktop wallets: a full client and a lightweight client. When we say client, it simply refers to
the functionality of the software application that is running on the computer.
A full client is a much more intensive software application, whereas a lightweight client provides a more hassle-free approach to storing bitcoin.
In the early days of Bitcoin, there was only the wallet associated with Satoshi’s
software, which is now referred to as Bitcoin Core. This wallet is a full client,
meaning it requires a full download of Bitcoin’s blockchain and therefore substantial bandwidth and storage space. When a computer is running this software, it is counted as a full node in Bitcoin’s network, meaning it has a record of
every single Bitcoin transaction. Full nodes are great for security and autonomy
and are the backbone of propagating and verifying bitcoin transactions, but the
hardware requirements are only for the most hardcore of hobbyists.34
Lightweight clients, also referred to as thin clients, don’t download Bitcoin’s
entire blockchain, nor do they propagate or verify new transactions being
passed through the network. Instead, they rely on full nodes for complete
information on Bitcoin’s blockchain, and are primarily focused on providing
transactional information involving only the user’s bitcoin. A lightweight wallet is much more practical for the average user who doesn’t have the means to
deal with running a full client. With these wallets, the private key(s) are on the
computer on which the software is downloaded. Popular lightweight clients
include Coinomi, Electrum, and Jaxx.

Mobile Wallets
Technically, we are referring to mobile wallets that store the private keys on
the device, as opposed to a third party’s servers. Mobile wallets are similar to

Burniske 03.indd 226

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

227

lightweight clients in that they don’t download Bitcoin’s blockchain (it would
break the smartphone). Innovative investors can use them on the go should
they need to transfer bitcoin to friends to pay for dinner at the local bar that
accepts bitcoin for beers.
Numerous wallets appear on app stores as mobile applications but are not
technically mobile wallets. They are web wallets that provide access through
a mobile application. The distinction boils down to who is storing the private
keys. If a third party is storing the private keys and the wallet is accessing that
information through the Internet, then that is a web wallet even if it’s in the
form of a mobile application.35 If the private keys are stored on the smartphone, then that mobile application is a mobile wallet, as is the case for mobile
wallets such as Airbitz and Breadwallet.

Hardware Wallets
As bitcoin has become more popular and widely used, companies have sprung
up that create dedicated hardware for storing private keys, and thereby storing
and sending bitcoin or cryptoassets to others. Several hardware wallets provide a variety of functionality. Some offer a full suite of key generation, storage,
and sending capabilities; others are simply used as an extra layer of transaction
confirmation security; others still need to be plugged into a computer to work.
A few of the more popular wallets are as follows:36
•

•

•

Trezor. This is one of the more secure ways to store bitcoin, as it generates private keys that never leave the device. This protects the data from
viruses and malware that may impact other devices or online storage.
Ledger Nano S. This device plugs into a USB port and allows for the
storage of bitcoin, ether, and other altcoins. It has a neat OLED display on what looks like a flash drive that provides confirmation when a
transaction takes place on the device.
KeepKey. This USB device not only securely stores bitcoin but also provides information on transactions and confirmations on its OLED display. It is also PIN-protected.

While a hardware wallet can always be misplaced, all is not necessarily lost
if that happens. During the initialization stage of setting up the hardware wallet there is a seed, which is like a backup password. That seed needs to be stored
in an extremely secure place because if the hardware wallet ever goes missing,

Burniske 03.indd 227

9/9/17 2:41 PM

228 CRYPTOASSETS

the seed will regenerate the private keys that were on the hardware wallet and
enable access to the bitcoin again.
Since hardware wallets require specific hardware engineering and associated software engineering, they often don’t support a wide array of crypto­
assets. Most hardware wallets support bitcoin. The Ledger Nano S provides
support to some cryptoassets beyond bitcoin, and KeepKey is now integrating with ShapeShift to support additional cryptocurrencies beyond bitcoin.37
We’re sure to see this space grow over the next few years as more hardware
wallets expand their capabilities to support various cryptoassets.

Paper Wallets
One of the simplest ways of storing private keys is also one of the most secure,
if done properly. Welcome to the paper wallet, which involves writing the long
alphanumeric string that is the public-private key pair on a piece of paper. A
paper wallet qualifies as a form of cold storage. The paper wallet can be locked
away in a safe for decades, and so long as the specific asset’s blockchain continues to exist, that private key can be used to access it. Paper wallets support all
cryptoassets because all they require are pen and paper. Many store these in a
fireproof safe deposit box or an equally secure location.

MANY CHOICES, SAME DISCIPLINES
With all the available choices, it’s vital that investors do their due diligence
when choosing the wallets and exchanges that best suit their needs. The basic
progression will be “how to acquire” and “how to store” the cryptoasset, and
while the same service can provide both functions, it’s useful to consider what
is most important before making a decision. Just as an investor would take the
time to consider which financial advisor to use, the innovative investor must
take time to investigate which cryptoasset “acquirer and storer” to use.
We recognize that the world of cryptoassets requires new habit patterns,
an often uncomfortable process, especially when money (in any form, digital
or paper) is at stake. As the visibility and marketplace grows for cryptoassets,
options will materialize that don’t require new habit patterns because they will
incorporate cryptoassets into the investment systems and vehicles with which
the investor is already familiar. We’re seeing money managers, investment
firms, and other capital market players step into the fray to investigate and

Burniske 03.indd 228

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

229

create investment vehicles that fit the mold of capital market assets and can be
housed in brokerage accounts, and potentially even 401(k) plans.
In the next chapter, we explore the growing capital market investment
choices available to investors. These still require due diligence, discipline, and
research, but they do away with the potentially scary components of private
key storage and setting up new accounts with startups.

Burniske 03.indd 229

9/9/17 2:41 PM

This page intentionally left blank

Burniske 03.indd 230

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Chapter 15
“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

B

uying cryptoassets through a dedicated cryptoasset exchange is a
direct avenue for investors to gain access to this new asset class, but
it does require orienting with a new application and user interface, as
well as trusting in what might be a young business.
There is a benefit to incorporating cryptoassets directly into the interface
you use to manage a preexisting investment portfolio, where prices can be
tracked easily, asset allocation models can be more carefully monitored, and
tax benefits can be leveraged. In this chapter, we discuss various capital market
vehicles that can give the innovative investor access to cryptoassets through
established investment channels, as well as what may be available in the future.
We also discuss what the innovative investor should expect from financial
advisors as this space continues to grow.

BITCOIN INVESTMENT TRUST
Grayscale Investments offers the largest capital markets vehicle with bitcoin
exposure, clocking in at north of $200 million or roughly 1 percent of all bitcoin outstanding as of March 2017. Grayscale was established in 2013 by its
parent company, Digital Currency Group (DCG). Founded by Barry Silbert,
a serial entrepreneur and influential figure in the Bitcoin community, some
would say that DCG is in the early stages of becoming the Berkshire Hathaway
of Bitcoin.1 Grayscale’s focus within DCG’s portfolio of operating compa231

Burniske 03.indd 231

9/9/17 2:41 PM

232 CRYPTOASSETS

nies is to provide digital currency investing options to the capital markets.
Currently, it has the Bitcoin Investment Trust (BIT), the Ethereum Classic
(ETC) Investment Trust, and a potential bitcoin ETF (exchange traded fund)
in filing with the SEC.
The BIT was the first product that Grayscale brought to market and upon
launch was only available to accredited investors. The BIT was structured
to acquire and secure bitcoin in a trust and then provide shares in the trust
to investors, with each share representing approximately 1/10 the value of a
single bitcoin. In theory, investors could assume that every 10 shares would
be backed by a single bitcoin.2 No hedging or leverage is used in the trust;
it simply holds bitcoin and allows investors to gain access to its price fluctuations without having to deal with the underlying asset. The bitcoin itself
is stored with Xapo, a firm that specializes in the secure custody of large
amounts of bitcoin.3 On its website, Grayscale advertises the following about
the BIT:4
•
•
•
•
•

Titled, auditable ownership through a traditional investment vehicle
Eligibility for tax-advantaged accounts
Publicly quoted
Supported by a network of trusted service providers
Robust security and storage

These services come with a management fee of 2 percent annually. After a
holding period of one year, investors can sell their shares in the OTCQX markets under the symbol GBTC.5 Through this process, accredited investors can
exit their initial investment, realizing any profits or losses, and in so doing
give all levels of investors access to their liquidated shares of the BIT. Other
investors can buy GBTC through their stockbroker of choice, whether that be
Fidelity or other firms.
SELF-DIRECTED IRA
One of the lesser-known options for investors seeking retirement-based
investments is the self-directed IRA. While it has been in place since the
creation of IRAs in 1974, what distinguishes it from the traditional IRA is
the variety of investment options available. Most people use an IRA to invest
in equities, bonds, mutual funds, and cash equivalents such as money market instruments. With a self-directed IRA, an investor can go beyond these

Burniske 03.indd 232

9/9/17 2:41 PM

“Where’s the Bitcoin ETF?”

233

investments to include such assets as real estate and gold. This structure provides a level of flexibility for investors that allows for the inclusion of various
alternative, often riskier, assets into an investment account. This flexibility
requires numerous additional rules. One such rule is that any investment in
this account can’t benefit the account owner “indirectly.” For example, an
indirectly beneficial investment in a self-directed IRA would be the use of
funds to buy a vacation home or other piece of real estate that the account
owner would use personally.6 These accounts often come with costly maintenance and management fees, so while they are useful, they require proper
due diligence and care.

The second leg of the BIT wasn’t always available. In early May 2015, the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) gave Grayscale the regulatory approval needed to allow the BIT to become a publicly traded vehicle on
OTCQX.7 On May 4, 2015, the very first accredited investors who had bought
into the BIT were given the option to sell their shares of GBTC in the OTCQX
market.8 The first trade was for 2 shares of GBTC at $44/share. Through the
entire day there were just 765 shares traded, or just over 75 bitcoin. Admittedly
a thin market, but this day in May was the first time a bitcoin vehicle was
traded on a regulated U.S. capital market.
Through the first quarter of 2017, there is plenty of reason to be excited
about the BIT and GBTC,9 but they are far from perfect vehicles. Grayscale’s
creativity in allowing accredited investors to buy into a one-year lockup before
selling in public markets does have a drawback. Unlike ETFs or mutual funds,
which can issue more shares to meet market demand, Grayscale is not able to
issue more shares of GBTC to meet investor demand. Instead, the creation of
new units of GBTC is entirely dependent on accredited investors being willing
to sell their shares, which they can only do after one year. Furthermore, now
that Grayscale has an S-1 filing under review with the SEC they are not able to
create more shares of the BIT for accredited investors that would like to buy
into the private placement.
Meanwhile, the price of GBTC can be bid up or down, depending on what
people were willing to pay for access to these shares. The first trade for GBTC
was at $44/share, and each share maps to roughly 1/10 of a bitcoin. So $44/
share would imply that bitcoin was in the $440 range. Instead, at the time of
the trade for $44/share, bitcoin was in the low $200s. Someone was willing to
pay nearly a 100 percent premium to get access to bitcoin as an investment
