
Does your original trading system—the one inspired by Gil
Blake's interview—still work?
It works, but it has degraded a lot.

Do you think this might be a temporary phase and that in the
future it might start working very well again?
I doubt it.

STEVE LESCARBE-AU*

Can you see yourself ever using it again?

No.
If you don't expect to ever use it again, and it's not related to
what you are doing now, is there any reason why you couldn't
talk about it more specifically?
Well, you never know [he lets out a long laugh].
Are you still in the process of trying to improve what you are
doing?
Absolutely. I'm trying to, but I don't know if I'll be able to. It's hard to
improve on 60 percent a year,* but I'll be happy to maintain it. I'm
constantly concerned that it is going to go away. In fact, I know it will.
If you come back a year from now, I'll probably be doing something
different. I'm sure what I'm doing now won't work as well as it has up
until this point.
You are implying that systems have a life span.
There is absolutely no doubt about it. There is no way anyone could
convince me otherwise. Systems definitely have a life span.
Why do you think that is?
I think it's because eventually enough people figure it out. When too
many people jump on the bandwagon, the market takes it away. That's
why 1 would be very skeptical about anyone being able to buy a trading system that worked—that is, a system that made money with an
acceptable level of risk.
If you develop a system that you have thoroughly tested and truly
believe works, clon't tell anyone about it. Use it, because it's going to
go away at some point in time. Understand that it won't last forever,
and work on coming up with something different for when that happens.
I'm always concerned about people figuring out what I do,
because I know if that happens, it's going to stop working. For example, the "January effect" is gone. [The January effect is the tendency
for small capitalization stocks to outperform large capitalization
stocks during January—a pattern that until 1993 had repeated in over
*As of March 2000, Lescarbcau's average annual compounded return had risen to 70
percent.

THE U L T I M A T E TRADING S Y S T E M

90 percent of all years since the mid-1920s. Then the pattern failed
six years in a row. Lescarbeau is implying, quite plausibly, that the
January effect's increasing publicity triggered its own demise.]
If too many people are using the same system, what mechanism
in the marketplace causes the system to self-destruct?
I can't answer that question. It could just be a matter of too many
people on the same side of the trade at the same time. Everything I
have experienced tells me that systems have a life span, and not a terribly long life span.
That speaks to the death of systems; what about the birth of systems? Will systems start working at some point in time, say 1994,
and then stop working a few years later? Or if you tested the systems you are currently using over the past twenty or thirty years,
would you find that they worked over the entire time span, but
it's just a matter of your not finding them until more recently?
Usually when I discover a system, it's been working all along. Having
said that, though, I find that the systems that have done the best in
the most recent past also tend to do the best in the immediate future.
Therefore I tend to lean on the systems that have done the best very
recently.
You say that systems have a limited life span, but by your own
admission, the systems you are using have worked for over
twenty years. Why couldn't they work for another twenty
years?
I understand where you are going with that question, but I don't agree
with the conclusion. I don't buy it because there is just a lot more
money pouring into the markets. The best example is the commodity
markets. When we sold the managed futures account to Kodak, the
traders managing the account had systems with great track records;
these systems had been averaging 40 percent for fifteen years. They
said there was no way that these systems would stop working. Well,
they did. They stopped working because too many people started
using similar systems.
Another classic example is O'Shaughnessy. His book What Works
on Wall Street was terrific; it was well written and well researched.
The performance of his funds, however, has been less than stellar.

THE U L T I M A T E TRADING S Y S T E M

What do you consider "less than stellar"?
[At this point, Lescarbeau looks up the performance of O'Shaughnessy's funds on his computer screen. He checks two of the funds
and finds that they are up 43 percent and 46 percent. Although this
doesn't sound too disastrous, during the same time period (late 1996
to mid-1999), the S&P 500 was up 89 percent. So, these funds made
only about half as much as the S&P 500, which is representative of
the benchmark they were designed to beat.] Great book. He tested
his strategies all the way back to the early 1950s, but they don't work.
So, even though his strategies worked for over forty years at the
time the book was published, they have stopped working in
recent years.
You know what? Had he not published his book, they might well have
continued to work. He should have just managed money and not published his book; of course, if he hadn't published the book, he probably wouldn't have raised any money.
Your premise is that his strategies stopped working because too
many people were following the same ideas.
Exactly. The most important message I can give anyone who reads
your book is that if you have a great idea, don't talk about it.

Some people I have interviewed say, "I could publish my system
in the Wall Street Journal and it wouldn't make a difference." I
take it that you don't agree.
I've read statements like that, and 1 couldn't disagree more.
You feel that if you described your system in The Wall Street
Journal, it would stop working.
It would be over. Tomorrow [he laughs]\
At one point, you had investors, but you no longer do. What
happened?
I had investors from 1995 through 1997. I did very well for them—I
was up 58 percent in 1995, 50 percent in 1996, and 60 percent in
1997. By the end of 1997, I was managing about $35 million. It
became very difficult to use my style of investment, which involves
switching money in and out of mutual funds, because mutual funds
don't like it if you trade more than four times a year.

But you trade more than four times a year now.
I trade a lot less money, and I have it spread out over more than
twenty mutual funds.
So you stopped managing money for logistical reasons?
That and because investors can be such a pain.
What could your investors possibly have complained about?
You made over 50 percent every year with hardly any losing
months.
You can't even imagine the stuff they complained about. They complained that I didn't make enough money if I wasn't up at least 4 percent for the month. They complained that I made too much money
because they had to pay taxes on the profits.

I can't believe it; you actually had someone complain that you
made too much money!
I told him that I could lose money; then he wouldn't have to pay any
taxes. I asked him if he would prefer that.
Some investors didn't trust me. Because the results were so good,
they thought I was making up the numbers and had absconded with
their money. They would call my accountant every month to ask if the
money was really in the account.
If the market was up a lot on the day, they would call up and ask,
"Are we in the market?" That would drive me crazy. If the market was
down a lot, they would call up and ask, "Are we out of the market?"
Of course, they always expected me to be on the right side of the
market.
How much of your decision to get out of money management
was due to the headaches given to you by mutual funds and
how much was due to the headaches given to you by your
investors?
Split equally! [He laughs loudly] I think I used the headache I was
getting from the funds as the excuse to give investors their money
back. I did feel badly for those investors who had been with me from
the beginning and had never opened their mouths.
Didn't the friends who were your original investors and hadn't
bothered you try to talk you into not returning their money?

STEVE ttSlARBEAU

They did, but my problem was how to differentiate between this
friend and that friend? Where do I draw the line? Therefore, I had to
do it across the board.
Did you lose any friendships as a result?
No, although they still ask me to reconsider whenever we get together
for a poker game.
It is interesting that so many of the traders I have interviewed
are poker players.
I love playing poker.
I assume the stakes you are playing at are not terribly meaningful relative to the amount of money you are trading. You could
stay in every hand, and it wouldn't make any difference to
you.
It's pretty hard to get concerned about losing $200 when you've just
lost $100,000, but 1 never let my income level interfere with the way
1 play. I play to win. If a hand is not a good bet, I get out.
Do you ever break your trading rules?
Only on the side of caution. 1 might take partial profits on a position, or
not go fully long on a buy signal, but I will never hold after a sell signal.
Were you that disciplined from the very beginning?
Yes, because prior to that, I did all my screwing up in futures. I made
every possible mistake you could make. I don't even have to go over
them because they are all classic mistakes.
How long did you trade futures?
[He searches his memory for a while, as if trying to retrieve an experience
from the distant reaches of his mind.] For about three years.
Were you a net loser?
Oh, big-time! I made money investing with other futures managers,
but trading for my own account, I turned a $125,000 account into
$50,000. I did everything wrong.
Were there any particularly painful trades during that period?
Too numerous to count.
What stands out?
I developed a currency trading system. I bought this computer software program that allowed you to optimize trading systems [to finetune the indicator values in a system so as to maximize the

THE U L T I M A T E T R A D I N G S Y S T E M

performance results for the tested price data]. Like any stupid
trader, I optimized it completely. [He adjusted the system indicator
values so that they best fit the past price data.] Of course, the
results looked spectacular. [Because by optimizing, he was using
hindsight to define and test the system. The problem is that the
results will be very misleading when applied to unseen price data—
namely, future price data.] I knew better, but I didn't think it applied
to me.
In a span of two weeks, 1 lost about 50 percent of the money in my
trading account. 1 started veering from the system, and every time I
did, it was the absolute wrong time to do it. It was a nightmare. I realized I wasn't cut out to trade futures.
This sounds like the only thing you ever did where you failed.
With everything else you kept at it until you succeeded. Why did
you give up here?
Because I realized futures were a losing game. The commissions and
slippage [the difference between the screen price and the actual
trade execution price] placed the odds too much against you. If you
have only a 50 percent chance of being right when you buy or sell,
and you pay commissions and incur slippage costs, you have to lose
over the long run.
But that 50 percent assumption presupposes that you don't have
any edge in the market. Couldn't you have found patterns that
had some reliability and gave you an edge similar to what you did
in the stock market?
I couldn't do it. I couldn't find any patterns that worked.
Are you able to take any vacations?
Yes, as long as I have access to my computer. I own a vacation home
on a lake in New Hampshire.
What if you wanted to go away and hike in the Swiss Alps, or
for that matter even take a full-day hike in the White Mountains?
For five years, I have been available at 3:45 P.M. every day without
exception. I have never taken a day off. The problem with taking a
day off is that it will probably be the day you shouldn't have taken
off.

S T E V E lUCARBEAi]

What happened when you had your knee surgery? [Lescarbeau
and I had compared notes on personal sports injuries on our

drive back from the restaurant.]
I had outpatient surgery with general anesthesia. I returned home at

around 11 A.M., very groggy, and went straight to bed. My wife was
supposed to wake me at 3:30, but out of compassion, she decided to
let me sleep. At 3:45, I woke up with a start. I was in the bedroom,
which is on the other side of the house. I jumped out of bed and with
excruciating pain hobbled down to my office. I looked at the screen,
and based on what I saw, I sold half my portfolio.
An hour later, I returned to the office and looked at the screen
again. I realized that I had totally screwed up. 1 couldn't figure out
why I had sold anything. I had completely misread the information.
As it turned out, the next day the market tanked. It was utter luck.

What percent of the time are you in the market?
About 50 to 55 percent of the time.
Do you use leverage?
Selectively. On average, I'm less than fully invested, even counting
only those days when I am in the market. Occasionally, if conditions
are right, I use leverage. But I have never been leveraged more that
140 percent of my capital—that's the limit of my comfort level. I have
never lost money on a trade that I was leveraged on.

Do you ever go net short?
Ninety percent of my success is clue to not doing things that are stupid. I don't sell winners; I don't hold losers; I don't get emotionally
involved. I do things where the odds are in my favor. Shorting stocks
is dumb because the odds are stacked against you. The stock market
has been rising by over 10 percent a year for many decades. Why
would you want to go against that trend?

Any advice for novice traders?
Don't confuse activity with accomplishment. I think one mistake
novice traders make is that they begin trading before they have any
real idea what they are doing. They are active, but they are not
accomplishing anything. I hardly spend any time trading. Over 99
percent of my time is spent on the computer, doing research.

Although Lescarbeau refused to reveal any details about his own
trading systems, he provides some important insights into the traits
of a successful trader. One characteristic that I have repeatedly
noticed in winning traders—and that is probably true of winners in
any field—is that they are extremely confident. Perhaps no other
trader I have interviewed has exemplified this quality better than
Lescarbeau. He exudes confidence. Consider, for example, his
description of the certainty that he would succeed as a money
manager before he had even developed a methodology. (Lescarbeau's decision to assume trading responsibility before he had
developed a trading method is not being held up as model of laudable behavior—on the contrary, for most people it would represent
a reckless course of action—but only as an illustration of his sense
of confidence.)

An honest assessment of your own confidence level may be the
best indicator of your potential for success. If you are confident that
you will succeed in the markets—not to be confused with wanting to
be confident—then the odds are good that you will. If you are uncertain, then tread very gingerly with your risk capital. Confidence cannot be manufactured or wished into existence. You either have it, or
you don't. Can't confidence be acquired? Sure, sometimes hard
work—another trait of winning traders—can lead to proficiency,
which can lead to confidence. But even then, until you are truly confident, proceed with great caution in the markets.
Another trait I have noticed among the Market Wizards is that
they approach trading and sometimes other endeavors with an intensity bordering on obsession. Lescarbeau is a perfect example. He
never misses a day—even surgery didn't prevent him from checking
the market. Whenever the performance of his systems failed to meet
his extraordinarily high standards, even though this meant nothing
worse than a break-even quarter or two, he worked incessantly to
develop better systems. Even his recreational activities—for example,
bicycling and weight training—reflect an obsessive streak.

Is there any single trait that is shared by all great traders? Yes, discipline. Lescarbeau's unfailing sense of discipline is clear in all his
actions. He has never decided to hold a position once he gets a sell
signal. If his system tells him to liquidate, he's out—no questions, no
second-guessing, no qualifications. He never thinks "I'll just give it
one more day" or "I'll get out if it goes down another 2 points." For
Lescarbeau, discipline also demands being there every day to check
the system signals and enter the orders. Every day means every day;
no minivacations, no days off—not even after surgery. The essence of
discipline is that there are no exceptions.
Many people are attracted to the markets because they think it is
an easy way to make a lot of money. Ironically, hard work is one of
the key common denominators I have noted among the traders I
have interviewed. Even though Lescarbeau has already developed
trading systems that are incredible—his trading system results are by
far the best 1 have ever seen and beyond anything I even thought
possible—he continues his research without abatement. He doesn't
relax even though what he is using is working and has been working
for years, but instead he plows ahead daily, as if what he is using will
cease to work tomorrow.
Risk control means longevity. Some traders achieve high returns
for many years, but with large equity retracements as a by-product of
their methodology. Although these traders can attain great track
records, they often skate near the edge—and in doing so they are
always in danger of falling. A trader like Lescarbeau, who keeps his
losses very low, has a much higher probability of long-term success.

MICHAEL MASTERS
Swimming Through
the Markets
Five years ago, Masters was an unemployed stockbroker; today, he is one of
the largest stock traders in the country. Masters, an Atlanta-based fund
manager, got his start in the business as a broker, but he never liked it.
After five years and growing frustration, he virtually forced his own firing.
With no other qualifications than desire and confidence, Masters
decided to start his own fund. He raised his start-up capital by selling ten
1-percent shares in his new company at $7,000 per share (an astoundingly fortuitous investment for his initial backers).
In 1995, he launched the Marlin fund, a name that reflects his love
of sportsfishing. During the five years he has managed the hedge fund,
Masters has achieved the extremely rare combination of lofty returns
and low risk: an average annual compounded return of 86 percent, with
only three losing months—the worst a relatively minuscule 3 percent
decline. As of April 2000, assets under management had grown past the
one-half billion dollar mark, reflecting the combined influence of huge
returns and a steady influx of new investors. Total assets would have
been even larger, but Masters had decided to close his fund to new
investment, reflecting his concern that excessive asset growth could
impede performance.
Although its plus-one-half-billion-dollar asset base places Masters
Capital Management among the larger hedge funds, the figure drastically
understates the firm's trading activity. Because of Masters's extremely
high turnover of positions—far more rapid than the industry average—
the firm's level of transactions rivals that of the country's largest hedge
funds and mutual funds.
207

MICHAI

During trading hours Masters's concentration on the market is
intense and all-inclusive. To avoid any interruptions or distractions, he
locks himself in the trading room with the company's trader, Tom Peil.
The firm's research analysts know the computer lock combination and
can gain entry if they have sufficiently urgent market information. With
rare exception, Masters will not accept any phone calls during market

hours. "He is so completely absorbed watching the market," says Peil,
"that when an important call does come in, I can yell at him repeatedly to
pick up the phone, and he won't hear me until I scream something ludicrous like 'purple dragons!'"

Masters is affectionately known as "the big sloppy" by his staff, a
nickname that reflects both his size (six foot five) and the copious amounts
of food he eats at his desk, leaving a wake of leftovers and dirty paper
plates. One of Masters's idiosyncrasies is that he is so used to using a
keyboard to navigate the computer screen—a habit that dates back to the
premouse days when DOS reigned supreme—that he still refuses to use
a mouse except when it is absolutely necessary. "Mike's keyboard clattering is a constant throughout the day," says Peil. "We joke that when
Mike's time comes, they will have to bury him with his keyboard."
Although he quips about Masters's quirks, Peil's admiration for him
comes through very strongly. Peil, a veteran of brokerage firm trading
desks, was enjoying his retirement, trading his own account, when he
met Masters. He was so struck with Masters's character and talent that
he came out of retirement to join the firm as a trader. When I asked Peil
what he found so impressive about Masters, he cited three factors, two
of which were synonymous with honesty: "First, his integrity; second, his
morality; and third, his determination to succeed."
Masters is an openly religious man. During our conversations, he
referred to the importance of his belief in God to his life in general, and
his trading in particular. "Believing in a higher power gives me the
strength to deal with the losses that are an inevitable part of this business. For example, I lost millions of dollars today, which would have been
difficult to handle otherwise." Although Masters didn't mention it himself, I learned that he tithes his income. He also works at a Christian
mission regularly.

S W I M M I N G T H R O U G H THE M A R K E T S

Since I was arriving in Atlanta in the evening and had to catch a connecting flight the next morning, Masters and I decided to conduct the
interview over dinner. Masters suggested a favorite restaurant of his: Bacchanalia. The food was superb, and if you are ever in Atlanta, I can
heartily recommend it, with one caveat: cabdrivers apparently can't find
the place. My cab from the airport got lost, and for all I know the first
two cabs the restaurant called to pick me up are still circling Atlanta.
