
COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 20

If we fail to anticipate the unforeseen or expect the unexpected
in a universe of infinite possibilities, we may find ourselves at
the mercy of anyone or anything that cannot be programmed,
categorized, or easily referenced.
—Agent Fox Mulder, The X-Files

F I R S T, D O N ’ T L O S E
What is risk?
You’ll get different answers depending on whom, and when, you
ask. In 1999, risk didn’t mean losing money; it meant making less
money than someone else. What many people feared was bumping
into somebody at a barbecue who was getting even richer even
quicker by day trading dot-com stocks than they were. Then, quite
suddenly, by 2003 risk had come to mean that the stock market might
keep dropping until it wiped out whatever traces of wealth you still had
left.
While its meaning may seem nearly as fickle and fluctuating as the
financial markets themselves, risk has some profound and permanent
attributes. The people who take the biggest gambles and make the
biggest gains in a bull market are almost always the ones who get hurt
the worst in the bear market that inevitably follows. (Being “right”
makes speculators even more eager to take extra risk, as their confidence catches fire.) And once you lose big money, you then have to
gamble even harder just to get back to where you were, like a racetrack or casino gambler who desperately doubles up after every bad
bet. Unless you are phenomenally lucky, that’s a recipe for disaster.
No wonder, when he was asked to sum up everything he had learned
in his long career about how to get rich, the legendary financier J. K.
525

526

Commentary on Chapter 20

Klingenstein of Wertheim & Co. answered simply: “Don’t lose.” 1 This
graph shows what he meant:

FIGURE 20-1

The Cost of Loss

Value of $10,000 investment

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Years

5% return every year

50% loss in year one, 10% gain every year thereafter

Imagine that you find a stock that you think can grow at 10% a year even if
the market only grows 5% annually. Unfortunately, you are so enthusiastic
that you pay too high a price, and the stock loses 50% of its value the first
year. Even if the stock then generates double the market’s return, it will
take you more than 16 years to overtake the market—simply because you
paid too much, and lost too much, at the outset.

Losing some money is an inevitable part of investing, and there’s nothing you can do to prevent it. But, to be an intelligent investor, you must
take responsibility for ensuring that you never lose most or all of your
money. The Hindu goddess of wealth, Lakshmi, is often portrayed standing on tiptoe, ready to dart away in the blink of an eye. To keep her sym-

1

As recounted by investment consultant Charles Ellis in Jason Zweig, “Wall
Street’s Wisest Man,” Money, June, 2001, pp. 49–52.

18

Commentary on Chapter 20

527

bolically in place, some of Lakshmi’s devotees will lash her statue down
with strips of fabric or nail its feet to the floor. For the intelligent investor,
Graham’s “margin of safety” performs the same function: By refusing to
pay too much for an investment, you minimize the chances that your
wealth will ever disappear or suddenly be destroyed.
Consider this: Over the four quarters ending in December 1999,
JDS Uniphase Corp., the fiber-optics company, generated $673 million in net sales, on which it lost $313 million. Its tangible assets
totaled $1.5 billion. Yet, on March 7, 2000, JDS Uniphase’s stock hit
$153 a share, giving the company a total market value of roughly
$143 billion.2 And then, like most “New Era” stocks, it crashed. Anyone who bought it that day and still clung to it at the end of 2002
faced these prospects:

FIGURE 20-2

Breaking Even Is Hard to Do

Average annual rates of return

5%

84.6

10%

43.3

15%

29.5

20%

22.6

25%

18.5

30%

15.7

40%

12.3

50%

10.2

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Number of years

If you had bought JDS Uniphase at its peak price of $153.421 on March 7,
2000, and still held it at year-end 2002 (when it closed at $2.47), how
long would it take you to get back to your purchase price at various annual
average rates of return?

2

JDS Uniphase’s share price has been adjusted for later splits.

90

528

Commentary on Chapter 20

Even at a robust 10% annual rate of return, it will take more than 43
years to break even on this overpriced purchase!
TH E R I S K I S NOT I N OU R STOCKS,
B U T I N O U R S E LV E S
Risk exists in another dimension: inside you. If you overestimate
how well you really understand an investment, or overstate your ability
to ride out a temporary plunge in prices, it doesn’t matter what you
own or how the market does. Ultimately, financial risk resides not in
what kinds of investments you have, but in what kind of investor you
are. If you want to know what risk really is, go to the nearest bathroom
and step up to the mirror. That’s risk, gazing back at you from the
glass.
As you look at yourself in the mirror, what should you watch for?
The Nobel-prize–winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman explains two
factors that characterize good decisions:
•
•

“well-calibrated confidence” (do I understand this investment as
well as I think I do?)
“correctly-anticipated regret” (how will I react if my analysis
turns out to be wrong?).

To find out whether your confidence is well-calibrated, look in the
mirror and ask yourself: “What is the likelihood that my analysis is
right?” Think carefully through these questions:
•
•
•
•

3

How much experience do I have? What is my track record with
similar decisions in the past?
What is the typical track record of other people who have tried
this in the past?3
If I am buying, someone else is selling. How likely is it that I know
something that this other person (or company) does not know?
If I am selling, someone else is buying. How likely is it that I know
something that this other person (or company) does not know?

No one who diligently researched the answer to this question, and honestly accepted the results, would ever have day traded or bought IPOs.

Commentary on Chapter 20

•

529

Have I calculated how much this investment needs to go up for
me to break even after my taxes and costs of trading?

Next, look in the mirror to find out whether you are the kind of person who correctly anticipates your regret. Start by asking: “Do I fully
understand the consequences if my analysis turns out to be wrong?”
Answer that question by considering these points:
•

•

•

•

If I’m right, I could make a lot of money. But what if I’m wrong?
Based on the historical performance of similar investments, how
much could I lose?
Do I have other investments that will tide me over if this decision
turns out to be wrong? Do I already hold stocks, bonds, or funds
with a proven record of going up when the kind of investment I’m
considering goes down? Am I putting too much of my capital at
risk with this new investment?
When I tell myself, “You have a high tolerance for risk,” how do I
know? Have I ever lost a lot of money on an investment? How did
it feel? Did I buy more, or did I bail out?
Am I relying on my willpower alone to prevent me from panicking
at the wrong time? Or have I controlled my own behavior in
advance by diversifying, signing an investment contract, and dollar-cost averaging?

You should always remember, in the words of the psychologist Paul
Slovic, that “risk is brewed from an equal dose of two ingredients—
probabilities and consequences.” 4 Before you invest, you must ensure
that you have realistically assessed your probability of being right and
how you will react to the consequences of being wrong.
P A S C A L’ S W A G E R
The investment philosopher Peter Bernstein has another way of summing this up. He reaches back to Blaise Pascal, the great French
mathematician and theologian (1623–1662), who created a thought

4

Paul Slovic, “Informing and Educating the Public about Risk,” Risk Analysis, vol. 6, no. 4 (1986), p. 412.

530

Commentary on Chapter 20

experiment in which an agnostic must gamble on whether or not God
exists. The ante this person must put up for the wager is his conduct
in this life; the ultimate payoff in the gamble is the fate of his soul in the
afterlife. In this wager, Pascal asserts, “reason cannot decide” the
probability of God’s existence. Either God exists or He does not—and
only faith, not reason, can answer that question. But while the probabilities in Pascal’s wager are a toss-up, the consequences are perfectly clear and utterly certain. As Bernstein explains:
Suppose you act as though God is and [ you] lead a life of virtue and
abstinence, when in fact there is no god. You will have passed up
some goodies in life, but there will be rewards as well. Now suppose
you act as though God is not and spend a life of sin, selfishness, and
lust when in fact God is. You may have had fun and thrills during the
relatively brief duration of your lifetime, but when the day of judgment
rolls around you are in big trouble.5

Concludes Bernstein: “In making decisions under conditions of
uncertainty, the consequences must dominate the probabilities. We
never know the future.” Thus, as Graham has reminded you in every
chapter of this book, the intelligent investor must focus not just on getting the analysis right. You must also ensure against loss if your analysis turns out to be wrong—as even the best analyses will be at least
some of the time. The probability of making at least one mistake at
some point in your investing lifetime is virtually 100%, and those odds
are entirely out of your control. However, you do have control over the
consequences of being wrong. Many “investors” put essentially all of
their money into dot-com stocks in 1999; an online survey of 1,338
Americans by Money Magazine in 1999 found that nearly one-tenth of
them had at least 85% of their money in Internet stocks. By ignoring
Graham’s call for a margin of safety, these people took the wrong side
of Pascal’s wager. Certain that they knew the probabilities of being

5

“The Wager,” in Blaise Pascal, Pensées (Penguin Books, London and
New York, 1995), pp. 122–125; Peter L. Bernstein, Against the Gods (John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1996), pp. 68–70; Peter L. Bernstein, “Decision
Theory in Iambic Pentameter,” Economics & Portfolio Strategy, January 1,
2003, p. 2.

Commentary on Chapter 20

531

right, they did nothing to protect themselves against the consequences of being wrong.
Simply by keeping your holdings permanently diversified, and refusing to fling money at Mr. Market’s latest, craziest fashions, you can
ensure that the consequences of your mistakes will never be catastrophic. No matter what Mr. Market throws at you, you will always be
able to say, with a quiet confidence, “This, too, shall pass away.”

Postscript

We know very well two partners who spent a good part of their

lives handling their own and other people’s funds on Wall Street.
Some hard experience taught them it was better to be safe and careful rather than to try to make all the money in the world. They
established a rather unique approach to security operations, which
combined good profit possibilities with sound values. They
avoided anything that appeared overpriced and were rather too
quick to dispose of issues that had advanced to levels they deemed
no longer attractive. Their portfolio was always well diversified,
with more than a hundred different issues represented. In this way
they did quite well through many years of ups and downs in the
general market; they averaged about 20% per annum on the several millions of capital they had accepted for management, and
their clients were well pleased with the results.*
In the year in which the first edition of this book appeared an
opportunity was offered to the partners’ fund to purchase a halfinterest in a growing enterprise. For some reason the industry did
not have Wall Street appeal at the time and the deal had been turned
down by quite a few important houses. But the pair was impressed
by the company’s possibilities; what was decisive for them was that
the price was moderate in relation to current earnings and asset
value. The partners went ahead with the acquisition, amounting in
dollars to about one-fifth of their fund. They became closely identified with the new business interest, which prospered.†

* The two partners Graham coyly refers to are Jerome Newman and Benjamin Graham himself.
† Graham is describing the Government Employees Insurance Co., or
GEICO, in which he and Newman purchased a 50% interest in 1948, right
532

Postscript

533

In fact it did so well that the price of its shares advanced to two
hundred times or more the price paid for the half-interest. The
advance far outstripped the actual growth in profits, and almost
from the start the quotation appeared much too high in terms of
the partners’ own investment standards. But since they regarded
the company as a sort of “family business,” they continued to
maintain a substantial ownership of the shares despite the spectacular price rise. A large number of participants in their funds did the
same, and they became millionaires through their holding in this
one enterprise, plus later-organized affiliates.*
Ironically enough, the aggregate of profits accruing from this
single investment decision far exceeded the sum of all the others
realized through 20 years of wide-ranging operations in the partners’ specialized fields, involving much investigation, endless pondering, and countless individual decisions.
Are there morals to this story of value to the intelligent investor?
An obvious one is that there are several different ways to make
and keep money in Wall Street. Another, not so obvious, is that
one lucky break, or one supremely shrewd decision—can we tell
them apart?—may count for more than a lifetime of journeyman
efforts.1 But behind the luck, or the crucial decision, there must
usually exist a background of preparation and disciplined capacity.
One needs to be sufficiently established and recognized so that
these opportunities will knock at his particular door. One must

around the time he finished writing The Intelligent Investor. The $712,500
that Graham and Newman put into GEICO was roughly 25% of their fund’s
assets at the time. Graham was a member of GEICO’s board of directors
for many years. In a nice twist of fate, Graham’s greatest student, Warren
Buffett, made an immense bet of his own on GEICO in 1976, by which time
the big insurer had slid to the brink of bankruptcy. It turned out to be one of
Buffett’s best investments as well.
* Because of a legal technicality, Graham and Newman were directed by the
U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission to “spin off,” or distribute, GrahamNewman Corp.’s GEICO stake to the fund’s shareholders. An investor who
owned 100 shares of Graham-Newman at the beginning of 1948 (worth
$11,413) and who then held on to the GEICO distribution would have had
$1.66 million by 1972. GEICO’s “later-organized affiliates” included Government Employees Financial Corp. and Criterion Insurance Co.

534

The Intelligent Investor

have the means, the judgment, and the courage to take advantage
of them.
Of course, we cannot promise a like spectacular experience to all
intelligent investors who remain both prudent and alert through
the years. We are not going to end with J. J. Raskob’s slogan that we
made fun of at the beginning: “Everybody can be rich.” But interesting possibilities abound on the financial scene, and the intelligent and enterprising investor should be able to find both
enjoyment and profit in this three-ring circus. Excitement is guaranteed.

COMMENTARY ON POSTSCRIPT

S

uccessful investing is about managing risk, not avoiding it. At first
glance, when you realize that Graham put 25% of his fund into a single stock, you might think he was gambling rashly with his investors’
money. But then, when you discover that Graham had painstakingly
established that he could liquidate GEICO for at least what he paid
for it, it becomes clear that Graham was taking very little financial risk.
But he needed enormous courage to take the psychological risk of
such a big bet on so unknown a stock.1
And today’s headlines are full of fearful facts and unresolved risks:
the death of the 1990s bull market, sluggish economic growth, corporate fraud, the specters of terrorism and war. “Investors don’t like
uncertainty,” a market strategist is intoning right now on financial TV or
in today’s newspaper. But investors have never liked uncertainty—and
yet it is the most fundamental and enduring condition of the investing
world. It always has been, and it always will be. At heart, “uncertainty”
and “investing” are synonyms. In the real world, no one has ever been
given the ability to see that any particular time is the best time to buy
stocks. Without a saving faith in the future, no one would ever invest at
all. To be an investor, you must be a believer in a better tomorrow.
The most literate of investors, Graham loved the story of Ulysses,
told through the poetry of Homer, Alfred Tennyson, and Dante. Late in
his life, Graham relished the scene in Dante’s Inferno when Ulysses
describes inspiring his crew to sail westward into the unknown waters
beyond the gates of Hercules:

1

Graham’s anecdote is also a powerful reminder that those of us who are
not as brilliant as he was must always diversify to protect against the risk of
putting too much money into a single investment. When Graham himself
admits that GEICO was a “lucky break,” that’s a signal that most of us cannot count on being able to find such a great opportunity. To keep investing
from decaying into gambling, you must diversify.
535

536

Commentary on Postscript

“O brothers,” I said, “who after a hundred thousand
perils have reached the west,
in this little waking vigil
that still remains to our senses,
let us not choose to avoid the experience
of the unpeopled world that lies behind the sun.
Consider the seeds from which you sprang:
You were made not to live like beasts,
but to seek virtue and understanding.”
With this little oration I made my shipmates
so eager for the voyage
that it would have hurt to hold them back.
And we swung our stern toward the morning
and turned our oars into wings for the wild flight.2

Investing, too, is an adventure; the financial future is always an
uncharted world. With Graham as your guide, your lifelong investing
voyage should be as safe and confident as it is adventurous.

2

Dante Alighieri, The Inferno, Canto XXVI, lines 112–125, translated by
Jason Zweig.

Appendixes

1. The Superinvestors of Graham-and-Doddsville
by Warren E. Buffett

EDITOR’S NOTE: This article is an edited transcript of a talk given at

Columbia University in 1984 commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of
Security Analysis, written by Benjamin Graham and David L. Dodd.
This specialized volume first introduced the ideas later popularized in
The Intelligent Investor. Buffett’s essay offers a fascinating study of how
Graham’s disciples have used Graham’s value investing approach to realize phenomenal success in the stock market.
Is the Graham and Dodd “look for values with a significant
margin of safety relative to prices” approach to security analysis
out of date? Many of the professors who write textbooks today say
yes. They argue that the stock market is efficient; that is, that stock
prices reflect everything that is known about a company’s
prospects and about the state of the economy. There are no undervalued stocks, these theorists argue, because there are smart security analysts who utilize all available information to ensure
unfailingly appropriate prices. Investors who seem to beat the market year after year are just lucky. “If prices fully reflect available
information, this sort of investment adeptness is ruled out,” writes
one of today’s textbook authors.
Well, maybe. But I want to present to you a group of investors
who have, year in and year out, beaten the Standard & Poor’s 500
stock index. The hypothesis that they do this by pure chance is at
537

538

Appendixes

least worth examining. Crucial to this examination is the fact that
these winners were all well known to me and pre-identified as
superior investors, the most recent identification occurring over fifteen years ago. Absent this condition—that is, if I had just recently
searched among thousands of records to select a few names for you
this morning—I would advise you to stop reading right here. I
should add that all these records have been audited. And I should
further add that I have known many of those who have invested
with these managers, and the checks received by those participants
over the years have matched the stated records.
Before we begin this examination, I would like you to imagine a
national coin-flipping contest. Let’s assume we get 225 million
Americans up tomorrow morning and we ask them all to wager a
dollar. They go out in the morning at sunrise, and they all call the
flip of a coin. If they call correctly, they win a dollar from those who
called wrong. Each day the losers drop out, and on the subsequent
day the stakes build as all previous winnings are put on the line.
After ten flips on ten mornings, there will be approximately
220,000 people in the United States who have correctly called ten
flips in a row. They each will have won a little over $1,000.
Now this group will probably start getting a little puffed up
about this, human nature being what it is. They may try to be modest, but at cocktail parties they will occasionally admit to attractive
members of the opposite sex what their technique is, and what
marvelous insights they bring to the field of flipping.
Assuming that the winners are getting the appropriate rewards
from the losers, in another ten days we will have 215 people who
have successfully called their coin flips 20 times in a row and who,
by this exercise, each have turned one dollar into a little over
$1 million. $225 million would have been lost, $225 million would
have been won.
By then, this group will really lose their heads. They will probably write books on “How I Turned a Dollar into a Million in
Twenty Days Working Thirty Seconds a Morning.” Worse yet,
they’ll probably start jetting around the country attending seminars on efficient coin-flipping and tackling skeptical professors
with, “If it can’t be done, why are there 215 of us?”
But then some business school professor will probably be
rude enough to bring up the fact that if 225 million orangutans
