
IF

YOU'RE

SO

RICH

WHY

AREN'T

YOU

SO

SMART?

.

19

AN O V E R P A I D H I C K

Nero also suffered the same ambiguous feeling towards his neighbors.
He was quite contemptuous of John, who represented about everything
he is not and does not want to be - but there was the social pressure that
was starting to weigh in on him. In addition, he too would like to have
sampled such excessive wealth. Intellectual contempt does not control
personal envy. That house across the street kept getting bigger, with
addition after addition - and Nero's discomfort kept apace. While Nero
had succeeded beyond his wildest dreams, both personally and intellectually, he was starting to consider himself as having missed a chance
somewhere. In the pecking order of Wall Street, the arrival of such types
as John had caused him no longer to be a significant trader - but while
he used to not care about this, John and his house and his cars had
started to gnaw away at him. All would have been well if Nero had not
had that stupid large house across the street judging him with a
superficial standard every morning. Was it the genetic pecking order at
play, with John's house size making him a beta male? Worse even, John
was about five years his junior, and, despite a shorter career, was
making at least ten times his income.
When they used to run into each other Nero had a clear feeling that
John tried to put him down - with barely detectable but no less potent
signs of condescension. Some days John ignored him completely. Had
John been a remote character, one Nero could only read about in the
papers, the situation would have been different. But there John was in
flesh and bones and he was his neighbor. The mistake Nero made was to
start talking to him, as the rule of pecking order immediately emerged.
Nero tried to soothe his discomfort by recalling the behavior of Swann,
the character in Proust's In Search of Time Lost, a refined art dealer and
man of leisure who was at ease with such men as his personal friend the
then Prince of Wales, but acted like he had to prove something in the
presence of the middle class. It was much easier for Swann to mix with
the aristocratic and well established set of Guermantes than it was with
the social-climbing one of the Verdurins, no doubt because he was far
more confident in their presence. Likewise Nero can exact some form of
respect from prestigious and prominent people. He regularly takes long
meditative walks in Paris and Venice with an erudite Nobel prize-caliber

20

SOLON'S

WARNING

scientist (the kind of person who no longer has to prove anything) who
actively seeks his conversation. A very famous billionaire speculator calls
him regularly to ask him his opinion on the valuation of some derivative
securities. But there he was obsessively trying to gain the respect of some
overpaid hick with a cheap New Jersey "Noo-Joyzy" accent. (Had I been
in Nero's shoes I would have paraded some of my scorn to John with the
use of body language, but again, Nero is a nice person.)
Clearly, John was not as well educated, well bred, physically fit, or
perceived as being as intelligent as Nero - but that was not all; he was
not even as street-smart as him! Nero has met true street-smart people in
the pits of Chicago who exhibit a rapidity of thinking that he could not
detect in John. Nero was convinced that the man was a confident
shallow-thinker who had done well because he never made an allowance
for his vulnerability. But Nero could not, at times, repress his envy - he
wondered whether it was an objective evaluation of John, or if it was his
feelings of being slighted that led him to such an assessment of John.
Perhaps it was Nero who was not quite the best trader. Maybe if he had
pushed himself harder or had sought the right opportunity - instead of
"thinking", writing articles and reading complicated papers. Perhaps he
should have been involved in the high-yield business, where he would
have shined among those shallow-thinkers like John.
So Nero tried to soothe his jealousy by investigating the rules of
pecking order. Psychologists Kahneman and Tversky showed that most
people prefer to make $70,000 when others around them are making
$60,000 than to make $80,000 when others around them are making
$90,000. Economics, schmeconomics, it is all pecking order, he thought.
No such analysis could prevent him from assessing his condition in an
absolute rather than a relative way. With John, Nero felt that, for all his
intellectual training, he was just another one of those who would prefer
to make less money provided others made even less.
Nero thought that there was at least one piece of evidence to support
the idea of John being merely lucky - in other words Nero, after all,
might not need to move away from his neighbor's starter palazzo. There
was hope that John would meet his undoing. For John seemed unaware
of one large hidden risk he was taking, the risk of blow up, a risk he
could not see because he had too short an experience of the market (but
also because he was not thoughtful enough to study history). How could

IF

YOU'RE

SO

RICH

WHY

AREN'T

YOU

SO

SMART?

.

21

John, with his coarse mind, otherwise be making so much money? This
business of junk bonds depends on some knowledge of the "odds", a
calculation of the probability of the rare (or random) events. What do
such fools know about odds? These traders use "quantitative tools" that
give them the odds - and Nero disagrees with the methods used. This
high-yield market resembles a nap on a railway track. One afternoon,
the surprise train would run you over. You make money every month
for a long time, then lose a multiple of your cumulative performance in a
few hours. He has seen it with option sellers in 1987, 1989, 1992, and
1998. One day they are taken off the exchange floors, accompanied by
oversized security men, and nobody ever sees them again. The big house
is simply a loan; John might end up as a luxury car salesman somewhere
in New Jersey, selling to the new newly rich who no doubt would feel
comfortable in his presence. Nero cannot blow up. His less oversized
abode, with its 4,000 books, is his own. No market event can take it
away from him. Every one of his losses is limited. His trader's dignity
will never, never, be threatened.
John, for his part, thought of Nero as a loser, and a snobbish overeducated loser at that. Nero was involved in a mature business. He
believed that he was way over the hill. "These 'prop' traders are dying",
Jbe used to say. "They think they are smarter than everybody else, but
they are passe".

The Red-Hot

Summer

Finally, in September 1998, Nero was vindicated. One morning while
leaving to go to work he saw John in his front yard unusually smoking a
cigarette. He was not wearing a business suit. He looked humble; his
customary swagger was gone. Nero immediately knew that John had
been fired. What he did not suspect was that John also lost almost
everything he had. We will see more details of John's losses in Chapter 5.
Nero felt ashamed of his feelings of schadenfreude, the joy humans
can experience upon their rivals' misfortune. But he could not repress it.
Aside from it being unchivalrous, it was said to bring bad luck (Nero is

22

SOLON'S

WARNING

weakly superstitious). But in this case, Nero's merriment did not come
from the fact that John went back to his place in life, so much as it was
from the fact that Nero's methods, beliefs, and track-record had
suddenly gained in credibility. Nero would be able to raise public money
on his track record precisely because such a thing could not possibly
happen to him. A repetition of such an event would pay off massively
for him. Part of Nero's elation also came from the fact that he felt proud
of his sticking to his strategy for so long, in spite of the pressure to be the
alpha male. It was also because he would no longer question his trading
style when others were getting rich because they misunderstood the
structure of randomness and market cycles.

SEROTONIN AND RANDOMNESS

Can we judge the success of people by their raw performance and their
personal wealth? Sometimes - but not always. We will see how, at any
point in time, a large section of businessmen with outstanding track
records will be no better than randomly thrown darts. More curiously,
and owing to a peculiar bias, cases will abound of the least-skilled
businessmen being the richest. However, they will fail to make an
allowance for the role of luck in their performance.
Lucky fools do not bear the slightest suspicion that they may be
lucky fools - by definition, they do not know that they belong to such
category. They will act as if they deserved the money. Their strings of
successes will inject them with so much serotonin (or some similar
substance) that they will even fool themselves about their ability to
outperform markets (our hormonal system does not know whether our
successes depend on randomness). One can notice it in their posture; a
profitable trader will walk upright, dominant "style - and will tend to
talk more than a losing trader. Scientists found out that serotonin, a
neurotransmitter, seems to command a large share of our human
behavior. It sets a positive feedback, the virtuous circle, but, owing to
an external kick from randomness, can start a reverse motion and cause
a vicious circle. It has been shown that monkeys injected with serotonin
will rise in the pecking order, which in turn causes an increase of the
serotonin level in their blood - until the virtuous cycle breaks and starts

IF

YOU'RE

SO

RICH

WHY

AREN'T

YOU

SO

SMART?

.

23

a vicious one (during the vicious cycle failure will cause one to slide in
the pecking order, causing a behavior that will bring about further
drops in the pecking order). Likewise, an increase in personal
performance (regardless of whether it is caused deterministically or
by the agency of lady Fortuna) induces a rise of serotonin in the subject,
itself causing an increase of what is commonly called leadership ability.
One is "on a roll". Some imperceptible changes in deportment, like an
ability to express oneself with serenity and confidence, makes the
subject look credible - as if he truly deserved the shekels. Randomness
will be ruled out as a possible factor in the performance, until it rears
its head once again and delivers the kick that will induce the vicious
cycle.
People have often had the bad taste of asking me in a social setting if
my day in trading was profitable. If my father were there, he would
usually stop them by saying "never ask a man if he is from Sparta: if he
were, he would have let you know such an important fact - and if he
were not, you could hurt his feelings". Likewise, never ask a trader if he
is profitable; you can easily see it in his gesture and gait. People in the
profession can easily tell if traders are making or losing money; head
traders are quick at identifying an employee who is faring poorly. Their
..face will seldom reveal much, as people consciously attempt to gain
control of their facial expressions. But the way they walk, the way they
hold the telephone, and the hesitation in their behavior, will not fail to
reveal their true disposition. On the morning after John had been fired,
he certainly lost much of his serotonin - unless it was another substance
that researchers will discover in another decade. One cab driver in
Chicago explained to me that he could tell if traders he picked up near
the Chicago Board of Trade, a futures exchange, were doing well. "They
get all puffed up", he said. I found it interesting (and mysterious) that he
could detect it so rapidly. I later got some plausible explanation from
evolutionary psychology, which claims that such physical manifestations of one's performance in life, just like an animal's dominant
condition, can be used for signaling: it makes the winners seem easily
visible, which is efficient in mate selection.

24

SOLON'S

WARNING

Your Dentist Is Rich, Very Rich
We close this chapter with a hint on the next discussion of resistance to
randomness. Recall that Nero can considered prosperous but not "very
rich" by his day's standards. However, according to some strange
accounting measure we will see in the next chapter, he is extremely rich
on the average of lives he could have led - he takes so little risk in his
trading career that there could have been very few disastrous outcomes.
The fact that he did not experience John's success was the reason he did
not suffer his downfall. He would be therefore wealthy according to this
unusual (and probabilistic) method of accounting for wealth. Recall that
Nero protects himself from the rare event. Had Nero had to relive his
professional life a few million times, very few sample paths would be
marred by bad luck - but, owing to his conservatism, very few as well
would be affected by extreme good luck. That is, his life in stability
would be similar to that of an ecclesiastic clock repairman. Naturally,
we are discussing only his professional life, excluding his (sometimes
volatile) private one.
Arguably, in expectation, a dentist is considerably richer than the
rock musician who is driven in a pink Rolls Royce, the speculator who
bids up the price of impressionist paintings, or the entrepreneur who
collects private jets. For one cannot consider a profession without taking
into account the average of the people who enter it, not the sample of
those who have succeeded in it. We will examine the point later from the
vantage point of the survivorship bias, but here, in Part I, we will look at
it with respect to "resistance to randomness.
Consider two neighbors, John Doe A, a janitor who won the New
Jersey lottery and moved to a wealthy neighborhood, compared to John
Doe B, his next-door neighbor of more modest condition who has been
drilling teeth eight hours a day over the past 35 years. Clearly one can
say that, thanks to the dullness of his career, if John Doe B had to reiive
his life a few thousand times since graduation from dental school, the
range of possible outcomes would be rather narrow (assuming he is
properly insured). At the best, he would end up drilling the rich teeth of
the New York Park Avenue residents, while the worst would show him
drilling those of some semi-deserted town full of trailers in the Catskills.

IF

YOU'RE

SO

RICH

WHY

AREN'T

YOU

SO

SMART?

.

25

Furthermore, assuming he graduated from a very prestigious teethdrilling school, the range of outcomes would be even more compressed.
As to John Doe A, if he had to relive his life a million times, almost all of
them would see him performing janitorial activities (and spending
endless dollars on fruitless lottery tickets), and one in a million would
see him winning the New Jersey lottery.
The idea of taking into account both the observed and unobserved
possible outcomes sounds like lunacy. For most people, probability is
about what may happen in the future, not events in the observed past;
an event that has already taken place has 100% probability, i.e.,
certainty. I have discussed the point with many people who platitudinously accuse me of confusing myth and reality. Myths, particularly
well-aged ones, as we saw with Solon's warning, can be far more potent
(and provide us with more experience) than plain reality.

TWO

A BIZARRE ACCOUNTING METHOD

On alternative histories, a probabilistic view of the world,
intellectual fraud, and the randomness wisdom of a Frenchman
with steady bathing habits. How journalists are bred to not
understand random series of events. Beware borrowed wisdom:
how almost all great ideas concerning random outcomes are
against conventional sapience. On the difference between
correctness and intelligibility.

Alternative History
start with the platitude that one cannot judge a performance in any
given field (war, politics, medicine, investments).by the results, but by
the costs of the alternative (i.e. if history played out in a different way).
Such substitute courses of events are called alternative histories. Clearly,
the quality of a decision cannot be solely judged based on its outcome,
but such a point seems to be voiced only by people who fail (those who
succeed attribute their success to the quality of their decision). Such
opinion is what politicians on their way out of office keep telling those
members of the press who still listen to them that they followed the best

I

A BIZARRE

ACCOUNTING

METHOD

27

course - eliciting the customary commiserating "yes, we know" that
makes the sting even worse. And like many platitudes, this one, while
being too obvious, is not easy to carry out in practice.

RUSSIAN R O U L E T T E

One can illustrate the strange concept of alternative histories as follows.
Imagine an eccentric (and bored) tycoon offering you $10 million to
play Russian roulette, i.e. to put a revolver containing one bullet in the
six available chambers to your head and pull the trigger. Each
realization would count as one history, for a total of six possible
histories of equal probabilities. Five out of these six histories would lead
to enrichment; one would lead to a statistic, that is, an obituary with an
embarrassing (but certainly original) cause of death. The problem is that
only one of the histories is observed in reality; and the winner of $10
million would elicit the admiration and praise of some fatuous journalist
(the very same ones who unconditionally admire the Forbes 500
billionaires). Like almost every executive I have encountered during a
15-year career on Wall Street (the role of such executives in my view
being no more than a judge of results delivered in a random manner),
the public observes the external signs of wealth without even having a
glimpse at the source (we call such source the generator). Consider the
possibility that the Russian roulette winner would be used as a role
model by his family, friends, and neighbors.
While the remaining five histories are not observable, the wise and
thoughtful person could easily make a guess as to their attributes. It
requires some thoughtfulness and personal courage. In addition, in time,
if the roulette-betting fool keeps playing the game, the bad histories will
tend to catch up with him. Thus, if a 25-year-old played Russian
roulette, say, once a year, there would be a very slim possibility of his
surviving his 50th birthday - but, if there are enough players, say
thousands of 25-year-old players, we can expect to see a handful of
(extremely rich) survivors (and a very large cemetery). Here I have to
admit that the example of Russian roulette is more than intellectual to
me. I lost a comrade to this "game" during the Lebanese war, when we
were in our teens. But there is more. I discovered that I had more than a

28

SOLON'S

WARNING

shallow interest in literature thanks to the effect of Graham Greene's
account of his flirt with such a game; it bore a stronger effect on me than
the actual events I had recently witnessed. Greene claimed that he once
tried to soothe the dullness of his childhood by pulling the trigger on a
revolver - making me shiver at the thought that I had at least a one in six
probability of having been without his novels.
The reader can see my unusual notion of alternative accounting: $10
million earned through Russian roulette does not have the same value as
$10 million earned through the diligent and artful practice of dentistry.
They are the same, can buy the same goods, except that one's dependence
on randomness is greater than the other. To an accountant, though, they
would be identical. To your next-door neighbor too. Yet, deep down, I
cannot help but consider them as qualitatively different. The notion of
such alternative accounting has interesting intellectual extensions and
lends itself to mathematical formulation, as we will see in the next
chapter with our introduction of the Monte Carlo engine. Note that such
use of mathematics is only illustrative, aiming at getting the intuition of
the point, and should not be interpreted as an engineering issue. In other
words, one need not actually compute the alternative histories so much
as assess their attributes. Mathematics is not just a "numbers game", it is
a way of thinking. We will see that probability is a qualitative subject.

AN EVEN MORE VICIOUS ROULETTE

Reality is far more vicious than Russian roulette. First, it delivers the
fatal bullet rather infrequently, like a revolver that would have
hundreds, even thousands of chambers instead of six. After a few
dozen tries, one forgets about the existence of a bullet, under a numbing
false sense of security. The point is dubbed in this, book the black swan
problem, which we cover in Chapter 7, as it is linked to the problem of
induction, a problem that has kept a few philosophers of science awake
at night. It is also related to a problem called denigration of history as
gamblers, investors, and decision makers feel that the sort of things that
happen to others would not necessarily happen to them.
Second, unlike a well-defined precise game like Russian roulette,
where the risks are visible to anyone capable of multiplying and dividing

A

BIZARRE

ACCOUNTING

METHOD

29

by six, one does not observe the barrel of reality. Very rarely is the
generator visible to the naked eye. One is thus capable of unwittingly
playing Russian roulette - and calling it by some alternative "low risk"
name. We see the wealth being generated, never the processor, a matter
that makes people lose sight of their risks, and never the losers. The
game seems terribly easy and we play along blithely.

Smooth Peer Relations
The degree of resistance to randomness in one's life is an abstract idea,
part of its logic counterintuitive, and, to confuse matters, its realizations
non-observable. But I have been increasingly devoted to it - for a
collection of personal reasons I will leave for later. Clearly my way of
judging matters is probabilistic in nature; it relies on the notion of what
could have probably happened, and requires a certain mental attitude
with respect to one's observations. I do not recommend engaging an
accountant in a discussion about such probabilistic considerations. For
an accountant a number is a number. If he were interested in probability
he would have gotten involved in more introspective professions - and
would be inclined to make a costly mistake on your tax return.
While we do not see the roulette barrel of reality, some people give it
a try; it takes a special mindset to do so. Having seen hundreds of people
enter and exit my profession (characterized by extreme dependence on
randomness), I have to say that those who have had a modicum of
scientific training tend to go the extra mile. For many, such thinking is
second nature. This might not necessarily come from their scientific
training per se (beware of causality), but possibly from the fact that
people who have decided at some point in their lives to devote
themselves to scientific research tend to have an ingrained intellectual
curiosity and a natural tendency for such introspection. Particularly
thoughtful are those who had to abandon scientific studies because of
their inability to keep focused on a narrowly defined problem. Without
excessive intellectual curiosity it is almost impossible to complete a
Ph.D. thesis these days, but without a desire to narrowly specialize it is
