
 Seabury had an office in the penthouse on the second floor. No one could get in without going past the executive secretary. She also had a secretary. When you got called to his office you had to climb this long stairway. There was a door at the end, a long conference table, and at the other end was Seabury’s desk. 14 

 At noon, he would descend from the leather-appointed ivory tower to a waiting black Cadillac, which would scoot him home for lunch past the working-class wood-frame homes in the South End. Though the mill was visible from his stairway, Stanton had little contact with the rank and file. He saw the men on the night shift once a year, at Christmas, when he somberly descended from the ivory tower to shake their hands—hands that the workers had mischievously coated with grease in anticipation of their boss’s visit. 
 Seabury was also at odds with Otis, his brother. Otis vehemently took issue with Seabury’s strategy of reinvesting in textiles, and was similarly unhappy with Seabury’s insistence on holding down wages at the expense of taking a strike. 15 This division between the brothers began to permeate the company. 
 Otis split his time between New Bedford and the company’s sales office, in New York’s garment district. He was outgoing and warm, and was largely responsible for the success of Hathaway’s fabled rayon suit lining. It was Otis who marketed Hathaway’s synthetic fabrics, including its linings, to “converters,” who dyed and finished them and sold them to suit manufacturers. During the war, when other suppliers had allocated scarce fabrics on the basis of payola, Otis had remained honest. After the war, when supplies became plentiful, his customers, who liked him anyway, paid him back with their business. 
 However, Seabury, whose expertise was in manufacturing, invaded Otis’s turf by setting up a new division to finish fabrics in-house and sell directly to manufacturers—thus cutting out the converters. This looked sensible in New Bedford but overlooked a vital fact of the trade. The weaving business was gentile. The converters were Jewish—as were the garment makers. “You had to live with them to do business with them,” noted Stanley Rubin, a Berkshire vice president for sales in New York. “That was the worst mistake that Seabury made. It was the beginning of the end.” 
 Increasingly, Berkshire was a house divided. When Seabury spoke about the industry’s glorious potential, the people in New York, who marketed the company’s unfinished fabrics—called “grey goods”—snickered. They could see the business sinking before their eyes. One time, a Berkshire salesman was with a customer on Fifth Avenue, trying to sell handkerchief cloth. The customer pointed out his window to the women going into Lord & Taylor and said, “You see all those women carrying pocketbooks? There is a box of Kleenex in every one. And that’s the end of the handkerchief business.” 16 
 By the end of 1961, Berkshire was down to seven plants. In the previous three years alone, it had plowed $11 million back into the business. 17 And while its mills were enhanced, its business was not. Its “regular plain weave” fabrics were commodities—indistinguishable from those of any other manufacturer. When competitors flooded the market, Berkshire was helpless. Thus, in 1962, the year that its modernization was complete, it suffered a crushing $2.2 million loss. 
 By then, the blood feud between Seabury and Otis was boiling over Seabury’s plan to pass the reins to his son. Jack Stanton was tall, thin, and stony-faced, like his father, but his misty blue eyes bespoke a sadness. Jack had followed Seabury to Harvard and into a world war, and had thrown a couple of no-hitters in the marines. The Philadelphia Athletics invited him to camp, but Seabury forbade it. The dutiful son gave up baseball and went to work on the looms, “shoulder to shoulder, all greased up.” By 1962, dour Jack was treasurer. Seabury, then seventy, was planning to work a few more years and make him president. Otis and Malcolm Chace each thought Jack was unqualified and secretly began to look for someone else. 
 On Wall Street, Berkshire’s stock was out of favor. Richard N. Tillison, a security analyst with Value Line, had recommended the shares at the beginning of 1955, at a price of 14¾. From then on, Tillison had suffered through years of oversupplied markets and shuttered mills. By early 1963, the stock was at 8⅛—down 45 percent from his original call. 
 But hope in the breast of a textile analyst never dies. In March 1963, Tillison reported that the outlook for Berkshire “now appears more promising than it has for a considerable time.” In June, he crawled without his shell and predicted a modest quarterly profit. Alas, in September, he was forced to postpone his hopes once more: 

 Berkshire is not now expected to break into the earnings column, as was earlier thought possible, because the rapid movement of many cotton textile producers into blended fabrics has caused temporary price weakness.… 18 

 No profit “now” on account of “temporary” weakness. And so it had been for eight long years. 
 According to economic theory, when a company is so mismanaged, sooner or later an investor will decide that he can do more with its assets and take it over. It happened that Buffett had run across Berkshire at the same time as Tillison, when he was working for Graham-Newman, in the 1950s. 19 Howard Newman had gone to look at Berkshire and had come close to making an offer for it. Buffett was merely an observer of the company’s troubles until late in 1962, when the stock fell below $8 a share. Since Berkshire had $16.50 per share of working capital, it seemed to be a bargain, and Buffett bought some stock, via his partnership. However, he had no thought of a takeover. He approached it as he did any other stock, assuming that he would hold for a couple of years or so. 
 But with Buffett’s interest piqued, Daniel Cowin, a New York broker friend, found several large blocks of stock for him. 20 By 1963, Buffett Partnership was the company’s biggest shareholder. 21 For a while, Buffett was able to keep his identity as a shareholder secret, and Cowin, playing the role of Buffett’s stalking horse, took a seat on Berkshire’s board. 22 
 Then, word leaked out that Cowin’s client was Buffett. Stanley Rubin, the Berkshire sales executive, who knew Buffett, called to see if he was planning to buy more. 
 Buffett said coyly, “I may or I may not.” Still, nobody seemed to realize that Buffett might be up to something. 
 A short time later, Buffett visited the mill. When he found that Jack Stanton had copies of Berkshire’s financials going back to the 1920s, he got very excited and quickly made copies of them. Then he asked to see some of the plants. Jack recalled, “I was very busy, so we sent Ken Chace with him.” 
 This was the mistake of Jack’s life. Otis was already considering Ken Chace (no relation to Malcolm) as a candidate to succeed Seabury—though, of course, neither Seabury nor Jack, who coveted the throne for himself, had any idea of it. Chace, an unpretentious late-fortyish chemical engineer who drove a Chevrolet, was also a local boy. He had attended something called the New Bedford Textile School, joined Hathaway in 1947 to work on synthetic fibers, and worked his way up to the lofty position of vice president of manufacturing. 
 For two days, the square-jawed Chace took Buffett through the mills. They must have looked to Buffett like something out of Samuel Slater’s sketchbook—the thick wads of cotton-candy raw stock disappearing into giant hoppers, their fibers being combed into glossy, transparent webs, their ropelike strands being twisted into yarn on hundreds of spinning frames, aligned like soldiers. Whatever Buffett grasped of it, there was something compelling in their unsung industry, something close to the soul of New England. According to Chace: 

 Warren asked questions like crazy. About the marketing, the machinery, about what I thought should be done, where I thought the company was going, the technical end of it, what kind of products were we selling, who we were selling to. He wanted to know everything. 

 Chace spoke candidly about the company’s problems, and Buffett decided he had found his man. Buffett didn’t say much, but when the tour was over, he dropped an intriguing clue. 
 “I’ll be in touch with you, Ken.” 
 Meanwhile, Stanton finally sensed that he was under siege. In 1964, Berkshire made repeated offers to buy back shares—thereby raising the proportion of stock under Stanton’s control. Buffett was on the brink of selling out to him, but he thought that Stanton was chiseling him on the price. 
 “They were three-eighths of a point apart” or Buffett would have sold, according to Charlie Munger. “It was an absolute accident that Berkshire became his vehicle.” 
 As a corporate vehicle, Berkshire had nothing to recommend it. But now, Buffett, who felt that Stanton hadn’t been square with him, 23 was unwilling to step aside. He and Stanton were bitterly at odds over an understanding that Buffett felt had come undone—though Buffett, as usual, let someone else do his fighting. 
 Dan Cowin and Stanton had a heated argument over it in the ivory tower. Stanton loudly proclaimed that no one would tell him what to do. Knowing that Cowin was representing Buffett, Edmund Rigby, an executive vice president, rushed in and warned Stanton, “You shouldn’t talk that way to a major shareholder.” 
 Events now rushed to a climax. Ken Chace, the plainspoken executive who had shown Buffett the plant, was so worried about Berkshire’s future that he had been talking to a competitor in South Carolina. Stanley Rubin called Chace early in 1965 and pleaded with him to stay put. When Chace asked why, Rubin mysteriously told him to take his word for it. 
 A month or so later, Rubin called again. “You remember that Warren Buffett fellow? He’s going to control Berkshire Hathaway. He’s been holding stock under Street [brokerage-house] names.” Rubin said Buffett had something to discuss with Chace and wanted Chace to meet him at the Plaza Hotel in New York. 
 It was one of the first fine days of spring. Buffett and Chace walked to the little park in front, and Buffett bought a couple of ice cream bars on sticks. 
 Wasting no time, Buffett said, “I’d like to have you become president of Berkshire Hathaway. How do you feel about that?” 
 Chace was forty-eight. The man who was proposing to catapult his career was thirty-four. 
 By the time Chace could blurt out his consent, Buffett added that he had enough stock to pull it off at the next directors’ meeting, and that Chace should keep quiet in the meantime. As regards Berkshire’s future, he said, “Figure out what you’ll need. It’ll be your baby.” Buffett was finished with him in ten minutes. Chace left in a state of shock. 
 What he didn’t know was that Buffett had gone to the chairman, Malcolm Chace, and offered to buy him out. Chace refused, citing his long history with the company, but some of Chace’s family agreed to sell. 
 Buffett had one hill left to climb. Would Otis Stanton sell his shares—and undermine his brother? Stanley Rubin set up a lunch with Buffett and Otis at the Wamsutta Club in New Bedford. After Buffett made his pitch, Otis agreed to sell—provided that Buffett make an equivalent offer to buy out Seabury. That was the break. Though Jack was primed for a proxy fight, Seabury didn’t have the stomach for it. With the Stantons’ shares, Buffett Partnership owned 49 percent of the stock, at an average cost of about $15 a share. 24 
 Jack Stanton, who had been too busy to show Buffett the plant, now realized—too late—that he ought to meet with him. Jack and his then wife, Kitty, hurried to New York and had breakfast with Warren and Susie at the Plaza. But Jack was awed, and in over his head. According to Ralph Rigby, a fabric salesman, Kitty pled harder than Jack did. Buffett joked later, “If I had hired anybody, I would have hired Kitty.” 
 Perhaps eager to change the subject, Buffett told Jack about his own career, recounting his rise as an investor. Jack asked, “How do you do it?” Buffett said he read “a couple of thousand” financial statements a year. 
 Shortly before the May board meeting, Buffett was secretly named a director. 25 On the morning of his big takeover, Buffett flew into New Bedford, crew-cut, his suit tightly buttoned and noticeably creased, with an attaché and an oversized valise and something of the appearance of a down-at-the-heels but earnest traveling salesman. 
 Buffett made for the office on Cove Street, and Seabury emerged from the ivory tower for a final time. Calling the meeting to order, Seabury read through the agenda, showing nothing. And then Seabury Stanton resigned. It merely remained to pass the poison cup to Jack. Without a word, the two stormed out of the elegant wood-paneled boardroom. Ken Chace was voted president, Buffett chairman of the executive committee. Otis, in a final stab at his brother, voted with the majority and remained on the board. Though Malcolm Chace retained the title of board chairman, Buffett was now in charge of Berkshire. The stock closed that day—May 10, 1965—at $18 a share. 
 Buffett’s tidy script was nearly wrecked when a messenger burst in with a copy of the afternoon Standard-Times , revealing the shake-up on the front page. Seabury had leaked the story, blaming his departure on a rift with “certain outside interests.” 26 Buffett, fearing he would be seen as a liquidator—the hated epithet from Dempster Mill—was visibly enraged. But he papered it over in public, praising the departing Stantons and soft-pedaling his plans. Quoted in the next day’s edition, Buffett promised “to sell the same goods from the same plants to the same customers.” 
 Over the previous decade, Berkshire had closed all but two of its mills and accumulated a net loss of $10.1 million. 27 Its assets had shrunk by half, and merely 2,300 workers—one of every five from the 1955 merger—remained. But its fortunes now seemed on the mend. Demand for synthetics was strong, and the company was—finally—in the black. One yearns to hear what Tillison would have made of Buffett’s arrival, but, alas, the dutiful analyst was benched at the same juncture as Seabury Stanton. Value Line’s May report on Berkshire was signed by a new analyst, who observed that the plans of “the new controlling interest” were not known. 
 After the board meeting, Buffett and Ken Chace strolled past the historic mill and sat down to talk. Chace now made ready to hear the new owner’s plans for the mill. But Buffett said anything to do with warps and looms would be up to Chace. Buffett would watch the money. 
 Then, in his blunt fashion, he outlined what each of them should expect. The first point was deflating: Buffett would not approve of stock options for Chace or for anyone else. 
 Buffett opposed options for the reason that most CEOs were enamored of them. Options conferred potential—sometimes vast—rewards, but spared the recipients any risk, thus giving executives a free ride on the shareholders’ capital. 
 More subtly, Buffett wanted managers whose personal interests were in line with those of the stockholders. A manager who owned options, as distinct from shares, had nothing to lose, and would be more inclined to gamble with the shareholders’ capital. 
 However, Buffett offered to cosign a loan so that Chace could borrow $18,000 and buy a thousand shares. For Chace, who was making less than $30,000, and who normally didn’t like to borrow a shoelace, that was a huge amount. But Buffett was a supersalesman, especially when he was selling himself. Like some of those early partnership investors, Chace had a feeling that good things would happen with Buffett in charge. Chace took the plunge. 
 Then Buffett explained to Chace the basic theory of return on investment. He didn’t particularly care how much yarn Chace produced, or even how much he sold. Nor was Buffett interested in the total profit as an isolated number. What counted was the profit as a percentage of the capital invested . That was the yardstick by which Buffett would grade Chace’s performance. 
 To Chace, who had been reared, like most managers, to think of growth as an absolute good, this idea was new. But he grasped that it was pivotal to Buffett’s capitalist credo, and Buffett put it in terms that Chace could understand. 
 “I’d rather have a $10 million business making 15 percent than a $100 million business making 5 percent,” Buffett said. “ I have other places I can put the money .” He flew back to Omaha that night. 
 Buffett was serious about having “other places” to put the money. He leaned on Chace to keep the inventory and overhead as low as possible. As Chace said, “One thing Buffett wanted was to come up with cash quickly.” 
 Buffett also followed through with his promise of autonomy. He told Chace not to bother with quarterly projections and other time-wasters. He merely wanted Chace to send him a monthly financial report and to warn him of any unpleasant surprises. 
 Indeed, Buffett sculpted the relationship to get the most out of it with a minimum of personal contact. He was easy to reach, but this had the perverse effect of restraining Chace from calling except when he really needed to. And when Chace did call, Buffett didn’t linger on the phone. 
 “I’d give the results, and the estimate for the year, and he’d remember them forever,” Chace noted. 
 Once, Buffett said Chace had switched a figure from an earlier call—which Chace disputed. After he checked his notes, Chace saw that Buffett was right. From then on, he carefully checked his data before he called. 
 Chace’s freedom had one boundary. Only Buffett could allocate capital. And as most of the previous capital that Seabury had poured into textiles had gone for naught, Buffett was extremely reluctant to put in more. 
 Still, Chace tried. He would propose an investment, backed by careful research and good-looking projections. And Buffett would reply, “Ken, you won’t beat the historical average.” 
 J. Verne McKenzie, Berkshire’s treasurer, who had gotten to know Buffett as the outside auditor for Buffett Partnership, said, “Try to remember, Ken. Warren uses the same rule for measuring a $5,000 investment as he does for $5 million.” 
 During the first two years of the Buffett/Chace regime, textile markets boomed. Profits were earned; however, they were not reinvested in textiles. Chace trimmed inventories and fixed assets, just as Buffett had demanded. In a symbolic step, he abandoned the ivory tower. And the company’s cash position grew. 28 Buffett paid out a meager ten-cent dividend in 1967—but quickly thought better of it. ‡ From then on, Buffett hung on to the money—just as he said he would. 
 To Berkshire’s shareholders, most of whom lived in New England, there was no outward sign that the big decisions were being made in Omaha. The headquarters remained in New Bedford, and the annual reports were signed by Ken Chace and Malcolm Chace. But a close reader of those reports might have wondered at the hand behind the tiller. 

 The Company has been searching for suitable acquisitions within, and conceivably without, the textile field. 29 

 Shortly after those words were written, Buffett struck. For some time, he had been studying an Omaha insurance firm, National Indemnity Co. The majority owner was Jack Ringwalt, who had once laughed off Buffett’s request for a $50,000 investment in the partnership. Since then, Ringwalt had heard about Buffett’s record, and Buffett had learned a lot about Ringwalt. 
 A college dropout with a rogue wit, Ringwalt had started by providing insurance for taxicabs in the Depression. This led him to conclude that the way to make money was to write policies for risks that other insurers did not want to touch. 

 This was particularly true in my case since my competitors had more friends, more education, more determination, and more personality than I. 30 § 

