back the stock piecemeal. The act requires buyers to make a “tender offer” that puts all sellers on a level
playing field under the same price and terms.
28. According to Fred Stanback, when Buffett had “bought all he could pay for,” he also let Stanback start
buying.
29. A year later, Buffett sold the National American stock for around $125 (to the best of his memory) to J.
M. Kaplan, a New York businessman who had reorganized and headed Welch’s Grape Juice in the 1940s and
’50s and was later known for his philanthropy. Kaplan eventually sold the stock back to Howard Ahmanson.
30. See, for example, Bill Brown, “The Collecting Mania,” University of Chicago Magazine, Vol. 94, No. 1.,
October 2001.
31. Interview with Chuck Peterson. This was insurance proceeds from her husband’s estate. By then, Buffett
had decided to offer his partners several choices of risk versus reward. Mrs. Peterson chose a fee structure

that shifted more of both to Warren. He had to beat the market by 6%, not 4%, before earning anything. But
he got one third of everything he made above that. Under this structure, only Warren’s capital was at risk for
the 25% payback-of-losses provision. Certificate of Limited Partnership, Underwood Partnership, Ltd., June
12, 1957.
32. Arthur Wiesenberger, Investment Companies. New York: Arthur W. Wiesenberger & Co., released
annually from 1941.
33. United States & International Securities Corp. was formed amid much fanfare in October 1928 by Dillon,
Read & Co. and promptly sank into ignominy, becoming a cigar butt by 1950. Clarence Dillon, the founder of
Dillon, Read, was called before the Pecora hearings in 1933 to explain how Dillon, Read obtained control of
US&IS and US&FS, which were capitalized at $90 million, for $5 million.
34. Quote is from Lee Seeman. Buffett confirms the substance of the statement. The intriguing question is
who or what prompted Wiesenberger to make the phone call.
35. Lee Seeman’s recollection in an interview is that Dorothy Davis made the comparison.
36. Buffett, recalling a conversation with Eddie Davis.
37. Dacee resembled the Buffett Fund. Buffett was credited 25% of any profits over a 4% hurdle rate.
Certificate of Limited Partnership, Dacee Ltd., August 9, 1957.
38. Congressional records note a Washington, D.C., furniture store was giving away shares of uranium stock
with any purchase for a Washington’s Birthday sale. (Stock Market Study, Hearings before the Committee on
Banking and Currency of the United States Senate, March 1955.)
39. Monen had also invested in a small real estate partnership with Warren and Chuck Peterson. The money
from this, a profit from National American, and likely some personal savings had, in short order, made him
one of Buffett’s largest partners.
40. Above a 4% to 6% “bogey.” He benchmarked himself against the rate of long-term government bonds,
telling his partners that if he could not do better than that, he should not get paid. The wide range of profitsharing reflected the varying level of risk Warren was taking. In the partnerships that paid him the most, he
also had unlimited liability to pay back losses.
41. Buffett was charging 25% of the partnership’s appreciation in excess of 6%.
42. Meg Mueller, in an interview, recalls its size relative to other houses on the street at the time.
43. Reynolds was a city councilman. “Sam Reynolds Home Sold to Warren Buffett,” Omaha World-Herald,
February 9, 1958. “Buffett’s Folly” was referred to in a letter to Jerry Orans, March 12, 1958, cited in Roger
Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Doubleday, 1996.
44. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
45. Interview with Howie Buffett.
46. Pyelonephritis, sometimes associated with pregnancy.
47. As quoted in Lowenstein, Buffett. Billig is now deceased.
48. Interview with Charlie Munger.
49. In interviews, Dr. Marcia Angle recalls the TV being acquired in the late 1950s and how much it
impressed her father. Kelsey Flower and Meg Mueller recall its impact on the neighborhood.

50. Interviews with Howie Buffett, Peter Buffett, Susie Buffett Jr.
51. Interview with Thama Friedman. Laurette Eves was the third partner.
52. Interview with Howie Buffett.
53. Kuhlken had introduced Cowin to Buffett in 1951 on one of Buffett’s trips back to New York after his
graduation from Columbia.
54. From Buffett’s eulogy for Cowin.
55. From Joyce Cowin’s eulogy for Cowin.
56. Marshall Weinberg, Tom Knapp, Ed Anderson, Sandy Gottesman, Buffett, and others contributed to this
portrait of Cowin.
57. “He lent me unsecured. A dollar of short-term loss offset two dollars of long-term gain for tax
purposes, and you could buy a mutual fund that was going to pay a long-term capital-gains dividend and
redeem it immediately thereafter to offset a long-term gain going into the end of the year. I bought a
combination of long-term gain and short-term loss, which, though equal in amount, had different effects on
your tax return. It was all legit then; you can’t do it anymore. It probably saved me a thousand dollars.
Boy, it was huge,” says Buffett.
58. Interview with Joyce Cowin.
59. This was an experimental town built to house 1,800 families in low-cost units. Numerous government
properties were auctioned off after World War II. “House Passes Bill to Speed Greenbelt Sale,” Washington
Post, April 14, 1949; “U.S. Sells Ohio Town It Built in Depression,” New York Times, December 7, 1949;
“Greenbelt, Md., Sale Extended for 30 Days,” Washington Post, May 31, 1952.
60. Chuck Peterson paraphrased this quote from the version of the story he heard. It is probably correct in
substance, but, as with all quotes recalled from memory, the exact wording is in doubt.
Chapter 23
1. “A. C. Munger, Lawyer, Dies,” Omaha World-Herald, July 1, 1959.
2. The obituary of Henry A. Homan, son of George W. Homan, in the Omaha World-Herald, March 22,
1907, mentions that Homan, who was twelve years older than Judge Munger, was a close friend of the judge.
The Homan and Buffett sides of the families, however, were not close.
3. “33 Years a Federal Judge,” Omaha World-Herald, March 12, 1939.
4. Charles Munger letter to Katharine Graham, November 13, 1974. When Judge Munger died, this same
aunt Ufie (Ruth) reportedly made the bizarre claim that he must have been taken by God’s grace because of a
mistake he’d made recently in arithmetic. She said she knew “he couldn’t stay on after that.”
5. Lowe, Damn Right!: Behind the Scenes with Berkshire Hathaway Billionaire Charlie Munger. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000. Lowe’s biography, which is based on extensive family interviews, was the
author’s principal source for the Munger family history.
6. Said approvingly in Lowe, Damn Right!
7. Interview with Lee Seeman.

8. Interview with Mary McArthur Holland.
9. Interview with Howard Jessen, a friend of the Buffetts’.
10. His grandfather, a prominent Omaha lawyer, was a friend of Dean Roscoe Pound, the dean of Harvard
Law School.
11. Munger made no effort to burnish a résumé by, for example, joining the Law Review. In an interview, he
described himself as relatively aloof.
12. His father also gave him this advice.
13. Lowe, Damn Right!
14. As quoted in Lowe, Damn Right!
15. Munger, as told to Janet Lowe in Damn Right!
16. In Damn Right!, Munger compared getting married to investing. Nancy said he was “uptight” about
showing emotions. His son Charles Jr. said, “There are some things my dad could deal with better if he faced
them more” but “he just walks away.”
17. Munger, as quoted in Lowe, Damn Right!
18. Ibid.
19. In Damn Right!, Nancy says that Charlie “was not much of a helpmate around the house.” For her
seventieth birthday, Buffett says he went to a pawn shop and got her a Purple Heart.
20. Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist. New York: Doubleday, 1996.
21. Lowe, Damn Right!
22. Interview with Charlie Munger.
23. Interview with Lee Seeman.
24. In a year when the Dow was up 38.5%, Warren had managed to beat it, taking minimal risk.
25. In addition to his $100 stake in Buffett Associates, Buffett had later put $100 into each of his other
partnerships: Buffett Fund, B-C, Underwood, Dacee, Mo-Buff, and Glenoff.
26. Interview with Lee Seeman.
27. This version differs from some others that have been published. For example, Susie Buffett has said that
she was present. Several writers have set the meeting at a dinner at Johnny’s Café. Roger Lowenstein,
however, also set the meeting at the Omaha Club. Most likely, other versions are conflations of later events.
To the author, Seeman’s version is the most detailed yet has the least embellished air.
28. Interview with Charlie Munger. The dinner is reconstructed from interviews with Buffett and Munger,
whose memories are hazy. Nancy Munger doesn’t remember. The wives were introduced soon after the first
meeting, and Johnny’s is the most likely location. Buffett recalls Munger’s self-intoxication clearly.
Chapter 24
1. Estimated. Buffett was managing $878,211 at the end of 1958 in six partnerships. The $50,000 Glenoff

Partnership was formed in February 1959. By the end of 1959, the partnerships’ market value had grown to
$1,311,884. His personal funds and Buffett & Buffett increased this total.
2. Sanborn sent its customers paste-over revisions each year showing new construction, changed occupancy,
new fire-protection facilities, and changed structural materials. A new map was published every few decades.
Buffett took note of the company, as far as he recalls, when a large block of stock came up for sale. The
widow of the deceased president was reportedly selling 15,000 shares because her son was leaving the
company. Phil Carret owned 12,000 shares.
3. Five or ten shares apiece, forty-six shares in total.
4. Buffett had become friendly with the company’s CEO, Parker Herbell, whom he said the rest of the board
treated as an “errand boy.” Herbell supported the plan to separate the investments from the map business,
and had facilitated some of its underpinnings, such as this study.
5. “It does not make sense to have management, consultants, and major stockholders in complete agreement
regarding a course of action but unable to proceed because of directors owning an insignificant amount of
stock.” Warren Buffett letter to C. P. Herbell, September 25, 1959.
6. In those days, appreciated shares could be exchanged for a company’s own shares. So a company could
get rid of the capital-gains tax that was inherent in an operation if it just sold stock from time to time.
7. As part of the deal, the Buffett partnerships agreed to tender their stock.
8. Interview with Doris Buffett.
9. Interview with Kelsey Flower, a childhood friend of Susie Jr.’s.
10. Interview with Dick and Mary Holland.
11. Interview with Peter Buffett.
12. Interview with Howie Buffett.
13. Ibid.
14. Gateway, May 26, 1961.
15. “Paul Revere’s Ride,” Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Listen my children, and you shall hear of the
multitudes rescued by Susan Buffett.
16. From remarks made by Eisenberg at Susie’s funeral.
17. According to his autobiography, Stranger to the Game (written with Lonnie Wheeler, New York:
Penguin, 1994), Bob Gibson lived in Omaha in the off season. He talks about playing basketball in Omaha
with a white team in 1964, traveling to Iowa for games, and hanging out at a bar on North 30th Street. The
bartender wouldn’t serve him.
18. Howard Buffett quoted in Paul Williams, “Buffett Tells Why He Joined Birch Society,” Benson Sun,
April 6, 1961.
19. The Christian Anti-Communist Crusade was founded in 1953 by “a crisp, energetic, self-confident
Austrian,” Fred Schwarz, who was a physician, psychiatrist, and lay preacher. It used media to spread its
anti-Communist philosophy. Cabell Phillips, “Physician Leads Anti-Red Drive with ‘Poor Man’s Birch
Society,’” New York Times, April 30, 1961. See the CACC website, http://www.schwarzreport.org/.

20. Leila Buffett letter to Dr. Hills, December 10, 1958.
21. Leila Buffett to Mrs. Kray, May 23, 1960.
22. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr. and Howie Buffett. They recall their father’s behavior during this period
as routine and, with hindsight, as a form of denial.
23. Interview with Howie Buffett.
24. Interview with Chuck Peterson.
25. According to Chuck Peterson, Carol Angle “did not hear well.” This is a example of Buffett’s
raconteuring. She says she had progressive hearing loss.
26. Interview with Lee Seeman.
27. Interview with Dick Holland.
28. Interviews with Frank Matthews Jr. and Walter Schloss, who agree that Schloss introduced them on the
street corner.
29. This is how hedge funds are commonly managed to stay within the legal investor limit today.
30. George Payne was also a founding member of this partnership. By then, B-C had been folded into
Underwood. Along with the ten partnerships, Warren and his father were still operating Buffett & Buffett.
31. The Dow’s results include dividends received. Note that this was the performance for the partnership
before Warren’s fees.
32. Interview with Chuck Peterson.
33. Interviews with Kelsey Flower, Meg Mueller.
34. Interview with Stan Lipsey.
35. Buffett was 31 on January 1, 1962, but his personal investments and gains in the partnership had taken
him past the million-dollar mark months earlier, when he was still 30.
36. Interview with Bill Scott.
37. Buffett waived his fee for Scott, one of the two most lucrative arrangements he ever made with an
employee. (See Henry Brandt in “Haystacks of Gold” and “Folly” for the other.)
38. He put in everything except his investment in Data Documents, a personal investment in a private
company.
39. Letter to partners, July 6, 1962. In the second quarter of 1962, the Dow fell from 723.5 to 561.3, or 23%.
In the first half of that year, the partnership saw a loss before payments to partners of 7.5%, compared with a
loss of 21.7% including dividends for the Dow—the partners had a14.2% outperformance.
40. Buffett’s phrase is a clever reworking of Graham’s original. In The Intelligent Investor: “The sovereign
virtue of all formula plans lies in the compulsion they bring upon the investor to sell when the crowd is
buying and to buy when the crowd lacks confidence” (Intelligent Investor, Part I: General Approaches to
Investment VI: Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side, 1949 edition). And in
Security Analysis: “It would require bond investors to act with especial caution when things are booming and
with greater confidence when times are hard” (Security Analysis, Part II: Fixed-Value Investments, XI:

Specific Standards for Bond Investment, 1940 edition).
Chapter 25
1. Warren Buffett typewritten file memo, undated.
2. Warren Buffett letter to Bob Dunn, June 27, 1958.
3. Note from Jack Thomsen to Warren Buffett, March 8, 1958: “I think we have to be realistic and
reorganize on a basis that has a reasonable chance of working…the only thing that Clyde is concerned about
is prestige…. Hale received a letter from Clyde yesterday to notify him that he was being removed as trustee
of his estate. I am certain the same rancor is and will be held for all of us who have dared to oppose him…. I
do feel sorry for him in his present predicament but I do not think we can correct our problems with
sympathy.”
4. Interview with Verne McKenzie, who says Buffett explained this to him when he hired him. Without a
public exit strategy, this is one of only two ways to realize the value of the assets. Buffett had not yet figured
out the other one, as the reader will see.
5. Interview with Walter Schloss.
6. Warren Buffett letter to Clyde Dempster, April 11, 1960.
7. Warren Buffett note to Bob Dunn, June 27, 1958: “…has become increasingly less active in the business
and it appeared the company was just drifting with him not interested and no one else having the authority to
do anything…. We finally got the job accomplished by letting Clyde stay as president.” He gave Jack
Thomsen, executive vice president, temporary operating authority.
8. Interview with Walter Schloss.
9. At $30.25 per share. Warren Buffett letter to Dempster shareholders, September 7, 1961.
10. Warren Buffett letter to partners, July 22, 1961.
11. “Dempster had earned good money in the past, but was currently only breaking even. “We continued to
buy the stock in small quantities for five years. During most of this period I was a director and was becoming
consistently less impressed with the earnings prospects under existing management. However, I also became
more familiar with the assets and operations and my evaluation of the quantitative factors remained very
favorable,” thus leading him to continue buying stock. Letter to partners, January 24, 1962.
12. And water-system parts—as the demand for windmills was waning.
13. “We had parts for windmills and certain farm equipment,” says Scott, “where we had a lock on the
business and by repricing it could stop losing money down there. And we were successful to some degree.”
14. January 18, 1963.
15. Interview with Bill Scott.
16. “Still a Chance City Can Keep Dempster,” Beatrice Daily Sun, September 1, 1963; “Drive to Keep
Dempster Rolls,” Omaha World-Herald, September 30, 1963.
17. As Buffett’s successor, Dempster’s chairman W. B. McCarthy, put it, “We understand, as I am sure you
do, that a number of the people in Beatrice do not recognize the fine, necessary job that you and Harry
accomplished with Dempster.” W. B. McCarthy letter to Warren Buffett, November 19, 1963.

18. Of the $2.8 million total financing, $1.75 million went to pay the sellers and the remainder to expand the
operation. “Launch 11th Hour Effort to Keep Dempster Plant Here,” Beatrice Daily Sun, August 29, 1963.
19. “Beatrice Raises $500,000,” Lincoln Evening Journal, September 3, 1963; “Fire Sirens Hail Victory,
Beatrice Gets Funds to Keep Dempster,” Omaha World-Herald, September 4, 1963; “Contracts for
Dempster Sale Get Signatures,” Beatrice Daily Sun, September 12, 1963.
20. The partnership made $2.3 million, almost three times its investment. Buffett changed the name of the
holding company to First Beatrice Corp. and moved its headquarters to Kiewit Plaza.
Chapter 26
1. The speakers appeared as individuals who happened to belong to different groups rather than
“representatives” of their races and faiths. All went well, except once, says Doris Buffett, when a Protestant
panelist started telling the Catholic and the Jew that they were going to hell.
2. The black workers were squeezed out of jobs as Omaha’s packinghouse industry shrank. Marginalized into
a ghetto north of downtown called the Near North Side, they lived in dilapidated, aging tenements for which
unscrupulous landlords charged high rents. In 1957, the Omaha Plan, a communitywide study, proposed
redevelopment of the Near North Side, but bond issues were defeated. A budding civil-rights movement led
by college students at Creighton University, the Urban League, and other civic groups had worked to improve
black employment and end segregation of teachers in the public schools since 1959.
3. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr., who wondered what good the police whistle was going to do.
4. Interview with Peter Buffett.
5. Interview with Doris Buffett. Viktor E. Frankl, Man’s Search for Meaning. Boston: Beacon Press, 1962.
6. Interview with Sue James Stewart.
7. Alton Eltiste, “Miss Khafagy Gives Views on Homeland,” Gateway, October 5, 1962.
8. This image of the crossing guard may surprise modern readers, but in the United States until the latter part
of the twentieth century, children were traditionally given significant freedom and responsibility.
9. Interview with Howie Buffett.
10. Howie and Susie Jr. describe themselves and their relationship this way in interviews.
11. This composite picture of the Buffett household is based on interviews with Susie Buffett Jr., Howie
Buffett, and Peter Buffett.
12. Interview with Meg Mueller. “My mom has commented on that several times over the years,” she says.
13. Interview with Bill Ruane.
14. Interview with Dick Espenshade. One of the founding lawyers, Jamie Wood, joined from another firm.
15. Interview with Ed Anderson.
16. The example has been simplified for ease of understanding the concept of leverage. Obviously the exact
return on capital depends on how long it took to make the profit, and on the funding rate.
17. Interview with Rick Guerin in Janet Lowe, Damn Right!: Behind the Scenes with Berkshire Hathaway
Billionaire Charlie Munger. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000.

18. This description is from Ed Anderson.
19. Interview with Ed Anderson.
20. Interview with Charlie Munger. Guerin’s seamstress mother died when he was a teenager.
21. Interviews with Rick Guerin, Ed Anderson.
22. Janet Lowe, Damn Right!
23. Interview with Ed Anderson. Guerin doesn’t remember this specific incident but says it sounds likely.
24. Anderson takes the blame for being too obtuse to read Munger’s mind, rather than blaming Munger for
not explaining things to him.
25. Interview with Ed Anderson.
26. Along with Munger, Ed Anderson recalls this extraordinary trade. Munger says the story is true in
substance. Buffett also recalled the reasoning.
27. Interview with Ed Anderson, who suggested the word “pretender” because, as he put it, “Charlie would
never feel like he was an ‘apprentice.’”
28. Ira Marshall relates Munger’s confusion with names in Damn Right!
29. Interview with Ed Anderson. This term was commonly used among Buffett’s friends. He referred to
“coattail riding” in his partnership letter of January 18, 1963.
30. Buffett also recalls Munger hyperventilating at his own jokes.
31. Charles T. Munger letter to Katharine Graham, December 9, 1974.
32. Ibid.
33. In 1953, Buffett sold copies of this report for $5.
34. Buffett had also let Brandt in on one lucrative private investment, the Mid-Continental Tab Card
Company. While Buffett gave up his override on Brandt’s money, the deal was a win/win.
35. “There’s got to be a warehouse full of these somewhere,” said Bill Ruane in an interview, but the author
never saw it.
36. Bill Ruane introduced Buffett to Fisher’s ideas. Philip A. Fisher, Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits.
New York, Evanston, and London: Harper & Row, 1958. (“Scuttlebutt” is a nautical term for a barrel with a
hole in it used to hold the sailors’ drinking water.)
37. The market for soybean oil was not large, a key element in the scheme. It would be impossible for a single
