
and their fears, their wives and their little ones? replied unhesi- tatingly that he never did.
From the time that the omens were favourable, the Thugs considered all the travellers
they met as victims thrown into their hands by their divinity to be killed. The Thugs were
the mere instruments in the hands of Bhawanee to destroy them. "If we did not kill them,"
said Sahib, "the goddess would never again be propitious to us, and we and our families
would be involved in misery and want. If we see or hear a bad omen, it is the order of the
goddess not to kill the travellers we are in pursuit of, and we dare not disobey."
As soon as an expedition has been planned, the goddess is consulted. On the day chosen
for starting, which is never during the unlucky months of July, September, and
December, nor on a Wednesday or Thursday; the chief Thug of the party fills a brass jug
with water, which he carries in his right hand by his side. With his left, he holds upon his
breast the sacred pickaxe, wrapped carefully in a white cloth, along with five knots of
turmeric, two copper, and one silver coin. He then moves slowly on, followed by the
whole of the gang, to some field or retired place, where halting, with his countenance
turned in the direction they wish to pursue, he lifts up his eyes to heaven, saying, "Great
goddess! universal mother! if this, our meditated expedition, be fitting in thy sight,
vouchsafe to help us, and give us the signs of thy approbation." All the Thugs present
solemnly repeat the prayer after their leader, and wait in silence for the omen. If within
half an hour they see Pilhaoo, or good omen on the left, it signifies that the goddess has
taken them by the left hand to lead them on; if they see the Thibaoo, or omen on the right,
it signifies that she has taken them by the right hand also. The leader then places the
brazen pitcher on the ground and sits down beside it, with his face turned in the same
direction for seven hours, during which time his followers make all the necessary
preparations for the journey. If, during this interval, no unfavourable signs are observed,
the expedition advances slowly, until it arrives at the bank of the nearest stream, when
they all sit down and eat of the goor, or consecrated sugar. Any evil omens that are
perceived after this ceremony may be averted by sacrifices; but any evil omens before,
would at once put an end to the expedition.
Among the evil omens are the following: -- If the brazen pitcher drops from the hand of
the Jemadar or leader, it threatens great evil either to him or to the gang -- sometimes to
both. If they meet a funeral procession, a blind man, a lame man, an oil-vender, a
carpenter, a potter, or a dancing-master, the expedition will be dangerous. In like manner
it is unlucky to sneeze, to meet a woman with an empty pail, a couple of jackals, or a
hare. The crossing of their path by the latter is considered peculiarly inauspicious. Its cry
at night on the left is sometimes a good omen, but if they hear it on the right it is very
bad; a warning sent to them from Bhawanee that there is danger if they kill. Should they
disregard this warning, and led on by the hope of gain, strangle any traveller, they would
either find no booty on him, or such booty as would eventually lead to the ruin and
dispersion of the gang. Bhawanee would be wroth with her children; and causing them to
perish in the jungle, would send the hares to drink water out of their skulls.
The good omens are quite as numerous as the evil. It promises a fortunate expedition, if,
on the first day, they pass through a village where there is a fair. It is also deemed
fortunate, if they hear wailing for the dead in any village but their own. To meet a woman

with a pitcher full of water upon her head, bodes a prosperous journey and a safe return.
The omen is still more favourable if she be in a state of pregnancy. It is said of the Thugs
of the Jumaldehee and Lodaha tribes, that they always make the youngest Thug of the
party kick the body of the first person they strangle, five times on the back, thinking that
it will bring them good luck. This practice, however, is not general. If they hear an ass
bray on the left at the commencement of an expedition, and an another soon afterwards
on the right, they believe that they shall be supereminently successful, that they shall
strangle a multitude of travellers, and find great booty.
After every murder a solemn sacrifice, called the Tuponee, is performed by all the gang.
The goor, or consecrated sugar, is placed upon a large cloth or blanket, which is spread
upon the grass. Beside it is deposited the sacred pickaxe, and a piece of silver for an
offering. The Jemadar, or chief of the party, together with all the oldest and most prudent
Thugs, take their places upon the cloth, and turn their faces to the west. Those inferior
Thugs who cannot find room upon the privileged cloth, sit round as close to it as possible.
A pit is then dug, into which the Jemadar pours a small quantity of the goor, praying at
the same time that the goddess will always reward her followers with abundant spoils. All
the Thugs repeat the prayer after him. He then sprinkles water upon the pickaxe, and puts
a little of the goor upon the head of every one who has obtained a seat beside him on the
cloth. A short pause ensues, when the signal for strangling is given, as if a murder were
actually about to be committed, and each Thug eats his goor in solemn silence. So
powerful is the impression made upon their imagination by this ceremony, that it almost
drives them frantic with enthusiasm. Captain Sleeman relates, that when he reproached a
Thug for his share in a murder of great atrocity, and asked him whether he never felt pity;
the man replied, "We all feel pity sometimes; but the goor of the Tuponee changes our
nature; it would change the nature of a horse. Let any man once taste of that goor, and he
will be a Thug, though he know all the trades and have all the wealth in the world. I never
was in want of food; my mother's family was opulent, and her relations high in office. I
have been high in office myself, and became so great a favourite wherever I went that I
was sure of promotion; yet I was always miserable when absent from my gang, and
obliged to return to Thuggee. My father made me taste of that fatal goor, when I was yet
a mere boy; and if I were to live a thousand years I should never be.able to follow any
other trade."
The possession of wealth, station in society, and the esteem of his fellows, could not keep
this man from murder. From his extraordinary confession we may judge of the extreme
difficulty of exterminating a sect who are impelled to their horrid practises, not only by
the motives of self-interest which govern mankind in general, but by a fanaticism which
fills up the measure of their whole existence. Even severity seems thrown away upon the
followers of this brutalizing creed. To them, punishment is no example; they have no
sympathy for a brother Thug who is hung at his own door by the British Government, nor
have they any dread of his fate. Their invariable idea is, that their goddess only suffers
those Thugs to fall into the hands of the law, who have contravened the peculiar
observances of Thuggee, and who have neglected the omens she sent them for their
guidance.

To their neglect of the warnings of the goddess they attribute all the reverses which have
of late years befallen their sect. It is expressly forbidden, in the creed of the old Thugs, to
murder women or cripples. The modern Thugs have become unscrupulous upon this
point, murdering women, and even children, with unrelenting barbarity. Captain Sleeman
reports several conversations upon this subject, which he held at different times with
Thugs, who had been taken prisoners, or who had turned approvers. One of them, named
Zolfukar, said, in reply to the Captain, who accused him of murdering women, "Yes, and
was not the greater part of Feringeea's and my gang seized, after we had murdered the
two women and the little girl, at Manora, in 1830? and were we not ourselves both seized
soon after? How could we survive things like that? Our ancestors never did such things."
Lalmun, another Thug, in reply to a similar question, said, "Most of our misfortunes have
come upon us for the murder of women. We all knew that they would come upon us
some day, for this and other great sins. We were often admonished, but we did not take
warning; and we deserve our fates." In speaking of the supposed protection which their
goddess had extended to them in former times, Zolfukar said: -- "Ah! we had some
regard for religion then! We have lost it since. All kinds of men have been made Thugs,
and all classes of people murdered, without distinction; and little attention has been paid
to omens. How, after this, could we think to escape? * * * * Davee never forsook us till
we neglected her!"
It might be imagined that men who spoke in this manner of the anger of the goddess, and
who, even in custody, showed so much veneration for their unhappy calling, would
hesitate before they turned informers, and laid bare the secrets and exposed the haunts of
their fellows: -- among the more civilized ruffians of Europe, we often find the one
chivalrous trait of character, which makes them scorn a reward that must be earned by the
blood of their accomplices: but in India there is no honour among thieves. When the
approvers are asked, if they, who still believe in the power of the terrible goddess Davee,
are not afraid to incur her displeasure by informing of their fellows, they reply, that
Davee has done her worst in abandoning them. She can inflict no severer punishment,
and therefore gives herself no further concern about her degenerate children. This
cowardly doctrine is, however, of advantage to the Government that seeks to put an end
to the sect, and has thrown a light upon their practices, which could never have been
obtained from other sources.
Another branch of the Thug abomination has more recently been discovered by the
indefatigable Captain Sleeman. The followers of this sect are called MEGPUNNAS, and
they murder travellers, not to rob them of their wealth, but of their children, whom they
afterwards sell into slavery. They entertain the same religious opinions as the Thugs, and
have carried on their hideous practices, and entertained their dismal superstition, for
about a dozen years with impunity. The report of Captain Sleeman states, that the crime
prevails almost exclusively in Delhi and the native principalities, or Rajpootana of Ulwar
and Bhurtpore; and that it first spread extensively after the siege of Bhurtpore in 1826.
The original Thugs never or rarely travel with their wives; but the Megpunnas invariably
take their families with them, the women and children being used to inveigle the victims.
Poor travellers are always chosen by the Megpunnas as the objects of their murderous

traffic. The females and children are sent on in advance to make acquaintance with
emigrants or beggars on the road, travelling with their families, whom they entice to pass
the night in some secluded place, where they are afterwards set upon by the men, and
strangled. The women take care of the children. Such of them as are beautiful are sold at
a high price to the brothels of Delhi, or other large cities; while the boys and ill-favoured
girls are sold for servants at a more moderate rate. These murders are perpetrated perhaps
five hundred miles from the homes of the unfortunate victims; and the children thus
obtained, deprived of all their relatives, are never inquired after. Even should any of their
kin be alive, they are too far off and too poor to institute inquiries. One of the members,
on being questioned, said the Megpunnas made more money than the other Thugs; it was
more profitable to kill poor people for the sake of their children, than rich people for their
wealth. Megpunnaism is supposed by its votaries to be, like Thuggee, under the
immediate protection of the great goddess Davee, or Kalee, whose favour is to be
obtained before the commencement of every expedition, and whose omens, whether of
good or evil, are to be diligently sought on all occasions. The first apostle to whom she
communicated her commands for the formation of the new sect, and the rules and
ordinances by which it was to be guided, was called Kheama Jemadar. He was considered
so holy a man, that the Thugs and Megpunnas considered it an extreme felicity to gaze
upon and touch him. At the moment of his arrest by the British authorities, a fire was
raging in the village, and the inhabitants gathered round him and implored him to
intercede with his god, that the flames might be extinguished. The Megpunna, says the
tradition, stretched forth his hand to heaven, prayed, and the fire ceased immediately.
There now only remain to be considered the exertions that have been made to remove
from the face of India this purulent and disgusting sore. From the year 1807 until 1826,
the proceedings against Thuggee were not carried on with any extraordinary degree of
vigour; but, in the latter year, the Government seems to have begun to act upon a settled
determination to destroy it altogether. From 1826 to 1855, both included, there were
committed to prison, in the various Presidencies, 1562 persons accused of this crime. Of
these, 328 were hanged; 999 transported; 77 imprisoned for life; 71 imprisoned for
shorter periods; 21 held to bail; and only 21 acquitted. Of the remainder, 31 died in
prison, before they were brought to trial, 11 escaped, and 49 turned approvers.
One Feringeea, a Thug leader of great notoreity, was delivered up to justice in the year
1830, in consequence of the reward of five hundred rupees offered for his apprehension
by the Government. He was brought before Captain Sleeman, at Sangir, in the December
of that year, and offered, if his life were spared, to give such information as would lead to
the arrest of several extensive gangs which had carried on their murderous practices
undetected for several years. He mentioned the place of rendezvous, for the following
February, of some well organized gangs, who were to proceed into Guzerat and
Candeish. Captain Sleeman appeared to doubt his information; but accompanied the Thug
to a mango grove, two stages from Sangir, on the road to Seronage. They reached this
place in the evening, and in the morning Feringeea pointed out three places in which he
and his gang had, at different intervals, buried the bodies of three parties of travellers
whom they had murdered. The sward had grown over all the spots, and not the slightest
traces were to be seen that it had ever been disturbed. Under the sod of Captain Sleeman's

tent were found the bodies of the first party, consisting of a pundit and his six attendants,
murdered in 1818. Another party of five, murdered in 1824, were under the ground at the
place where the Captain's horses had been tied up for the night; and four Brahmin carriers
of the Ganges water, with a woman, were buried under his sleeping tent. Before the
ground was moved, Captain Sleeman expressed some doubts; but Feringeea, after
looking at the position of some neighbouring trees, said be would risk his life on the
accuracy of his remembrance. The workmen dug five feet without discovering the bodies;
but they were at length found a little beyond that depth, exactly as the Thug had
described them. With this proof of his knowledge of the haunts of his brethren, Feringeea
was promised his liberty and pardon if he would aid in bringing to justice the many large
gangs to which he had belonged, and which were still prowling over the country. They
were arrested in the February following, at the place of rendezvous pointed out by the
approver, and most of them condemned and executed.
So far we learn from Captain Sleeman, who only brought down his tables to the close of
the year 1835. A writer in the "Foreign Quarterly Review" furnishes an additional list of
241 persons, committed to prison in 1836, for being concerned in the murder and robbery
of 474 individuals. Of these criminals, 91 were sentenced to death, and 22 to
imprisonment for life, leaving 306, who were sentenced to transportation for life, or
shorter periods of imprisonment, or who turned approvers, or died in gaol. Not one of the
whole number was acquitted.
Great as is this amount of criminals who have been brought to justice, it is to be feared
that many years must elapse before an evil so deeply rooted can be eradicated. The
difficulty is increased by the utter hopelessness of reformation as regards the survivors.
Their numbers are still calculated to amount to ten thousand persons, who, taking the
average of three murders annually for each, as calculated by Captain Sleeman and other
writers, murder every year thirty thousand of their fellow creatures. This average is said
to be under the mark; but even if we were to take it at only a third of this calculation,
what a frightful list it would be! When religion teaches men to go astray, they go far
astray indeed!
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

VOL. II - PECULIAR FOLLIES
THE CRUSADES
They heard, and up they sprung upon the wing
Innumerable. As when the potent rod
Of Amram's son, in Egypt's evil day,
Waved round the coast, up call'd a pitchy cloud
Of locusts, warping on the eastern wind
That o'er the realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like night, and darken'd all the realm of Nile,
So numberless were they.
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand banners rise into the air,
With orient colours waving. With them rose
A forest huge of spears; and thronging helms
Appear'd, and serried shields, in thick array,
Of depth immeasurable.
-- Paradise Lost.
Every age has its peculiar folly -- some scheme, project, or phantasy into which it
plunges, spurred on either by the love of gain, the necessity of excitement, or the mere
force of imitation. Failing in these, it has some madness, to which it is goaded by political
or religious causes, or both combined. Every one of these causes influenced the Crusades,
and conspired to render them the most extraordinary instance upon record of the extent to
which popular enthusiasm can be carried. History in her solemn page informs us, that the
crusaders were but ignorant and savage men, that their motives were those of bigotry
unmitigated, and that their pathway was one of blood and tears. Romance, on the other
hand, dilates upon their piety and heroism and pourtrays in her most glowing and
impassioned hues their virtue and magnanimity, the imperishable honour they acquired
for themselves, and the great services they rendered to Christianity. In the following
pages we shall ransack the stores of both, to discover the true spirit that animated the
motley multitude who took up arms in the service of the Cross, leaving history to vouch
for facts, but not disdaining the aid of contemporary poetry and romance to throw light
upon feelings, motives, and opinions.
In order to understand thoroughly the state of public feeling in Europe at the time when
Peter the Hermit preached the holy war, it will be necessary to go back for many years
anterior to that event. We must make acquaintance with the pilgrims of the eighth, ninth,
and tenth centuries, and learn the tales they told of the dangers they had passed, and the
wonders they had seen. Pilgrimages to the Holy Land seem at first to have been
undertaken by converted Jews, and by Christian devotees of lively imagination, pining
with a natural curiosity to visit the scenes which of all others were most interesting in
their eyes. The pious and the impious alike flocked to Jerusalem, -- the one class to feast

their sight on the scenes hallowed by the life and sufferings of their Lord, and the other,
because it soon became a generally received opinion, that such a pilgrimage was
sufficient to rub off the long score of sins, however atrocious. Another and very
numerous class of pilgrims were the idle and roving, who visited Palestine then as the
moderns visit Italy or Switzerland now, because it was the fashion, and because they
might please their vanity by retailing, on their return, the adventures they had met with.
But the really pious formed the great majority. Every year their numbers increased, until
at last they became so numerous as to be called the "armies of the Lord." Full of
enthusiasm, they set the danger and difficulty of the way at defiance, and lingered with
holy rapture on every scene described in the Evangelists. To them it was bliss indeed to
drink the clear waters of the Jordan, or be baptized in the same stream where John had
baptized the Saviour. They wandered with awe and pleasure in the purlieus of the
Temple, on the solemn Mount of Olives, or the awful Calvary, where a God had bled for
sinful men. To these pilgrims every object was precious. Relics were eagerly sought
after; flagons of water from Jordan, or paniers of mould from the hill of the Crucifixion,
were brought home, and sold at extravagant prices to churches and monasteries. More
apocryphical relics, such as the wood of the true cross, the tears of the Virgin Mary, the
hems of her garments, the toe-nails and hair of the Apostles -- even the tents that Paul had
helped to manufacture -- were exhibited for sale by the knavish in Palestine, and brought
back to Europe "with wondrous cost and care." A grove of a hundred oaks would not
have furnished all the wood sold in little morsels as remnants of the true cross; and the
tears of Mary, if collected together, would have filled a cistern.
For upwards of two hundred years the pilgrims met with no impediment in Palestine. The
enlightened Haroun Al Reschid, and his more immediate successors, encouraged the
stream which brought so much wealth into Syria, and treated the wayfarers with the
utmost courtesy. The race of Fatemite caliphs, -- who, although in other respects as
tolerant, were more distressed for money, or more unscrupulous in obtaining it, than their
predecessors of the house of Abbas, -- imposed a tax of a bezant for each pilgrim that
entered Jerusalem. This was a serious hardship upon the poorer sort, who had begged
their weary way across Europe, and arrived at the bourne of all their hopes without a
coin. A great outcry was immediately raised, but still the tax was rigorously levied. The
pilgrims unable to pay were compelled to remain at the gate of the holy city until some
rich devotee arriving with his train, paid the tax and let them in. Robert of Normandy,
father of William the Conqueror, who, in common with many other nobles of the highest
rank, undertook the pilgrimage, found on his arrival scores of pilgrims at the gate,
anxiously expecting his coming to pay the tax for them. Upon no occasion was such a
boon refused.
The sums drawn from this source were a mine of wealth to the Moslem governors of
Palestine, imposed as the tax had been at a time when pilgrimages had become more
numerous than ever. A strange idea had taken possession of the popular mind at the close
of the tenth and commencement of the eleventh century. It was universally believed that
the end of the world was at hand; that the thousand years of the Apocalypse were near
completion, and that Jesus Christ would descend upon Jerusalem to judge mankind. All
Christendom was in commotion. A panic terror seized upon the weak, the credulous, and
