
didn’t get any more commissions from them. “You can’t make a living that way. The system pits your
interests against your clients.”
Nevertheless, he had begun to develop a small clientele of his own through his network of graduate school
friends. In the spring of 1952, he went to Salisbury, North Carolina, to spend Easter with Fred Stanback. He
charmed and amused Fred’s parents and entertained the family by talking stocks, quoting Ben Graham, and
asking for a Pepsi-Cola and a ham sandwich for breakfast.12 Soon afterward, back in Omaha, Fred
Stanback’s father gave him an order to sell some stock in a washing-machine company, Thor Corporation.
Warren found a customer through another broker, Harris Upham, who wanted to buy it. Then he got another
call from Stanback’s bank about the sale and thought he had two orders. He sold the Thor Corporation stock
twice, the second time unwittingly selling stock he didn’t have. Now he had to find additional shares, and
ended up buying them at a loss to cover the second sale.
Mr. Stanback treated him graciously despite the mistake. He absorbed the entire loss even though it was
Warren’s fault. Warren was grateful and never forgot it. He had more reason for concern about the second
buyer, a man known as “Mad Dog” Baxter, who was a remnant of Omaha’s days as a major gambling layoff
center*16 and an associate in some of the city’s many illegal betting parlors. Baxter had arrived at
Buffett-Falk in person, strolled up to the cashier’s cage, and pulled out a wad of $100 bills, waving it around
ostentatiously. Once again, “Carl Falk looked at me questioningly.” Was Buffett-Falk being used to launder
illegal gambling money? Situations like this reinforced Warren’s dislike for his job. Even when he wasn’t
selling stocks, he felt conflicted. He had turned Buffett-Falk into a “market maker,” a firm that acted as a
middleman, buying and selling stocks as a dealer.13 The firm made a profit by selling a stock to clients at a
slightly higher price than it paid, and buying stock from clients at a lower price than it sold the stock for. The
difference, or “spread,” was its profit. The spread was invisible to the customers. Acting as a market maker
lifted a brokerage firm from being a mere order taker to being a player in the Wall Street game. While
Warren was proud that he had the know-how to set Buffett-Falk up as a market maker, the conflict bothered
him.
“I don’t want to be on the other side of the table from the customer. I never was selling anything I didn’t
believe in myself or own myself. On the other hand, there was a markup that was undisclosed. If anybody
asked me about it, I told them. But I don’t like anything like that. I want to be on the same side of the table
with the people who are my partners, everybody knowing what’s going on. And a promoter, by his nature,
doesn’t do that.”
No matter how Warren thought about his job as a stockbroker, there was always a potential conflict of
interest, and always the possibility that he would lose money for his clients and open himself up to
disappointing them. He would much rather manage people’s money instead of selling them stocks, with his
interest on the same side as the customer’s. The problem was, there were no such opportunities in Omaha.
But in the spring of 1952, he wrote an article about GEICO that attracted the attention of a powerful man,
and with that, his luck seemed about to change. The article, “The Security I Like Best,” which appeared in
the Commercial and Financial Chronicle, was not just an advertisement for Warren’s favorite stock, but an
explanation of his ideas about investing. It caught the attention of Bill Rosenwald, who was a son of Julius
Rosenwald, a philanthropist and the longtime chairman of Sears, Roebuck & Co. The younger Rosenwald ran
American Securities, a money management firm launched with family stock in Sears14 that sought high
returns while minimizing risk and preserving capital. After contacting Ben Graham, who gave Warren a
strong recommendation, Rosenwald offered Warren a job. Few jobs in money management were as
prestigious, and Warren was dying to accept it, even though that meant moving back to New York City. To
do so, however, he had to get permission from the National Guard to leave Omaha.
“I asked my commanding officer whether it would be possible to transfer to New York to take this job. He
said, ‘You’ll have to go down and see the commanding general.’ So I went down to Lincoln, sat there in the
state capitol, waited awhile, went in to see General Henninger, and said, ‘Corporal Buffett reporting.’ I’d
written him ahead of time explaining and asking permission.
“And right away he said, ‘Permission denied.’

“That was the end of it. That meant I was in Omaha as long as he wanted to keep me captive.”
Thus Warren was stuck at Buffett-Falk, writing prescriptions for a living. The main comfort he had during the
challenges of his first year back in Omaha was his fiancée. He had begun to lean on Susie. All the while, she
was working at figuring Warren out. She began to understand the damage Leila Buffett’s rages had done to
her son’s self-worth, and she started trying to repair it. She knew that the main thing he needed was to feel
loved and never criticized. He also needed to feel that he could succeed socially. “People accepted me more
when I was with her,” he says. Even though she was still at the University of Omaha while he had been
working, he was like a toddler gazing up at a parent when it came to his relationship with his future wife.
Both were still living in their parents’ homes. Over time, Warren had developed a way of dealing with his
mother, which was to avoid being alone with her, while making use of her dutiful nature when in her
presence by besieging her with demands and requests. Yet the long stretches that he had spent away from her
while attending college had lowered his tolerance for Leila’s company instead of raising it. When she and
Howard came back from Washington for Warren and Susie’s wedding, Susie noticed that her fiancé avoided
his mother as much as he could. When forced to be in her company, he would turn his face away from her
and clench his teeth.
It was time for Warren to move out. He called Chuck Peterson, saying “Chas-o, I haven’t got a place for us
to live,” and Chas-o rented him a tiny apartment a couple of miles from downtown. When Warren gave
Susie, who had a strong sense of self-expression, an allowance of $1,500 to furnish their first apartment, she
and her future sister-in-law Doris took off for Chicago to shop for furniture in the colorful modern style she
liked.15
As the wedding date, April 19, 1952, approached, the question arose whether the ceremony would take place
at all. The week before, the Missouri River flooded upstream of Omaha. With the waters heading south,
officials predicted they would crest above the riverbank and flood the city during the weekend. This made it
likely that the National Guard would be called out.
“The whole town turned out with sandbags. I had all these buddies coming in for the wedding—Fred
Stanback was going to be best man, and various ushers and guests. They were all kidding me because I was
in the National Guard. They said, ‘Well, don’t worry about it, because we’ll substitute for you on the
honeymoon.’ Jokes like that. This was going on all week.”
A few days beforehand, Howard drove Warren and Fred down to the river. Thousands of volunteers were
building double walls of sandbags, six feet high and four feet deep. The earth sank under the wheels of the
huge trucks hauling sand and dirt, as if they were driving over rubber.16 Warren held his breath, hoping that
he would not be called for duty to sandbag and that the temporary levee would hold.
“Saturday came, and we were getting married about three in the afternoon. Around noon, the phone rang.
My mother said, ‘It’s for you.’ I picked up the phone. The guy at the other end said, ‘C-C-C-Corporal
Buffett?’ I had a commanding officer who had a really distinctive stutter. ‘This is C-C-C-Captain Murphy,’
he said.
“If he hadn’t stuttered, I’d have said something that’d probably have gotten me court-martialed, because I
would have thought it was the guys pulling a trick on me. But as it was, he said, ‘We’ve been activated.
What time c-c-c-can you show up at the Armory?’” Warren almost had a heart attack.17 “And I said, ‘Well,
I’m getting married at three o’clock.’ I said, ‘I could probably be there by five.’ He said, ‘Report for
d-d-d-duty. We’re going to be p-p-p-patrolling East Omaha d-d-down by the river.’ I said, ‘Yes, sir.’
“I got off the phone totally depressed. Then I get a call an hour later. And this guy had a perfectly normal
voice. He says, ‘Corporal Buffett?’ I said, ‘Yes, sir.’ He said, ‘This is General Wood.’18 That was the
commanding general of the Thirty-fourth Division, who lived way out in west Nebraska. General Wood
said, ‘I’m countermanding Captain Murphy’s order. Have a good time.’”

He had two hours left before the biggest event of his life. Warren showed up at the soaring Gothic sanctuary
of Dundee Presbyterian Church well before three o’clock. The wedding of a Congressman’s son and Doc
Thompson’s daughter was a major event in Omaha. Several hundred guests, including many of Omaha’s
top-drawer people, were expected.19
“Doc Thompson was so proud, he was popping buttons all over the place. I was so nervous that I just
figured—well, I didn’t wear my glasses so that I wouldn’t be able to see all those people out there.” Warren
also asked the normally reserved Stanback to distract him by talking so he wouldn’t have to focus on what
was happening.20
Bertie stood up for Susie as maid of honor, Susie’s sister Dottie as matron of honor. After the photographs,
the guests drank nonalcoholic punch and ate wedding cake downstairs in the linoleum-floored church
basement. That was the normal thing to do; the Thompsons and the Buffetts weren’t club people. Susie
smiled wide as an ivory fan. Warren glowed, incandescent, and wrapped his arm around her waist as if trying
to keep them both from sailing off into the air. After more photographs, they changed into their going-away
clothes and ran through the crowd of cheering guests to duck into Alice Buffett’s car, which she had lent
them for the honeymoon. Warren had already loaded the backseat with Moody’s Manuals and ledgers. All of
a sudden, Susie saw the writing on the wall.21 And from Omaha, the newlyweds set off on their
honeymoon—a cross-country automobile trip.
“On my wedding night, I had chicken fried steak at the Wigwam Café in Wahoo, Nebraska,” Buffett says.22
The Wigwam was a tiny hole-in-the-wall less than an hour from Omaha, with a few booths and cowboy
decor. From there, Warren and Susie drove thirty miles to the Cornhusker Hotel in Lincoln to spend the
night, “and that’s all I’ll say on that subject,” Buffett says.
“The next day I bought a copy of the Omaha World-Herald and it had run an article that said, ‘Only love
can stop the Guard.’” 23 The 1952 flood was the worst in modern times in Omaha, the effort spent to avert it
Herculean. “The other guys were sandbagging for days, patrolling in the flood, with the snakes and rats. I
was the only guy that didn’t get called out.”
The newlyweds traveled all over the western and southwestern United States. Warren had never been there,
but Susie knew the West Coast well. They visited her family, took in the sights, went to the Grand Canyon,
and had a wonderful time. “We did not stop to visit companies and look at investments, as has been
reported,” Buffett insists. On the way back they stopped in Las Vegas, which was full of ex-Omaha people.
The “layoff bookies” Eddie Barrick and Sam Ziegman had moved there shortly before and bought into the
Flamingo Hotel.24 They were soon followed by another associate, Jackie Gaughan, who had invested in
casinos from the Flamingo to the Barbary Coast. All these characters had shopped at the Buffett grocery
store, and Fred Buffett got along well with them, even though he wasn’t a gambler. For Warren, Vegas felt
almost homey, carrying echoes of the racetrack and full of people who knew his family. So he was not afraid
of the house. “Susie won a jackpot on the slot machine. She was only nineteen. They wouldn’t pay her
because she was underage. I said, ‘Lookit, you took her nickels.’ And they paid her.”
After Vegas, the Buffetts headed back to Omaha. Warren could not stop chortling over his luckless
colleagues in the Guard. “Oh, the honeymoon was great. It was great. Three weeks. And all the time, these
guys in the Guard were sloshing it up.”

PART THREE
The Racetrack

20
Graham-Newman
Omaha and New York City • 1952–1955

A few months after the wedding, Susie went to Chicago with her parents and new in-laws for the Republican
convention in July of 1952. The Thompsons and the Buffetts descended on Chicago, not as delegates but as
part of an army. Politically speaking at least, they were now one united family, and this election year they
were on a crusade to reclaim the White House for the Republicans after twenty agonizing years under the
Democrats.1 Doris would be working behind the scenes alongside her father, while the much younger Bertie
and Susie, innocents at the spectacle, spent their time gawking at celebrities like John Wayne, who had
shown up for the Grand Old Party.2
Warren, of course, stayed in Omaha, grinding away. Politics fascinated him, but not like money. He still
hated working as a “prescriptionist,” and kept toiling at it while trying to find a way out. His old teacher
David Dodd tried to help him by referring him to the Value Line Investment Survey, an investment adviser
and research publisher, which was looking for “new men.” The job would have paid well—“at least $7,000 a
year.”3 But Warren did not plan to be an anonymous researcher. So he carried on trying to sell GEICO to
uninterested clients while reading the convention news that was being reported under inch-high headlines in
the newspapers. For the first time in history, a convention was also being covered on television, and Warren
watched eagerly, struck by the power of this medium to magnify and influence events.
The front-runner going into the convention was Senator Robert Taft of Ohio.4 Known as “Mr. Integrity,” Taft
headed a minority wing of the Republican Party—centered around isolationist Midwesterners—that wanted
the government to be small, to stay out of everybody’s business, and above all to go after Communism more
aggressively than Truman had done.5 Taft made his friend Howard Buffett head of his Nebraska presidential
campaign and also head of his speakers’ bureau. To oppose Taft, the so-called Eastern Liberal
Establishment6 that Howard so despised had drafted retired General Dwight D. Eisenhower—a moderate
who had served as the Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in Europe during World War II and was the
first Supreme Commander of NATO forces. Eisenhower, a politically adroit diplomat with excellent
leadership skills, was a popular figure viewed by many as a war hero. As the convention approached, “Ike”
began to catch up in the polls.
What would prove to be the most controversial Republican convention in history unfolded in Chicago as

Eisenhower backers pushed through an amendment to the convention rules, passed on a contentious vote,
that handed him the delegates to win the nomination on the first ballot. Taft’s outraged supporters felt
robbed. But Eisenhower soon made peace with them by promising to combat “creeping socialism,” and Taft
insisted that his followers swallow their outrage and vote for Eisenhower for the sake of regaining the White
House. The Republicans united behind him and his running mate, Richard Nixon; “I Like Ike” buttons
sprouted everywhere.7 Everywhere, that is, except on Howard Buffett’s chest. He broke with the party by
refusing to endorse Eisenhower.8
This was an act of political suicide. His support within the party evaporated overnight. He was left standing
on principle—alone. Warren recognized that his father had “painted himself into a corner.”9 From his earliest
childhood, Warren had always tried to avoid broken promises, burned bridges, and confrontation. Now
Howard’s struggles branded three principles even deeper into his son: that allies are essential; that
commitments are so sacred that by nature they should be rare; and that grandstanding rarely gets anything
done.
Eisenhower defeated Adlai Stevenson in the November election, and in January Warren’s parents dragged
themselves back to Washington to finish out the rest of Howard’s lame-duck term. Warren, who had for
some time recognized obsessive qualities in Howard and Leila that disadvantaged them in various ways, had
begun to absorb something of his in-laws’ style. Dorothy Thompson was easygoing, and her husband, though
autocratic, was more personable and astute at human relations than the rigorously idealistic Howard Buffett.
The more time he spent with Susie and her family, the more they influenced him.
“Warren,” said Doc Thompson, who handed down advice with the authority of the Sermon on the Mount,
“always surround yourself with women. They’re more loyal and they work harder.”10 His son-in-law hardly
needed to be told that. Indeed, Warren had always craved being taken care of by women, as long as they
didn’t try to order him around. Susie could see that he was eager for her to assume a motherly role. So she
wrapped herself around her husband as she worked on “fixing” him, the wreck, the mess. “Oh, my God,” she
said, “he was a case.”11 When they met, she recalled, “I had never seen anyone in so much pain.”
Warren may not have been aware of the depths or dimensions of his pain, but describes the powerful role she
played in his life. “Susie was as big an influence on me as my dad, or bigger probably, in a different way. I
had all these defense mechanisms that she could explain, but I can’t. She probably saw things in me that
other people couldn’t see. But she knew it would take time and a lot of nourishment to bring it out. She
made me feel that I had somebody with a little sprinkling can who was going to make sure that the flowers
grew.”
Susie recognized Warren’s vulnerability, how much he needed to be soothed and comforted and reassured.
More and more, she could see the effect his mother had had on her children. Doris was the more badly
damaged, but Leila had convinced both Warren and Doris that deep down they were worthless. In every area
of life except business, Susie was discovering, her husband was riddled with self-doubt. He had never felt
loved, and she saw that he did not feel lovable.12
“I needed her like crazy,” he says. “I was happy in my work, but I wasn’t happy with myself. She literally
saved my life. She resurrected me.13 She put me together. It was the same kind of unconditional love you
would get from a parent.”
Warren wanted a lot of things from his wife that you would ordinarily get from a parent. Not only that, he
had grown up with a mother who did everything for him. Now Susie took over. Although their basic model of
wedded life was typical of the time—he made the money, she took care of him and covered the domestic
front—their arrangement was extreme. Everything in the Buffett household revolved around Warren and his
business. Susie understood her husband was special; she willingly became the cocoon for his embryonic
ambitions. He spent his days working and his nights hunched over the Moody’s Manual. He also arranged his
schedule to give himself leisure time to play golf and Ping-Pong, even signing up as a junior member of the
Omaha Country Club.

Susie, barely twenty years old, was no Betty Crocker, but she had taken up rudimentary cooking and basic
housekeeping like any 1950s wife—at a time when Omaha women were auditioning to appear on the show
Typical Housewife on local television station KTMV. She devoted herself to fulfilling her husband’s few but
specific requirements: Pepsi in the refrigerator, a lightbulb in his reading lamp, some indifferently cooked
version of meat and potatoes for dinner, a shaker full of salt, popcorn in the cupboard, ice cream in the
freezer. He also needed help getting dressed, assistance in dealing with people, tenderness, head rubs,
cuddling, and hugs. She even cut his hair, because he claimed he was afraid to go to the barber.14
Warren was “nuts about Susie, and she felt things” that were inside him, he says. He describes her role as
the giver, his as the receiver. “She was absorbing more about me and sensing much more about me than I
was sensing about her.” They were always seen kissing and cuddling, Susie often in Warren’s lap; she
frequently said this reminded her of her father.
Six months after the wedding, Susie was pregnant and had dropped out of the University of Omaha. Her
sister, Dottie, was pregnant, too, with her second baby. She and Susie had remained particularly close. A
dark-haired beauty, Dottie resembled her father in intelligence, and, according to family lore, she had
possessed the highest IQ in the school when she attended Central High. But in both looks and domesticity,
she was more like her mother.15 She had married Homer Rogers, a pilot and war hero with a big baritone
voice whom everybody called Buck Rogers, although he was modest about his war exploits. Homer was a
convivial, energetic cattleman, as beefy as the oversize steers he bought and sold. The Rogerses always had a
crowd at their house, Dottie playing piano while Homer sang something like “Katie, Katie, get off the table,
the money’s for the beer.” Susie and Warren did not take part in the Rogerses’ active social life, since they
tended to be more serious-minded and they did not drink, but the sisters spent a lot of time together on their
own. Dottie had always had difficulty making decisions, and since having her first son, Billy, she seemed
dazed at the demands of motherhood. Susie, naturally, took charge and helped her.
Susie had also become close to her sister-in-law Doris, who was working in Omaha as a schoolteacher now
that she was married. Her husband, Truman Wood, was a handsome man with a pleasant personality who
came from a prominent Omaha family, but Doris was starting to wonder if she was a racing filly hitched to a
Clydesdale. A girl of action, Doris told Truman to giddyup. He ambled along a little faster, but not much.
Susie’s protectiveness toward Warren and his sister ticked up a notch in January 1953 after Eisenhower was
sworn in, when Howard’s final congressional term ended and he and Leila returned to Nebraska for good.
Doris and Warren felt the strain of having Leila back in town. Warren could hardly bear to be in the same
room with his mother, and she still turned on Doris periodically.
Howard was at loose ends back in Omaha. Warren set up a partnership, Buffett & Buffett, that formalized
the way they had occasionally bought stocks together. Howard contributed some capital, and Warren’s
contribution was a token amount of money, but mostly ideas and labor. But Howard looked at going back
into the stockbroking business for the third time with dismay. Warren had been tending his old accounts
while he served in Congress, but Howard knew that Warren hated it, had never stopped trying to get Ben
Graham to hire him, and would leave in an instant if he could go to New York. For his part, Howard missed
his true love, politics. He harbored a desire to enter the Senate, especially now that there was a Republican in
the White House. Yet his ambitions conflicted with his extreme political views.
On July 30, 1953—Alice Buffett’s birthday—Susie and Warren’s first child, a daughter, was born. They
named her Susan Alice and called her Little Susie, sometimes Little Sooz. And Susie became a passionate,
playful, and devoted mother.
Little Susie was Howard and Leila’s first grandchild. A week later, Susie’s sister, Dottie, gave birth to her
second son, Tommy. Within months, Doris became pregnant with her first child, a daughter, Robin Wood. By
the spring of 1954, Susie was pregnant with her second child. Now the Buffetts and Thompsons had a new
focus—grandchildren.
