
But within two weeks Howard and two partners, Carl Falk and George Sklenicka, filed the papers to start a
stockbrokerage firm, Buffett, Sklenicka & Co.12 It was a maverick decision—to open a stockbroking
business at a time when no one wanted to buy stocks.
Three weeks later, England went off the “gold standard.”*5 This meant that, to avoid bankruptcy, the country
—which was deep in debt—would simply print more money to pay off its loans. This is a neat trick that only
a government can pull off. It was as if the country with the most widely trusted and accepted currency of the
age announced: “We are going to write bad checks, and you can take them or else.” The announcement
instantly exploded trust in formerly gilt-edged institutions. All over the world, financial markets plunged.
The already sputtering United States economy coughed, then stalled, then plummeted into free fall. A rush of
banks was sucked into its trailing vacuum and collapsed. In city after city, depositors fought their way to the
teller’s window and were turned away.13 But in the middle of this maelstrom, Howard’s business was
succeeding. His clients at first were mostly family friends. He sold them safe securities like utility stocks and
municipal bonds. In the firm’s first month of operation, as financial panic spread around the world, he
produced $400 of commissions and the firm was profitable.14 Through the ensuing months, even as people’s
savings evaporated and faith in banks disappeared, Howard stuck to the same kind of conservative
investments that had gotten him started, steadily adding customers and growing his business.15
The family’s fortunes had turned around. Then, shortly before Warren’s second birthday, twenty-month-old
Charles Lindbergh Jr. was kidnapped and murdered in March 1932. The snatching of the “Lone Eagle’s”
baby was “the biggest story since the Resurrection,” according to pundit H. L. Mencken. The country flew
into a kidnapping paranoia in which parents conveyed their terror of abduction to their children, the Buffetts
being no exception.16 Around then, Howard suffered some kind of attack serious enough for Leila to call an
ambulance. The Mayo Clinic eventually diagnosed him with a heart condition.17 From that time on, he lived
with restrictions: He wasn’t supposed to lift things, run, swim. Leila, whose life now revolved entirely around
Howard, the Prince Charming who had rescued her from the miserable fate of running a Linotype press, must
have been terrified at the thought of anything happening to him.
Warren was already a cautious child, who had kept his knees bent and stayed close to the ground when he
learned to walk. Now, when his mother took him to her church circle meetings, he was content to sit placidly
at her feet. She diverted him with an improvised toy—a toothbrush. Warren gazed quietly at the toothbrush
for two hours at a stretch.18 What could he have been thinking as he stared at its columns and rows of
bristles?
That November, with the country in crisis, Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected President. Howard was
certain this man of privilege who knew nothing of the common people would pollute the country’s currency
and drive it to ruination.19 He stuck a big sack of sugar in the attic to prepare for the worst. By this time,
Howard looked like a boyish Clark Kent in a business suit, nearsighted behind his wire-rimmed glasses, with
receding dark hair, an earnest smile, and a genial manner. But he turned thunderous when it came to politics,
reviewing the news of the day at top volume over dinner. Doris and Warren probably had no idea what
Howard meant as he ranted about the horrors that would befall the country now that a Democrat occupied
the White House. But terms like “socialism” started to embed themselves in the children’s minds. After
dinner, they watched their awe-inspiring father retire to his red leather armchair in the living room next to the
radio and disappear for hours behind his nightly newspaper and magazines.
Politics, money, and philosophy were acceptable topics for dinner-table discussion at the Buffett house, but
feelings were not.20 Even in an era of undemonstrative parents, Howard and Leila were notable for their lack
of warmth. Nobody in the Buffett household said “I love you,” and nobody tucked the children into bed with
a kiss.
But to everyone outside the family, Leila appeared the perfect mother and wife. People called her peppy,

upbeat, motherly, sweet, even “a gusher.”21 In repeating her history, as she was fond of doing, she painted
out the awkward bits, describing herself as a fortunate person brought up by wonderful Christian parents. Her
favorite stories told of her and Howard’s sacrifices—the three years of school she had missed to earn her
college money, the four months Howard had gone without making a sale when he first started his business,
walking to the dairy to save streetcar fare. Leila referred often to bouts of “neuralgia” (sometimes mistaken
for migraines), which she attributed to the childhood years spent alongside the pounding Linotype.22
Nevertheless, she acted as though she must do everything and drove herself hard—bridge teas and steak
fries, birthdays and anniversaries, calling on neighbors and cooking for church suppers. She paid more visits,
baked more cookies, and wrote more notes than anyone. When pregnant, she once cooked dinner by herself
for the family while trying to quell her morning sickness by smelling a bar of soap.23 Above all her attitude
was: anything for Howard. “She crucified herself,” said her sister-in-law Katie Buffett.24
But Leila’s attitude of duty and sacrifice had another, darker, side: blame and shame. After Howard left on
the streetcar for work in the morning, Doris and Warren would be playing or getting dressed and suddenly
Leila might explode at them. Something in the tone of her voice might give a clue that the fuse was lit, but
most of the time there was no warning.
“It was always something that we did or said, and there would be this flash, and then it didn’t subside. All
your past sins would be brought up. It was just endless. And my mother attributed it sometimes to having
neuralgia, but she never showed that outwardly.”
When in a rage, Leila would verbally lash the children over and over again, always the same: their lives were
easy compared to her sacrifices; that they were worthless, ungrateful, and selfish; and should feel ashamed.
She would pick at every real and imagined flaw; she nearly always aimed the tirade at Doris, and carried on
saying the same things for at least an hour, sometimes as long as two. She never stopped until both children
“just folded,” says Warren, weeping helplessly. “She was not content until she reduced you to tears,” says
Doris. Warren was forced to watch her explosions, unable to protect his sister and desperate to avoid being
targeted himself. While it was apparent that her attacks were deliberate and she had some degree of control
over them, it isn’t at all clear how she perceived her behavior as a parent. But no matter what she thought she
was doing, by the time Warren was three years old and their sister Roberta, known as Bertie, was born, “it
couldn’t be put back together,” he says, for him or for Doris. The damage to their souls was done.
The children never asked for help from their father, even though they knew that he was aware of Leila’s
eruptions. Howard might say to them, “Mom’s on the warpath,” a tipoff that a rage was coming, but he didn’t
intervene. Usually, however, Leila’s explosions took place out of Howard’s earshot, and they were never
aimed at him. In a sense, therefore, he was the children’s protector. Even though he did not save them,
Howard still meant security, because when he was around, they were safe.
***
Outside the tidy white bungalow on Barker Avenue, Nebraska was sliding into lawlessness. Bootlegging
flourished in Omaha until Warren was three years old.25 Out in the countryside, farmers faced with
foreclosure on mortgages backed by nearly worthless farmland rose up in civil disobedience.26 Five thousand
farmers marched on the state capitol in Lincoln until panicked lawmakers hastily passed a mortgage
moratorium bill.27
As the cold winds scoured the parched western sand hills in November of 1933, they kicked up vast swirls of
topsoil in towering black clouds that swept eastward as far as New York City at a clipper speed of sixty miles
per hour. The gale shattered plate-glass windows and blasted cars off the road in its wake. The New York
Times compared it to the volcanic eruption of Krakatoa. The dust-storm years had begun.28
In the middle of the worst drought of the twentieth century, Midwesterners took refuge in their homes as grit

sandblasted the paint and pitted the glass on their automobiles. Leila swept red dust off the porch every
morning. On Warren’s fourth birthday, a cloud of ruddy dust buried the Buffetts’ front porch and the wind
blew the paper plates and napkins off the party table.29
Along with the dust came years of extraordinary heat. In summertime 1934 the thermometer in Omaha hit
118 degrees. After searching for days, a Nebraska farmer found his cow down a crack in a remote stubble
field, trapped when the parched earth split apart.30 Plainsmen told tall tales about someone who fainted dead
away when hit in the face by a drop of water and had to be revived with three buckets of sand. People slept
in their backyards, camped on the grounds of Central High School, and on the grassy lawn of Omaha’s Joslyn
Art Museum, so as not to roast in the ovens of their own homes. Warren tried in vain to sleep covered in
bedsheets soaked with water, but nothing could cool the baked air that steamed up to his second-story room.
With the record drought and heat of 1934,31 millions of grasshoppers arrived to devour the parched corn and
wheat down to stubble.32 Leila’s father, John Stahl, suffered a stroke that year, and while visiting his
grandfather in West Point, Warren could hear the background drone of the ravenous hoppers. At their worst,
they consumed fence posts, the laundry on the clothesline, and finally one another, gumming up tractor
engines and clouding the air, thick enough to obscure a car.33
In truth, the early 1930s brought many other things to fear than fear itself.34 The economy worsened.
Imitators of the era’s most notorious gangsters—Al Capone, John Dillinger, and Baby Face Nelson—roamed
the Midwest, pillaging the already vulnerable banks.35 Parents worried about the dust-bowl drifters and
gypsies who passed through town. Occasional “mad dog” rabies scares quarantined children at home. The
public swimming pools closed in the dog days of summer out of fear of “infantile paralysis”—polio—and
parents warned their children constantly that if their lips touched the public water fountain, it could put them
in an iron lung.36
Yet Nebraskans were trained from birth to respond to calamity with teeth-gritted optimism. Those years of
dust and drought simply formed the backdrop to Midwestern life. The children grew up accustomed to
outlandish weather in a state plagued with tornadoes and winds strong enough to blow a train from its
tracks.37
The three little Buffetts went to school, played with friends, and ran around with a dozen kids in hundreddegree weather at neighborhood potluck picnics, their fathers in suits and their mothers in dresses and
stockings.
Many of their neighbors may have suffered, their standard of living in decline, but Howard, son of a grocery
man, had elevated his family into the more comfortable half of the middle class. “We made steady progress
even in those tough times,” he was to recall, “in an extremely modest sort of way.” He was being modest
about the family’s modesty. While fifty men stood in line for a $17-a-week job driving the orange Buffett &
Son grocery trucks, Howard’s persistence in knocking on doors had made his stockbroking business, now
called Buffett & Co., a success.38 Omaha was briefly under martial law during violent streetcar strikes and
rioting in 1935, but Howard bought a brand-new Buick. He became active in local Republican politics. At age
seven Doris, who had always worshipped her father, contemplated his future biography and wrote in the front
of one of her notebooks, Howard Buffett, A Statesman.39 A year later, still in the shadow of the Great
Depression, Howard built the family a much larger two-story red-brick Tudor-revival house in Dundee, a
suburb of Omaha.40
As the family prepared to move, Leila got word that her brother, Marion, now a successful lawyer in New
York, had been stricken with incurable cancer at age thirty-seven. “My uncle Marion was the pride and joy
of my mother’s family,” says Buffett, as well as their principal hope to carry on the family name, unsullied by
insanity.41 His death that November, childless, devastated his family. The next piece of bad news arrived
when Leila’s father, John Stahl, suffered another stroke that year, this one debilitating. Her sister Bernice,
who cared for him at home, seemed increasingly sunk in depression. Her other sister, Edie, a schoolteacher,

the prettiest and most adventurous of the girls, had vowed to stay single until either her thirties or until
Bernice wed, but Leila, sharp and aware, refused to be trapped by her family’s woes. She was going to make
it, no matter what; she was going to create a normal life with a normal family.42 She planned the move and
bought new furniture. In a major step up in the world, Leila could afford to hire a part-time housekeeper,
Ethel Crump.
Now a more experienced mother of a more prosperous family, Leila formed a much healthier relationship
with her youngest child, Bertie, as the intervals between her rages lessened. Bertie knew her mother had a
temper but says she always felt loved. Warren and Doris never did. And Leila’s obvious affection for Bertie
did not help their sense of worthlessness.43
In November 1936, Roosevelt was reelected to a second term. Howard’s only consolation was that FDR
would be out in another four years. While he read his conservative journals each night, the children listened
to the radio, played games, or sang hymns as Leila accompanied them on the family’s latest acquisition—a
pipe organ like the one her own mother had played.
While the Buffetts’ new house and occasional luxuries like the organ reflected their upward progress, Leila
always bought her children thrifty, practical, forgettable gifts, clothing bought on sale that couldn’t be
returned, and necessities—nothing that answered a child’s fantasies. Warren had a little single-oval
HO-gauge train set and coveted a more elaborate version, the kind he saw at the Brandeis department store
downtown, which had multiple engines twisting and turning past flashing lights and signals, rising over
snow-covered hills and dropping into tunnels, racing past tiny villages and disappearing into pine forests. But
the closest he came to owning it was buying the catalog that depicted it.
“If you were a little kid with one little oval track, looking at this thing, it was completely unbelievable.
You’d gladly pay a dime for the model-train catalog and just sit there and fantasize.”
An introverted child, Warren could lose himself for hours in a model-train catalog. Sometimes, however, as a
preschooler, he “hid,” as he put it, at his friend Jack Frost’s house, developing a babyish “crush” on Jack’s
kindhearted mother, Hazel. As time passed, his habit grew of spending much time at neighbors’ and relatives’
houses.44 His favorite relative was his father’s sister Alice, a tall woman who had remained unmarried, lived
at home with her father, and taught home economics. Surrounding Warren with warmth, she showed interest
in everything he did and was thoughtful about how to motivate him.
By the time Warren entered kindergarten,45 his hobbies and interests revolved around numbers. Around age
six, he became fascinated by the precision of measuring time in seconds, and desperately wanted a
stopwatch. Alice knew better than to offer such an important gift with no strings. “She was nuts about me,”
Buffett says, “but she still would attach a condition or two. I had to eat asparagus or something like that.
That was what motivated me. But I got a stopwatch in the end.”
Warren would pick up his stopwatch and summon his sisters to join him in the bathroom they shared to watch
the new game he had invented.46 He filled the bathtub with water and picked up his marbles. Each had a
name. He lined them up on the flat edge at the back of the tub. Then he clicked the stopwatch just as he
swept the marbles into the water. They raced down the porcelain slope, clicking and rattling, jumping as they
hit the waterline. The marbles chased each other toward the stopper. When the first one hit, Warren punched
the stopwatch and declared the winner. His sisters watched him race the marbles over and over, trying to
improve their times. The marbles never tired, the stopwatch never erred, and—unlike his audience—Warren
never seemed bored by the repetition.
Warren thought about numbers all the time and everywhere, even in church. He liked the sermons, he was
bored by the rest of the service; he passed the time by calculating the life span of hymn composers from their
birth and death dates in the hymnals. In his mind, the religious should reap some reward for their faith. He
assumed that hymn composers would live longer than average. Living longer than average seemed to him an
important goal. But piety, he found, did nothing to improve longevity. Lacking any personal sense of grace,
he began to feel skeptical about religion.

The bathtub steeplechase and the information he had collected about the hymn composers had taught him
something else, however, something valuable. He was learning to calculate odds. Warren looked around him.
There were opportunities to calculate odds everywhere. The key was to collect information, as much
information as you could find.

7
Armistice Day
Omaha • 1936–1939

When Warren started first grade at Rosehill School in 1936,1 he took to it right away. For one thing, it
liberated him from spending part of the day at home with his mother. School opened up a whole new world
for him, and right away he made two friends, Bob Russell and Stu Erickson. He and Bob, whom he called
“Russ,” began walking to school together, and on some days, he went over to the Russells’ house after
school. On other days, Stu, whose family lived in a modest frame house, went to the Buffetts’ new brick
home in the Happy Hollow country club neighborhood. Warren had something to do almost every day after
school until his father returned from work. He had always gotten along with other children; now they kept
him safe.
He and Russ would sit on the Russells’ porch for hours, watching the traffic on Military Avenue. Scribbling in
notebooks, they filled column after column with the license-plate numbers of passing cars. Their families
found this hobby strange but attributed it to the boys’ love of numbers. They knew Warren liked to calculate
the frequency of letters and numbers on license plates. And he and Russ never explained their real reason.
The street in front of the Russells’ house was the only route out of a cul-de-sac neighborhood where the
Douglas County Bank was located. Warren had convinced Russ that if someday that bank were robbed, the
cops could nab the robbers using license-plate numbers. And only he and Russ would own the evidence that
the cops would need to solve the crime.
Warren liked anything that involved collecting, counting, and memorizing numbers. He was already a keen
stamp and coin collector. He counted how often letters recurred in the newspaper and in the Bible. He loved
to read and spent many hours with books he checked out of the Benson Library.
But it was the crime-fighting and the theatrical potential of the license plates—which his family and the
Russells never knew about—that brought out other aspects of his temperament. He loved to play cop, and he
liked almost anything that brought him attention, including dressing up and playing at different roles. When
Warren was a preschooler, Howard had returned from business trips to New York City with costumes for him
and Doris, and he became an Indian chief, a cowboy, or a policeman. Once he started school, he began
coming up with dramatic ideas of his own.
Warren’s favorite games, however, were competitive, even if he was only competing with himself. He
progressed from the bathtub steeplechase to a yoyo, then to bolo, sending the bolo ball on its rubber string
flying away from his wooden paddle a thousand times. On Saturday afternoons at the Benson Theater, in
between movies—three films for a nickel, plus a serial—he stood on the stage with other kids, competing to
see who could keep the ball going longest. In the end everyone else stepped down, exhausted, leaving him
alone onstage, still smacking the ball.
He even played out his competitiveness in his special, teasing, warm relationship with Bertie. He called her
“chubby” because it made her mad and tricked her into singing at the dinner table, which was against the
family rules. He played games with her constantly but never let her win, even though she was three years

younger. But he had a tender side too. Once when Bertie stuffed her treasured Dy-Dee doll in a wastebasket
in a fit of anger at her mother, Warren rescued it and returned it to her in the sunroom. “I found this in the
wastebasket,” he said. “You wouldn’t want this in the wastebasket, would you?”2 Even as a child, Bertie
recognized that her brother knew how to be tactful.
Bertie, on the other hand, was the self-confident, adventurous one, which Doris and Warren thought might
explain why Leila rarely tore into her. Bertie had her own theory, seeing herself as someone who was able to
keep up appearances in the way that their mother valued.
What mattered most to Leila was the esteem of others; she had what Warren would later come to call an
Outer Scorecard. She was always worrying about what the neighbors would think, nagging her daughters to
create the right appearance. “I was so careful to do the right things. I didn’t want it to happen to me,” Bertie
says of Leila’s tirades.
Doris was the rebellious one. Early on, she displayed a refined sense of taste and a high threshold for
excitement, which put her at odds with the Buffetts’ sedate routines and cheeseparing ways. The exotic, the
stylish, and the novel attracted her, while her mother sheathed herself in a cloak of humility and preferred a
self-conscious austerity to any kind of display. Thus Doris’s very being seemed an affront to her mother, and
the two clashed constantly. Leila’s occasional rages were no less fierce than before. Doris had become a
pretty child. And “the prettier she got,” says Buffett, “the worse it was.”
Warren showed early signs of a knack with people, but was also the competitive, precocious child,
intellectually aggressive yet physically retiring. When his parents got him boxing gloves at age eight, he took
one lesson and never put them on again.3 He tried skating, but his ankles wobbled.4 He didn’t join in the
street games with the other boys, even though he loved sports and was well-coordinated. The only exception
to his aversion to hand-to-hand combat was Ping-Pong. When the Buffetts got a Ping-Pong table, he
slammed away at it night and day against anyone who would take him on—his parents’ friends, kids from
school—until he became a menace with the paddle. On the single occasion anyone remembers that called for
fists, however, little Bertie went out and took care of things for him. He cried easily if anyone was mean to
him; he worked hard to be liked and to get along well with others. Yet despite Warren’s cheerful demeanor,
something about him struck his friends as lonely.
The Buffetts took a photograph of the three children at Christmas in 1937. Bertie seems happy. Doris looks
wretched. Warren, clutching his favorite possession, a nickel-plated money changer, a gift from his aunt
Alice, looks far less happy than called for by the occasion.
Leila’s determination that they appear to be the perfect Norman Rockwell family hardened when Warren
was eight and new calamities befell the Stahls. Her mother, Stella, had deteriorated, and the family admitted
her to the Norfolk State Hospital, formerly the Nebraska State Insane Asylum, where Leila’s grandmother
had died.5 Her sister Edie spent three months in the hospital and nearly died of peritonitis after suffering a
ruptured appendix. Afterward, she made up her mind to go ahead and get married, and wed a man of
questionable background who made her laugh. This did not improve Leila’s dim view of her sister, who had
always seemed to her more interested in adventure than duty.
Meanwhile, Howard had been elected to the school board, a new role that became a point of pride in the
family.6 Amid this mixture of Buffett progress and Stahl backsliding, Warren spent most of his time away
from home, out of his mother’s way. He paid calls around the neighborhood, made friends with other
people’s parents, and listened to political talk at their houses.7 As he roamed, he began collecting bottle caps.
He went to filling stations all over town, scooping bottle caps out of the wells beneath the ice chests where
they had fallen after customers popped their sodas open. Down in the Buffetts’ basement, the piles of bottle
caps grew: Pepsi, root beer, Coca-Cola, ginger ale. He became obsessed with collecting bottle caps. All this
free information was lying around untouched—and no one wanted it! He found it amazing. After dinner, he
spread his collection of bottle caps on newspapers all over the living-room floor, sorting and counting, sorting
and counting.8 The numbers told him which soft drinks were most popular. But he also enjoyed sorting and
counting as a way of relaxing. When he wasn’t working on his bottle caps, he liked sorting and counting his
