
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

There Is No Fear or Pain

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

156

to hear bad news. However, cutting losses is not bad news, it is rather a necessity for
success over time. It is hard to accept losses. No one likes to lose money especially
when they follow their plan and they are rewarded with a loss. I personally have no
problem taking losses as I feel if I do not exit, the situation can morph into a situation
in which I lose more money and worse, affect my mental state. Trading is not about
being right or having an ego. Trading is about not being too wrong and letting a loss
morph into a big loss, which impacts the trading account and the psyche. This is what
makes trading so hard; we put on trades and we hope or expect profits. Otherwise
why would anyone risk his or her hard‐earned money? The problem arises when a
trader encounters a trade that is not working and takes it personally. This type of
trader has a major issue accepting that the trade has not worked and they are “wrong.”
I check my ego before I start my day. There is no wrong or right. The trades either
work or they don’t work. My day starts with the firm belief that anything can happen
and I need to be humble. Otherwise I will probably be out of business. I know that
the safest thing for me is to take a small loss and move on to the next trade, otherwise
this small loss can have extreme consequences for both my trading account and my
emotional state.
There is no wrong, losing, missing out, second guessing, or any other mental baggage when you are consistent when following your trading plan. You do not look to
avoid anything or any pain. You let the market do its own thing and unfold and let
yourself be available for the opportunity flow. The market is going to do whatever it
wants. The market does not care about you or me.

Don’t Try to Control It
No one can control the market. No one knows where any market is really ever going
for sure.You do not need to know where a market is headed in order to make money.
Why even try to think about it?
Accept the risk!
Define the risk!
Once you do this there is no struggle or pain. You are in the “just do it” mode.
You will not perceive anything that the market can do as threatening. There is nothing
to fear. It’s all about taking responsibility for your trading.
Sadly, most traders have an issue taking responsibility. It is easier to blame the broker, the data, the system, or the market rather than themselves. It is hard to put into
practice taking responsibility. However, those who want to play the blame game will
never be successful trend followers.
In order to reach this elusive level of success you must take responsibility. Successful
traders take responsibility for all of their actions. They trade without any fear or anxiety.

When they are trading their exact plan, they are aware of not being
reckless and every potential outcome has been thought out.
They have restraint, patience, and discipline.
I have seen countless traders who would spend hours planning their trades and instead of just putting them on and seeing what happens they freeze and don’t put them
on. They watch something on CNBC or a friend gives them a tip contrary to their plan
and they do not execute their plan. It is like Murphy’s Law, they do not take the trade,
and these trades could have been the big winner.
Trend followers need these big winners to succeed over time.

It Is All About Attitude

Think Like an Olympic Athlete!
Get in the Nike “Just do it” mode!
World‐class athletes have the winning attitude. They envision themselves in the
now moment. They envision that they have already won. They do not beat themselves

157
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

I have personally seen this occur repeatedly with traders.
I have been investing with commodity trading advisors since 1994. I have seen commodity trading advisors and even my dentist colleague with simple, robust, and even
mediocre trading techniques that have the correct tools as far as mindset outperform
other more astute traders. Some of the better or astute traders might have better analysis
or systematic trend following methodologies; however they lack the proper mindset.
They hesitate, they pick and choose their trades, and they jump the gun or simply pass
on trades they do not like. Some of these traders are simply brilliant; however, they do
not make money.They operate out of fear while the less brilliant trader follows his or her
plan and compounds money over time.
Attitude separates success and failure.
Ideally we would want both and in actuality you need both. With a robust methodology that trades all markets and all time frames the same with proper money management and proper mindset, you are on your way to compounding money. Sadly, most
traders think they need to read every article in the Wall Street Journal or figure out what
will happen in the world to make money.
The truth is much further than that.
Once you start believing in your trading methodology and following it exactly to the
plan, you will realize that no one knows anything more than you, nor is there anything to
predict. Really, no one knows where the dollar is going or where gold is going. If you can
internalize that, anything is possible. Gold can go to $3,000 or $300 and you do not care.
The Dow can go to 20,000 or 2,000. You do not care nor are you at the mercy of
the markets.

up after making errors, they keep going. World‐class athletes just do it, as Nike says.
It is almost the same when we drive a car. We just do it. We learned how to learn, we
wear a seat belt, we have our cars checked, and then we just drive.
It is the same with trading. You can be confident, not overwhelmed with fear or
greed, not afraid to miss out, you just flow with the markets.
You have a positive and reasonable expectation of yourself and your trend following. More so, you accept whatever results you get as an indication of where
you are and what the market gives you. No matter how brilliant you are, if there
are no trends depending on your time frame, you will not make money. My simple
analogy, I tell traders, is that if the fish are not out, you will not catch any fish no
matter how good your fishing rod is.

No Way to Avoid a Loss

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

158

Losses are as natural as profits. When you try to avoid them you will put yourself
in a position to lose even more. There is no holy grail or any guru. Losing is a
natural outcome of trading. Trading patterns and trends repeat themselves but not
every time. When they do not repeat, we have losses. Do not expect the market
to fulfill your expectations. Be pleasantly surprised when a trade works because it
does not have to. As I stated earlier, take responsibility for all outcomes. There is
an endless stream of opportunities. You are responsible for your success and failure as a trend follower. No one else! If you do not follow your plan, you will be
destined to failure. Perceive the endless flow of opportunities. Enter, exit trades
without fear, criticism, or regret and let the plan work over time. Be consistent,
patient, and disciplined. Once you enter this mode of attitude, you flow with the
markets without anger, fear, betrayal, disappointment, or despair. I know this
sounds very pink but it is doable. It took many years of trend following to get
into this mode. That is why you purchased this book and hopefully you will use
my services to help you become a better trader and compound money over time.
Basically, you need to be relaxed when trading. You can’t try to be relaxed; it just
has to be not stressful. It just flows. Have a carefree state of mind. It is similar to driving.You have a carefree state of mind without worry or fear.You just drive.
When you have numerous trades working you are the most susceptible to making mistakes, overtrading, putting on too big of a position, breaking your plan or
rules. Basically, you might feel invincible. This defies common sense and will bring
on disastrous results. Cockiness is the antithesis of successful trading. The markets
are humbling.
The reality is that only a small handful of trend followers are long‐term successful.
When I say small handful I would assume less than 10 percent.
Besides my own trend following I have been investing with other commodity
trading advisors since 1994. There are thousands of them to choose from. However,

there are only a small number of CTAs that I have invested with and compounded
money with. I chose them not just by their record, rather by how they think and
approach risk.
The irony is that countless professional traders do not approach risk in the appropriate way. Now if you take into account nonprofessional traders who do not
address risks, the failure rate skyrockets. Many traders go through boom and bust
cycles. Either they do not have rules or they ignore them. The boom and busters
make money and then end up losing more. Their equity curves look like a roller‐
coaster ride.
There is another group of traders that are the antithesis of the consistent compounding of successful trend followers. All of this has nothing to do with years of
trading or methodologies. It all boils down to attitude, patience, discipline, and
following a well‐thought‐out plan based on risk and money management. But these
traders are full of fear and greed. Successful trend followers check those attributes
at the door. I have heard repeatedly from brokers that their job is to keep their client traders from terminally damaging themselves. It is just a matter of time until
they quit.

■ This Will Not Be You

If I can learn this, so can you!
I did not go to Harvard!
I did not work for a large hedge fund.
Some of the most successful trend followers do not have large staffs or trading
floors. Rather, they work out of their house or small offices. Bill Dunn, an extremely

159
THE TREND FOLLOWER MINDSET

My goal is to help you compound money over time. I had a mentor who taught me
how to think. My mentors taught me that there is no holy grail. My mentors taught
me my money would be made over a long series of trades. My mentors taught me that
the market does not care about me. I cannot get revenge on the market. My mentors
taught me to take responsibility for my attitudes and my perspectives.
This thought sticks out with a definition of a winning attitude:
A positive expectation of my efforts all the while accepting my results are a
reflection of where I am at in my learning and development as a trend follower.
I have gotten to the point of just doing it! I have no fear or hesitation. I have developed a winning attitude. I am solely responsible for my winning attitude. I do
not expect or demand anything from the markets. I do not expect that markets
will do anything special for me or simply give me anything. The markets have a
life of their own.

successful trend follower, started in the 1970s out of his house. At his pinnacle of
success Bill Dunn was running in excess of $2 billion out of a small office. Another
example is David Druz, who is currently managing $100 million and works only with
a compliance worker who runs his office. Trend followers do not have large infrastructures in place.
You will not need it either. After you have done the proper mental work, the actual
trading does not take much time from your day. Within 30–60 minutes a day you can
complete all of your trading.

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

160

The Trend Following Bible: How Professional Traders Compound Wealth and Manage Risk
by Andrew Abraham
Copyright © 2013 by Andrew Abraham, Inc.

CHAPTER 10

My Trading
Journal
T

o give you the full realistic picture of trend following, I am including my proprietary trading results in a diary fashion. I do not trade that often. A good trading
day is a day in which I do not put on a trade. On average in both models I only trade
100 times a year. This keeps my slippage and commissions to a minimum. My trading
programs are systematic without any discretion used and tested over the years. Prior
to the fall of 2009 I primarily had one account and all of my trading programs were put
in this one account. I decided to segregate my trading in order to build my proprietary
track record. Even though I have been trading the same methodologies over the years,
I have added filters based on my experiences and mistakes. I was not searching for the
holy grail; rather, I have added risk filters over the years.
I have been trading in real time two models that are very close to being identical in
the rules and thought processes of the trading plan I have presented above.These trading
programs are based on unit sizes.
One unit is based on an account size of $150,000 Global Diversified and the other
account size is $300,000 Diversified. Both accounts trade the liquid futures markets. I believe when we trade the futures markets we trade and make ourselves available for every
aspect of our human existence.What I mean by this is, we wake up in the morning.We eat
cereal, wheat. We drink coffee. We get dressed, cotton. We get in our cars to go to work.
We put gas in our cars. We pay for the gas with a credit card (interest rates). We invest
in the stock market (stock indexes). We heat our homes, heating oil. We eat chocolate,
cocoa.You get the concept. Each and every one of these is a market. They go up and they
go down. Some of the time they trend. I look to ride these trends in these various markets.

161

Some of the markets in which I look to take trades are the following:

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

162

Australian dollar

Eurodollar

Soybeans

Soybean oil

Gold

Sugar

British pound

Copper

Swiss franc

Corn

Heating oil

Silver

Cocoa

Japanese yen

Soymeal

Canadian dollar

Lean hogs

S&P 500

Crude

Live cattle

10‐year bond

Cotton

Nasdaq

Wheat

Dollar index

Natural gas

30‐year bond

They are all liquid and highly traded. I have no opinion on any of these markets.
As in the rules I delineated in the prior chapters, I look to buy the strongest based on
the average rate of change and sell the weakest based on the average rate of change.
The difference between the two models is the risk I am willing to take, anticipated
returns, and anticipated drawdowns. The $300,000 Diversified unit model size is built
to be less volatile (at least try to be) with lower returns and lower drawdowns. The
$150,000 Global Diversified unit model size is slightly more aggressive, anticipates
greater drawdowns, and trades fewer markets due to its size. These models are based
on the rules expressed in the prior chapters. I have been researching and testing with
my passionate programmer for approximately one year to come up with a model in
which the returns are very modest and with lower volatility than the current two
models. The attempted goal is not how much we can generate but with the focus (attempt) to keep the draw downs, very low.
The $150,000 Global Diversified model takes on slightly more risk. It risks 1.25
percent maximum on any trade. However, many of the trades end up losing less than
this. In reality, as we are dealing in uncertainty, some trade losses have exceeded 1.25
percent. There are a few trades in which even though I had stops in the market, which
were placed immediately upon my entry, the price gapped above or below. More so,
there are periods when there will be limit moves in which one cannot exit. We are
dealing with risk and uncertainty. I have accepted the risk and try to mitigate as much
as possible, but it is not completely possible. Another slight variance of the model is
that I am willing to take on only a maximum risk of $2,000 per contract regardless
of total account size on the Global Diversified unit. What is ironic to investors is that
these slight differences have produced dramatically different real‐time results. It truly
exemplifies the realities of what I have expressed.
The $300,000 Diversified unit size model maximum risk is .75 percent. This is less
than 1 percent. I built the model in order to try to smooth out returns. Future results
will be interesting to see if this is the case. As we all know, past performance is not
indicative of future performance. More so, I am willing to risk $2,500 per contract.

I will chronicle the real‐time results of both starting from January 2010 to March
2012. I will demonstrate the realities of what possibility you might encounter.
Figure 10.1 shows what transpired with the $300,000 diversified unit model.

FIGURE 10.1

Equity Curve

For My Proprietary Account: $300,000 Diversified:
2009 (September–December) –2.73 percent net of fees
2010 +11.64 percent net of fees
2011 –2.10 percent net of fees
My $150,000 Global Diversified unit model equity curve in Figure 10.2 is from
January 2010 till March 2012, the time of this writing.

163
MY TRADING JOURNAL

Right off the bat I started experiencing a drawdown. As I stated I opened the separate proprietary account in the fall of 2009. Actually from that point all I experienced
was a drawdown. At the end of July 2010 while I was on vacation with my family, for
whatever reason several markets started to move. I did not do anything special other
than make myself available and they took off. My account for this unit jumped to the
$410,000 range in approximately October 2010. That is the good news. The reality is
that I have been in a drawdown since then, 17 months and no profits. This is the reality
of trend following. Do not think this is easy or retirement in a box. One trade after the
next I have put on. I have been waking up at 5 a.m. every trading day and not seen a
profit for 17 months. I have not nor will I quit. This is trend following. Trend following
is a marathon.

FIGURE 10.2 Real Time Equity Curve of Diversified Program

What you need to notice is the long periods when nothing has happened. Nothing
has to happen when trading. I had a very short run up and then for 17 months I have
been in a drawdown. Welcome to the reality of trend following.
For My Proprietary Account

164

2010 +34.27 percent net of fees

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

2009 (November–December) –1.12 percent net of fees

2011 –11.46 percent net of fees
There are only 4 possibilities when trading. One can have big losses, small losses, small
profits, and rare large profits. The above demonstrate this. In my $300,000 unit size,
Figure 10.3 shows some of the trades.

FIGURE 10.3

Example of Small Losses and small profits

Actually all that transpired for the first several months were small losses and small
gains up until the end of March 2010 (Figure 10.4). I had a Eurodollar breakdown
trade. Ironically the immediate trade before to go short ended in a small loss. Each
trade is statistically independent and the prior trade has no bearing.
The short Eurodollar was a trade that lasted for approximately three months with
2 percent gain. Nothing to get excited about, but it offset some of the other trades
that did not work. I went short March 22, 2010, and covered the short June 21, 2010.
What is interesting is as always, I did not get out at the bottom. I gave back some of

Eurodollar Trades
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 10.4

165
MY TRADING JOURNAL

my open trade equity. My trailing stop allowed the trade to work and when the Eurodollar hit my stop, I exited. Remember, only liars get out at bottoms and at tops.
Trend followers try to take a piece out of the move. We give it enough room to work
but many times Murphy’s law steps in and just as we exit, the trade turns around. The
only solution to this is not trade. There is nothing perfect about trading. We try our
best to catch trends when and if they are present. In the interim there were more small
trades that I lost money on and some on which I made a small amount. Continuing, I
stumbled into a nice interest rate trade in the beginning of May 2010. Trend followers
do not know the future, all we try to do is follow our plan and be consistent. In the
beginning of May 2010 I had a signal to purchase the 30‐year bonds. That was on May
5, 2010. That trade lasted until September 10, 2010. What I want to point out on this
trade was the proverbial let your winners run. You need to have patience when trend
following. You cannot panic and hit the cash register prematurely. If you cannot have
the patience to be in the trade for such a long period for whatever reason—greed,
boredom, or fear—you need to change your thought processes. If you do not have the
patience to let your winners run, you will not be in this field that long.You really need
the winning trades to make up for all the inherent losses when trading.
The trade shown in Figure 10.5 returned 4.2 percent or $11,925. One day after this
trade there was a signal for the 10 years. I took that trade because I did not supersede
more than a 5 percent correlation in my interest rate sector. This was the last trade for
the interest rate sector. I filled my quota. This is an important issue not to miss. No matter how good a trade looks, follow the plan. Make sure the plan includes the proper risk
management. The 10‐year trade was a good trade at a return of 2.2 percent or $6,331.
That was the good news. However, after these two unique nice trades that worked, I
experienced three months of nothing but typical small losses and small profits.An example is the loss I had in corn of –$2,100 or –.7 percent.The key is to keep the losses small
(Figures 10.6 and 10.7).

30 Year Bonds
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 10.5

THE TREND FOLLOWING BIBLE

166

FIGURE 10.6 10 Year Bonds

MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

There were small profits but in general I was just treading water waiting for something to trend either upward or downward.
The trade on soymeal that worked was not outstanding; rather, a 1 percent profit
of $2,885. Prior to this trade there was a trade that did not work. Examples like the
soymeal trade prove that one has to take every trade. We cannot pick and choose our
trades. We do not know the future and we must be consistent (Figure 10.8).

Corn
MetaStock®. Copyright© 2012 Thomson Reuters. All rights reserved.

FIGURE 10.7

167

Toward the end of the three‐month period in the end of July there was a beginning of a nice trend. On July 30, 2010, I entered a soybean trade. When I put this
trade on I had no idea it was going to work. I ended up staying in the soybean trade
until November 17, 2010. This trade highlights why you need to be patient and let
the trades work (when they work). I did not get nervous or anxious to take a profit.
I simply followed the tenet of good trend following—let your profits run. This trade
