Candlestick
and
Pivot Point
Trading
Triggers
Setups for Stock, Forex,
and Futures Markets

JOHN L. PERSON

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Additional Praise for

Candlestick and Pivot Point
Trading Triggers
“Coming from the trading floor, it wasn’t until we started building charting
software that I realized how little I knew about the retail trader’s passion
for technical analysis. John’s latest book clearly defines many of the delicate intricacies of trading patterns and key turning points. I’m a junkie for
this type of stuff and I learned a ton from this book.”
—Tom Sosnoff
CEO, thinkorswim Group
“As a professional options trader and teacher, I have always told my students that to be consistently successful in the markets, you must first
identify the opportunity and then apply the best strategy for you that fits
that opportunity. Candlestick and Pivot Point Trading Triggers is the answer to the first step: finding and identifying the best opportunities to trade.
John breaks down pivot points, a sophisticated form of technical analysis,
in a surprisingly simple way, and then combines it with candlesticks to create a simple and easy-to-use system. This system, unlike most others, is
consistently able to predict highs and lows of stocks and other securities
for multiple timeframes with amazing accuracy. This is a great book for
traders of all experience levels and I am making it mandatory reading for all
of my students.”
—Ron Ianieri
Chief Options Strategist, The Options University
“John Person has built his career on teaching investors how to understand
and use technical analysis. The strategies described in Candlestick and
Pivot Point Trading Triggers are employed by professional traders every
trading session and are the lifeblood of futures and forex investors. If you
want a complete guide to why the smart money buys at this level and sells
at that, you must read John’s book. I heartily endorse it!”
—Jon “Doctor J” Najarian
co-founder of www.optionmonster.com

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing
print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional
and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived
the market’s ever-changing temperament and have prospered—some by
reinventing systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice
trader, professional, or somewhere in-between, these books will provide
the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

Candlestick
and
Pivot Point
Trading
Triggers
Setups for Stock, Forex,
and Futures Markets

JOHN L. PERSON

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2007 by John L. Person. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 6468600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability
or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or
written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be
liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
RealTick® graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. © 1986–2006 Townsend Analytics,
Ltd. All rights reserved. RealTick is a registered trademark of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. Any unauthorized reproduction, alteration, or use of RealTick is strictly prohibited. Authorized use of RealTick does
not constitute an endorsement by Townsend Analytics of this book. Townsend Analytics does not guarantee the accuracy of or warrant any representations made in this book.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. In all
instances where John Wiley & Sons, Inc., is aware of a claim, the product names appear in initial capital
or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate companies for more complete
information regarding trademarks and registration.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Person, John L.
Candlestick and pivot point trading triggers : setups for stock, forex, and futures markets / John L.
Person.
p. cm. — (Wiley trading series)
Includes index.
ISBN-13 978-0-471-98022-3 (cloth)
ISBN-10 0-471-98022-6 (cloth)
1. Stocks—charts, diagrams, etc. 2. Investment analysis. 3. Futures. 4. Options (Finance).
I. Title. II. Series.
HG4638.P468 2007
332.63'2042--dc22
2006011098
Printed in the United States of America.
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

To my wife, Mary,
who is always by my side and who gave me
encouragement and assistance in completing this book.
Thank you from the bottom of my heart
and with all my love.

Contents

Introduction

CHAPTER 1

1

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs,
Futures, and Forex

5

Determining Market Condition:
Bullish, Bearish, or Neutral

77

How to Read Oscillators to Spot
Overbought or Oversold Conditions

93

Momentum Changes: How to
Spot Divergence or Convergence

111

Pivot Points: Determine Key Price
Support and Resistance Areas and
the Importance of Confluence

121

CHAPTER 6

Pivot Point Moving Average System

159

CHAPTER 7

Candle Charts and Top
Reversal Patterns

187

CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3

CHAPTER 4

CHAPTER 5

vii

viii
CHAPTER 8

CONTENTS

Setups and Triggers: Combining
Candles and Pivots

213

CHAPTER 9

Risk Management: Setting Stops

257

CHAPTER 10

Projecting Entry and Exit Points:
Learn to Scale Out

269

The Sample Analysis: The Proof
Is in the Back-Testing

279

Confidence to Pull the Trigger
Comes from Within

307

CHAPTER 11

CHAPTER 12

Glossary

317

About the CD-ROM

335

Index

339

Acknowledgments

want to thank Pamela van Giessen and Jennifer MacDonald of John
Wiley & Sons for allowing me to share my work. I would also like to
thank Cindy Cromwell, Mike Felix, Sarah Neis, and Joanna Pak from
RealTick Software—what a great team! I also extend my sincere gratitude
to Glen Larson and Peter Kilman from Genesis Software for testing my theories and for helping me to develop my trading library on their software.
Between these two charting software companies, any serious trader will
have the best support and the most advanced trading tools to succeed! I
also wish to thank the folks at eSignal.com.
I wish to thank all my past students for taking the initiative to apply
these principles and for testing me while trading. I wish you all the very
most life has to offer!
To my son John, you have made your father proud! Then to Mary, my
wife of 19 years, your help in fixing all my computer and technical issues
was instrumental in helping me finish this project, including completing the
Pivot Point Calculator CD.

I

JOHN L. PERSON

ix

Candlestick
and
Pivot Point
Trading
Triggers

Introduction

o all the individual traders reaching out to learn how to invest and
trade wisely and to all those who are looking for new ideas and who
have been around looking to learn a more positive approach, I say
that after reading this material, you will find a great approach to trading and
will learn the importance of or at least will expand your knowledge on how
to develop your personalized mechanical trading system and learn why that
is important. You will learn specifically what methods and parameters to
use with time-tested material. My first book, A Complete Guide to Technical Trading Tactics, was released in April 2004. It was a great introductory
on how to incorporate pivot point analysis with other forms of technical indicators and how it related to trading commodities. The foresight that book
offered suggested that we would see resurgence in commodity activity and
that commodity markets would soon be in vogue. I had chart examples of
silver at 4.50 per ounce and gold at 350 per ounce. On page 211, I gave an example of a potentially great scale trading opportunity in coffee when it was
as low as 49.00. Sugar was at 7.00. Crude oil was at 21.00. The 30-year bonds
were at 111. The Federal Funds interest rate was at 1.0 percent. There were
great trading opportunities, many of which I was able to take advantage.

T

THINGS CHANGE
Times changed, as did prices of these raw commodities. Other hard asset
products, including housing and real estate, besides the commodity markets, skyrocketed in value. Things changed; global tensions mounted as we
1

2

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

invaded Iraq trying to set a country free. Nations’ economies grew
as new opportunities emerged in places such as China and India. Global
economic growth pushed demand for products through the roof, creating
spectacular price gains. Things changed alright, even intermarket relationships. Gold went up on fears of inflationary pressures in light of the Federal
Reserve (Fed) raising interest rates. In turn, the U.S. dollar rallied as the interest rate differentials widened here in the United States against foreign
central banks.

THE CONUNDRUM
One favorite word among economists in 2005 was conundrum, which was
used by then-chairman of the Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan. This was
the term he used to describe the event of Treasury yields declining while
the Fed was raising interest rates. The Federal Reserve moved to raise interest rates 14 consecutive times in 0.25 percent increments in an effort to
reduce inflationary pressures. Bond yields, instead of moving in tandem
with the Fed’s rate hikes, declined. Short-term Treasury instruments were
yielding more than longer-term, and what developed was known as a flattening of the yield curve. At some points, we even had an inversion effect,
where longer-term interest rate instrument yields were lower than shorterterm. Throughout history, that is a sign that the economy will soon proceed
into a recession.

HISTORY SHOULD REPEAT ITSELF
Often it is said that history repeats itself. Economies and the world move in
cycles. Based on the market’s price behavior and the climb that commodity prices had, intermarket relationships were not moving in a traditional
way in 2005, or at least not in a manner in which they had in the past. History should have repeated itself, but it did not; or if it does, it will be a delayed reaction. Due to this keen observation, there was one solid piece of
advice I was constantly giving to people through our trading room or in my
newsletter advisory service. It was, “Trade the markets independently of
each other.” One reason for this advice was this: Not much was making
sense at times in the traditional way. Let’s face it, when crude oil or energies shoot to the moon, it is inflationary and has a taxing effect on consumers. We would have expected stocks to sell off sharply, and they did not
(they did not rally much either in 2005). When federal deficits soar, it creates inflationary pressures; when the Fed raises interest rates, yields should

Introduction

3

go up and Treasury prices should go down. The key word is “should go
down.” What happened was just the opposite. Gold was the only mover that
acted in response to investors’ demand for protection on resurgence in inflation. In fact, at times, price swings of gold interacted well with crude oil.

DELAYED REACTION
As of February 2006, the U.S. economy was in its third year of an economic
recovery. It remained a stock picker’s market, as we did see stellar moves
from Apple, Rambus, AMD, and other lost hopefuls. But there were other
investors who were expanding their knowledge in trading other investment
assets, such as foreign currencies. There were others who made fortunes in
real estate. Unemployment in January 2006 was reported at 4.7 percent.
Times were good and were probably going to remain good forever! Well,
that’s where I must say, “You can’t cheat history.” As the old saying goes, if
it’s got four legs and a tail, it’s probably an animal. I see a delayed reaction
and an economic downturn. Will it be the end of civilization as we know it
today? I doubt it. However, I believe we will go into a period of an economic
slowdown. Why? For starters, usually we see energy and commodity prices
rally near the peak of an economic upturn. Then, as the Fed fights inflation,
they will continue to put the brakes on and continue to raise interest rates.
Since no one knows for sure how soon or by how much consumers will adjust their spending habits, usually the Fed will go too far. That will slow borrowing and increase debt payments, especially on all those adjustable
mortgage rates (ARMs) that so many people have. Yes, I believe an economic downturn will occur. I just believe it will be a delayed reaction. It
seems that most cycles have stretched a little further than people believe.
Just ask all the folks who predicted a stock market crash in 1999. They
were right, but quite a bit off in their timing. That leaves one to wonder
where to go to make money.

TRADING FOR A LIVING
If you don’t already know of my past, I started in the business as a runner
on the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange back in the late 1970s. I
had the privilege of working with a true master trader, George Lane, the
creator of stochastics. I had a knack for the financial markets and learned
to trade the 30-year bonds. I also discovered how to use pivot points and
how to incorporate longer-term time periods in my analysis. Then came options on commodities; and in 1986 I made a fortune for myself and others in

4

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

the bond market. I gradually improved my techniques; and through the understanding of candle charts while using them in conjunction with pivot
points, I have developed quite a methodology that shows a high frequency
of recurring patterns. This is what I believe is one of the single best methods for identifying market moves for various trading vehicles. Trading for a
living is a fabulous career. Now more than ever, we have global market influences, advanced technology, equal access, market liquidity, and, best of
all, diversified markets investment vehicles. We have forex, or foreign currency exchange; futures products to day trade; and commodities that allow
speculators to participate in a structured, regulated, open marketplace that
offers leverage. Then we have stocks to participate in investing for longterm growth. And there is a new breed of investment asset, exchange
traded funds. Most of these products offer options so as to hedge or speculate to fully capture a market opportunity and develop the right strategy to
enhance rewards wile reducing risks.

THE NEW AGE TECHNICIAN
As a technician, one who practices the art of technical analysis, I have now
more than at any time in the past a greater edge in the marketplace.
Through electronic market access and charting software with the power of
today’s computers, I can take my refined market analysis methods and implement these strategies and apply them to all markets. As long as there is
liquidity and a structured environment, and as long as I keep my trading
capital intact, follow specific trading rules to manage risk, there will be a
bonanza of opportunities in the years ahead. I fully expect the techniques
that I am sharing with you in this book to help you discover how to be a
consistently profitable trader. This book opens the door to how you can
learn to read charts and rely on price rather than on indicators. You will
learn what triggers momentum and what to look for in order to spot when
a market changes direction. Another important element of this book is that
it will help you learn techniques to cut your losses quickly and to stay with
the winning trend, to ride a winning tide.

CHAPTER 1

Trading Vehicles,
Stock, ETFs,
Futures,
and Forex

elcome to Trading Triggers. If you are an active trader or a firsttime investor looking for a trading method that suits your personality, then you have the right book. Trading for a living is an
amazing and yet risky business. There is more to trading than buying and
selling. There are often-missed but important issues that many books do
not mention, such as not only how to make money in the market but also
how to keep it and create a positive cash flow. The purpose of this book is
to take you to a new level of trading knowledge by giving detailed explanations of technical tools that will help you develop your own trading system
so you can cultivate and extract money from the market, especially those
traders who want high alpha (big returns) with reasonable standard deviation (volatility). I will explain some of the most obvious yet simple concepts
of how to interpret technical analysis and improve your chart-reading skills
so you can make money in the markets.
There are two theories on how markets perform: efficient market theory and random walk theory.

W

1. Efficient market theory lends to the belief that markets are always

priced correctly because the current price reflects all factual information. If the markets are efficient, then no fundamental information will
give an investor an edge in the market.
2. Random walk theory lends to the belief that price movements do not
follow any pattern or trend and that past price behavior cannot be used

5

6

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

to predict future price movements. In other words, the markets are
completely unpredictable.
I fall in the category of believing that history can and does repeat itself.
People can and do make money based on technical analysis, and I am here
to help prove it.

IMPORTANCE OF A RULE-BASED APPROACH
You may have heard of Jesse Livermore, who was immortalized by Edwin
Lefèvre’s book Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (G. H. Doran, 1923;
Wiley, 2006). Jesse was considered one of the greatest speculators of his
day. Many of his principles and ideas are still used. His three key concepts
of trading are (1) timing, (2) risk management, and (3) emotional control.
This quote from Richard Smitten’s Trade Like Jesse Livermore (Wiley,
2005, p. 70) sticks with me because it is as true now as it ever was (keep in
mind that Jesse committed suicide in 1940, so this was stated nearly 70
years ago): “All through time, people have basically acted the same way in
the stock and commodity markets as a result of greed, fear, ignorance, and
hope: that is why the formations and patterns recur on a constant basis. The
patterns the traders and technicians observe are simply the reflections of
human emotional behavior.”
Most traders who are consistently profitable have learned to develop a
rule-based approach that doesn’t change. They have within their arsenal of
trading tools, definitive, recognizable, and frequently reoccurring patterns
that can be used to trade by a set of established trading rules. They can
clearly define, without guessing or using a vague approach, support and resistance levels and what to do once prices reach those levels. Moreover,
they have the ability to clearly define their entry, stop-loss, or risk parameters and their profit objectives in a consistent, repetitious fashion each time
they place a trade. This is what I do when trading my own account and what
I have taught my son and even my own father. My dad used to think trading
commodities was like gambling until I showed him a method. This is the
same method that will be disclosed in these pages.
It is important for you to realize that it is the emotional balance that
helps keep you on the profitable side of the ledger. You must never anticipate what the market might do, but rather wait for confirmation on
your triggers.
Most traders who are profitable are flexible as to the anticipated outcome that may occur on each trade. Successful traders have the mindset to
develop the perspective that their trading business is to manage their

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

7

money rather than to predict the future. Successful traders can emotionally
handle losing trades or the negative trades that result from an error or
trading equipment malfunction. Remember that the business of trading
for a living requires that you establish some kind of structure in a marketplace with countless variables. Why not consider trading by a set of rules?
Most traders do not trade by a system; the term “black box” just means
that a trader has input a set of trading parameters and automatically executes a trade based on a specific set of criteria—strict rules to automatically trade by.

START TRADING AS A BUSINESS
If you are currently trading for a living or if you are expanding your knowledge to learn how to trade for a living, remember that this is a business. You
need to treat it like a business. Therefore, some considerations need to be
made, for example, forming a corporation in order to deduct such expenses
as your computer equipment, quote feed, DSL (digital subscriber line), office rent, travel to investment conferences, and continued education seminars. What matters most to every trader and investor is creating a positive
cash flow. You wouldn’t want to finally start learning to make money consistently in the market and find out that you cannot take any expense deductions. You should seek advice from a tax specialist so that you can take
advantage of all regular and necessary expenses as business deductions
and save thousands of dollars each year.
Let’s add up the examples I mentioned: Suppose your quote feed is
$200 per month and your DSL is $40 per month. Renting a small one-room
office could run $500 to $700 per month. Then there are equipment expenses, such as your desktop computers, a laptop for travel, monitors and
printers and ink cartridges and general office supplies to purchase and upgrade from time to time, say $2,000. Attending an investment conference
could mean $700 roundtrip airfare, plus $250 per night for hotel and meals.
If you have business entertaining expenses and went to at least two conferences per year, you could be talking as little as $5,000 to as much as
$25,000 in actual business expenses that can be deducted if you are running
trading as a business.
If you are a first-time smaller investor and decide that trading for a living is something you have the financial resources, time, and emotional
makeup to do, what business plan do you have in place to protect the
money you make in the market? Where will you put your profits as a shortterm trader? Some traders have had many problems with this issue; it is
similar to the old expression of “Robbing Peter to pay Paul.” After all, who
