
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

41

themselves as especially bright and insightful. The reality is that they are enjoying
pretending to be experts, but are talking nonsense. Their predictive ability based on
the fundamentals is pure guesswork and has a 50 percent probability of being correct. Their technical analysis, however, is sound, and if the trade is successful, it is
entirely due to their chart reading and in no way related to their fundamental analysis. Stock pundits also regularly make absurd interpretations of the fundamentals,
like telling listeners to buy GS tomorrow, even though it has been in a bear trend for
six months, because its CEO is strong and he will take action to make end the bear.
Well, that CEO was there last week, last month, and six months ago, yet GS has
been falling relentlessly! Why should it start to rally tomorrow or over the coming
weeks? There is no fundamental reason at all, despite the professorial proclamation by the carnival barker on television whose job is to sell advertising, not to help
you make money. Another pundit might recommend ADM or POT because Africa is
developing quickly, and the improved quality of life of Africans will create demand
for agricultural products. Well, it was growing quickly last month and six months
ago, and nothing is different today. Whenever you hear a pundit make a recommendation based on what he proudly considers to be his profound insight, it is far
better to assume that he is a fool and is on television only to entertain in order to
earn advertising dollars for the network. Instead, simply look at the chart. If the
market is going up, look to buy. If it is going down, look to sell. These television
analysts always make it sound as if their single piece of fundamental information
will control the direction of the market. Markets are far more complex and move
for hundreds of reasons, most of which the television analyst has no way of knowing. The fundamentals are already reflected in the price action, and all you have
to do is look at the chart to understand how the institutions, who are far smarter
than the clown on television and who trade enough dollars to control the direction of the market, view the fundamentals. They analyze all of the data, not just
one small piece, and they base their trades on thorough mathematical analysis, not
some whimsical, simplistic sound bite. Follow them, not the pundit on television.
They will clearly show you what they believe, and they cannot hide it. It is on the
chart in front of you. Incidentally, fundamental analysis is basically a form of technical analysis because fundamental traders are making their decisions based on
charts. However, their charts are of earnings growth, debt growth, revenue, profit
margins, and many other factors. They study momentum, slope, and trend lines so
they are really technicians but do not see themselves that way, and many don’t trust
the technical analysis of price alone.
Why does price move up one tick? It is because there is more volume being bid
at the current price than being offered, and a number of those buyers are willing to
pay even more than the current price, if necessary, to get their orders filled. This
is sometimes described as the market having more buyers than sellers, or as the
buyers being in control, or as buying pressure. Once all of those buy orders that can

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

42

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

possibly be filled are filled at the current price (the last price traded), the remaining
buyers will have to decide whether they are willing to buy at one tick higher. If they
are, they will continue to bid at the higher price. This higher price will make all
market participants reevaluate their perspective on the market. If there continues
to be more volume being bid than offered, price will continue to move up since
there is an insufficient number of contracts being offered by sellers at the last price
to fill the orders of the buyers. At some point, buyers will start offering some of their
contracts as they take partial profits. Also, sellers will perceive the current price as
a good value for a short and offer to sell more than buyers want to buy. Once there
are more contracts being offered by sellers (either buyers who are looking to cover
some or all of their long contracts or new sellers who are attempting to short), all
of the buy orders will be filled at the current price but some sellers will be unable
to find enough buyers. The bid will move down a tick. If there are sellers willing to
sell at this lower price, this will become the new last price.
Because volume controls the direction of the market, beginning traders invariably wonder if market depth can give them an edge in their trading. If they are
placing their trades on a price ladder, they can see the volume at every tick for several ticks above and below the current price. They think that since the information
is there, there must be some way to use it to get an edge. They forget that the market is controlled by computer algorithms, and the programmers are also after every
imaginable edge. When the game centers on quickly processing a lot of information
in a fraction of a second in an attempt to make one or two ticks a thousand times
a day with just a 55 percent success rate, an individual trader will lose every time.
Traders have no way of knowing if what they see is real, or just a trap being set
by one computer to trap other computers. There is a reason why you don’t hear a
lot of professional traders talking about incorporating market depth into their decision making. It is because it is not helpful. Even if traders could process it fast
enough, the edge would be tiny compared to the edge that they can have from reading charts. They would be distracted and end up missing lots of other trades with a
comparable risk, but a larger reward and winning percentage, and would therefore
make less money. Only fight wars that you know you can win.
Since most markets are driven by institutional orders, it is reasonable to wonder whether the institutions are basing their entries on price action or their actions
are causing the price action. The reality is that institutions are not all watching Apple (AAPL) or the SPDR S&P 500 exchange-traded fund (SPY) tick by tick and then
starting a buy program when they see a two-legged pullback on a 1 minute chart.
They have a huge number of orders to be filled during the day and are working to
fill them at the best price. Price action is just one of many considerations, and some
firms will rely on it more and others will rely on it less or not at all. Many firms have
mathematical models and programs that determine when and how much to buy and
sell, and all firms continue to receive new orders from clients all day long.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

43

The price action that traders see during the day is the result of institutional
activity and much less the cause of the activity. When a profitable setup unfolds,
there will be a confluence of unknowable influences taking place during the trade
that results in the trade being profitable or a loser. The setup is the actual first phase
of a move that is already underway and a price action entry lets a trader just jump
onto the wave early on. As more price action unfolds, more traders will enter in
the direction of the move, generating momentum on the charts and causing additional traders to enter. Traders, including institutions, place their bids and offers
for every imaginable reason and the reasons are largely irrelevant. However, sometimes a reason can be relevant, because it will allow smart price action traders to
benefit from trapped traders. For example, if you know that protective stops are
likely located at one tick below a bar and will result in losses to traders who just
bought, then you should consider getting short on a stop at that same price because
you will have a good chance to make a profit off the trapped traders as they are
forced out.
Since institutional activity controls the move and their volume is so huge, and
they place most of their trades with the intention of holding them for hours to
months, most will not be looking to scalp and instead they will defend their original
entries. If Vanguard or Fidelity has to buy stock for one of its mutual funds, its
clients will want the fund to own stock at the end of the day. Clients do not buy
mutual funds with the expectation that the funds will day trade and end up in all
cash by the close. The funds have to own stock, which means they have to buy and
hold, not buy and scalp. For example, after their initial buy, they will likely have
much more to buy and will use any small pullback to add on. If there is none, they
will continue to buy as the market rises.
Some beginning traders wonder who is buying as the market is going straight
up and why anyone would buy at the market instead of waiting for a pullback. The
answer is simple. It is institutions working to fill all of their orders at the best possible price, and they will buy in many pieces as the market continues up. Also, a lot of
this trading is being done by institutional computer algorithms and it will end after
the programs are complete. Other firms trade programs that buy constantly when
the momentum is strong and stop only when the momentum slows. If a trade fails,
it is far more likely the result of the trader misreading the price action than it is of
an institution changing its mind or taking a couple of ticks’ profit within minutes of
initiating a program. The programs are statistically based, and for a trend to continue is statistically likely. The trend will continue until it reaches some technical
point where the odds are that it has gone too far. It is not as if there is some single
trend line or measured move target that all of the software writers will agree on.
There are actually countless key technical points on the chart. The market turns
when enough of them occur in the same area. One firm’s programs will use some,
and another firm will use others. If enough firms are betting on a reversal in the

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

44

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

same general area, the reversal will occur. At that point, the math favors a reversal;
the institutions will take partial profits, and the quantitative analyst (quant) firms
will take positions in the opposite direction. These algorithms will continue trading
in the opposite direction until the market overshoots again, at which point the math
favors a reversal and the quants will once again bet in the opposite direction.
If institutions are smart, profitable, and responsible for every tick, why would
they ever buy the highest tick in a bull trend (or sell the lowest tick in a bear trend)?
It is because that is what their algorithms have been doing profitably all of the way
up, and some are designed to continue to do it until it is clear that the bull trend is
no longer in effect. They lose on that final buy, but make enough on all of their earlier trades to offset that loss. Remember, all of their systems lose between 30 and
70 percent of the time, and this is one of those times. There are also HFT firms that
will scalp for even a single tick right up to the high tick of a bull trend. The high is
always at a resistance level, and many HFT firms will buy a tick or two below resistance to try to capture that final tick, if their systems show that this is a profitable
strategy. Other institutions are buying as part of a hedge in another market (stocks,
options, bonds, currencies, etc.) because they perceive that their risk/reward ratio
is better by placing the hedge. The volume is not from small individual traders,
because they are responsible for less than 5 percent of the volume at major
turning points.
The only importance of realizing that institutions are responsible for price action is that it makes placing trades based on price action more reliable. Most institutions are not going to be day trading in and out, making the market reverse after
every one of your entries. Your price action entry is just a piggyback trade on their
activity, but, unlike them, you are scalping all or part of your trade.
Incidentally, if a scalper is using a stop that is larger than his profit target, he has
to win on 70 percent or more of their trades to be profitable. Very few traders can
consistently win 70 percent of the time, and therefore most traders should never
use a stop that is larger than the profit target. However, when traders see a situation where the potential profit is at least as large as the risk and they are at least
60 percent confident about the setup, then they can consider taking the trade. Most
traders should start out looking for swing trades where the profit is at least twice
as large as the risk. The probability of success is usually only 40 to 50 percent, and
there are only a few opportunities a day, but the chance of being profitable longterm is greater. There are times when a swing setup has a chance of success of
60 percent or more, but these are usually during strong breakouts. These are difficult for most traders to take because of the limited time to analyze the trade and
the large bars and, therefore, larger risk, but the math is often the best that a trader
will ever have.
There are some firms that day trade substantial volume. However, for their
trades to be profitable the market has to move many ticks in their direction, and

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

45

price action traders will see the earliest parts of the move, allowing them to get
in early and be confident that the odds of a successful scalp are high. Those firms
cannot have the market go 15 ticks against them if they are trying to scalp four
or eight ticks. Therefore, they will enter only when they feel that the risk of an
adverse move is small. If you read their activity on the charts, you should likewise be confident in your trade, but always have a stop in the market in case your
read is wrong or other institutions overwhelm the current move with trades in the
opposite direction.
There is often a pullback that tests the entry bar’s extreme to the tick. For
example, if there is a long entry, the buyers will often place their protective sell
stop at one tick below the low of that entry bar just after the bar closes. It is fairly
common to see a pullback that comes down exactly to the low of that entry bar but
not one tick lower. This means that the stops were not run, and that there must be
institutional size volume protecting the stops. Since it is such an obvious price on
the chart, they are doing this buying based on price action.
In the 5 minute Emini, there are certain price action events that change the
perspective of smart traders. For example, if there is a two-legged pullback (an
ABC) in a bull trend and the market then trades above the high of the prior bar,
many buyers will be long at one tick above that prior bar’s high (a high 2 long entry).
If the market then trades below the low of the two-legged pullback, everyone will
assume that the market will likely have at least one more leg down. If you are an
institutional trader and you bought that high 2, you do not want it to fail and you
will buy more all the way down to one tick above that key protective stop price.
That institution is using price action to support its long.

HIGH-FREQUENCY TRADING
It is important to realize that a large and increasing part of the daily stock, futures,
exchange-traded fund, currency, commodity, and options volume is being executed
by high-frequency trading (HFT) firms that have algorithms designed by quantitative analysts called quants. Most of the programmers have master’s degrees or PhDs
in mathematics, quantitative analysis, engineering, programming, or physics, and
the best ones make a $1 million a year for their efforts. Some algorithms hold positions for a fraction of a second, and others for an hour or two. Every imaginable
strategy is used, including models based on complex financial analysis of huge volumes of data, to simple statistical aberrations. Every idea has to have sound logic,
and back-testing has to confirm that it is effective. Some programmers tweak their
programs during the day to give them an edge for the next few hours. Many programs operate in the world of nanoseconds (a billionth of a second), and every

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

46

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

advance in hardware and software that reduces the latency between receiving data
and getting orders filled is employed. The fastest programming languages and operating systems are also used to reduce the latency. Since their edge is very small
and hundreds of millions of dollars are at stake, HFT firms tend to be secretive,
stealthy, and filled with smart people.
CBS’s 60 Minutes ran a story on HFT in October 2010 and reported that as
much as 70 percent of the volume and over a billion shares of stock daily were
being traded by HFT programs. This is somewhat misleading because the HFT
firms are only part of the algorithm trading world. There are other programs that
are designed for longer-term trading and are also part of that 70 percent. Both
the instantaneous high-frequency trading software and the longer-term program
trading software are created by quantitative analysts. These quants are mathematicians, and the ones who design the HFT programs care nothing about charts or
fundamentals and are interested only in short-term market tendencies based on
statistical analysis. Most of them don’t even care about 5 minute charts, and their
trading has nothing to do with whatever chart you are watching during the day.
In its report, 60 Minutes interviewed the head of Tradeworx, a small HFT firm
of mathematicians and quants that was trading 40 million shares a day on its basket
of 4,500 stocks. That means that the firm is averaging 10,000 shares per day per
stock. Since the traders are often making only a penny or a fraction of a penny
per trade, they hold their positions for only a few seconds to a few minutes, and
their position size is probably very small. Computers do all of the trading because
the opportunities that they are trading exist for only a fraction of a second and
humans are too slow to capture them. Because they are trading 4,500 companies,
one of those companies is ranked 4,500th in terms of size and probably average
daily volume. This means that some of the companies they are trading trade just
a few hundred thousand shares or less a day. If they trade 10,000 shares in that
company and 50 other HFT firms also trade 10,000 shares, that would be 5 million
shares a day. Because this is more than the total volume traded in that company, it is
likely that Tradeworx is often trading 1,000 shares or fewer per trade. The traders
are obviously not trading 10,000 shares in every stock, but that is their average,
based on the 40 million shares that they trade and Tradeworx’s basket of 4,500
stocks. They are probably trading larger volume and more often in companies that
have huge daily volume, but they would still have to be trading very small volume
on many stocks. Many firms trade with the goal of scalping a penny or less on each
trade, holding the trade for a few seconds to a few minutes.
Their programs are based solely on statistics. The edge in trading is always very
small, but if it has a high mathematical certainty and you use it thousands of times
a day, it theoretically will produce consistent profits. This is the same principle on
which casinos make their money. On most games, their edge is only 3 percent or
less, but they are more than 99 percent certain that the edge is real and not just

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

47

a coincidence. If a casino only has one customer, and he bets a billion dollars on
a single bet, the casino has a 47 percent chance of going out of business on that
bet. However, when thousands of gamblers place small bets every day, the odds
are overwhelming that the casinos will consistently make money. The same is true
for HFT firms.
One hypothetical strategy that this quant mentioned was buying $5 of every
stock that fell 5 percent in the past week and shorting $10 of every stock that went
up 10 percent in the past week on the basket of 4,500 stocks. The number of winners is only slightly greater than the number of losers, but when you trade a system
with a slight edge often enough, you can generate a consistent profit, just like the
casinos. He said that his firm sometimes loses two or three days in a row but has
never had a losing month. One person interviewed mentioned that one firm reportedly made money every day for four consecutive years. You have to assume that
they test every strategy that they can imagine, based on every piece of data available, including spreads, volumes, related markets, and the overall market, and if
the testing shows that they have an edge, then they will trade it until it no longer
continues to test well.
These firms get information about order flow a few milliseconds before everyone else and they spend tens of thousands of dollars a month to be as close to
the exchange as possible to get their information as quickly as possible, and they
also run the fastest computers available. Every extra millisecond that they can buy
increases their edge. Their computers place and cancel thousands of order per second to get a sense of the impending market direction, and then they use this information to get in and out as early as possible. The technology is rapidly changing
and since computerized trading controls most of the volume, it controls most of
the price action, and this will likely always be the case. One important benefit to
individual traders is that the huge volume makes liquidity high and allows traders
to exit and enter with small spreads, reducing the cost of trading.
Dow Jones & Company now has a news service called Lexicon that transmits
machine-readable financial news to its subscribers. Lexicon scans all of the Dow
Jones stories about stocks and converts the information into a form that the algorithms can use to make decisions to buy and sell stocks in a fraction of a second.
Other algorithms operate on a longer time frame and analyze stock performance
and earnings statements, in addition to the news feeds, to make trading decisions.
Some use differential evolution optimizing software to generate data that is used to
generate other data. They can continue to refine the data until it reaches some level
of mathematical certainty, and then the result is used to automatically buy or sell
stocks. Some orders are so huge that they take time to place, and algorithmic trading software breaks the orders into small pieces to conceal the trading from traders
who would try to capitalize on the incipient trend. Predatory trading algorithms
try to unravel what the algorithm trading programs are trying to hide. Everyone is
