
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"Why in Hades didn't you tell me you meant him!"
yelled the broker. "You cost me thirty-five hundred
dollars!" He didn't believe in family tips. The farther away
the source the purer the tip.
Old Westlake was a rich and successful banker and
promoter. He ran across John W. Gates one day. Gates
asked him what he knew. "If you will act on it I'll give you
a tip. If you won't I'll save my breath," answered old
Westlake grumpily.
"Of course I'll act on it," promised Gates cheerfully.
"Sell Reading! There is a sure twenty-five points in it,
and possibly more. But twenty-five absolutely certain,"
said Westlake impressively.
"I'm much obliged to you," and Bet-you-a-million Gates
shook hands warmly and went away in the direction of his
broker's office.
Westlake had specialized on Reading. He knew all about
the company and stood in with the insiders so that the
market for the stock was an open book to him and
everybody knew it. Now he was advising the western
plunger to go short of it.
Well, Reading never stopped going up. It rose
something like one hundred points in a few weeks. One
day old West-lake ran smack up against John W. in the
Street, but he made out he hadn't seen him and was
walking on. John W. Gates caught up with him, his face all
smiles and held out his hand. Old Westlake shook it
dazedly.
"I want to thank you for that tip you gave me on
Reading," said Gates.
"I didn't give you any tip," said Westlake, frowning.
"Sure you did. And it was a Jim Hickey of a tip too. I
made sixty thousand dollars."
"Made sixty thousand dollars?"

230

XVI

"Sure! Don't you remember? You told me to sell
Reading; so I bought it! I've always made money coppering
your tips, Westlake," said John W. Gates pleasantly.
"Always!"
Old Westlake looked at the bluff Westerner and
presently remarked admiringly, "Gates, what a rich man
I'd be if I had your brains!"
The other day I met Mr. W. A. Rogers, the famous
cartoonist, whose Wall Street drawings brokers so greatly
admire. His daily cartoons in the New York Herald for
years gave pleasure to thousands. Well, he told me a story.
It was just before we went to war with Spain. He was
spending an evening with a broker friend. When he left he
picked up his derby hat from the rack, at least he thought
it was his hat, for it was the same shape and fitted him
perfectly.
The Street at that time was thinking and talking of
nothing but war with Spain. Was there to be one or not? If
it was to be war the market would go down; not so much
on our own selling as on pressure from European holders
of our securities. If peace, it would be a cinch to buy
stocks, as there had been considerable declines prompted
by the sensational clamorings of the yellow papers. Mr.
Rogers told me the rest of the story as follows:
"My friend, the broker, at whose house I had been the
night before, stood in the Exchange the next day anxiously
debating in his mind which side of the market to play. He
went over the pros and cons, but it was impossible to
distinguish which were rumours and which were facts.
There was no authentic news to guide him. At one moment
he thought war was inevitable, and on the next he almost
convinced himself that it was utterly unlikely. His
perplexity must have caused a rise in his temperature, for
he took off his derby to wipe his fevered brow. He couldn't
tell whether he should buy or sell.

231

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"He happened to look inside of his hat. There in gold
letters was the word WAR. That was all the hunch he
needed. Was it not a tip from Providence via my hat? So he
sold a raft of stock, war was duly declared, he covered on
the break and made a killing." And then W. A. Rogers
finished, "I never got back that hat!"
But the prize tip story of my collection concerns one of
the most popular members of the New York Stock
Exchange, J. T. Hood. One day another floor trader, Bert
Walker, told him that he had done a good turn to a
prominent director of the Atlantic & Southern. In return
the grateful insider told him to buy all the A. & S. he could
carry. The directors were going to do something that
would put the stock up at least twenty-five points. All the
directors were not in the deal, but the majority would be
sure to vote as wanted.
Bert Walker concluded that the dividend rate was going
to be raised. He told his friend Hood and they each bought
a couple of thousand shares of A. & S. The stock was very
weak, before and after they bought, but Hood said that was
obviously intended to facilitate accumulation by the inside
clique, headed by Bert's grateful friend.
On the following Thursday, after the market closed, the
directors of the Atlantic & Southern met and passed the
dividend. The stock broke six points in the first six
minutes of trading Friday morning.
Bert Walker was sore as a pup. He called on the grateful
director, who was brokenhearted about it and very
penitent. He said that he had forgotten that he had told
Walker to buy. That was the reason he had neglected to
call him up to tell him of a change in the plans of the
dominant faction in the board. The remorseful director
was so anxious to make up that he gave Bert another tip.
He kindly explained that a couple of his colleagues wanted
to get cheap stock and against his judgment resorted to
coarse work. He had to yield to win their votes. But now
232

XVI

that they all had accumulated their full lines there was
nothing to stop the advance. It was a double, riveted, leadpipe cinch to buy A. & S. now.
Bert not only forgave him but shook hands warmly with
the high financier. Naturally he hastened to find his friend
and fellow-victim, Hood, to impart the glad tidings to him.
They were going to make a killing. The stock had been
tipped for a rise before and they bought. But now it was
fifteen points lower. That made it a cinch. So they bought
five thousand shares, joint account.
As if they had rung a bell to start it, the stock broke
badly on what quite obviously was inside selling. Two
specialists cheerfully confirmed the suspicion. Hood sold
out their five thousand shares. When he got through Bert
Walker said to him, "If that blankety-blank blanker hadn't
gone to Florida day before yesterday I'd lick the stuffing
out of him. Yes, I would. But you come with me."
"Where to?" asked Hood.
"To the telegraph office. I want to send that skunk a
telegram that he'll never forget. Come on."
Hood went on. Bert led the way to the telegraph office.
There, carried away by his feelings they had taken quite a
loss on the five thousand shares he composed a
masterpiece of vituperation. He read it to Hood and
finished, "That will come pretty near to showing him what
I think of him."
He was about to slide it toward the waiting clerk when
Hood said, "Hold on, Bert!"
"What's the matter?"
"I wouldn't send it," advised Hood earnestly.
"Why not?" snapped Bert.
"It will make him sore as the dickens."
"That's what we want, isn't it?" said Bert, looking at
Hood in surprise.
But Hood shook his head disapprovingly and said in all
seriousness, "We'll never get another tip from him if you
send that telegram!"
233

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

A professional trader actually said that. Now what's the
use of talking about sucker tip-takers? Men do not take
tips because they are bally asses but because they like
those hope cocktails I spoke of. Old Baron Rothschild's
recipe for wealth winning applies with greater force than
ever to speculation. Somebody asked him if making money
in the Bourse was not a very difficult matter, and he
replied that, on the contrary, he thought it was very easy.
"That is because you are so rich," objected the
interviewer.
"Not at all. I have found an easy way and I stick to it. I
simply cannot help making money. I will tell you my secret
if you wish. It is this : I never buy at the bottom and I
always sell too soon."
Investors are a different breed of cats. Most of them go
in strong for inventories and statistics of earnings and all
sorts of mathematical data, as though that meant facts and
certainties. The human factor is minimised as a rule. Very
few people like to buy into a one-man business. But the
wisest investor I ever knew was a man who began by being
a Pennsylvania Dutchman and followed it up by coming to
Wall Street and seeing a great deal of Russell Sage.
He was a great investigator, an indefatigable
Missourian. He believed in asking his own questions and
in doing his seeing with his own eyes. He had no use for
another man's spectacles. This was years ago. It seems he
held quite a little Atchison. Presently he began to hear
disquieting reports about the company and its
management. He was told that Mr. Reinhart, the
president, instead of being the marvel he was credited with
being, in reality was a most extravagant manager whose
recklessness was fast pushing the company into a mess.
There would be the deuce to pay on the inevitable day of
reckoning.
This was precisely the kind of news that was as the
breath of life to the Pennsylvania Dutchman. He hurried
over to Boston to interview Mr. Reinhart and ask him a
234

XVI

few questions. The questions consisted of repeating the
accusations he had heard and then asking the president of
the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe Railroad if they were
true.
Mr. Reinhart not only denied the allegations
emphatically but said even more: He proceeded to prove
by figures that the alligators were malicious liars. The
Pennsylvania Dutchman had asked for exact information
and the president gave it to him, showing him what the
company was doing and how it stood financially, to a cent.
The Pennsylvania Dutchman thanked President
Reinhart, returned to New York and promptly sold all his
Atchison holdings. A week or so later he used his idle
funds to buy a big lot of Delaware, Lackawanna & Western.
Years afterward we were talking of lucky swaps and he
cited his own case. He explained what prompted him to
make it.
"You see," he said, "I noticed that President Reinhart,
when he wrote down figures, took sheets of letter paper
from a pigeonhole in his mahogany roll-top desk. It was
fine heavy linen paper with beautifully engraved
letterheads in two colors. It was not only very expensive
but worse—it was unnecessarily expensive. He would write
a few figures on a sheet to show me exactly what the
company was earning on certain divisions or to prove how
they were cutting down expenses or reducing operating
costs, and then he would crumple up the sheet of the
expensive paper and throw it in the waste-basket. Pretty
soon he would want to impress me with the economies
they were introducing and he would reach for a fresh sheet
of the beautiful notepaper with the engraved letterheads in
two colors. A few figures and bingo, into the waste-basket!
More money wasted without a thought. It struck me that if
the president was that kind of a man he would scarcely be
likely to insist upon having or rewarding economical
assistants. I therefore decided to believe the people who
235

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

had told me the management was extravagant instead of
accepting the president's version and I sold what Atchison
stock I held.
"It so happened that I had occasion to go to the offices
of the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western a few days later.
Old Sam Sloan was the president. His office was the
nearest to the entrance and his door was wide open. It was
always open. Nobody could walk into the general offices of
the D. L. & W. in those days and not see the president of
the company seated at his desk. Any man could walk in
and do business with him right off, if he had any business
to do. The financial reporters used to tell me that they
never had to beat about the bush with old Sam Sloan, but
would ask their questions and get a straight yes or no from
him, no matter what the stock-market exigencies of the
other directors might be.
"When I walked in I saw the old man was busy. I
thought at first that he was opening his mail, but after I
got inside close to the desk I saw what he was doing. I
learned afterwards that it was his daily custom to do it.
After the mail was sorted and opened, instead of throwing
away the empty envelopes he had them gathered up and
taken to his office. In his leisure moments he would rip the
envelope all around. That gave him two bits of paper, each
with one clean blank side. He would pile these up and then
he would have them distributed about, to be used in lieu of
scratch pads for such figuring as Reinhart had done for me
on engraved notepaper. No waste of empty envelopes and
no waste of the president's idle moments. Everything
utilised.
"It struck me that if that was the kind of man the D. L. &
W. had for president, the company was managed
economically in all departments. The president would see
to that! Of course I knew the company was paying regular
dividends and had a good property. I bought all the D. L. &
W. stock I could. Since that time the capital stock has been
doubled and quadrupled. My annual dividends amount to
236

XVI

as much as my original investment. I still have my D. L. &
W. And Atchison went into the hands of a receiver a few
months after I saw the president throwing sheet after
sheet of linen paper with engraved letterheads in two
colors into the waste-basket to prove to me with figures
that he was not extravagant."
And the beauty of that story is that it is true and that no
other stock that the Pennsylvania Dutchman could have
bought would have proved to be so good an investment as
D. L. & W.

237

XVII
One of my most intimate friends is very fond of telling
stories about what he calls my hunches. He is forever
ascribing to me powers that defy analysis. He declares I
merely follow blindly certain mysterious impulses and
thereby get out of the stock market at precisely the right
time. His pet yarn is about a black cat that told me, at his
breakfast-table, to sell a lot of stock I was carrying, and
that after I got the pussy's message I was grouchy and
nervous until I sold every share I was long of. I got
practically the top prices of the movement, which of course
strengthened the hunch theory of my hard-headed friend.
I had gone to Washington to endeavor to convince a few
Congressmen that there was no wisdom in taxing us to
death and I wasn't paying much attention to the stock
market. My decision to sell out my line came suddenly,
hence my friend's yarn.
239

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I admit that I do get irresistible impulses at times to do
certain things in the market. It doesn't matter whether I
am long or short of stocks. I must get out. I am
uncomfortable until I do. I myself think that what happens
is that I see a lot of warning-signals. Perhaps not a single
one may be sufficiently clear or powerful to afford me a
positive, definite reason for doing what I suddenly feel like
doing. Probably that is all there is to what they call "tickersense" that old traders say James R. Keene had so strongly
developed and other operators before him. Usually, I
confess, the warning turns out to be not only sound but
timed to the minute. But in this particular instance there
was no hunch. The black cat had nothing to do with it.
What he tells everybody about my getting up so grumpy
that morning I suppose can be explained if I in truth was
grouchy by my disappointment. I knew I was not
convincing the Congressman I talked to and the
Committee did not view the problem of taxing Wall Street
as I did. I wasn't trying to arrest or evade taxation on stock
transactions but to suggest a tax that I as an experienced
stock operator felt was neither unfair nor unintelligent. I
didn't want Uncle Sam to kill the goose that could lay so
many golden eggs with fair treatment. Possibly my lack of
success not only irritated me but made me pessimistic over
the future of an unfairly taxed business. But I'll tell you
exactly what happened.
At the beginning of the bull market I thought well of the
outlook in both the Steel trade and the copper market and
I therefore felt bullish on stocks of both groups. So I
started to accumulate some of them. I began by buying
5,000 shares of Utah Copper and stopped because it didn't
act right. That is, it did not behave as it should have
behaved to make me feel I was wise in buying it. I think
the price was around $114. I also started to buy United
States Steel at almost the same price. I bought in all
20,000 shares the first day because it did act right. I
followed the method I have described before.
240

XVII

Steel continued to act right and I therefore continued to
accumulate it until I was carrying 72,000 shares of it in all.
But my holdings of Utah Copper consisted of my initial
purchase. I never got above the 5,000 shares. Its
behaviour did not encourage me to do more with it.
Everybody knows what happened. We had a big bull
movement. I knew the market was going up. General
conditions were favourable. Even after stocks had gone up
extensively and my paper-profit was not to be sneezed at,
the tape kept trumpeting: Not yet! Not yet! When I arrived
in Washington the tape was still saying that to me. Of
course, I had no intention of increasing my line at that late
day, even though I was still bullish. At the same time, the
market was plainly going my way and there was no
occasion for me to sit in front of a quotation board all day,
in hourly expectation of getting a tip to get out. Before the
clarion call to retreat came barring an utterly unexpected
catastrophe, of course the market would hesitate or
otherwise prepare me for a reversal of the speculative
situation. That was the reason why I went blithely about
my business with my Congressmen.
At the same time, prices kept going up and that meant
that the end of the bull market was drawing nearer.
I did not look for the end on any fixed date. That was
something quite beyond my power to determine. But I
needn't tell you that I was on the watch for the tip-off. I
always am, anyhow. It has become a matter of business
habit with me.
I cannot swear to it but I rather suspect that the day
before I sold out, seeing the high prices made me think of
the magnitude of my paper-profit as well as of the line I
was carrying and, later on, of my vain efforts to induce our
legislators to deal fairly and intelligently by Wall Street.
That was probably the way and the time the seed was sown
within me. The subconscious mind worked on it all night.
In the morning I thought of the market and began to
wonder how it would act that day. When I went down to
241

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

the office I saw not sa much that prices were still higher
and that I had a satisfying profit but that there was a great
big market with a tremendous power of absorption. I could
sell any amount of stock in that market; and, of course,
when a man is carrying his full line of stocks, he must be
on the watch for an opportunity to change his paper profit
into actual cash. He should try to lose as little of the profit
as possible in the swapping. Experience has taught me that
a man can always find an opportunity to make his profits
real and that this opportunity usually comes at the end of
the move. That isn't tape-reading or a hunch.
Of course, when I found that morning a market in
which I could sell out all my stocks without any trouble I
did so. When you are selling out it is no wiser or braver to
sell fifty shares than fifty thousand; but fifty shares you
can sell in the dullest market without breaking the price
and fifty thousand shares of a single stock is a different
proposition. I had seventy-two thousand shares of U. S.
Steel. This may not seem a colossal line, but you can't
always sell that much without losing some of that profit
that looks so nice on paper when you figure it out and that
hurts as much to lose as if you actually had it safe in bank.
I had a total profit of about $1,500,000 and I grabbed it
while the grabbing was good. But that wasn't the principal
reason for thinking that I did the right thing in selling out
when I did. The market proved it for me and that was
indeed a source of satisfaction to me. It was this way: I
succeeded in selling my entire line of seventy-two
thousand shares of U. S. Steel at a price which averaged
me just one point from the top of the day and of the
movement. It proved that I was right, to the minute. But
when, on the very same hour of the very same day I came
to sell my 5,000 Utah Copper, the price broke five points.
Please recall that I began buying both stocks at the same
time and that I acted wisely in increasing my line of U. S.
Steel from twenty thousand shares to seventy-two
thousand, and equally wisely in not increasing my line of
242

XVII

Utah from the original 5,000 shares. The reason why I
didn't sell out my Utah Copper before was that I was
bullish on the copper trade and it was a bull market in
stocks and I didn't think that Utah would hurt me much
even if I didn't make a killing in it. But as for hunches,
there weren't any.
The training of a stock trader is like a medical
education. The physician has to spend long years learning
anatomy, physiology, materia medica and collateral
subjects by the dozen. He learns the theory and then
proceeds to devote his life to the practice. He observes and
classifies all sorts of pathological phenomena. He learns to
diagnose. If his diagnosis is correct and that depends upon
the accuracy of his observation—he ought to do pretty well
in his prognosis, always keeping in mind, of course, that
human fallibility and the utterly unforeseen will keep him
from scoring 100 per cent of bull's-eyes. And then, as he
gains in experience, he learns not only to do the right thing
but to do it instantly, so that many people will think he
does it instinctively. It really isn't automatism. It is that he
has diagnosed the case according to his observations of
such cases during a period of many years; and, naturally,
after he has diagnosed it, he can only treat it in the way
that experience has taught him is the proper treatment.
You can transmit knowledge—that is, your particular
collection of card-indexed facts but not your experience. A
man may know what to do and lose money—if he doesn't
do it quickly enough.
Observation, experience, memory and mathematics—
these are what the successful trader must depend on. He
must not only observe accurately but remember at all
times what he has observed. He cannot bet on the
unreasonable or on the unexpected, however strong his
personal
convictions
may
be
about
man's
unreasonableness or however certain he may feel that the
unexpected happens very frequently. He must bet always
on probabilities—that is, try to anticipate them. Years of
243

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

practice at the game, of constant study, of always
remembering, enable the trader to act on the instant when
the unexpected happens as well as when the expected
comes to pass.
A man can have great mathematical ability and an
unusual power of accurate observation and yet fail in
speculation unless he also possesses the experience and
the memory. And then, like the physician who keeps up
with the advances of science, the wise trader never ceases
to study general conditions, to keep track of developments
everywhere that are likely to affect or influence the course
of the various markets. After years at the game it becomes
a habit to keep posted. He acts almost automatically. He
acquires the invaluable professional attitude and that
enables him to beat the game at times! This difference
between the professional and the amateur or occasional
trader cannot be over emphasised. I find, for instance, that
memory and mathematics help me very much. Wall Street
makes its money on a mathematical basis. I mean, it
makes its money by dealing with facts and figures.
When I said that a trader has to keep posted to the
minute and that he must take a purely professional
attitude toward all markets and all developments, I merely
meant to emphasise again that hunches and the
mysterious ticker-sense haven't so very much to do with
success. Of course, it often happens that an experienced
trader acts so quickly that he hasn't time to give all his
reasons in advance but nevertheless they are good and
sufficient reasons, because they are based on facts
collected by him in his years of working and thinking and
seeing things from the angle of the professional, to whom
everything that comes to his mill is grist. Let me illustrate
what I mean by the professional attitude.
I keep track of the commodities markets, always. It is a
habit of years. As you know, the Government reports
indicated a winter wheat crop about the same as last year
and a bigger spring wheat crop than in 1921. The condition
244
