
ATM Trigger
The ATM Trigger is an oscillator comprised of three models represented by
three lines. They are the ATM TSB Line (Trend Strength Bar), the ATM FT
(Fast Trigger), and the ATM ST (Slow Trigger). Let’s begin with the TSB.
The TSB line is the horizontal line found at 0 and 100 with 0 being
bearish and 100 being bullish. Its primary function is to determine the trend’s
strength and help deﬁne the background of each timeframe—when it is
present, look only for trades in its direction. The ending action of the TSB is
a trader’s ﬁrst indication that the trend is trying to end. And its absence from
the chart indicates the market is trying to change its characteristic and may
morph into a new trend direction.
The ATM TSB line can have up to three different colors on either the
bullish or bearish TSB line (represented in shades of gray in the ﬁgures in
this chapter). The bullish TSB can have a light blue line, which indicates a
rapid rise in the market price, a dark green line representing mildly bullish
trend strength, or a bright green line that represents a strongly bullish trend
condition. The bearish TSB line can have a magenta line, which indicates a

290

FIGURE 6.1

Jun

Jul

Bullish

Aug

Sep
2010

ATM Trend Bars Applied to the U.S. 10-Year Future

Oct

Nov

Dec

Bearish

Jan
2011

118

120

122

124

126

291

Advanced Trading Methods
FIGURE 6.2

ATM Trend Lines Applied to the U.S. 10-Year Future

rapid break in the market prices, an orange line representing mildly bearish
trend strength, or a bright red line that representing a strongly bearish trend
condition. This is summarized in Table 6.1.
Under most circumstances, when a bullish/bearish ATM Trend Strength
Bar is present, ATM will only enter trades from the long/short side of the
market using the ATM Add On Alert and ATM Pullback Alert. We will also
trade out or around positions using the ATM Exhaustion Alert and ATM
Divergence Alert (more on alert types further on in this chapter).
A second line in the ATM Trigger is the ATM FT (Fast Trigger) Alert. It
is the thicker of the two oscillating lines. The ATM FT line is used for two
purposes.
1. As the ﬁnal condition needed to initiate an ATM X Signal. The turning
up/down from an overbought/sold condition is of highest importance.
2. As a tool for risk management.
Each X Signal (with the exception of the ATM Pullback Alert, which uses
the ATM ST line) has a series of conditions associated with their mathematical
TABLE 6.1

A Summary of Signals from the ATM Trigger TSB

Bullish TSB

Signal

Bearish TSB

Signal

Light blue

Rapid rise

Magenta

Rapid decline

Dark green

Mildly bullish

Orange

Mildly bearish

Bright green

Strongly bullish

Bright red

Strongly bearish

292

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

output, with the ﬁnal condition being the turning up or down of the ATM
FT line. Once all conditions are met, including the turning up or down of the
ATM FT, the alert is placed on the chart. In addition to being one of the main
components of the X Signals, the ATM FT line is used to anticipate market
pressure for approximately eight periods following its turn up or down. Our
current research concludes that when the ATM FT turns up or down, price
will move in the direction of the turn or sideways 66.32 percent of the time for
a period on average of 7.583 bars. Having this time management tool allows
us to eliminate a side, make assumptions on price movement, and monitor
these assumptions over 7.583 (rounded to eight) bars with the color changes
within the ATM TSB, ATM Trend Line, and ATM Trend Bar models.
The third line in the ATM TSB is the ATM ST (Slow Trigger) Alert.
This is represented by the thinner, and as the name indicates, slower moving
oscillating line. The ATM ST line is used for two purposes.
1. As an additional trend strength conﬁrmation with the ATM TSB line
2. As the ﬁnal condition needed to generate the ATM Pullback Alert
Monitor the ATM ST line for strength when it becomes overbought/oversold and remains in this condition. When it does, the market
trend is strong and conﬁrms the condition of the ATM TSB line. In addition,
monitor the ATM ST line when it is overbought/oversold in the direction of
the current trend as represented by the ATM TSB line. This condition does
not occur often, but when it does, it will produce an ATM Pullback Alert.
In Figure 6.3, the ATM Trigger study has three lines; FT, ST, and TSB.
The TSB (Trend Strength Bar) is the horizontal lines running above and
FIGURE 6.3

ATM Trigger Applied to the U.S. 10-Year Future

Advanced Trading Methods
FIGURE 6.4

293

ATM Trend Bars, Trend Lines, and Trigger Applied to the U.S. 10-Year

Future

below the FT and ST lines. When the TSB is on top it indicates a strong bull
trend. When it is on the bottom, it represents a strong bear trend. Absence of
these two lines indicates a trend that is in a potential transition.

ATM Trigger, Lines, and Bars
Figure 6.4 represents the ATM Trend Lines, ATM Trend Bars, and ATM
Trigger study.
The process of interpreting this chart is as follows. From August through
November, the ATM Trend Lines continually narrow, representing a gradual
decline in volatility, which typically leads to a consolidation or topping pattern. In September, the ATM TSB line at 100 went from “Strongly Bullish”
to absent. In October, price consistently failed at the upper ATM Trend Line
deviation. In late October, the ATM Trend Bars turned bearish for two periods
but held support. This was the ﬁrst time in a long time they turned bearish.
A few periods later, price tried to rally through resistance but failed and no
ATM TSB line appeared to support the rally. Next, price broke the ATM
Trend Line support and at the same time ATM Trend Bars turned bearish.
Shortly thereafter, ATM TSB appeared at the 0 level with a “Mildly Bearish”
signal. Then, before the rapid December decline, the ATM TSB signaled a
“Strongly Bearish” condition.

Elliott Wave
Obviously ATM did not invent or create Elliott Wave counts. Nonetheless,
several of the big-name traders believe in them. However, they are somewhat

294

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

subjective and interpretative and the pure Elliott Wave practitioner spends
endless hours with their counts. That being said, they provide a great roadmap
for the trader. The issue for me was how you scale the process with so many
securities in the world and timeframes. I felt ATM needed a way to provide
these counts so I began searching for a method. I approached CQG to see if
they would be willing to sell me their code. They said yes, and now ATM has
the Elliott Wave algorithms that have been vetted in the marketplace for over
25 years. So for the ﬁrst time, Bloomberg users who use ATM can obtain an
Elliott Wave major, intermediate, and minor wave count across any timeframe
and security charted within Bloomberg.

ATM Elliott Wave
It is sufﬁcient to say that Elliott Wave analysis is complicated, but in very
simplistic terms it can be classiﬁed into two parts (see Figure 6.5): (1) impulse
patterns composed of ﬁve waves, Waves One, Two, Three, Four, and Five; and
(2) corrective patterns composed of three waves, Waves A, B, and C. Wave
Three, or C, has the greatest potential, followed by Wave Five.
One of the interesting things about Elliott Waves is that they are easy to see
in hindsight—once you understand what you are looking for—but difﬁcult
in the present tense. That is why I like the ATM Elliott Wave study, as it
attempts to explain the current price wave count. The study looks back over
the last 1,000 bars of data and adjusts the wave counts based on the current
price. And the study is self-adjusting. By this I mean that it is constantly
trying to explain the current price action. So, as it changes so will the count.
FIGURE 6.5 ATM Elliott Wave with Major and Intermediate Waves Applied to the Daily
10-Year Futures Contract

Advanced Trading Methods

295

They Say Entry Is Easy, but Not in My Book

Entry is easy—they say—unless, of course, you are a perfectionist, and then
your entries become more important. Everything has to be right for a perfectionist. There is no room for error. I must confess I have a high degree of
perfectionism in me. Entry is important to me, as I feel it helps me manage the
trade. And to a degree that is true, if you get immediate or almost-immediate
movement in your direction. However, one must understand the backdrop
of the market or, in other words, what the longer timeframes are saying. In
addition, your conclusion must have a solid fundamental reason supporting
the decision.
Regardless, an entry is a single event, whereas monitoring your position is
a continual effort. This monitoring must be void of emotion and solely based
on market conditions of the moment. In other words, let the market tell you
what it is doing using ATM, but don’t be passive about it.
If you have a reason to get involved in a direction and you are looking
for entry signals, ATM will help you with a series of entries called ATM X
Signals across whichever timeframe you feel comfortable trading.
Currently there are six types of X Signals and each is shown in one of the
next examples.

ATM X Alert
The ATM X Alert is designed to pick up the earliest possible condition that
indicates a potential new bear or bull trend. It is a very aggressive contra trend
indicator as it has little to no new trend conﬁrmation. Represented by an
X above or below the bar, this alert requires the previous ATM TSB line to
end and the ATM FT line to move to an overbought or oversold condition
shortly after the end of the ATM TSB line. During the ensuing eight bars,
anticipate quick price movement and the overall condition of the market
to begin changing into the new potential trend. Should these changes not
occur over the speciﬁed time period, the new trend may not be developing
as expected and you should consider exiting the position before any initial
stop is hit.
See Figure 6.6. The ATM X Alert is represented by an “X” placed below
the bar for a buy alert and above the bar for a sell alert. The signal is predicated
on the ending of the ATM TSB line and the next cycle of the ATM FT line.
It is a very aggressive signal as many times it has no new trend conditions
conﬁrmed.

296
FIGURE 6.6

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
The ATM X Alert Is Represented by an X on the Chart

ATM First Alert
The ATM First Alert is also designed to pick up the earliest possible condition
that indicates a potential new bear or bull trend. However, unlike the ATM X
Alert, the ATM First Alert has some new trend conditions present as deﬁned
by the ATM indicators. Represented by an arrow above or below the bar,
this alert requires the ATM FT line to move to an overbought or oversold
condition and then turn up/down while these early trend conditions remain
present. During the ensuing eight bars, anticipate price movement and the
overall new trend conditions to maintain and get even stronger. Should the
trend conditions not continue over the speciﬁed time period, the new trend
may be weak and you should consider exiting the position before any initial
stop is hit (see Figure 6.7).
FIGURE 6.7 The ATM First Alert Is Represented by an Arrow: An Early Entry Signal
after New Trend Has Been Determined

Advanced Trading Methods

297

FIGURE 6.8 The ATM Add On Alert Is Represented by a Circle: It Identiﬁes Breaks in a
Bull Trend and Rallies in a Bear Trend

ATM Add On Alert
The ATM Add On Alert is designed to buy breaks in a bull market and
sell rallies in a bear market while the appropriate trend conditions remain in
place as deﬁned by ATM. Represented by a circle above or below the bar,
this alert requires the ATM FT line to move to an overbought or oversold
condition and turn up/down while the current trend conditions are present
(see Figure 6.8). During the ensuing eight bars, anticipate price movement,
the current trend conditions to persist and price to advance past the previous
highs/lows. Should market conditions change or price fail to move to new
highs/lows, the current market trend may be losing its strength.

ATM Pullback Alert
The ATM Pullback Alert is designed to buy signiﬁcant breaks/rallies in an
established bull/bear market. In Figure 6.9, represented by a diamond above
or below the bar, this alert requires the ATM ST line to move to an overbought or oversold condition and turn up/down while the ATM TSB line
is present. During the ensuing eight bars, anticipate price movement, the
current trend conditions to maintain themselves, and price to resume in
the current direction of the trend.

ATM Exhaustion Alert
The ATM Exhaustion Alert is an aggressive contra trend indicator that locates
temporary exhaustion points within a trend as deﬁned by ATM. A strategy
for some funds is to establish a large position and then trade in and out of

298

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 6.9 The ATM Pullback Alert Is Represented by a Diamond and Identiﬁes Larger
Tradable Breaks in a Bull Trend and Rallies in a Bear Trend

20 percent of that position throughout the trend. The ATM Exhaustion Alert
identiﬁes these potential areas for this strategy. See Figure 6.10. Represented
by a square, the ATM Exhaustion Alert requires the ATM Fast Trigger and
ATM Slow Trigger lines to be concurrently oversold/overbought—against
the current trend as deﬁned by the ATM TSB line—and the ATM Fast
Trigger to turn up/down. During the ensuing eight bars, anticipate quick price
movement; however, in most cases this is simply a pause in the current trend.

ATM Divergence Alert
The ATM Divergence Alert is an aggressive exhaustion condition that occurs
against current trend movement. Represented by a square, it is designed to
FIGURE 6.10

The ATM Exhaustion Alert Is Represented by a Square and Identiﬁes
Potential Exits from an Existing Position

Advanced Trading Methods

299

FIGURE 6.11

The ATM Exhaustion Divergence Is Represented by a Square and
Identiﬁes the Divergence of Price and ATM FT Values

locate an ATM Fast Trigger to Price divergence at signiﬁcant highs/lows of
the market. Typical divergences occur throughout a trend. However, only a
particularly deﬁned divergence that occurs at potential market extremes is
picked up by ATM. Speciﬁcally, in the case of the ATM Divergence Alert,
it requires the surrounding low/high of the previous ATM FT Cycle to be a
signiﬁcant low/high as deﬁned by ATM (see Figure 6.11). This is followed
by a premature turn up/down of the current ATM FT cycle coupled with a
higher high/lower low than the last signiﬁcant high/low. In other words, a
new signiﬁcant high/low is being made while the ATM FT is prematurely
failing to cycle to an extreme overbought/oversold condition.
Trade When the Odds Are in Your Favor

Each of the traders I meet have looked for an edge or a way to have the odds
in their favor when they entered a new position. I believe ATM provides an
edge with its many data visualization tools or studies. One example of this is
the ATM Trigger–FT line. When you use the FT line, it provides odds in your
favor because when it moves up, the market usually moves up to sideways for
approximately eight bars. If FT moves down, the market usually moves down
to sideways for approximately eight bars. Our latest backtest of this behavior
was over the past 10 years in the INDU. The test reﬂected that once the
FT turned up or down it was followed by closes in the new direction 66.32
percent of the time and that the FT moved from overbought to oversold or
oversold to overbought on average 7.583 bars. Plus, when you ﬁlter the FT
direction with the longer timeframe trend utilizing ATM Trend Line, ATM

300

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Trend Bars, and the ATM Trigger Line–TSB, they can increase the odds even
more.
When you have an edge such as FT, you can give up the bid or offer to
the market markers and still make money. However, trade location (where
you place your trade relative to its position in the trend) is key. Plus you must
understand the backdrop of the market. Using ATM on two timeframes will
allow you an understanding of this backdrop. This is accomplished with ATM
Trend Line, ATM Trend Bars, and the ATM Trigger Line–TSB. In the next
section we take a look at some examples.
Don’t Fight the Trend

A few of the traders would say “the market will punish those who try and
ﬁght it.” I had a hard time with this one as I ﬁrst thought it meant you had
to be a trend follower. My preference was and still is trend exhaustion. But I
now understand that this means you can participate at the extremes if:
r The trend is about to end.
r Time is used to manage the entry.
r After the extreme, a change in the market condition occurs after a period

of time.
Regardless of how you choose to participate at the extremes of a move,
use the ATM Trigger–FT line to help you determine if the market is in an
oversold or overbought condition. And following your entry, monitor the
overall condition of the market during the preceding eight bars for a change
of condition. For example, when you buy a market extreme, ATM would
specify the overall market condition as bearish and would color the ATM
Trend Bars red (indicating a bearish market). And of course, you would be
expecting the market to respond to your purchase. But if the market does
not begin changing the ATM Trend Bar coloring before one half-cycle of the
ATM Trigger–FT line, ATM will still term the market bearish and the trend
followers who have pushed the market lower will ﬁnd the rally an opportunity
to sell again. However, if the ATM Trend Bars do begin to change colors or
the ATM Trend Line appears, it is an indication that the market could be
starting a new trend. Therefore, when sellers return on the ensuing rally, they
will ﬁnd the market is stronger than expected and more likely to hold the lows
created by the exhaustion, as the rally has begun its early transition. During
the next full cycle of the FT, watch price. It should move up and the Trend

Advanced Trading Methods
FIGURE 6.12

301

ATM TSB and ATM Exhaustion Alert

Bars should return to and maintain their green condition. Plus the ATM
Trend Line and ATM Trigger–TSB line will appear. All these signs will alert
you that the market is entering a new trend up.
Should you consider trading a bullish market event, you must (a) have a
reason to do so, such as the ATM Exhaustion Alert in this example; (b) make
sure the ATM Trigger FT line is also oversold and turning up; and (c) the
market must change its overall condition from bearish to bullish, preferably
before the ATM Trigger FT reaches overbought and turns down. See the
example in Figure 6.12.
Another method to trade ending trend action is waiting for a quick vertical
move in the direction you wish to trade. Then, wait for a price retracement
that fails to take out the previous low/high created by the quick vertical
movement, and then enter the market. ATM calls this pattern a “failure to
continue” and this action is picked up within the ATM X signals and or
ATM First Alert. The process is as follows: on the retracement, monitor the
condition of the ATM FT line. Look for the FT to reach an overbought or
oversold condition while monitoring price. Price should not go lower/higher
than the previous low/high of the quick vertical movement.
Trade Location Is Key to Long-term Success

Obviously, if you are a buyer/seller of extremes, you will have a great trade
location, should the current down/uptrend end. But if your trade develops
into a trend, you will be presented with additional opportunities to entry
using ATM Add On Alerts and ATM Pullback Alerts. The key to successful
entries are their trade location relative to the ATM Target lines and the overall

302
FIGURE 6.13

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
ATM Trend Targets Will Be Identiﬁed Once a New Trend Is Determined

trend. Positions taken above ATM Target Level 3 have greater risk than those
taken earlier in the trend as their trade location is poor. This does not mean
that entries above these levels never work—they do, and this is evident by
the success of the trend-following traders. However, when you do trade them
or use other trend-following techniques, you must be aware that your trade
should develop quicker than those with better trade location.

ATM Targets
ATM Trend Targets was designed to assist you in identifying the location of
your trade in the overall trend. Being aware of where your new trade is relative
to the overall trend is important for a successful trade. Once a new trend is
determined, ATM will present ATM Targets. See Figure 6.13 for an example.

ATM Targets with ATM Add On Alerts Above/Below Levels 2 and 3
For a new long position, be aware that entries greater than ATM Target Level
3 have less chance of success. Therefore, when you enter at these levels, make
sure price moves in your favor rapidly. See Figure 6.14 for an example.
Adjusting to Volatility

One of the most-asked questions is, “What timeframe should I be trading?”
The answer lies in your acceptance of risk. If I were to say the best timeframe
is daily, but you must be willing to hold that trade for up to eight or nine days
in order for it to develop, you might ﬁnd that that period has an unacceptable

Advanced Trading Methods
FIGURE 6.14

303

ATM Targets with ATM Add On Alerts Above/Below Target Levels 2 and 3

risk for you. So, you should adjust your own timeframe by dividing your
maximum holding period by eight or nine. If you can hold an e-mini position
for only 45 minutes, then you need to analyze the market on a ﬁve-minute
basis. I ﬁnd my timeframes are determined by the volatility of that speciﬁc
market and the amount of leverage I am utilizing. The size of the position
relative to my portfolio plus the volatility reduces my holding period.

Anticipating What Needs to Happen

There are some trading theories that suggest you should not anticipate what
is going to happen to your position. Those theories suggest you should let
the market tell you what to do with the trade. ATM agrees with allowing the
market to tell you whether to stay or exit. However, we believe you need tools
to measure that, rather than depending solely on price or your gut feel.
But as you enter your position, we believe you should have some expectations about what the trade should do as well as what it can do against you.
With the ATM Trigger FT line, ATM Trend Bars, ATM Trend lines, ATM
Trigger TSB Line, and the ATM Trade Velocity study you can anticipate the
next eight or nine bars.
