
376 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

private information, the DHS model predicts that investors' confidence in
their private research will increase. "This unequal treatment of new information means initial overconfidence is on average followed by even
greater overconfidence, thus generating price momentum. "88 However, after a sequence of contradictory public news signals, the investors' confidence in their private information will be shattered (crime of small
numbers), and price trends will reverse.
Both DHS and BSV predict that investors are sometimes excessively
optimistic and sometimes excessively pessimistic. In addition, these beliefs are predicted to be subject to reversal when a streak of disconfirming information arrives. If DHS and BSV are valid, then the profits earned
by strategies that exploit trend reversals should be concentrated at the
times of information releases. This predicted consequence, which opens
both hypotheses to refutation, has been confirmed. 89 Indeed, a large
fraction of the excess returns earned by buying value stocks (low price
to book, low PIE, and so forth) and buying the weakest stocks of the
past three to five years do occur near the times of earnings information
releases.

News Traders and Momentum 'fraders: 'fhe liS lIypothesis.
As just described, certain instances of price momentum can be explained

by prices catching up with fundamentals due to an initial underreaction to
news. Other trends can be explained by positive feedback, in which a
price increase stimulates additional buying and price weakness stimulates
additional selling. 90 Thus, some investors look for signals in recent price
changes rather than news.
From the perspective of TA, trends spawned by positive feedback can
be viewed as a cascade of progressively less sensitive trend-following signals being triggered. An initial price movement (news inspired or random)
triggers the most sensitive trend signals (e.g., a very short-term moving average crossover signal). Transactions triggered by that signal push prices
enough to trigger a somewhat less sensitive trend signal (e.g., mediumterm moving average), which in turn triggers even less sensitive signals
and so on. Whatever the mechanism, investor actions become correlated,
forming a herd effect.
The hypothesis proposed by Hong and Stein91 (HS) explains three
market phenomena: momentum, underreaction, and overreaction. To do
so, they postulate two classes of investors, news watchers (fundamentalists) and momentum traders (technicians). The HS hypothesis asserts that
an interaction between these two classes of investors creates positive
feedback and, therefore, price momentum. The HS assumption that there
is more than one class of investors is grounded in the notion that in-

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

377

vestors, by dint of their intellectual limits, must confine their attention to a
restricted portion of the available infom1ation. News watchers confine
their attention to fundamental developments. On the basis of this information, they derive private estin1ates of future returns. In contrast, momentum traders confine their attention to past price changes and derive their
private forecast of future trends.
Hong and Stein posit that news watchers pay little or no attention to
price changes. As a result, their private assessments of the news fail to
spread quickly throughout the community of news watchers. To understand how an exclusive focus on the fundamental news impedes the diffusion of information, consider what would happen if the news watchers
also paid attention to price action. Watching price movements would allow them to infer, to some degree, the private information of other news
watchers. For example, rising prices might imply that other news watchers were interpreting the news as favorable, whereas falling prices might
imply the opposite. As we have seen, any investor behavior that slows
the process by which prices incorporate new information can cause
price trends. That is, instead of prices instantaneously adjusting to new
information, they move gradually to a higher or lower level justified by
new information. For momentum (trend-following) strategies to work,
prices must change in a gradual enough fashion to allow signals based
on an initial price change to predict additional price change. Thus, the
failure of news traders to extract information from price action slows
the rate at which prices adjust to new information, thus resulting in
price trends.
Now consider the effect on market dynamics caused by momentum
traders (trend-followers). The HS hypothesis claims that momentum
traders only pay attention to signals from price behavior. Trend following assumes that newly emerging price trends are an indication that important new fundamental information is starting to diffuse throughout
the market. Momentum traders make the bet that the diffusion is incomplete and that the price trend will continue after the initial momentum signal. Actions taken by subsequent waves of trend followers keep
prices moving, thus generating positive price feedback. Ultimately, as
more trend followers join the party, prices may carry further than fundamentals justify. The overshooting occurs because momentum traders
are unable to judge the extent to which the news has been diffused and
understood by all investors. When the news is fully diffused and all investors have acted on it, no further price movement is fundamentally
justified. Thus, HS assert that the overshooting of rational price levels,
resulting from the positive feedback of momentum traders, sets up the
conditions for a trend reversal back toward rational levels based on
fundamentals.

378 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
Behavioral finance has offered a number of
testable hypotheses that attempt to explain systematic price motion. It is
not yet clear which, if any, of these are correct. No doubt new hypotheses
will be offered. So long as they generate testable (falsifiable) predictions,
they should be entertained. What is of importance to TA is that these theories suggest that systematic price movements should occur in financial
market prices.
'fhe Bottom Line.

NOMlANDOM PRICE MOTIO
OF EFFICIENT MARKETS

I

THE CO TEXT

The preceding section explained how systematic price movement can
arise in markets that are not fully efficient. However, even if markets are
fully efficient, the case for TA is not lost. A case cam be made for the existence of systematic price motion in markets that are fully efficient. This
section presents this case.

How Systematic Price Motion and
Market Efficiency Can Coexist
Some economists contend that systematic price movements are possible
even if markets are fully efficient.92 In other words, the existence of nonrandom price behavior and the possibility of price prediction does not
necessarily imply that financial markets are inefficient. 93
Other economists state the case more strongly, asserting that some
degree of predictability is not only possible but necessary for markets to
function properly. In their book A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street,
Andrew Lo and Craig MacKinlay say, "predictability is the oil that lubricates the gears of capitalism."94 A similar position is taken by Grossman
and Stiglitz. 95 They contend that efficient markets must offer profit opportunities to motivate investors to engage in the costly activities of information processing and trading. For it is these very activities that drive prices
toward rational valuations.
In fact, there is only one special condition under which market efficiency necessarily implies that price movement must be random and,
therefore, unpredictable. This occurs when all investors have the same
attitude toward risk, a condition that is simply not plausible. Is there
any type of risk about which all people have the same attitude? To see
how far-fetched this assumption is, imagine for a moment a world in
which all people have the same attitude toward risk. There would be either too many test pilots and high steel workers or not enough of them.

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

379

Either everyone would be into skydiving and alligator wrestling, or no
one would.
It is far more realistic to assume a world of investors with highly diverse attitudes toward risk. In such a world, some investors would be
more adverse to risk than others, and they would be willing to pay other
investors to accept the burden of additional risk. Also, there would likely
be risk-tolerant investors looking to profit from the opportunity to assume
additional risk. All that would be needed in such a world is a mechanism
by which risk can be transferred from the risk adverse to the risk tolerant
and for compensation to be paid to those willing to accept said risk.
Let's step away from markets for a moment to consider one mechanism by which the risk adverse can compensate the risk inclined-the insurance premium. Homeowners dread the possibility of a fire, so they
enter into a transaction with a fire insurance company. The homeowner
transfers the financial risk of a fire to the insurance company and, in exchange, the insurance company earns a premium. This is a profitable business if the insurance company can predict the likelihood of a house
burning down (over a large number of homes-Law of Large Numbers)
and charge a premium that compensates it for that risk plus a bit more for
profit. The bottom line: The insurance company provides a risk acceptance service and is compensated for doing so.
Participants in financial markets have exposures to various risks and
vary in their tolerance for them. These ingredients motivate transactions
that transfer risk from one party to another. In this situation, the investors
willing to bear greater risks can reasonably demand compensation in the
form of a higher return than that offered by riskless investments, just as
test pilots and high steel workers can demand a premium salary for the
additional risks they bear. In financial market terms, compensation for accepting increased risk is called a risk premium or economic rent.
Financial markets offer several kinds of risk premiums:
• The equity market risk premium: Investors provide working capital for new business formation and are compensated by receiving a return that is above the risk-free rate for incurring the risk of business
failure, economic downturns, and such.
• Commodity and currency hedge risk transfer premium: Speculators assume long and short positions in futures to give commercial
hedgers (users and producers of the commodity) the ability to shed
the risk of price change. Compensation is in the form of profitable
trends that can be captured with relatively simple trend-following
strategies.
• Liquidity premium: Investors assume positions in less liquid securities and in securities being aggressively sold by investors with acute

380 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

short-term needs for cash. Compensation is in the form of higher returns for holding illiquid securities or in the form of short-term gains
for buying stocks that have recently been very weak (i.e., engaging in
countertrend strategies).
• Information or price discovery premium for promoting market
efficiency: This premium compensates investors for making buy-andsell decisions that move prices toward rational levels. Because these decisions are often based on complex models developed by sophisticated
research, this premium might also be called a complexity premium. 96
For example, a strategy that sells overvalued stocks and buys undervalued stocks helps move prices back to rational values (price discovery).
The good news about returns that come in the form of a risk premium
is that they are more likely to endure into the future. Of course, it is every
analyst's dream to discover true market inefficiencies because the returns
earned from them do not entail additional risk. 97 However, inefficiencies
are ephemeral. Sooner or later they tend to be discovered and wiped out
by other diligent researchers. However, returns that are justified as a risk
premium are more likely to endure as they represent payment for service.
How do risk premiums explain the existence of systematic price
movements? Such price movements can provide a mechanism for riskaccepting investors to be compensated. The investor who is willing to provide liquidity to a stockholder with a strong desire to sell winds up buying
stocks that have a systematic tendency to rise over the near term. These
stocks can be identified with countertrend strategies. 98
Therefore, in the context of efficient markets, the profits-earned by
TA strategies may be understood as risk premiums; compensation for the
beneficial effect the strategy confers on other investors or the market as a
whole. In other words, TA signals may generate profits because they identify opportunities to assume risks that other investors wish to shed.
I should point out that the mere fact that an investor is willing to bear
a risk does not guarantee that a return will be earned. The risk taker must
be clever about it. Just as a careless high steel worker or test pilot may not
live long enough to collect a wage that includes the hazardous-duty premium, a careless seeker of risk premiums may not stay in the game long
enough to collect, either.

Hedge Risk Premium and the Gains to
Trend-Following Commodity Futures
This section describes how the profits to trend followers in the commodities markets may be explained as a risk transfer premium. The
commodities futures markets perform an economic function that is fun-

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

381

damentally different from the stock and bond markets. The stock and
bond markets provide companies with a mechanism to obtain equity and
debt financing 99 and provide investors with a way to invest their capital.
Because stocks and corporate bond investments expose investors to
risks that exceed the risk-free rate (government treasury bills), investors
are compensated with a risk premium-the equity risk premium and the
corporate-bond risk premium.
The economic function of the futures markets has nothing to do with
raising capital and everything to do with price risk. Price changes, especially large ones, are a source of risk and uncertainty to businesses that
produce or use commodities. The futures markets provide a means by
which these businesses, called commercial hedgers, can transfer price
risk to investors (speculators).
At first blush, it may seem puzzling that commercial hedgers would
even need investors to assume their price risk. Because some hedgers
need to sell, like the farmer who grows wheat, and some need to buy, like
the bread company that uses wheat, why don't hedgers simply contract
with each other? They do, but often there is an imbalance in their hedging
needs. Sometimes wheat farmers have more wheat to sell than bakery
companies and other commercial users of wheat need to buy. At other
times, the situation is the opposite. Thus there is often a gap between the
farmers' supply and the bakers' demand. This creates the need for a third
group of market participants who are willing to buy or sell. That is, they
are willing to fill the supply-demand gap that develops between commercial producers and commercial users.
The existence of a supply-demand gap is a predicable consequence of
the law of supply and demand; as the price of wheat rises, supply goes up
while demand goes down. As the price falls, supply goes down while demand goes up. Data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CITC), which tracks the buying and selling of commercial hedgers, confirms this is exactly what occurs in the futures markets. During rising
price trends, commercial hedge selling exceeds hedge buying (i.e.,
hedgers are net sellers). During falling trends, commercial hedge buying
exceeds commercial hedge selling (hedgers are net buyers).
In the futures markets, the amount sold and the amount bought must
be equal just as in real estate transactions the number of homes sold must
equal the number of homes bought. It cannot be otherwise. Given that a
rising trend motivates more commercial hedge selling than hedge buying,
there is a need for additional buyers during rising markets to accommodate the excess hedge selling. During falling trends, excessive commercial
hedge buying creates the need for additional sellers.
Enter the price trend speculator who is willing to buy during uptrends
to meet the unfilled needs of commercial hedge sellers and willing to sell

382 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
short during falling price trends, to meet the unmet needs of the commercial hedge buyers. In other words the futures markets need speculators to
be trend followers. And it is the invisible hand of the marketplace that creates the trends to compensate them for filling this need.
However, trend followers are exposed to significant risks. For example, most trend-following systems generate unprofitable signals 50 to 65
percent of the time. These occur when markets are trendless, which is the
case a majority of the time. During these times, the trend followers experience the dreaded equity drawdown. During drawdowns it is not unusual
for successful trend followers to lose up to 30 percent of their trading capital. Thus they need a strong motive to tolerate drawdown risk. That motive is the opportunity, though not the guarantee, to profit from price
trends when they do occur. In other words, large-scale trends provide a
profit opportunity to trend followers who are adequately capitalized and
who manage leverage correctly.
The Mt. Lucas Management Index
of Trend Following Returns

The risk premium earned by commodity trend followers has been quantified with the creation of a benchmark index called the Mt. Lucas Management Index (MLM). It is a historical record of the returns that can be
earned by an extremely simplistic trend-following formula. In other
words, it assumes no specialized knowledge of a complex forecasting
model. If it did it could not legitimately be called a benchmark index,
whose function is to estimate the returns that can be earned by investing
in an asset class with no special skill.
The risk-adjusted returns earned by the MLM index suggest that commodity futures markets contain systematic price movements that can be
exploited with relatively simple TA methods. The MLM index monthly returns, which have been computed back to the 1960s, are derived by applying a 12-month moving-average crossover strategy to 25 commodities
markets. 100 At the end of each month, the price of the nearby futures contract for each of the markets is compared to its 12-month moving average.
If the price is greater than the moving average, a long position is held in
that market for the next month. If the price is below the average, a short
position is held.
The annualized return lOl and risk, as measured by the standard deviation in annual returns, of the MLM index is compared with returns and
risks of several other asset-class benchmarks in Figure 7.13.
The risk-adjusted excess return or Sharpe ratio for the MLM index,
and the other asset classes are shown Figure 7.14. The trend follower
earns a risk premium that is somewhat better than the other asset-class

383

Theories of Nonrandom Price Motion

=

18

16

,:::::::::.

14
10

4

2

l-

f----

f--

f--

I--

~

I-

~

f--

f----

f--

I-

Int.
Stocks

T-Bills

Corp.
Bonds

MLM
Index

Returns and standard deviations for five benchmarks.

0.7

f'=
~

0.6
0.5

f--

>-.-.c=

f--

:;::=

0.3

l-

f.-----

0.2

>-.-

f----

>-.-

f----

o

l-

f--

,:::::::::.
f--

'::::::.L
US
Stocks

0.1

I-

f--

f--

o

0.4

=-

= "--

-

8
6

FIGURE 7.13

~

-

12
Annualized
Percent

~

-,:::::::::.

US
Stocks

FIGURE 7.14

Int.
Stocks

IORisk-Adj. Return I

f-f--

f.-----

T-Bills

Corp.
Bonds

I--

MLM
Index

Risk-adjusted excess returns.

benchmarks. '02 The MLM index provides some evidence that the futures
markets offer compensation in the form of systematic price movements.
If a risk-transfer premium is a valid explanation of trend-follower returns, then trend following in stocks should not be as rewarding as it is in
the commodity futures markets. A trend follower in stocks is not providing a risk-transfer service. There are data suggesting that trend following
in stocks is indeed a less rewarding enterprise. 103 Lars Kestner compared
the performance of trend-following systems for a portfolio of futures and
a portfolio of stocks. The futures considered were 29 commodities in 8
different sectors. 104 The stocks were represented by 31 large-cap stocks in
9 different industry sectors,105 and 3 stock indices. Risk-adjusted performance (Sharpe ratio) was computed for 5 different trend-following systems,106 over the period January 1, 1990 through December 31, 2001. The
Sharpe ratio averaged over the five trend-following systems in futures was

384 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
.604 versus .046 in stocks. These results support the notion that futures
trend followers are earning a risk premium that is not available to trend
followers in stocks. See Figure 7.15.

Liquidity Premium and the Gains
to Counter Trend Trading in Stocks
The stock market offers risk-taking stock traders a different form of compensation. They can earn a premium for providing liquidity to highly motivated sellers. In other words, there are systematic price movements in
stocks that can be exploited with countertrend strategies that buy stocks
that have been very weak over the recent past.
Owners of stock with an urgent need to liquidate their holdings need
buyers. This suggests that the market should offer compensation to
traders who are willing to meet unmet needs for liquidity. Evidence presented by Michael Cooper shows that buyers of oversold stocks can
earn above-average short-term returns. 107 His study shows that stocks
that have displayed negative price momentum on declining trading volume earn excess returns. In other words, the pattern identifies stocks
with distressed sellers in search of buyers. The excess returns appear to
be a liquidity premium. Cooper's study showed that stocks that have declined sharply over the prior two weeks on declining volume display a
systematic tendency to rise over the following week. The declining volume aspect of this pattern is plausible because it can be interpreted to
mean that there are insufficient buyers to meet the acute needs of the
sellers. To guard against the possibility of data mining, Cooper used a
walk-forward out-of-sample simulation to form portfolios of long and
short positions over the period 1978 to 1993. The long/short portfolios,
created from 300 large capitalization stocks, earned an annualized return of 44.95 percent versus a benchmark buy-and-hold return of 17.91
