
UNDERSTANDING PRICE BREAKS
Trade new high breakouts differently than markets retracing old numbers. A special condition
signals when stocks trend through new highs: no built-in supply of losers exists within that time
frame. Price can easily go vertical when supply doesn’t overhang the stock from a larger trend.
Pullback strategies often fail in this environment. During these momentum markets, swing traders
may need to enter near highs rather than pullbacks and manage risk without close support under
positions.
One typical signal for a new high momentum trade prints a tight flag at the top of expanding price
right after a breakout. This common pattern appears on both 5-minute and weekly charts. As trends
jump to new highs, bars congest while price searches for the next crowd to carry it
higher. Congestion near the top of the range generates strong demand that attracts the needed
greed. Price pierces the top of the flag and ejects into a vertical move.
Breakouts and breakdowns attract many participants but require precise timing to turn a profit.
Insiders know that these hot spots attract dumb money. They initiate whipsaws after each volume
surge to shake out weak hands. This ensures that the majority enters positions just as the market

reverses. Swing traders rarely run with the emotional crowd and never with these frantic momentum
plays.
Effective momentum trading requires thorough analysis of the intended execution level before price
strikes it. Plan to enter the position right at that number or pass up the trade. These volatile
conditions may require breaking some of the rules that govern normal risk management. For
example, a pre-open limit order might provide the best entry for a hot stock when many participants
avoid this strategy at other times.
Swing traders can join the momentum club, get filled way above their comfort level, and still walk
away with a nice profit. But this practice will crush their hopes of success over the long term.
Breakouts and breakdowns consistently lack easy escape routes. This fast-paced environment will
chew up participants that don’t rely on flat stop losses. And glamorous momentum positions can
trigger heavy losses but still maintain all the technicals of a good setup. That’s a formula for
disaster.
Flat percentage or dollar stop losses will avoid serious problems. But swing strategy depends on
price pivot behavior against known S/R barriers. New high trends often display no simple price
floors. Whenever possible, enter breakout trades close to the point that proves the setup was wrong
if price violates it. And consider that markets offer tremendous opportunities that don’t rely on
strong momentum.
TABLE 3.1
Pattern Play—Quick Tips for Successful Swing Trading
• No two patterns behave alike. Triangles and pennants are ideal shapes that rarely
occur with perfection in the real world.
• Three strikes and you’re out. Price should break out of a pattern no later than the
third time a key price point is tested, to the upside or downside. Failure of price to
reach the third test in either direction favors a breakout in the opposite direction.
• Use the rule of alternation to predict how a pattern will develop. Corrections
should alternate between simple and complex shapes in a series of impulses.
• Every pattern has an underlying positive or negative appearance that represents
the likely outcome. So if it looks bullish or bearish, it probably is.
• The sharp breakout above an ascending triangle often signals the climax of an
entire series of rallies.
• Rising wedges can lead to very powerful upside breakouts, but they are too
undependable to enter until the move is underway.
• Demand perfection on the inverse head and shoulders reversal. They attract
attention only when every rule is fulfilled: the neckline must line up correctly, the
two shoulder lows must be at the same price, and the breakout must pierce other
known resistance (MAs, gaps, etc.) on high volume.
• Double triangles that form after strong rallies are very bullish for a new move of
equal size to the one that occurred just before the first triangle.
• The contraction in price range and volatility that follows a new pattern seeks a
natural balance point corresponding with the location of the new impulse. Use
Bollinger Bands and rate of change indicators to identify this pivot in advance.
• Every pattern is a solvable puzzle defined by support, resistance, and volatility.
Look for highs and lows to point to a natural exit spot in time. Volatility should
decrease into this apex and expand out of it.
• Volume should dry up as each of the three rallies comprising the head and
shoulders pattern uses up all the available bull power. The lower the volume on
the right shoulder rally, the higher the odds that the neckline will eventually break.

•

•

•

Excellent long trades on the head and shoulders can be initiated at the right
shoulder neckline when accumulation diverges positively from the bearish pattern.
Also watch closely when the neckline breaks but price immediately pops back
above it and indicates that few stops were waiting.
The deeper the downslope of the head and shoulders neckline, the greater the
prospect for a bearish break. Stay away from ascending necklines completely.
These patterns easily evolve into sideways motion.
Calculate the Fibonacci relationship between the left shoulder peak and the head
length of the head and shoulders pattern. If the left shoulder topped at a Fib
retracement such as 62%, the right shoulder should go no higher and may be a
good short sale entry point.

FIGURE 3.10
Copper Mountain expands out of a channel break and gaps to new highs. It then forms a high, tight flag before adding
50% to price in a few weeks. Notice how the flag sits on the top of three vertical bars. It pulls back to test both the
breakout gap and channel in a small hammer bar before leaping to higher ground.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Breakouts and breakdowns tend to occur in waves. Quite often each surge prints at a similar angle,
duration, and extent to the one that precedes it. Use this tendency to predict when the break will
occur and how many points that price will move when it ejects. Between each sharp thrust, price

will often stop and congest until volatility winds down and stability returns. Trade analysis yields
the greatest benefit right at this point. Study the prior waves and locate any trendlines or chan nels.
Count the number of bars within prior congestion zones. Locate the S/R level where a violation will
likely trigger the next trend wave. Look at price ranges for the last few bars or candles. Do they
narrow or expand? Plan the setup now and decide what to do if the stock gaps through S/R on the
next bar.
Price breaks often stop dead after the first surge and pull back very close to the original S/R barrier.
This second chance provides an excellent entry point. Although momentum traders watch their
profits drop as the market retraces, the underlying technicals actually strengthen and encourage new
entry. Sometimes price will jump back through the barrier that ignited the original breakout and
drop into the old range. But if the break occurred with good participation, pushed well out of old
congestion, and volume dries up during the pullback, get on board fast. The countertrend will
rebound quickly and with little warning.
Action speeds up as price breaks free of congestion. Expanding bars or candles reflect surging
momentum, regardless of time frame. Expansion equals profit. Swing traders who enter the first
pullback try to pocket a big piece of the next price thrust. This strategy becomes extremely
important in exit planning. Natural bias assumes that the position should be held until momentum
and price movement slow. But this exposes a large profit percentage to natural retracement. Protect
the position by using bar expansion patterns to signal the exit. Combine this method with Bollinger
Band resistance and grab a high profit exit just as the market turns against the crowd.

RECOGNIZING TRENDS
Markets alternate between constricted range and directional trend. Ranges emit negative feedback, a
directionless state in which cumulative bars or indicators wobble between defined boundaries.
Trends emit positive feedback, in which each bar or indicator builds on the previous one and clearly
points in a single direction. This powerful axis overrides all other considerations for the swing
trader. These opposing forces constantly battle to print the varied patterns that form the core of
technical analysis.
This primary trend-range axis underlies price charts through all time frames and markets. Learn to
recognize each element by watching how price reacts to important levels. Then focus on key
relationships that effectively predict market movement through convergence-divergence over a
small number of bars or candles. Remember to answer the three important trend-range questions in
every setup analysis:
•
•
•

What is the current trend or range intensity?
What is the expected direction of the next price move?
When will this move occur?

Trading profits depend on the trend-range axis. Individual stocks struggle through a constant cycle
of synergy, balance, and conflict as trend intensity and direction shift alignment through different
time frames. The most dynamic trends arise when multiple periods stack up into directional positive
feedback. The most persistent ranges emerge when divergence generates negative feedback through
many views and stalls price change.
Negative feedback initiates many of the classic chart patterns popularized in recent years. The head
and shoulders, triangle, and wedge formations all reflect the discordant swings within a rangebound
market. Swing traders must recognize new range conditions early and shift out of momentum

strategies if they choose to remain in the game. Constricted price action requires selling strength
and buying weakness at the extremes of the congestion.
The transition from negative feedback into positive feedback represents a high profit
interface. Volatility, bar width, and volume all decline as a rangebound market nears its conclusion.
Participation fades and many traders move on to other opportunities. But right at these quiet empty
zones (EZs) the odds for price expansion sharply increase. The narrow bars encourage very low-risk
entry where even a small move against the position signals a violation.
Examine the overall congestion pattern to identify which side of the trade to enter. The EZ rarely
registers on technical indicators since most mathematics can’t digest the flatline conditions. Use
short-term bar range analysis to locate this interface. The NR7 (the narrowest range bar of the last
seven bars) offers one classic method to find the elusive EZ. The next bar after a NR7 will often
trigger a major breakout. If it doesn’t, the appearance of a NR7-2 (the second NR7 day in a row)
may ring an even louder bell. Odds then sharply increase for a major bar expansion event.
The trend-range axis offers all the signals needed to execute original intraday swing trades. Shortterm cycles often carry across several days of trading. Prepare multiday views of 5-minute, 15minute or 1-hour charts. Positive feedback in most markets tends to occur during the volatile first
and last hours while negative feedback can persist throughout the rest of the day. Intraday planning
remains the same as position trading: locate congestion boundaries and prepare to trade breakouts or
fades against them. Remember that classic swing strategies require intraday ranges broad enough to
permit decent reward. Range extremes should print at least 2 to 2 1/2 points apart to make the effort
pay off.
Price bar expansion-contraction presents a simple visual method for the swing trader to evaluate
volatility. Trends generally reflect expanding bars, while range-bound periods exhibit contracting
ones. The highest profitability will come when entering a position at the end of a low-volatility
period (contracting bar) and exiting on a volatility peak (expanding bar) just as the trend pulls back.
Learn to recognize the early warning signs for a trend change. The evolution from trending into a
rangebound or reversing market forces a shift in trading strategies to capitalize on the new
conditions. First rise/first failure provides one effective visual tool to beat the competition at this
task. Get defensive when price gives up 100% of the last move. Then apply classic swing tactics
until the intermediate high or low gets taken out.

TREND MIRRORS
Price remembers. Past battles between bulls and bears leave their mark long after the fight ends. As
stocks pass through old price levels, they must continually navigate the trading debris generated by
these prior events. These trend powerpoints mark their existence through dramatic S/R zones, sharp
volume spikes, and runaway gapping thrusts. But rather than add confusion, this scarred
battleground provides technicians with a trading map of incredible value.
Use trend mirrors (TMs) to interpret these volatile chart zones. Look horizontally at past action to
predict where price bars should bounce or fail. Current movement will often mimic the angle and
extent of past patterns. TMs locate S/R hotspots just as clear air targets bar expansion. When price
action swings repeatedly off either side of a mirror, odds increase that bars will act the same way
during the next pass. These chart memory levels can act as classic S/R or mark a swing axis for
price to shift back and forth. Each type requires an appropriate trading response.

This intricate puzzle of time and price requires skill to solve. The TM landscape defines profitable
execution points throughout the range from old low to new high. But an infinite variety of external
forces can overcome a stock’s natural tendency to reverse at exactly the same level it did in the past.
Choppy action may repeat itself when price returns or one singular event may draw so much interest
that other relative landscape features become undependable. Pass on low-reward conditions and
seek TM levels that stand out dramatically as the current trend pushes towards them. Then seek
cross-verification for the anticipated setup through moving averages, central tendency, and
retracement tools.
Mirrors have a finite shelf life. As time passes, individual characteristics of prior trends reinforce or
soften through subsequent price discovery. Common sense dictates that the more often that support
holds through testing, the stronger it becomes. So when price finally breaks support, odds increase
that it will break again on future swings. This testing creates a simple hierarchy that the swing
trader applies to evaluate the strength of these price levels. Use it the same way as trendline
analysis. In other words, place larger bets when levels hold for longer periods. Exercise caution on
single past events and noisy patterns.
The combination of gaps, spikes, and surging volatility can overwhelm analysis. But beneath this
complex landscape lies order and structure. Lay a Fibonacci grid across prior trend movement and
many terrain features will stand out right at major retracement levels. Add moving averages to
enclose the price activity within known S/R behavior. Draw trendlines and parallel price channels to
cross-verify expected turning points. Opportunities should stand out at important price intersections
after layers are applied.
Complex price action develops when trend breaks into levels where multiple swings took place in
the past. The odds favor a new range of the same duration as prior passages through these zones.
These offer excellent setups if they display clear horizontal S/R boundaries. Past persistence
improves the odds for successful fades off each edge of the congestion. One quick way to measure
the range’s potential endurance is to count the number of individual swing moves in the past. The
higher the total number of swings, the longer the fade strategy should work before price finally
surges out of the congestion. The mirror also reveals which side of the swing contains the higher
reward or risk. But make sure to look for other landscape features that might signal an earlier
breakout from these profitable zones.
Trend mirrors can generate at many different S/R angles. Visible trend emerges from many small
trendlets of divergent activity. Both upward and downward trendlets can contribute to price
movement at the same time. And normal trendlines or channels may not fully contain these odd
impulses. Trendlets will skip several crosses over a period of months or years but then reassert
themselves just as everyone concludes that they no longer exist.
Past price action exerts a powerful influence on current price activity. But don’t assume that each
impulse will stop right at the tick where it did a year or two ago. Trend development combines
many diverse forces to reach the printed outcome. But swing traders can still isolate key past
influences on current price and make skilled judgments about where major reversals will occur.

FIGURE 3.11
Trend mirrors build complex price action from the debris of prior bull-bear conflict. Although the puzzle appears
difficult at first glance, it grows from simple elements of support and resistance. Start each TM investigation with prior
gaps and horizontal price extremes. Then look for sideways congestion and volatile reversals. These key features should
predict the most obvious course of events as price returns to test those levels.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Ride the trend coaster and appreciate the diverse elements that influence markets. Focus the eyes
narrowly at the beginning of a major move and follow the price action bar by bar until the crowd
emotions pop out of the chart. Better yet, page back through the charting program so that the
beginning of the move is up against the hard right edge and then step forward one bar at a time.
Discover that each trend has a different identity and emotional nature. This sentiment guides how
greed and fear will interact to trigger reversals at important turning points. Study a market’s TM
history to examine these underlying emotions. New profit opportunities will suddenly appear out of
the restless action.

CLEAR AIR
Profits depend on the relationship between price and time. When price moves a greater distance
over a lesser period of time, individual chart bars and candlesticks expand in length. This
phenomenon signals those points of greatest market opportunity. Swing traders enter positions to
capitalize on these expansion events. Charting landscapes print many pockets of thin ownership
even though trading volume may be high. When price moves into one of these well-defined levels,
bars often expand sharply and trigger a surge toward the next barrier.
Clear air (CA) identifies TM price levels where this volatility should spike. The more violent the
prior events, the more likely it is that rapid price change will print on the next pass. This tendency

allows swing traders to locate outstanding reward through fast visual scans of their favorite stock
charts. Search for CA zones through repeated expansion bars that print at the same levels in past
price action. Prediction is simple: the more often expansion bars show up at these levels, the more
likely that it will happen again.
Not all CAs offer tradable conditions. Some exhibit wild and unpredictable midstream bar reversals.
Measure the pattern’s dependability from review of the prior passage history. Past swings from one
CA extreme to the other with few retracements suggests that the position will not face heavy
whipsaws after entry. Target a position right near the zone’s edge and plan to exit when price
reaches the average number of bars required crossing that region in the past. Clearly defined
horizontal extremes permit very profitable swing trades with simple exit strategies.
FIGURE 3.12
Silicon Graphics paints a jigsaw puzzle of trendlines and channels. Trend mirrors reflect all angles of past price action.
Market participants find ways to justify positions at almost every extension of two chart points. This can mask
underlying directional movement and cloud effective prediction. Always concentrate on primary trend features but
consider that these complex lines will introduce whipsaw and frustration into most setups.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Congestion limits volatility. Range expansion offers the state of least congestion and greatest
volatility. However, it also cautions the swing trader to manage risk closely as opportunity and
danger stand side by side. Defense trading must be exercised in the active momentum environment.

Clear air space can produce violent reversals. Utilize known S/R and Fibonacci retracement to
predict natural swing points in preexisting CA. Use detailed price/volume data from prior passages
to target high-probability setups with natural entry and exit triggers.
FIGURE 3.13
Clear air pockets may persist for months. Lycos price action shot through this thin 17-point zone repeatedly in 1999.
Note at least 16 quick swings of 10 or more points during the event. This chart also points out the danger of CA trades.
Sharp and violent reversals characterize price movement, especially during the most volatile phase near the end of the
prior trend.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Target new high CA with detailed Fibonacci projections. These major breaks often print few
congestion and swing points that offer good S/R data. But skilled observation suggests that the last
38% of these rallies can exhibit vertical movement. Locate the base for the breakout in the last
congestion under the new high and draw an extended Fib grid above the current rally to locate the
final CA level. Keep in mind that this strategy requires great discipline since the method doesn’t
rely on prior passages.
Apply Fibonacci grids after the completion of a clear air series to examine hidden reversal zones not
apparent during the event. This will assist planning for the next swing back into the zone. Try to
place a grid over new expansion moves to anticipate where opportunities will emerge on next
