
book_c02.qxd

14

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 14

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“What does that mean? Is it expensive?”
“No,” I said as I chuckled. “In fact, so far it has been paying for itself.” I
explained the late night commercial, the clandestine purchase, the allnighter at the office when I learned to use the software, and how I had already started making money.
“How much?” she asked.
“Three hundred dollars.”
She lifted her head from my lap. “Three hundred dollars?” I could tell
she was amazed. Well, that’s what the software promised! This was good!
This was not a crazy scheme to ask for another raise, especially now that I
was probably the highest paid (overpaid) file manager in any U.S. law firm.
This was a way to make money on the side! This was being sensible! This
was what the provider does! He thinks of real solutions that make sense to
wives.
In that moment, I remembered the iPod and felt even more proud of
myself.
The obvious question came next: “What kind of trading is it?”
I hesitated. My wife was excited and I didn’t want to have an endless
discussion of the risks associated with trading. Honestly, I had hardly listened to the risk disclaimers on the commercial, and thank goodness I
hadn’t paid more attention. I might never have bought it.
But I owed her the truth.
“It’s forex trading.”
“Flo-recks?” She was perplexed.
“No, forex, like ‘foreign exchange,’ or currencies. It’s like trading
stocks, only you trade currencies.”
“Wow. I didn’t know they did that.” I was really happy that she did not
blow up the idea immediately. This emboldened me.
“Honestly, neither did I,” I admitted. “But it only took me about a
minute to trade today.”
“So you can do it at work?”
“Well, at lunch. And after I get home.”
“At night?”
I nodded. “Yes, it’s a 24-hour market, so I can trade it anytime. It’s perfect for keeping my job now and doing this on the side.”
“Can you make that much every day?” she asked, perhaps now more
hopeful than I was. I decided a bit of restraint was in order.
“Well, not every day. Maybe that much. Maybe a bit less.”
She was doing numbers in her head. “That’s like nine thousand dollars
in a month.” I could tell she was having trouble comprehending that I could
make that much money.
“Well, there isn’t any trading on Saturday. So it’s less than that.”
“Still,” she spoke, putting her head back down on my lap. “That is so
much money. We could be out of debt in a few months.” She then said noth-

book_c02.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

The Future Looks Bright

Page 15

15

ing for a few minutes, and I knew what was coming next. Her head popped
back up: “Is this risky?”
I shrugged, trying to act cool. “For a beginner. For someone who
doesn’t know what he is doing. Sure. But I’ve got the software, and I am
going to play it safe.”
“Can we lose the thousand dollars you put in?”
“I don’t think so. I’m only going to trade when the software tells me to.
There are people making a lot of money from this. I watched it for a week
and it was just as amazing as they say—it was really making some incredible trades.”
Skeptical but satisfied, she told me she just wanted to go back to bed
now. I told her that before she did I wanted to give her a gift. I went into the
hallway, opened my briefcase, and brought her the present.
When she unwrapped the iPod, she threw her arms around me and
kissed me. “Can we afford this?” she asked.
“We can now,” I laughed. And with that, we went back to sleep, peacefully and with hope of the brighter future that was now within our reach.

book_c03.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 16

CHAPTER 3

A Trip to the
Thirty-First
Floor

worked in midtown Manhattan for 11 years. I worked at the law firm of
Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey, and all I did—and I am not making
this up—is file stuff away. Motions, briefs, interrogatories, settlements . . . you name it, I found a way to file it. This may sound like a boring
job, and that’s exactly what it was. It was like watching Brady Bunch reruns while poking my eyeballs out with a fork. This is the type of job that a
man will do anything to get fired from. And believe me, I tried. There were
times when I wanted to eat my leg just to inject an interesting event into
my day.
While I never ate my leg, I did all sorts of other things to pass the time.
I spent as much time as possible walking in between lawyers’ offices and
the filing area: We had 145 attorneys at the time, and I could waste a good
25 minutes on the way to a lawyer’s office. I still finished all the work that I
was supposed to do.
What got me the job in the first place was a pretty well connected father. Mine, to be exact. Harold Banes Sr. worked in the New York Metropolitan Transit Authority. He wasn’t an engineer. He didn’t dig tunnels or do
anything cool like that either. He was a janitor. To put this into perspective,
you need to pretend that you are in charge of cleaning up an area the size
of a football field, only it’s made of secret passageways, it’s always either
below zero or above 90 degrees, you enjoy the company of rats, and you
consider it a pleasure to call the police about once a week because someone is living (or dying) in your work space. He’s retired now, but I imagine
he has nightmares in the same way as do Vietnam vets or abused pets.

I

16

book_c03.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 17

A Trip to the Thirty-First Floor

17

He happened to work the same station that just about every single
lawyer from Wakeman, Butterman, and Bailey walked through every day.
And over the years, he spoke to every one of those lawyers. He became
good friends with many of them, and when I graduated from high school, I
had already worked three summers in the filing office of the firm, thanks to
his relationships.
I wasn’t making a lot of money at the time, but I didn’t know it. I think
they were paying me $15 an hour, back in 1992. That seemed like a ton of
money to me then. But I certainly didn’t protect the money as if I thought it
was a lot. I spent it like money was coming out of the fire hydrants, and I
lived like there would be a raise every year. And that was fine for a long
time because it was just me, and I was living at home.
Soon enough though, my high school girlfriend and I were deciding to
get married, and soon enough after that, we were having kids. Three, to be
exact, in the first seven years of marriage. And now we had one more on
the way.
Every day for the past 11 years, I had taken an elevator up to the 44th
floor of a shining Manhattan skyscraper, to go to work at a job I didn’t
much care for, for people I didn’t really think about unless they were standing in front of me, to earn about $300 less per month than I needed to survive (until now, ha!). And on the way up in that elevator, I passed floor after
floor of other offices. I never really stopped to wonder who worked on
those floors.
Anyway, when I got up to my cubicle, Scott was waiting for me just as
he had done every day, for the past five years.
Today, he looked worried. This wasn’t normal. He was about the most
laid-back guy in the world, but right now he looked as if someone had
caught him smoking behind the front desk. For a moment, I worried that
this had something to do with trading.
“You didn’t make any trades on my account, did you?”
He shook his head. I felt relief wash over me. I did not want him touching the account or the software. I didn’t mind that he was now interested in
trading, but I didn’t fully trust him.
“Dude, Herbie wants to see you,” he said, trying to seem as matter-offact as possible but really coming off as worried.
“Mr. Johnson?” Scott called him Herbie, always out of earshot, but all
the same I hated when he did that. When I heard the name “Herbie,” the
name played over and over in my mind, and I worried that I might blurt it
out sometime in front of Mr. Johnson.
Scott nodded quickly, like a child would do.
“Did he say what he wanted?” I asked, already dreading the encounter
I was about to have. I had a lot of filing in front of me for the day, plus
I wanted to trade again. I wanted to show my wife another good day of

book_c03.qxd

18

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 18

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

profits. Maybe I could go one more point past 30 today, and get $310. That
would be awesome.
“No, he didn’t say what he wanted,” Scott replied, interrupting my daydream. “In fact, he just left a voice mail for you, which as usual I checked
because you never do.”
I smiled weakly. “I wanted to check the market before I got started
with work today. It’s why I got here early.”
Scott nodded. “I’m sure you have a few moments. Let’s fire it up.”
We did. And things were hopping! There were already seven Amazing
Forex orders open—all but two were profitable. I looked at the most recent order: It was an order to buy the British Pound against the U.S. Dollar—the GBP/USD—and the trade alert had just come through 5 minutes
ago. It was only 10 points in the negative right now.
Scott brightened up: “You can trade that right now and get a better
price than they suggested.” I thought about it, and he was right: They had
suggested buying the GBP/USD at 1.8100, and it was now at 1.8090. That
meant that we could get in on a profitable buy trade and at a better price
than had originally been suggested. I opened my trading platform and entered the order.
Whoosh! I liked that sound. Now we only had to wait for the profit to
appear. We also had to keep an eye on the Amazing software, so that we
would know when to exit. Yesterday we had exited in a gleeful pandemonium resulting from my first profit. But now I was committed to exiting the
trades when the software told me to. I rubbed my hands together. I forgot
about the filing that I needed to do. I expected the profit to come quickly
again, but after a few moments had passed, the trade still did not budge. I
was down $50.
“Why is it negative from the start?” I wondered aloud.
Scott answered quickly. “You’ve got to pay the spread. You can buy at a
price higher than what you can sell for. That’s how the broker makes his
money.”
“Ahh,” I answered. The spread. Okay. That made sense. So I would be
negative from the start of every trade. But Amazing Forex had been giving
such good trades that usually I didn’t notice this. Minutes passed.
It was 8:29 A.M.
I heard a booming voice down the hall. It was Mr. Johnson. I heard my
name being called and remembered that the big man wanted to see me.
Oops. I had an open trade! I expected it to be closed by now. I was becoming uncomfortable with this trade out there in cyberspace. I should have
some profit by now!
“Harry, he wanted to see you first thing when you got in.”
“I know.”
“And he knows you get here every day at eight-fifteen A.M.”

book_c03.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 19

A Trip to the Thirty-First Floor

19

“I know.”
What could I do?
Scott smiled at me and said: “I will get out of the trade right when the
software says to. You go talk to Herbie. Here’s a pen and a pad so you can
take notes while he is yelling, and here is a tissue in case he spits on you.”
He handed me these things as if he were preparing me for battle.
I did not want to leave Scott in charge of my trade, but I had no choice.
“Don’t do anything else. Just close it when the software says to close it.”
“I will. I won’t move.”
I started on my way to Herb’s office, glancing over the top of my cubicle on the way out. I couldn’t see the screen because I had moved my monitor. This meeting with Mr. Johnson could last for a half minute. Or it could
take an hour.
Herb Johnson was the managing partner of the firm. Newly elected, he
was in the position he was because he could get things done. He was a
first-class operator. This Napoleon-shaped man could return two phone
calls, scribble down a defense strategy, and scream at an associate lawyer
all at the same time. He had earned more money for the firm in fees than
any other attorney in the firm’s history, he had brought in more clients, had
a reputation for speaking his mind clearly and loudly, and scared the crap
out of anyone who worked for him. When I arrived at his office, he was already screaming. Not at me yet, but at someone on the phone.
Instead of ending the phone call like most humans do, he simply put
down the phone—didn’t hang up, just put it down on the desk—and stared
me down for a good 30 seconds.
Was he going to fire me? Maybe.
Promote me? No way.
Yell at me about missing documents? Oh, yes. That was going to be it
for sure.
“Banes, you’ve done it again,” he growled. I heard what he was saying,
but I was really thinking about my trade. Could it be possible that I was already making some money? Ohhh, money. How I loved it. How I longed to
see the trade! It must be very profitable by now. I wondered how long it
generally took an Amazing Forex Profit System trade to reach its profit target. Maybe I would call the company later that day and ask. But for now, I
could nearly smell the profit wafting over the cubicles to me; it was a sweet
scent that I hoped to smell again many times that same day.
I imagined myself sitting by the midnight blue water, reclining on a
lounge chair. An attentive server was approaching me:
ATTENTIVE SERVER: Mr. Banes, would you like another drink?
ME: Why yes. I’ll have another virgin strawberry daiquiri.
ATTENTIVE SERVER: Of course.

book_c03.qxd

20

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 20

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Mr. Johnson was still yelling when I snapped back into the present
tense. He was blabbering about some lost file, some letter that surely demanded legal redress for the wrongs done to our firm’s client blah blah
blah.
When Herbie was really upset, he growled, and his growling increased
as he talked. “It’s the most important file in this whole damn office, Banes.
It’s the Anderson case, the trader. The bonus discrimination case.”
He said this as if I actually cared about Anderson, or his case, or
whether the file had been shredded with the receipts of Herbie’s gifts to his
mistress. I did care about trading, though, and when Mr. Johnson said,
“trader,” it made me even more excited to go check with Scott to see what
had happened.
I wrote some notes down on the pad of paper that Scott had given me
while Mr. Johnson continued his tirade. I didn’t have to take any notes
about the case, which Mr. Johnson was now describing in the most specific
detail. I knew this case because it was on the front pages of every New
York business section. We were representing a Wall Street firm—one of the
biggest securities firms in the world. The firm was accused of paying a
smaller bonus to a physically handicapped trader, or something like that,
to force the trader out of the firm. I didn’t know all the details, but I knew
that the case was Herb’s, that it was producing huge amounts of filing
work, and that meant that it was producing huge fees. I stopped drawing
my portrait of the managing partner, and asked: “Which document specifically do you want me to find?”
He stopped talking and stared me down again for what seemed like
forever. I thought at any moment he would pounce on me, his little Danny
DeVito frame scrambling across the desk to rip out my throat or something. I took a step back.
The phone was still sitting on his desk, and I could barely hear a voice
calling out to him, wondering where Herb went. I think Herb was partly
glad I had interrupted him so that he could get back to billing three people
at once.
“It’s a letter,” he answered, as he started walking around his desk to
pick up his briefcase. As he described the letter, he was already in the process of doing something else entirely. When he finished letting me know
what I was supposed to go look for, he looked up at me and said, “Take it
down to the 31st floor, personally, and tell Mr. Anderson that I want him to
call me and let me know that you delivered it.”
So this was the punishment: I was messenger boy for a morning. That
was perfectly fine. I could stand that, especially since there were mountains of Anderson files that my team and I were going to have to work on
for the rest of the day. And now I could check on the trade!

book_c03.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 21

A Trip to the Thirty-First Floor

21

As I ran back to the file room to grab the letter, which I immediately
recognized and which I had personally placed in the correct location only
24 hours before, I noticed Scott walking down the far hall of the office. He
was more than 50 feet away and it was impossible to yell loud enough to
get his attention. That meant that he wasn’t watching the trade!
I bolted back to my desk to get the update. But the screen was blank—
just a screen saver. The Amazing software was closed; the trading account
program was no longer open. And I had no idea where to find Scott. And I
needed to deliver the letter pronto.
Then I heard Mr. Johnson’s voice booming from down the hall. Reluctantly I left my desk, determined to never again leave it while I had an open
trade. Having to delay my knowledge of the outcome was going to kill me.

MY EYES ARE OPENED
I needed a special code to even get the elevator to stop at the 31st floor. On
exiting the elevator, all I saw in front of me was a small lobby, with furniture that appeared to have never been used. Brass letters spelled out
ERNEST WELLINGTON AND COMPANY above the secretary who
guarded the desk, and behind her was a steel door that fit in very nicely
with the wood trim in the rest of the small room. I stated my purpose, she
made a phone call to check my identity, and then she turned around,
swiped a card through a slot, and the steel door unlocked. She pushed it
open, and while turning around and leaving me, said something which I
never heard. In fact, I almost had to cover my ears to protect them from the
noise I now encountered.
I could feel the door close behind me—it hit me in the butt—but I
hardly moved. I was staring at the trading floor of a major Wall Street firm,
and I thought I had been teleported to another planet.
There were at least 20 rows of desks, formed in a giant half-circle,
starting directly in front of me, and extending out all the way across the
floor to the other end of the building. At least 200 men and a few women
were yelling, pounding on their computers, and watching their screens.
There was so much happening right here, just a few floors below where I
had been working for 11 years.
I forgot entirely about Anderson, and just wandered onto the floor.
Glass windows looked out on midtown from the west side, and every other
wall had glass conference rooms, one after the other, mostly empty. Above
the conference rooms were screens: Some screens showed what were obviously quotes on stocks or bonds or whatever, and some showed what appeared to be news conferences from around the world, with closed

book_c03.qxd

22

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 22

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

captioning but no sound. I felt as if time stood still for me and was moving
at 1,000 miles per hour for everyone around me.
It was chaos.
Walking a few feet forward, I stood next to a guy who was probably 21
years old, and he was screaming into his phone something about selling
stock in November for some price that I cannot remember. The man next
to him was at least twice his age and had his head in his hands, and didn’t
look very happy. The woman down one more seat was poking her finger
into her trading screen, and saying something to the guy next to her about
Commitments of Traders, and how she was owed a case of beer.
And this scene was repeated, row after row, until I was dizzy. I heard
people talking about millions and millions of dollars. As I walked further
toward the center of the floor, I heard a trader say to the guy next to him
that he had just dumped a million shares of GE. A million shares of General
Electric? That must have been worth tens of millions of dollars. How did
he get those shares? Upon whom had he dumped them? Why did they buy
them? How did the dumpee feel about all of this?
There is a time in one’s life that is a wake-up call. This was mine.
Maybe it doesn’t happen to everyone. It might have happened to you
when you learned about trading or peered over a friend’s shoulder to see
him making trades. It’s a moment when you feel as if you are just waking
up out of hibernation and realize that you have been missing life for at least
a few years, if not your entire prior existence. I forgot completely about my
open trade on the GBP/USD and thought: These men and women are making enormous amounts of money by trading. I had thought that $300 was
big time.
No, this scene in front of me was big time. It was the biggest time of all.
I had never seen so many people this animated, this excited, this depressed, this wild—all working in the same room, talking about dumping
tens of millions of dollars of shares on someone else. Something clicked inside me. Or it was more like something snapped.
I knew this is what I needed to be doing. Already I knew that I wanted
to trade. Already I knew that I had the talent to do it—but this trading floor,
this mass of chaotic buying and selling: This is what I wanted to do for the
rest of my life.
There could not have been a more ridiculous thought at the time. I had
taken just one trade of my own. I was a file manager in a New York law
firm, with ninth-grade math skills and a diploma from Ben Cardozo High
School. Surrounding me at that moment were men and women educated at
some of the finest universities in the United States—I probably was standing among more than a hundred Harvard Business School graduates. It was
just as likely that I’d be made partner that same day in my own law firm
without a law degree, not to mention a college degree.

book_c03.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 23

A Trip to the Thirty-First Floor

23

But I knew what I wanted. I wanted to do what these people did.
Now, I remembered my trade. Seeing all these people in a state of violent anxiety over their trades made me feel part of the group. A member of
a brotherhood of traders who worried about whether their trade was profitable. Just like me.
“Hey, Mack, you lookin’ for somebody?” a voice called out to me.
I could not tell where it had come from, so I just answered while I was
looking around the room, “Anderson. Looking for Anderson.”
“Over in front of you, keep walking, to the conference room. You look
like you stepped in something.”
If I had been able to identify who was talking to me, I would have
asked about the current price on the British Pound.
Copies of the Wall Street Journal were everywhere, but most of them
were unopened. The sports sections of the New York Daily News and New
York Post were opened across one out of three desks, at the least. Most
traders wore casual clothes. If a guy had a sport coat of any kind, it was
strewn over the back of his chair or on the floor.
Everywhere I looked around the trading floor, there were computer
screens and on those screens, charts. Not so different from the charts I
would see if I watched business news on television, which was mostly
never. Every trader I could see—in fact, all of them—had at least three flat
panel computer monitors, and some had four. At least one of those screens
on each desk was showing some form of financial charts. The charts still
made no sense to me. But obviously they were indispensable. It was one
more thing I was going to have to learn.
Instead of spending more time gawking at the trading operation, I decided I’d be better off just getting over to see Anderson, and then getting
back upstairs to check on my trade.
I hurried to the conference room where I saw a thin, blond man, with
wire glasses and a bow tie, standing by a sea of papers on a glass conference table. Although he had boyish looks, it was obvious he was an important person around here, just from the way he stood at the table in deep
thought, with his hand rubbing his chin. Maybe it was his ability to look so
calm while there was so much madness happening right on the other side
of the glass conference room.
He grinned at me when I opened the door.
“You must be Harry Banes,” he said in a quiet voice. I would not have
heard him if the glass conference room walls had not been surprisingly
soundproof.
“Yes, that’s right. I brought this letter from Herb.”
He put out his hand to take the letter and smiled warmly. “How long
have you been with the firm?”
“About 10 years.”
