
At a meeting of the Council of Finance, and the general council of the Regency,
documents were laid upon the table, from which it appeared that the amount of notes in
circulation was 2700 millions. The Regent was called upon to explain how it happened
that there was a discrepancy between the dates at which these issues were made, and
those of the edicts by which they were authorised. He might have safely taken the whole
blame upon himself, but he preferred that an absent man should bear a share of it, and he
therefore stated that Law, upon his own authority, had issued 1200 millions of notes at
different times, and that he (the Regent) seeing that the thing had been irrevocably done,
had screened Law, by antedating the decrees of the council, which authorised the
augmentation. It would have been more to his credit if he had told the whole truth while
he was about it, and acknowledged that it was mainly through his extravagance and
impatience that Law had been induced to overstep the bounds of safe speculation. It was
also ascertained that the national debt, on the 1st of January, 1721, amounted to upwards
of $100 millions of livres, or more than 124,000,000 pounds sterling, the interest upon
which was 3,196,000 pounds. A commission, or visa, was forthwith appointed to
examine into all the securities of the state creditors, who were to be divided into five
classes, the first four comprising those who had purchased their securities with real
effects, and the latter comprising those who could give no proofs that the transactions
they had entered into were real and bona fide. The securities of the latter were ordered to
be destroyed, while those of the first four classes were subjected to a most rigid and
jealous scrutiny. The result of the labours of the visa was a report, in which they
counselled the reduction of the interest upon these securities to fifty-six millions of livres.
They justified this advice by a statement of the various acts of peculation and extortion
which they had discovered, and an edict to that effect was accordingly published and duly
registered by the parliaments of the kingdom.
Another tribunal was afterwards established, under the title of the Chambre de l'Arsenal,
which took cognizance of all the malversations committed in the financial departments of
the government during the late unhappy period. A Master of Requests, named Falhonet,
together with the Abbe Clement, and two clerks in their employ, had been concerned in
divers acts of peculation, to the amount of upwards of a million of livres. The first two
were sentenced to be beheaded, and the latter to be hanged; but their punishment was
afterwards commuted into imprisonment for life in the Bastile. Numerous other acts of
dishonesty were discovered, and punished by fine and imprisonment.
D'Argenson shared with Law and the Regent the unpopularity which had alighted upon
all those concerned in the Mississippi madness. He was dismissed from his post of
Chancellor, to make room for D'Aguesseau; but he retained the title of Keeper of the
Seals, and was allowed to attend the councils whenever he pleased. He thought it better,
however, to withdraw from Paris, and live for a time a life of seclusion at his countryseat. But he was not formed for retirement, and becoming moody and discontented, he
aggravated a disease under which he had long laboured, and died in less than a
twelvemonth. The populace of of Paris so detested him, that they carried their hatred even
to his grave. As his funeral procession passed to the church of St. Nicholas du
Chardonneret, the burying-place of his family, it was beset by a riotous mob, and his two

sons, who were following as chief-mourners, were obliged to drive as fast as they were
able down a by-street to escape personal violence.
As regards Law, he for some time entertained a hope that he should be recalled to France,
to aid in establishing its credit upon a firmer basis. The death of the Regent, in 1723, who
expired suddenly, as he was sitting by the fireside conversing with his mistress, the
Duchess de Phalaris, deprived him of that hope, and he was reduced to lead his former
life of gambling. He was more than once obliged to pawn his diamond, the sole remnant
of his vast wealth, but successful play generally enabled him to redeem it. Being
persecuted by his creditors at Rome, he proceeded to Copenhagen, where he received
permission from the English ministry to reside in his native country, his pardon for the
murder of Mr. Wilson having been sent over to him in 1719. He was brought over in the
admiral's ship, a circumstance which gave occasion for a short debate in the House of
Lords. Earl Coningsby complained that a man, who had renounced both his country and
his religion, should have been treated with such honour, and expressed his belief that his
presence in England, at a time when the people were so bewildered by the nefarious
practices of the South Sea directors, would be attended with no little danger. He gave
notice of a motion on the subject; but it was allowed to drop, no other member of the
House having the slightest participation in his lordship's fears. Law remained for about
four years in England, and then proceeded to Venice, where he died in 1729, in very
embarrassed circumstances. The following epitaph was written at the time :-"Ci git cet Ecossais celebre, Ce calculateur sans egal, Qui, par les regles de l'algebre, A
mis la France a l'Hopital."
His brother, William Law, who had been concerned with him in the administration both
of the Bank and the Louisiana Company, was imprisoned in the Bastile for alleged
malversation, but no guilt was ever proved against him. He was liberated after fifteen
months, and became the founder of a family, which is still known in France under the
title of Marquises of Lauriston.
In the next chapter will be found an account of the madness which infected the people of
England at the same time, and under very similar circumstances, but which, thanks to the
energies and good sense of a constitutional government, was attended with results far less
disastrous than those which were seen in France.

THE SOUTH SEA BUBBLE
At length corruption, like a general flood,
Did deluge all, and avarice creeping on,
Spread, like a low-born mist, and hid the sun.
Statesmen and patriots plied alike the stocks,
Peeress and butler shared alike the box;
And judges jobbed, and bishops bit the town,
And mighty dukes packed cards for half-a-crown:
Britain was sunk in lucre's sordid charms.
--Pope.
The South Sea Company was originated by the celebrated Harley, Earl of Oxford, in the
year 1711, with the view of restoring public credit, which had suffered by the dismissal
of the Whig ministry, and of providing for the discharge of the army and navy
debentures, and other parts of the floating debt, amounting to nearly ten millions sterling.
A company of merchants, at that time without a name, took this debt upon themselves,
and the government agreed to secure them, for a certain period, the interest of six per
cent. To provide for this interest, amounting to 600,000 pounds per annum, the duties
upon wines, vinegar, India goods, wrought silks, tobacco, whale-fins, and some other
articles, were rendered permanent. The monopoly of the trade to the South Seas was
granted, and the company, being incorporated by Act of Parliament, assumed the title by
which it has ever since been known. The minister took great credit to himself for his
share in this transaction, and the scheme was always called by his flatterers "the Earl of
Oxford's masterpiece."
Even at this early period of its history, the most visionary ideas were formed by the
company and the public of the immense riches of the eastern coast of South America.
Everybody had heard of the gold and silver mines of Peru and Mexico; every one
believed them to be inexhaustible, and that it was only necessary to send the
manufactures of England to the coast, to be repaid a hundredfold in gold and silver ingots
by the natives. A report, industriously spread, that Spain was willing to concede four
ports, on the coasts of Chili and Peru, for the purposes of traffic, increased the general
confidence; and for many years the South Sea Company's stock was in high favour.
Philip V of Spain, however, never had any intention of admitting the English to a free
trade in the ports of Spanish America. Negotiations were set on foot, but their only result
was the assiento contract, or the privilege of supplying the colonies with negroes for
thirty years, and of sending once a year a vessel, limited both as to tonnage and value of
cargo, to trade with Mexico, Peru, or Chili. The latter permission was only granted upon
the hard condition, that the King of Spain should enjoy one-fourth of the profits, and a tax
of five per cent. on the remainder. This was a great disappointment to the Earl of Oxford
and his party, who were reminded much oftener than they found agreeable of the
"Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus,"

But the public confidence in the South Sea Company was not shaken. The Earl of Oxford
declared, that Spain would permit two ships, in addition to the annual ship, to carry out
merchandise during the first year; and a list was published, in which all the ports and
harbours of these coasts were pompously set forth as open to the trade of Great Britain.
The first voyage of the annual ship was not made till the year 1717, and in the following
year the trade was suppressed by the rupture with Spain.
The King's speech, at the opening of the session of 1717, made pointed allusion to the
state of public credit, and recommended that proper measures should be taken to reduce
the national debt. The two great monetary corporations, the South Sea Company and the
Bank of England, made proposals to Parliament on the 20th of May ensuing. The South
Sea Company prayed that their capital stock of ten millions might be increased to twelve,
by subscription or otherwise, and offered to accept five per cent. instead of six upon the
whole amount. The Bank made proposals equally advantageous. The House debated for
some time, and finally three acts were passed, called the South Sea Act, the Bank Act,
and the General Fund Act. By the first, the proposals of the South Sea Company were
accepted, and that body held itself ready to advance the sum of two millions towards
discharging the principal and interest of the debt due by the state for the four lottery funds
of the ninth and tenth years of Queen Anne. By the second act, the Bank received a lower
rate of interest for the sum of 1,775,027 pounds 15 shillings due to it by the state, and
agreed to deliver up to be cancelled as many Exchequer bills as amounted to two millions
sterling, and to accept of an annuity of one hundred thousand pounds, being after the rate
of five per cent, the whole redeemable at one year's notice. They were further required to
be ready to advance, in case of need, a sum not exceeding 2,500,000 pounds upon the
same terms of five per cent interest, redeemable by Parliament. The General Fund Act
recited the various deficiencies, which were to be made good by the aids derived from the
foregoing sources.
The name of the South Sea Company was thus continually before the public. Though
their trade with the South American States produced little or no augmentation of their
revenues, they continued to flourish as a monetary corporation. Their stock was in high
request, and the directors, buoyed up with success, began to think of new means for
extending their influence. The Mississippi scheme of John Law, which so dazzled and
captivated the French people, inspired them with an idea that they could carry on the
same game in England. The anticipated failure of his plans did not divert them from their
intention. Wise in their own conceit, they imagined they could avoid his faults, carry on
their schemes for ever, and stretch the cord of credit to its extremest tension, without
causing it to snap asunder.
It was while Law's plan was at its greatest height of popularity, while people were
crowding in thousands to the Rue Quincampoix, and ruining themselves with frantic
eagerness, that the South Sea directors laid before Parliament their famous plan for
paying off the national debt. Visions of boundless wealth floated before the fascinated
eyes of the people in the two most celebrated countries of Europe. The English
commenced their career of extravagance somewhat later than the French; but as soon as
the delirium seized them, they were determined not to be outdone. Upon the 22nd of

January 1720, the House of Commons resolved itself into a Committee of the whole
House, to take into consideration that part of the King's speech at the opening of the
session which related to the public debts, and the proposal of the South Sea Company
towards the redemption and sinking of the same. The proposal set forth at great length,
and under several heads, the debts of the state, amounting to 30,981,712 pounds, which
the Company were anxious to take upon themselves, upon consideration of five per cent.
per annum, secured to them until Midsummer 1727; after which time, the whole was to
become redeemable at the pleasure of the legislature, and the interest to be reduced to
four per cent. The proposal was received with great favour; but the Bank of England had
many friends in the House of Commons, who were desirous that that body should share
in the advantages that were likely to accrue. On behalf of this corporation it was
represented, that they had performed great and eminent services to the state, in the most
difficult times, and deserved, at least, that if any advantage was to be made by public
bargains of this nature, they should be preferred before a company that had never done
any thing for the nation. The further consideration of the matter was accordingly
postponed for five days. In the mean time, a plan was drawn up by the Governors of the
Bank. The South Sea Company, afraid that the Bank might offer still more advantageous
terms to the government than themselves, reconsidered their former proposal, and made
some alterations in it, which they hoped would render it more acceptable. The principal
change was a stipulation that the government might redeem these debts at the expiration
of four years, instead of seven, as at first suggested. The Bank resolved not to be
outbidden in this singular auction, and the Governors also reconsidered their first
proposal, and sent in a new one.
Thus, each corporation having made two proposals, the House began to deliberate. Mr.
Robert Walpole was the chief speaker in favour of the Bank, and Mr. Aislabie, the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, the principal advocate on behalf of the South Sea
Company. It was resolved, on the 2nd of February, that the proposals of the latter were
most advantageous to the country. They were accordingly received, and leave was given
to bring in a bill to that effect.
Exchange Alley was in a fever of excitement. The Company's stock, which had been at a
hundred and thirty the previous day, gradually rose to three hundred, and continued to
rise with the most astonishing rapidity during the whole time that the bill in its several
stages was under discussion. Mr. Walpole was almost the only statesman in the House
who spoke out boldly against it. He warned them, in eloquent and solemn language, of
the evils that would ensue. It countenanced, he said, "the dangerous practice of
stockjobbing, and would divert the genius of the nation from trade and industry. It would
hold out a dangerous lure to decoy the unwary to their ruin, by making them part with the
earnings of their labour for a prospect of imaginary wealth. The great principle of the
project was an evil of first-rate magnitude; it was to raise artificially the value of the
stock, by exciting and keeping up a general infatuation, and by promising dividends out
of funds which could never be adequate to the purpose. In a prophetic spirit he added,
that if the plan succeeded, the directors would become masters of the government, form a
new and absolute aristocracy in the kingdom, and control the resolutions of the
legislature. If it failed, which he was convinced it would, the result would bring general

discontent and ruin upon the country. Such would be the delusion, that when the evil day
came, as come it would, the people would start up, as from a dream, and ask themselves
if these things could have been true. All his eloquence was in vain. He was looked upon
as a false prophet, or compared to the hoarse raven, croaking omens of evil. His friends,
however, compared him to Cassandra, predicting evils which would only be believed
when they came home to men's hearths, and stared them in the face at their own boards.
Although, in former times, the House had listened with the utmost attention to every
word that fell from his lips, the benches became deserted when it was known that he
would speak on the South Sea question.
The bill was two months in its progress through the House of Commons. During this time
every exertion was made by the directors and their friends, and more especially by the
Chairman, the noted Sir John Blunt, to raise the price of the stock. The most extravagant
rumours were in circulation. Treaties between England and Spain were spoken of,
whereby the latter was to grant a free trade to all her colonies; and the rich produce of the
mines of Potosi-la-Paz was to be brought to England until silver should become almost as
plentiful as iron. For cotton and woollen goods, with which we could supply them in
abundance, the dwellers in Mexico were to empty their golden mines. The company of
merchants trading to the South Seas would be the richest the world ever saw, and every
hundred pounds invested in it would produce hundreds per annum to the stockholder. At
last the stock was raised by these means to near four hundred; but, after fluctuating a
good deal, settled at three hundred and thirty, at which price it remained when the bill
passed the Commons by a majority of 172 against 55.
In the House of Lords the bill was hurried through all its stages with unexampled
rapidity. On the 4th of April it was read a first time; on the 5th, it was read a second time;
on the 6th, it was committed; and on the 7th, was read a third time, and passed.
Several peers spoke warmly against the scheme; but their warnings fell upon dull, cold
ears. A speculating frenzy had seized them as well as the plebeians. Lord North and Grey
said the bill was unjust in its nature, and might prove fatal in its consequences, being
calculated to enrich the few and impoverish the many. The Duke of Wharton followed;
but, as he only retailed at second-hand the arguments so eloquently stated by Walpole in
the Lower House, he was not listened to with even the same attention that had been
bestowed upon Lord North and Grey. Earl Cowper followed on the same side, and
compared the bill to the famous horse of the siege of Troy. Like that, it was ushered in
and received with great pomp and acclamations of joy, but bore within it treachery and
destruction. The Earl of Sunderland endeavoured to answer all objections; and, on the
question being put, there appeared only seventeen peers against, and eighty-three in
favour of the project. The very same day on which it passed the Lords, it received the
Royal assent, and became the law of the land.
It seemed at that time as if the whole nation had turned stockjobbers. Exchange Alley was
every day blocked up by crowds, and Cornhill was impassable for the number of
carriages. Everybody came to purchase stock. "Every fool aspired to be a knave." In the
words of a ballad, published at the time, and sung about the streets, ["A South Sea Ballad;

or, Merry Remarks upon Exchange Alley Bubbles. To a new tune, called ' The Grand
Elixir; or, the Philosopher's Stone Discovered.'"]
Then stars and garters did appear Among the meaner rabble; To buy and sell, to see and
hear, The Jews and Gentiles squabble.
The greatest ladies thither came, And plied in chariots daily, Or pawned their jewels for a
sum To venture in the Alley.
The inordinate thirst of gain that had afflicted all ranks of society, was not to be slaked
even in the South Sea. Other schemes, of the most extravagant kind, were started. The
share-lists were speedily filled up, and an enormous traffic carried on in shares, while, of
course, every means were resorted to, to raise them to an artificial value in the market.
Contrary to all expectation, South Sea stock fell when the bill received the Royal assent.
On the 7th of April the shares were quoted at three hundred and ten, and. on the
following day, at two hundred and ninety. Already the directors had tasted the profits of
their scheme, and it was not likely that they should quietly allow the stock to find its
natural level, without an effort to raise it. Immediately their busy emissaries were set to
work. Every person interested in the success of the project endeavoured to draw a knot of
listeners around him, to whom he expatiated on the treasures of the South American seas.
Exchange Alley was crowded with attentive groups. One rumour alone, asserted with the
utmost confidence, had an immediate effect upon the stock. It was said, that Earl
Stanhope had received overtures in France from the Spanish Government to exchange
Gibraltar and Port Mahon for some places on the coast of Peru, for the security and
enlargement of the trade in the South Seas. Instead of one annual ship trading to those
ports, and allowing the King of Spain twenty-five per cent. out of the profits, the
Company might build and charter as many ships as they pleased, and pay no per centage
whatever to any foreign potentate.
Visions of ingots danced before their eyes,
and stock rose rapidly. On the 12th of April, five days after the bill had become law, the
directors opened their books for a subscription of a million, at the rate of 300 pounds for
every 100 pounds capital. Such was the concourse of persons, of all ranks, that this first
subscription was found to amount to above two millions of original stock. It was to be
paid at five payments, of 60 pounds each for every 100 pounds. In a few days the stock
advanced to three hundred and forty, and the subscriptions were sold for double the price
of the first payment. To raise the stock still higher, it was declared, in a general court of
directors, on the 21st of April, that the midsummer dividend should be ten per cent., and
that all subscriptions should be entitled to the same. These resolutions answering the end
designed, the directors, to improve the infatuation of the monied men, opened their books
for a second subscription of a million, at four hundred per cent. Such was the frantic
eagerness of people of every class to speculate in these funds, that in the course of a few
hours no less than a million and a half was subscribed at that rate.
