
Volume, the number of units of an asset (such as shares or contracts) that
changes hands during a specific period, is shown by the vertical lines at the
bottom of Fig. 5-12. Volume expands marginally as the price approaches its

low at the beginning or rectangle AA, but as the accumulation pattern is
formed, activity recedes noticeably.

Ue

Price Patterns 75

As the pattern nears completion, disinterest prevails and volume almost
dries up. As if by magic, activity picks up noticeably when the security
moves above its level of resistance (bounded by the upper line in the rec-
tangle). It is sometimes possible to draw a trend line joining the lower vol-
ume peaks, as shown in Fig. 5-12. It is this upward surge in trading activity
that confirms the validity of the breakout. A similar move on low volume
would be suspect and would result in a failure of volume to move with the
trend. *

Following the sharp price rise from the rectangle, enthusiasm dies down
as prices correct in a sideways movement and volume contracts (rectangle
BB). This is a perfectly normal relationship, since volume is correcting
(declining) with price. Eventually, volume and price expand together, and
the primary upward trend is once again confirmed. Finally, the buyers
become exhausted, and the price forms yet another rectangle (rectangle
CC) characterized, as before, by falling volume, but this time destined to
become a reversal pattern.

It is worth noting that while the volume from the breakout in rectangle
BBis high, it is relatively lower than that which accompanied the move from
rectangle AA. In relation to the overall cycle, this is a bearish factor.

In this case, volume makes its peak just before entering rectangle BB,
while the peak in prices is not reached until rectangle CC.



76 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Volume contracts throughout the formation of rectangle CCand expands
as prices break out on the downside. This expanded level of activity associ-
ated with the violation of support at the lower boundary of the rectangle
emphasizes the bearish nature of the breakout, although expanding volume
is not a prerequisite for a valid signal with downside breakouts, as it is for
an upside move. Following the downside breakout, more often than not,
prices will reverse and put on a small recovery or retracement rally. This
advance is invariably accompanied by declining volume, which itself rein-
forces the bearish indications. It is halted at the lower end of the rectangle,
which now becomes an area of resistance. Chart 5-3 shows an example of
the Dow Jones Rail Average at the 1946 bull market high.

It is now time to expand our discussion to some of the other price pat-

terns, starting with one of the most notorious: the head-and-shoulders (H&S)
formation.
/

H&S Patterns
H&S as Reversal Patterns

At Tops The H&S is probably the most reliable of all chart patterns. It
occurs at both market tops and market bottoms. Figure 5-18 shows a typi-
cal H&S distribution pattern. (See also Chart 5-4.)

This typical H&S distribution pattern consists of a final rally (the head)
separating two smaller, although not necessarily identical, rallies (the shoul-
ders). If the two shoulders were trends of intermediate duration, the first
shoulder would be the penultimate advance in the bull market, and the sec-
ond the first bear market rally. The head would, of course, represent the
final intermediate rally in the bull market. Volume characteristics are of crit-
ical importance in assessing the validity of these patterns. Activity is normally
heaviest during the formation of the left shoulder and also tends to be quite
heavy as prices approach the peak. The real tip-off that an H&S pattern is
developing comes with the formation of the right shoulder, which is invari-
ably accompanied by distinctly lower volume. Quite often, the level of vol-
ume contracts as the peak of the right shoulder is reached. The line joining
the bottoms of the two shoulders is called the neckline.

PIOS S@sDYS JO SUOIT|IW

77

(| i

8

+38

¢

Ps ;
A 7 7
is . 7 > ote
EB :
3 “
ae ;
|-3? 4
| is
|e 3
p z H 4 ' p:
v i|as Fi
| = :
; et 5
Ls] © 3) fas 5
we }l —~ %
») i ii
fegenge? “ (



1
78 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques 7

Chart 5-4 The New York Times average, 1928. This chart of The New York Times aver-
age of 50 railroad and industrial stocks shows the formation of an upward-sloping H&S dur-
ing March, April, and May 1928. The minimum downside objective of about 182 was
fairly quickly, but a 3-month period of base building commensurate with the H&S
was still necessary before the effect of the distribution was canceled out and prices were
able to resume their primary advance. Note the heavy volume on the left shoulder and head,
and the relatively low volume on the right shoulder. Also, activity declined substantially during
the formation of the triangle, but began to expand during the breakout in September.

210

i

Figure 5-13 Classic H&S top. poe

If you look carefully at Fig. 5-18, you will appreciate that the violation of
the neckline also represents a signal that the previous series of rising peaks 1908
and troughs has now given way to at least one declining peak and trough.

The right shoulder represents the first lower peak and the bottom of the
move following the breakdown represents a lower trough.

The measuring formula for this price formation is the distance between | } Muy
the head and the neckline Projected downward from the neckline, as A |
shown in Fig. 5-13. It follows that the deeper the pattern, the greater its bear- bi '
ish significance once it has been completed. Sometimes an H&S comple-
tion will be followed by a fairly extensive downtrend; at others, the negative
effect of the pattern will be quickly cancelled by the completion of a base.

Often, traders will observe the formation of an H&S top and anticipate
a breakdown. This is an incorrect tactic based on this evidence alone 128 t
because it is not known until later whether the prevailing trend will continue
or if'a reversal signal will be given with a decisive break below the neckline. 170
Over the years, I have seen many analysts, who should know better, forecast
a bearish trend based on an incomplete H&S top. Remember, in technical
analysis, the prevailing trend is assumed to be in force until the weight of the 165
evidence proves otherwise. An incomplete H&S is not evidence, just a possible

scenario,

H&S patterns can be formed in 10 to 15 minutes or take decades to
develop. Generally speaking, the longer the period, the greater the amount
of distribution that has taken place, and therefore the longer the ensuing
bear trend is likely to be. The larger H&S formations are often very com-
plex and comprise several smaller ones, as shown in Fig. 5-14.

The H&S patterns illustrated in Figs. 5-13 and 5-14 have a horizontal neck-
line, but there are many other varieties [see Fig. 5-15(a)-(c)], all of which

5 Ghee Vas felt ; < "25 6 2 8 4 af 1 24 7 19 3 1 28 6 8 NH
pores sp SRE Pea implications as the horizontal variety once they | Feb. Mor. Apr. Moy June July Aug. Sept.

1928

2 .

| |

| |

|

?

|

T T
|

190

180

8) ee ee ee

nw bw

79

A



Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Figure 5-14 Complex H&S.

(a)
Figure 5-15 H&S variations.

()

(©)

At Bottoms Figure 5-16 indicates how an H&S pattern would look at a
market bottom; this is usually called an inverse H&S, a reverse H&S, or an
H&S bottom.

Normally, volume is relatively high at the bottom of the left shoulder and
during the formation of the head. The major factor to watch for is activity
on the right shoulder, which should contract during the decline to the
trough and expand substantially on the breakout (see Chart 5-5). Like the
H&S distribution patterns, the inverse (accumulation) H&S can have a num-
ber of variations in trend line slope, number of shoulders, and so on. *
Usually, the more complex the formation, the greater its significance. This
goes back to the idea that price formations Tepresent battles between buy-
ers and sellers: the more battles that go on, the greater the complexity and
the more significant the new trend is once the battle has been resolved.
Some of these reverse H&S variations are shown in Figs. 5-17(a)-(¢).

H&S patterns are extremely reliable formations, and their successful com-
pletion usually gives an excellent indication of a trend reversal.

Price Patterns 81

Chart 5-5 DJIA, 1898. This downward-sloping inverse H&S pattern developed in the spring
of 1898. Note that the April rally developed on very low volume. The subsequent reaction suc-
Sees fatten teen nanieSirekabesiboteisedeapecilibty 6 oteh
expansion of volume. By August, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) had reached 60.9
and by April 1899 it rose to 77.28. ‘ F

60

58
Sé-

s4b

aaeeet 7 mA |

May June July Aug.

Figure 5-16 Classic reverse H&S.

H&S Formations as Continuation Patterns

H&S and reverse H&S formations occasionally show up on the charts as con-
tinuation patterns. Measuring implications and volume characteristics are
the same as for the reversal type. The only difference is that these patterns
develop duringa trend rather than at the end. Chart 5-6 shows an example
of an H&S consolidation during a decline.

%

yy


82 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Figure 5-17 Reverse H&S variations.

H&S Failures

Sometimes the price action exhibits all the characteristics of an H&S dis-
tribution pattern, but it either refuses to penetrate the neckline or pene-
trates it temporarily and then starts to rally. This represents an H&S failure
and is usually followed by an explosive rally. It is probably due to misplaced
pessimism. Once the real fundamentals are perceived, not only do new buy-
€rs rush in, but also traders holding short positions are forced to cover. Since
fear is a stronger motivator than greed, these bears bid up the price very
aggressively.

Chart 5-7, which shows the daily close for the DJIA in 1975, illustrates this
phenomenon very clearly, as the failure of an H&S pattern results in a fairly
worthwhile rally. Nevertheless, an H&S that does not work indicates that
while there is still some life left in the situation, the end may not be far off.
In Chart 5-6, the rally ended rather abruptly in July.

Unfortunately, the pattern itself gives no indication that it is going to fail.
Sometimes such evidence can be gleaned from other technical factors. For
example, if a countertrend signal looks as if it may be taking place, this is

just as likely to result in a failure. For instance, the H&S failure in Chart 5-7
was a sell signal in a bull market. Chart 5-8 shows another example of an
H&S failure for Alberto Culver.

Failures used to be fairly rare, but now seem to be more common, which
indicates the necessity of waiting for a decisive breakout on the downside.
If any action is contemplated, it should be taken when the price breaks
above the right shoulder on heavy volume (see Fig. 5-18). Usually, such sig-
nals offer substantial profits in a very short period of time and are well worth
acting on. Inverse H&S patterns can also fail. Again, the failure is usually
followed by an extremely sharp sell-off, as participants who bought in antic-
ipation of an upward breakout are flushed out when the new bearish fun-
damentals become more widely known.

. 83
Price Patterns

Chart Citigroup idatii &S top for

consolidation H&S top. This chart shows a consolidation Hi
Ctigroupin 1996 Nene how the volume mich hao darn he formation fhe kt shou
der and the head. Also notice how it expands as the price breaks below the neckline. (
Intermarket Review.) "

309 ahh

ae dre! cabin Ac Sop on s
2 \l A

: TH

19+ f

Double Tops and Bottoms

consists of two peaks separated by a reaction or valley in prices.
tant Gore is that the eaiial top is formed with distinctly less
volume than the first (see Chart 5-9). It is normal for both peaks to form at
the same price level, but it is also possible for the second peak to slightly
exceed the first or to top out just a little below it. Remember, this is not an
exact science, but a commonsense interpretation of a battle between buy-
ers ‘
fr anit measuring implications for double tops, as shown in
Fig. 5-19, are similar to H&S patterns.



84

Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 5-7 DJIA 1974-1975 double bottom. Notice the lower volume established on the sec-

ond low in December 1974. Also, in the of 1975,
on oak abigh , spring , we see an example of a failed H&S

ors

rT

fe

}
'

|

al

Figure 5-18 H&S failure.

Neckline violated

ty i

Price Patterns 85

Chart 5-8 Alberto Culver and a failed H&S top. This chart of Alberto Culver shows a clas-
sic H&S failure. The neckline was violated in mid-1993. A retracement followed, but the yel-
low flags began to come out when the early 1994 decline failed to make a new low. If the H&S
was going to work, this should have happened. Later, the price rallied back above the neck-
line. At that point, the viability of the pattern was very much open to question. The real tip-
off came when the price rallied above the down trendline joining the head and the right shoulder
and finally when it rallied above the right shoulder at arrow X. (From Intermarket Review.)

164 Ss
es eaX
10-

peor fises ses fiss0—«i991 ~—«jiss2_~—=S«spasS3 fieg4 [i996 i996 [19

A double bottom is shown in Fig. 5-20. This type of pattern is typically accom-
panied by high volume on the first bottom, very light volume on the second,
and very heavy volume on the breakout. Usually, the second bottom is formed
above the first, but these formations are equally valid whether or not the sec-
ond reaction reaches (or even slightly exceeds) the level of its predecessor.



Price Patterns 87 .

a ATEN, ot

o

Figure 5-20 Double bottom.

Double patterns may extend to form triple tops or bottoms, or sometimes
even quadruple or other complex formations. Some variations are shown
in Figs. 5-21(a)-(¢).

The measuring implications of all these patterns are derived by calculat-
ing the distance between the peak (trough) and lower (upper) end of the BEY
pattern and projecting this distance from the neckline. Chart 5-7, shown ear-
lier, and Chart 5-10 show two classic double bottoms in the DJIA in 1974

and 1962, respectively.

wa
er
the first post-Depression bull market ended in

shows a classic double top. N 4
m Intermarket peor ote that the volume during the July-to-August rally was substantially below that of the Loyal

tal
i |

Broadening Formations

Broadening formations occur when a series of three or more price fluctu- 4
z ations widen out in size so that peaks and troughs can be connected a
; with two diverging trendlines. The easiest types of broadening formations 4
to detect are those with a “flattened” bottom or top, as shown in Figs. 3

' 5-22(a) and (6).
The pattern in Fig. 5-22(a) is sometimes referred to as a right-angled broad-

ening formation. Since the whole concept of widening price swings suggests
highly emotional activity, volume patterns are difficult to characterize,
although at market tops, volume is usually heavy during the rally phases. The ;
patterns at both bottoms and tops are similar to the H&S variety, except that :
the head in the broadening formation is always the last to be formed. A bear !
signal comes with a decisive downside breakout. Volume can be heavy or
light, but additional bearish’émphasis arises if activity expands at this point.
Since a broadening formation with a flattened top is an accumulation pat- cs
tern, volume expansion on the breakout is an important requirement, as z
Shown in Fig. 5-22(b). Examples of broadening formations are shown in +
Charts 5-11 and 5-12. These two types of broadening formations can also

9 DJIA 1936-1937 double top. Following a substantial advance from 1932

TO!

Chart 5-
The chart
peak. (Fr

86 }

o—-|
| coe ees



89

“Bay Aine aunp KOw udy aOW aed “wor

“28Q ‘SON ‘PO

ji
rue

SUIN|OA SSAN

| 4 0oL

| ASA! Ic
“ y NAN fe
NAPE Ion
I~ An door

Spur

JaQUIAAON Ul [a2] GT
‘majnay JayADULaZU] WoL) ‘JHIW ING GEGT-BEGT AF 20} YyBIY OUT auto passe Pies fa gis auiey bans
; (« i = Ra B Aq pamoyjoy axe susayed uo}epyOsuco asey} Wo. sjnoyee.g “Al] us On jeyURYsqns ay} aJON “Joysew
oh eee ae sey eee auy qnoyeasq ayy Bumojjo ‘jnoyeaiq apisdn ayy petueduioooe ices Ot op 61 ‘WIrd T1-§ BeYD
psc mote yowonoq ayy Fe pexnsoo ejBuenn pa[BueqYBu e jo ajdusexe juarjeoxe sty “aBuery pajbueqyo
aq 7

panied by lower vol-
, the increase in activity

i
e)

Picts a classic double bottom in the

one was accom]

Hh
ila
‘ety

A ie

ugha

(b)

panded during the 1962 breakout.

Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques
(©)

, double bottom. This chart de;
ig 1962. Note that the second

(a)

10 DJIA, 1962

which formed durin
ume than the first. While volume ex;

was not particularly spectacular. (From Intermarket Review.)

Figure 5-21 Triple tops and bottoms.
Figure 5-22 Broadening formations.

Chart 5-
DJIA,

88

a aS SOS

See see SS +=



90 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

iS |
Sl tt Mal Ly

develop as consolidation patterns, as shown in Figs. 5-23(a) and (4). Charts
5-13 and 5-14 show several more examples of right-angled broadening
formatting.

Broadening formations occasionally fail to work. Some Possibilities are
shown in Figs. 5-24(@) and (6). Unfortunately, there does not appear to be
a reliable point beyond which it is safe to say that the pattern has failed to
operate. The best defense in such cases is to extend the diverging trend-
lines, that is, the dashed lines in the figures, and await a decisive penetra-
tion by the price as confirmation.

When completed, tight-angled broadening formations of both the rever-
sal and the continuation type usually result in a particularly dynamic move.
It is almost as if they are aborted H&S formations in which the move is so
powerful that there is not time to complete the right shoulder,

“ye +} oa
Vv
Orthodox

The final type of broadening formation, known as an orthodox broadening top,

is shown in Fig. 5-25. This pattern comprises three rallies, with each
hyve

“pr ¢

;
H
i

Price Patterns =

[ |\ ’

lit

(a)

—

=

lll litt

Figure 5-23 Consolidation broadening formations.

ul

(0)

“Chart 5-13  T-Bills, 90 days, various price patterns, (From Intermarket Review.)

\
MT
\
= ' \



92 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 5-14 IBM—broadening formations. This chart of IBM shows a form of right-angled
broadening top. There is no doubt that the chart reflects a bull market that is becoming more
and more unstable. However, it is more likely that the price would experience a sharp sell-off
immediately after the breakout. In the case of IBM, however, it hung around in a trading range
for quite a while before moving significantly lower. Note also another broadening formation in
1991 to 1992. This one is not exactly "right-angled” because the lower line has a slight upward
trajectory. Also, a classic pattern contains three complete price swings, and this one only has
two. However, the rallies are progressively higher, thereby injecting the feeling of instability that
is required for any broadening formation. (From Intermarket Review.)

604
454
404

(a) (b)

Figure 5-24 Broadening formation failures.

succeeding peak higher than its predecessor, and each peak separated by
two bottoms, with the second bottom lower than the first. Orthodox broad-
ening formations are associated with market peaks rather than market
troughs.

These patterns are extremely difficult to detect until some time after the
final top has been formed since there is no clearly definable level of sup-
port, the violation of which could serve as a benchmark. The violent and

Price Patterns 93

Figure 5-25 Orthodox broadening formation.

emotional nature of both price and volume swings further compounds the
confusion and increases the complexity of defining these situations.
Obviously, a breakout is difficult to pinpoint under such conditions, but if
the formation is reasonably symmetrical, a decisive move below the descend-
ing trendline joining the two bottoms, or even a decisive move below the
second bottom, usually serves as a timely warning that an even greater
decline is in store.

Measuring implications are similarly difficult to determine, but normally
the volatile character of a broadening top formation implies the comple-
tion of a substantial amount of distribution. Consequently, price declines
of considerable proportions usually follow the successful completion of such
patterns.

Triangles 2

Triangles, perhaps the most common of all the price patterns discussed in
this chapter, are unfortunately the least reliable. Triangles may be consoli-
dation or reversal formations, and they fall into two categories: symmetri-
cal and right-angled.

Symmetrical Triangles

A symmetrical triangle is composed of a series of two or more rallies and
reactions in which each succeeding peak is lower than its predecessor, and
the bottom from each succeeding reaction is higher than its predecessor
(see Fig. 5-26). A triangle is therefore the opposite of a broadening forma-
tion since the trendlines joining peaks and troughs converge, unlike the
(orthodox) broadening formation in which they diverge.



94 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Figure 5-26 Symmetrical triangles.

These patterns are also known as coils, because the fluctuation in price
and volume diminishes as the pattern is completed. Finally, both price and
(usually) volume react sharply, as if a coil spring had been wound tighter
and tighter and then snapped free as prices broke out of the triangle.
Generally speaking, triangles seem to work best when the breakout occurs
somewhere between one-half and three-fourths of the distance between the
widest peak and rally and the apex (as in Fig. 5-27). The volume rules used
for other patterns are also appropriate for triangles. ;

Right-Angled Triangles

Right-angled triangles are really a special form of the symmetrical type, in
that one of the two boundaries is formed at an angle of 90 degrees, that is,
horizontal to the vertical axis [see Figs. 5-28(a) and (4)]. (An example is
illustrated in Chart 5-11.) The symmetrical triangle does not give an indi-
cation of the direction in which it is ultimately likely to break, but the right-
angled triangle does, with its implied level of support or resistance and
contracting price fluctuations. An example of a bearish right-angled trian-
gle is shown in Chart 5-13.
