
Some of us think holding on makes us strong; but sometimes it is letting go.
HERMANN HESSE

14

1
What Really Causes the
Markets to Move?
Did You Know That Most People Who Lose Money in the Markets Do So Because of These Four Things?
Individual traders live in a state of constant flux, stuck between two worlds that combine both the best and the worst that trading has to offer. On the one hand, they
can move into and out of markets with an ease and efficiency that large funds can only dream of. Have you ever wondered what it would be like to have to dump 200
million shares of AAPL (Apple) stock—without drawing attention to what you are doing? Well, like trying to hide a pregnancy, it ain’t easy. It’s a process, not a
mouse click. On the other hand, you can get into and out of 1,000 shares of AAPL or 10 E-mini S&P 500 futures contracts instantaneously, and it won’t even register
as a minor blip on the day’s trading activity. In other words, a smaller trader can move about undetected—a huge advantage. Funds need days, and sometimes weeks or
months, to move into and out of sizable positions without showing their hand. If they do show their hand, then other funds will front-run them (jump in front of their
orders) and bury them if possible. That is how money is made in the markets—by taking it from other traders. If you think this sounds ruthless, you are right. It is.
This isn’t a holistic coming together of like-minded souls to celebrate the meaning of life. This is trading.
Then why are so many people attracted to this profession? It’s exciting, yes. It’s engaging, definitely. It’s a chance to make a lot of money. In a word, though, it’s
freedom. In every area of our lives, we are told what to do. Some people don’t like that. Traders have the freedom to carve out specific niches for themselves that other
people on the planet can never achieve or duplicate. M ost centimillionaires and billionaires don’t have freedom. They have obligations, although they can fulfill those
obligations in style. Retirees have a sort of freedom, but at what price? And many that I talk to are bored out of their minds. Stay-at-home moms? That’s the hardest
job on the planet (as is marrying rich). The only professions I’ve seen that have a large amount of freedom are prostitution, homelessness, and trading. Since I knew I
didn’t have much of a future as a prostitute (I got nothin’), and since I’m a wimp when it comes to sleeping (I need a clean mattress), trading won out. Traders, at least
traders who learn the art of being consistent, have the opportunity to create an independent life, free from the hassles of the average Joe. These perks are extremely
appealing and impossible to duplicate in many other professions.
Reasons for trading full or part time are many, and can include wanting a career change, a wish to be more independent, the desire to escape the responsibilities of
running a large corporate division or individual business, or choosing to be a stay-at-home parent. A lot of would-be traders I meet are already successful in other areas
of their lives—they are just bored with those other areas of their lives. I call these folks “doctors who hate their jobs,” although they can include anyone who is in a
high-paying career. They like the income and the prestige … they just don’t like the bubble in which they are now trapped. Others have been burned by the financial
markets and are now interested in taking control of their financial future. And many have put together a small stake and want to give it a go and pursue their dreams of
becoming a trader. I see this firsthand in my office, watching guys like Henry go through the painful cycle from “the excitement of discovering trading” to “wow, I
can’t believe that option expired worthless.” This is a “job” that provides the chance to make a very nice living, and it’s a lot more interesting and fun than any other
profession—except being a rock star, of course. But if sharing the stage alongside U2 seems slightly out of reach, then trading is a good alternative.
It can be done from anywhere that has reliable Internet access—and as I’m writing this update in 2011, that means just about anywhere. There are no bosses
spewing forth inane, ever-changing contradictory orders as they struggle within a system that has promoted them right up to—and through—their level of competence.
For some people, working for a corporation is a way to gain power, which is more important to them than financial independence. Working for one of these clowns is
enough to drive anyone to drink. In addition, in trading, employees are not necessary, although at some point they can be very helpful if you decide to trade many
markets and watch many different time frames (I’d love to trade the European session, but I have to sleep sometime—however, I can hire someone to do that for me).
Those of us who have survived the corporate world can find nothing on this earth that’s equal to the freedom and beauty that come from no longer having to manage a
large group of dispassionate human beings: “I’ll pretend to praise you, and you’ll pretend to love your job.” The good news is that if you hire someone to help you out
with your trading, he will generally be as passionate and excited as you are about the adventure.
Start-up costs are minimal thanks to leasing programs from companies like Dell. Trading in your robe or nothing at all is perfectly fine. Best of all, a trader can
choose her own working hours. Some examples of schedules from successful traders I work with include trading actively from October through April and then taking
the remaining five months off; trading only the first two hours of the market open and taking the rest of the day off; and trading until they make 50 percent on their
capital and then taking the rest of the year off. The list goes on and on. By the way, one of the common fallacies of trading is the idea that “to make more money, I
need to trade more.” Nothing could be further from the truth. Trading smarter and less frequently is one of the hidden secrets of doing this for a living. There is no need
to catch every move.
Since trading has so much to offer, it is no wonder that tens of thousands of people toss their hats into the ring, trying to make a go at this most appealing of
professions. It truly represents the proverbial American dream, and traders from all over the world are giving it a shot. Since this book first hit the shelves, I’ve had the
opportunity to speak to traders in China, Taiwan, India, Sweden, Australia, England, France, Singapore and many other countries. The bottom line is that traders
sweep aside political and philosophical differences when speaking to other traders. Traders around the world are linked together by a single idea—to generate cash with
their mind and to reap the benefit that this cash creates: freedom. It’s a beautiful thing. I love traders and all the craziness they represent.
And I’m not kidding when I say “craziness.” The University of St. Gallen, Switzerland, has come out with a study that compares traders with psychopaths. The
study reviewed the results from an existing study comparing 24 psychopaths in German high-security hospitals with a control group of 27 “normal” people. The
funny thing is, this control group of “normal” people turned out to be traders. Stock guys, currency and commodity traders, and derivative types happened to be the
normal control group that was stacked up against the high-security, barbed-wire-enclosed psychopaths. In the end, the performance of the trading group was actually
worse than that of the psychopaths. The study indicated that traders, “Have a penchant for immense destruction,” and that their mindset would lead them to the
logical conclusion of “beating one of the neighbor’s expensive cars with a baseball bat with the sole objective of owning the most beautiful car in the neighborhood.” In
other words, traders are nuts. Indeed if you look up the textbook definition of a psychopath, here are some of the tidbits you’ll uncover: antisocial behavior, poor
judgment and failure to learn from experience, inability to see oneself as others do, inexplicable impulsiveness … sounds like a typical trader who is struggling against
the market and can’t figure out why.
So it’s the freedom that attracts traders. And it’s the freedom that is the undoing of many, because with so much freedom comes a cruel price. Simply put, the
markets cannot protect a trader from herself. Individual traders, unlike fund managers (most of them, anyway), are unsupervised and have the freedom to act unchecked
15

in any way that they choose. And for many traders, this means they live a life where they are one mouse click away from disaster. The markets lull them, encouraging
and even reinforcing bad habits. Have you ever removed your stop and had the trade then go on to hit your target? Well, the market just taught you that it is perfectly
okay to do that, at least once in a while. That can work 999 times in a row. It’s the one time where it doesn’t work that wipes out the profits from all your previous
trades, and can potentially wipe out your entire account. It’s the day you buy gold on a dip, remove your stop, and it falls $80 an ounce. “Wow,” you think, “I can’t
believe it fell that far!” Exactly. It’s what we don’t see coming at us like a runaway freight train that destroys us. It’s the classic bad habits—chasing a market higher or
lower, trading too large for your account size, not having a firm idea of your loss limits, and so on—that creates a market that moves and thrives in such a way as to
prevent as many people as possible from consistently making money. Remember the psychopath trait, “Failure to learn from experience”? Why is this? Why are
traders so good at sabotaging themselves? After all, nobody, and I mean nobody, enters a trade with the idea of losing money. In a nutshell, it has to do with traders
being the best salespeople in the world. Introverted, yes, but salespeople nonetheless.
Although used-car salespeople are saddled with the reputation of being pushy and dishonest, they don’t hold a candle to the average trader. A trader, once in a
position, can deceive himself into believing anything that helps to reinforce the notion that he is right—or at least “not wrong”—on this particular trading idea. Nobody
likes to be wrong. In a job, a person who is wrong can typically blame it on someone else. “It was those stupid delivery people,” he says. “They screwed it up.” In
trading, there is nobody to blame but yourself. And human beings have a very difficult time accepting that they might, in fact, be wrong. “If a husband expresses a
thought alone in the middle of the woods,” so the joke goes, “is he still wrong?” Probably so.
When faced with a loss, Joe Trader will look at a chart and tell whoever is nearby, “See that spike? That’s the hedge funds running stops.” He then says with a
knowing grin, “As soon as they’re done, just watch; this market is going to rip higher.” Net result: he does not exit the position, and his losses mount. When faced with
a profit, Joanne Trader hesitates to pull the trigger, telling her cat, “The market is acting fantastic here. There is a ton of good news on CNBC. I bet it goes a lot higher.”
Net result: she does not exit the trade, and it turns into a loser. The mistake these traders are making is a common, yet fatal affliction that most traders suffer from: they
are unaware that the market naturally programs their reactions into a losing trader ’s mindset. And they are unaware of the key factors that really move the markets.
The net result is a trader who “eats like a sparrow and defecates like an elephant.” This is a situation, of course, that no account can withstand. Worse, this cycle of
emotional slavery will not end until it’s met head on, until a trader can “pull his head out” and realize that trading is unlike any other activity on earth. Trading has a lot
more to do with repeatedly admitting that you are wrong than with trying to make a lot of money. Unfortunately, professional traders understand this all too well, and
they set up their trade parameters to take advantage of these situations, specifically preying on the traders who haven’t figured out why they lose. One trader’s
disaster is another trader’s bread and butter.
And there you have it, the four things that cause traders to lose money. First, anyone who is attracted to trading shares the same characteristics as a psychopath.
Second, the inherent freedom is destructive—after all, we spent our first 18 years of life learning that it’s better to follow the rules and do what we are told. Third, the
markets actually encourage and reinforce bad habits. And fourth, traders are seduced into taking every opportunity to sell themselves on the idea that they are right.
There is always someone on the other side of your trade. Start being that trader. Not the one who chases, but the one who knows that other people are chasing. Not
the one who removes stops, but the one who knows that traders tend to remove stops. Not the one who trades too big for her account size, but the one who trades just
the right size, or smaller, for her account size (two points a day is fine, even though deep down we all want ten). Not the one who frantically feels that he has to be in
every move, but the one who is content to wait patiently for the one setup that falls within his trading plan, even if it means not having a trade that day.
Be the trader that wants to make money over time, not the one that needs to be right, right now.

How Do Our Odds for Success Increase Once We Understand the Pain and Suffering of Individual Market Participants?
The problem is simple and twofold. First, although traders certainly know that not all their trades are going to work out, they do get a distinct feeling right after placing
every trade that this trade is going to work out. A study done by a pair of Canadian psychologists documented this fascinating aspect of human behavior. Just after
placing a bet at the racetrack, people are much more confident about their horse’s chance of winning than they were immediately before laying down the bet.
Obviously, there is nothing about the horse that has changed, but in the minds of those bettors, its prospects improved significantly once they placed their bet and got
their ticket. Without getting into a large psychological treatise on why humans behave like this, it has to do with a strong, underlying social influence to appear
consistent with our choices. Once we make a choice, we respond to external and internal pressures in such a way as to justify our earlier decisions. If we made a good
choice, then this process works out very well for us, and we will continue to build upon our good choice. However, if we made a bad choice, whether it is regarding a
trade, a job, a significant other, or a business deal, then this process will take this bad choice and make it emphatically worse. We will simply refuse to let go and move
on, as we are more concerned about trying to act consistent with our earlier decision. People can waste an entire lifetime living within the justifications of a bad choice:
trying to make it work, trying to be nice and look good and not hurt anyone’s feelings, and trying to make it look as if they were right.
Doing and saying things just to prove to others that your choice was right leads down a slippery slope of not being true to yourself. And if you aren’t true to
yourself, it just leads to frustrations, some of them popping up for no apparent reason. Did you ever get ticked off at your mom when she simply told you to eat more
veggies? Bingo. There is some stuff going on there, and, believe it or not, it will affect your performance as a trader.
By the way, your personal life is a good place to test this out, and it’s a lot cheaper than working it all out in your trading account. Just start paying attention to
what annoys you.
I worked with Rosa, my awesome sister-in-law, for a while on our website back in 2005. We are very close, like brother and sister. I’ve known her since she was
seven years old. While we were working together, we would get into arguments, and essentially I would calmly try to show her why I was right and she was wrong. I
didn’t think much about it (because, hell, I was right!), but eventually our working relationship became very frustrating for both of us, to the point where she moved on
to “explore other opportunities.”
I had no idea what was going on. I just knew that even though I loved my sister-in-law dearly, I just couldn’t work with her. I discussed this issue with some friends.
They pointed out to me that “my having to look like I knew what I was doing at all times” was the real issue, and that if I wanted to learn more about this, I should go
to a workshop called the Landmark Forum. I Googled it and initially decided to pass—after all, it looked like a damn cult. Then I read that it had made a top 10 list of
weekend adventures, and that piqued my interest. An adventure? And I could see the positive change in my buddies, M ichael Palmieri and Tom Tuohy. They were
becoming more effective in their chosen fields of work, and they were happier and more engaging. And they pointed out that my frustrations with Rosa were really a
reflection of something that was going on with me. If I wanted to find out what it was, then I should man up and take the course. Fine. I didn’t go in kicking and
screaming, but let’s just say I was very skeptical.
I attended, and I can honestly say I’m glad I did. A year later, my wife also attended, and our lives are the better for it. She’s empowered. Our communication is
better, and we are more open and honest with each other and not worried about “hurting each other’s feelings” or anything. If she’s pissed at me, she just lets me know
16

instead of holding it in for days. Straight talk. In other words, we can be authentic with each other, which is a much easier and more pleasant way to live. For my own
trading, it led me to develop a “cash flow trading plan,” which I’ll share later in the book. It’s a purely discretionary trading concept that focuses in on the mental game
of trading.
Like developing a solid trading plan, I took from Landmark what was helpful to me and discarded the rest. I also sent Rosa to the course, and it changed her life as
well. We now have a much more open and honest relationship, and we can have discussions without trying to be right. We just say what needs to be said without
worrying about hurting the other person’s feelings. It’s great. And that is what the trading journey is all about—taking bits and pieces here and there that make sense to
you, and then turning those bits and pieces into a trading plan that works for you and your personality. I see a lot of traders wrestling with personal issues that they
try to “take out or work out” in the markets. Doing the Landmark Forum is one way to experiment with working those issues out of your system before you take
them out on your account.
I think there are a lot of parallels between being a good trader and living a good life. The market truly is the ultimate psychologist. To be a happy trader, you must
cut off bad trades at the knees and throw them on the trash heap. Clinging to a bad trade like a limpet “in order to be right” is like stabbing yourself in the throat with a
pencil. Think about it.
Second, many traders feel that they can rely on their judgment while they are in a trade. On paper, this makes a lot of sense. After all, before a trade is placed,
traders are at their most objective. However, once the trade is on, the degree of objectivity diminishes immediately and in direct proportion to the number of shares or
contracts being traded relative to the account size. Think of it this way: if one trader is long 10 E-mini S&Ps in a $10,000 account using day-trading margin, and another
trader is long 1 E-mini S&P in a $100,000 account, who is going to be sweating bullets over each tick? Not only does the first trader already have the feeling that “this
trade is going to work out,” but now she is trapped with the additional pressure of having to manage a position that causes huge equity percentage swings with every
tick. Traders who rely on their judgment when they are in a position that is churning their brain with extreme emotions is like trying to row a boat upstream with a
piece of Swiss cheese—it simply does not work. Ever. And, believe it or not, studies show that the intensity with which you stare at the price charts on your
computer screen actually has zero correlation with what the markets are going to do next.
These factors perpetuate a vicious cycle, with the end result being traders who, like bad used-car salespeople, are consistently selling themselves a faulty collection
of beliefs that set them up for slaughter. Instead of following a game plan with which to exit a position, traders in this situation spend their time justifying why they are
right (if you are married, you’ll know why this is a waste of time) and will end up closing a position only for one of two reasons. First, the pain of holding becomes so
great that they cannot “take it” any longer. Once they reach this “uncle” point, they start frantically banging their keyboard to sell (or cover) “at the market” in order
to relieve the pain. Second, their broker politely offers to help them out by giving them a phone call, gently letting them know that they should exit their position. This
is also called “getting a margin call.” This trade is also placed “at the market.” In these situations, there is no plan, no thought, and no objectivity. There’s just a batch
of forced sell orders or, in the case of someone who is short, a batch of forced buy orders, or covering. This act of capitulation—traders exiting a position because they
have to, not because they want to—is emotions-based trading at its finest, and this is what moves the market. Whether it is a sustained multimonth move to the
downside because of continuous capitulation selling or a quick 10-minute rally because of shorts being forced to cover, these acts are responsible for the major moves in
all markets, in all time frames. In the end, markets don’t move because they want to. They move because they have to.
The pressure from traders who are trying to act “consistent with their original choice,” combined with that from traders who are trading way too big for their
account, leads to more disasters in trading than anything else. However, right on the other side of disaster is opportunity. For 20 traders who are blowing up their
account, there is another trader out there on the opposite side of that blowup. After all, the money doesn’t just disappear. It simply flows into another account—an
account that utilizes setups that specifically take advantage of human nature. One person’s panic stop loss is another trader’s entry level.
Don’t let the markets seduce you into having to be right.
