
perspective. This is where our pain-avoidance mechanisms do us a disservice, especially as traders. To
understand this concept, ask yourself what exactly about market information is threatening. Is it
threatening because the market actually expresses negatively charged information as an inherent
characteristic of the way it exists?
It may seem that way, but at the most fundamental level, what the market gives us to perceive are
uptics and down-tics or up-bars and down-bars. These up and down tics form patterns that represent
edges. Now, are any of these tics or the patterns they form negatively charged? Again, it may certainly
seem that way, but from the market's perspective the information is neutral. Each up-tic, down-tic, or
pattern is just information, telling us the market's position. If any of this information had a negative
charge as an inherent characteristic of the way it exists, then wouldn't everyone exposed to it
experience emotional pain? For example, if both you and I get hit on the head with a solid object, there
probably wouldn't be much difference in how we would feel. We'd both be in pain. Any part of our
bodies coming into contact with a solid object with some degree of force will cause anyone with a
normal nervous system to experience pain.
We share the experience because our bodies are constructed in basically the same way. The pain is an
automatic physiological response to the impact with a tangible object. Information in the form of words
or gestures expressed by the environment, or up and down tics expressed by the market, can be just as
painful as being hit with a solid object; but there's an important difference between information and
objects. Information is not tangible. Information doesn't consist of atoms and molecules. To experience
the potential effects of information, whether negative or positive, requires an interpretation. The
interpretations we make are functions of our unique mental frameworks. Everyone's mental framework
is unique for two fundamental reasons.
First, all of us were born with different genetically encoded behavior and personality characteristics
that cause us to have different needs from one another. How positively or negatively and to what
degree the environment responds to these needs creates experiences unique to each individual. Second,
everyone is exposed to a variety of environmental forces. Some of these forces are similar from one
individual to the next, but none are exactly the same. If you consider the number of possible
combinations of genetically encoded personality characteristics we can be born with, in relation to the
almost infinite variety of environmental forces we can encounter throughout our lives, all of which
contribute to the construction of our mental framework, then it's not difficult to see why there is no
universal mental framework common to everyone.
Unlike our bodies, which have a common molecular structure that experiences physical pain, there is
no universal mind-set to assure us that we will share the potential negative or positive effects of
information in the same way. For example, someone could be projecting insults at you, intending to
cause you to feel emotional pain. From the environment's perspective, this is negatively charged
information. Will you experience the intended negative effects? Not necessarily! You have to be able to
interpret the information as negative to experience it as negative. What if this person is insulting you in

a language you don't understand, or is using words you don't know the meaning of? Would you feel the
intended pain? Not until you built a framework to define and understand the words in a derogatory
way. Even then, we can't assume that what you'd feel would correspond to the intent behind the insult.
You could have a framework to perceive the negative intent, but instead of feeling pain, you might
experience a perverse type of pleasure. I've encountered many people who, simply for their own
amusement, like to get people riled up with negative emotions.
If they happen to be insulted in the process, it creates a sense of joy because then they know how
successful they've been. A person expressing genuine love is projecting positively charged information
into the environment. Let's say the intent behind the expression of these positive feelings is to convey
affection, endearment, and friendship. Are there any assurances that the person or persons this
positively charged information is being projected toward will interpret and experience it as such? No,
there aren't. A person with a very low sense of self-esteem, or someone who experienced a great deal of
hurt and disappointment in relationships, will often misinterpret an expression of genuine love as
something else. In the case of a person with low self-esteem, if he doesn't believe he deserves to be
loved in such a way, he will find it difficult, if not impossible, to interpret what he is being offered as
genuine or real. In the second case, where one has a significant backlog of hurt and disappointment in
relationships, a person could easily come to believe that a genuine expression of love is extremely rare,
if not non-existent, and would probably interpret the situation either as someone wanting something or
trying to take advantage of him in some way.
I'm sure that I don't have to go on and on, sighting examples of all the possible ways there are to
misinterpret what someone is trying to communicate to us or how what we express to someone can be
misconstrued and experienced in ways completely unintended by us. The point that I am making is that
each individual will define, interpret, and consequently experience whatever information he is exposed
to in his own unique way. There's no standardized way to experience what the environment may be
offering—whether it's positive, neutral, or negative information—simply because there is no
standardized mental framework in which to perceive information. Consider that, as traders, the market
offers us something to perceive at each moment. In a sense, you could say that the market is
communicating with us.
If we start out with the premise that the market does not generate negatively charged information as an
inherent characteristic of the way it exists, we can then ask, and answer, the question, "What causes
information to take on a negative quality?" In other words, where exactly does the threat of pain come
from? If it's not coming from the market, then it has to be coming from the way we define and interpret
the available information. Defining and interpreting information is a function of what we assume we
know or what we believe to be true. If what we know or believe is in fact true—and we wouldn't
believe it if it weren't—then when we project our beliefs out into some future moment as an
expectation, we naturally expect to be right. When we expect to be right, any information that doesn't
confirm our version of the truth automatically becomes threatening. Any information that has the

potential to be threatening also has the potential to be blocked, distorted, or diminished in significance
by our pain-avoidance mechanisms.
It's this particular characteristic of the way our minds function that can really do us a disservice. As
traders, we can't afford to let our pain-avoidance mechanisms cut us off from what the market is
communicating to us about what is available in the way of the next opportunity to get in, get out, add
to, or subtract from a position, just because it's doing something that we don't want or expect. For
example, when you're watching a market (one you rarely, if ever, trade in) with no intention of doing
anything, do any of the up or down tics cause you to feel angry, disappointed, frustrated, disillusioned,
or betrayed in any way? No! The reason is that there's nothing at stake. You're simply observing
information that tells you where the market is at that moment. If the up and down tics that you're
watching form into some sort of behavior pattern you've learned to identify, don't you readily recognize
and acknowledge the pattern? Yes, for the same reason: There's nothing at stake.
There is nothing at stake because there's no expectation. You haven't projected what you believe,
assume, or think you know about that market into some future moment. As a result, there's nothing to
be either right about or wrong about, so the information has no potential to take on a threatening or
negatively charged quality. With no particular expectation, you haven't placed any boundaries on how
the market can express itself. Without any mental boundaries, you will be making yourself available to
perceive everything you've learned about the nature of the ways in which the market moves.
There's nothing for your pain-avoidance mechanisms to exclude, distort, or diminish from your
awareness in order to protect you. In my workshops, I always ask participants to resolve the following
primary trading paradox: In what way does a trader have to learn how to be rigid and flexible at the
same time? The answer is: We have to be rigid in our rules and flexible in our expectations. We need to
be rigid in our rules so that we gain a sense of self-trust that can, and will always, protect us in an
environment that has few, if any, boundaries. We need to be flexible in our expectations so we can
perceive, with the greatest degree of clarity and objectivity, what the market is communicating to us
from its perspective. At this point, it probably goes without saying that the typical trader does just the
opposite: He is flexible in his rules and rigid in his expectations. Interestingly enough, the more rigid
the expectation, the more he has to either bend, violate, or break his rules in order to accommodate his
unwillingness to give up what he wants in favor of what the market is offering.
ELIMINATING THE EMOTIONAL RISK
To eliminate the emotional risk of trading, you have to neutralize your expectations about what the
market will or will not do at any given moment or in any given situation. You can do this by being
willing to think from the markets perspective. Remember, the market is always communicating in
probabilities. At the collective level, your edge may look perfect in every respect; but at the individual
level, every trader who has the potential to act as a force on price movement can negate the positive

outcome of that edge. To think in probabilities, you have to create a mental framework or mind-set that
is consistent with the underlying principles of a probabilistic environment. A probabilistic mind-set
pertaining to trading consists of five fundamental truths.
1. Anything can happen.
2. You don't need to know what is going to happen next in order to make money.
3. There is a random distribution between wins and losses for any given set of variables that define an
edge.
4. An edge is nothing more than an indication of a higher probability of one thing happening over
another.
5. Every moment in the market is unique.
Keep in mind that your potential to experience emotional pain comes from the way you define and
interpret the information you're exposed to. When you adopt these five truths, your expectations will
always be in line with the psychological realities of the market environment. With the appropriate
expectations, you will eliminate your potential to define and interpret market information as either
painful or threatening, and you thereby effectively neutralize the emotional risk of trading. The idea is
to create a carefree state of mind that completely accepts the fact that there are always unknown forces
operating in the market. When you make these truths a fully functional part of your belief system, the
rational part of your mind will defend these truths in the same way it defends any other belief you hold
about the nature of trading.
This means that, at least at the rational level, your mind will automatically defend against the idea or
assumption that you can know for sure what will happen next. It's a contradiction to believe that each
trade is a unique event with an uncertain outcome and random in relationship to any other trade made
in the past; and at the same time to believe you know for sure what will happen next and to expect to be
right. If you really believe in an uncertain outcome, then you also have to expect that virtually anything
can happen. Otherwise, the moment you let your mind hold onto the notion that you know, you stop
taking all of the unknown variables into consideration. Your mind won't let you have it both ways. If
you believe you know something, the moment is no longer unique.
If the moment isn't unique, then everything is known or knowable; that is, there's nothing not to know.
However, the moment you stop factoring in what you don't or can't know about the situation instead of
being available to perceive what the market is offering, you make yourself susceptible to all of the
typical trading errors. For example, if you really believed in an uncertain outcome, would you ever
consider putting on a trade without defining your risk in advance? Would you ever hesitate to cut a
loss, if you really believed you didn't know? What about trading errors like jumping the gun? How
could you anticipate a signal that hasn't yet manifested itself in the market, if you weren't convinced
that you were going to miss out? Why would you ever let a winning trade turn into a loser, or not have

a systematic way of taking profits, if you weren't convinced the market was going your way
indefinitely? Why would you hesitate to take a trade or not put it on at all, unless you were convinced
that it was a loser when the market was at your original entiy point? Why would you break your money
management rules by trading too large a position relative to your equity or emotional tolerance to
sustain a loss, if you weren't positive that you had a sure thing? Finally, if you really believed in a
random distribution between wins and losses, could you ever feel betrayed by the market? If you
flipped a coin and guessed right, you wouldn't necessarily expect to be right on the next flip simply
because you were right on the last.
Nor would you expect to be wrong on the next flip if you were wrong on the last. Because you believe
in a random distribution between the sequence of heads and tails, your expectations would be perfectly
aligned with the reality of the situation. You would certainly like to be right, and if you were that
would be great, but if you were wrong then you would not feel betrayed by the flip, because you know
and accept that there are unknown variables at work that affect the outcome. Unknown means "not
something your rational thinking process can take into consideration in advance of the Hi-r" ?jXCi>v'L
^ fu!Iv accept that you don't know As a result, there is little, if any, potential to experience the kind of
emotional pain that wells up when you feel betrayed. As a trader, when you're expecting a random
outcome, you will always be at least a little surprised at whatever the market does— even if it conforms
exactly to your definition of an edge and you end up with a winning trade. However expecting a
random outcome doesn't mean that you can't use your full reasoning and analytical abilities to project
an outcome, or that you can't guess what's going to happen next, or have a hunch or feeling about it,
because you can. Furthermore, you can be right in each instance.
You just can't expect to be right. And if you are right, you can't expect that whatever you did that
worked the last time will work again the next time, even though the situation may look, sound, or feel
exactly the same. Anything that you are perceiving "now" in the market will never be exactly the same
as some previous experience that exists in your mental environment. But that doesn't mean that your
mind (as a natural characteristic of the way it functions) won't try to make the two identical. There will
be similarities between the "now moment" and something that you know from the past, but those
similarities only give you something to work with by putting the odds of success in your favor. If you
approach trading from the perspective that you don't know what will happen next, you will circumvent
your mind's natural inclination to make the "now moment" identical to some earlier experience.
As unnatural as it seems to do so, you can't let some previous experience (either negative or extremely
positive) dictate your state of mind. If you do, it will be very difficult, if not impossible, to perceive
what the market is communicating from its perspective. When I put on a trade, all I expect is that
something will happen. Regardless of how good I think my edge is, I expect nothing more than for the
market to move or to express itself in some way. However, there are some things that I do know for
sure. I know that based on the markets past behavior, the odds of it moving in the direction of my trade
are good or acceptable, at least in relationship to how much I am willing to spend to find out if it does. I

also know before getting into a trade how much I am willing to let the market move against my
position. There is always a point at which the odds of success are greatly diminished in relation to the
profit potential. At that point, it's not worth spending any more money to find out if the trade is going
to work. If the market reaches that point, I know without any doubt, hesitation, or internal conflict that I
will exit the trade.
The loss doesn't create any emotional damage, because I don't interpret the experience negatively. To
me, losses are simply the cost of doing business or the amount of money I need to spend to make
myself available for the winning trades. If, on the other hand, the trade turns out to be a winner, in most
cases I know for sure at what point I am going to take my profits. (If I don't know for sure, I certainly
have a veiy good idea.) The best traders are in the "now moment" because there's no stress. There's no
stress because there's nothing at risk other than the amount of money they are willing to spend on a
trade. They are not trying to be right or trying to avoid being wrong; neither are they trying to prove
anything. If and when the market tells them that their edges aren't working or that it's time to take
profits, their minds do nothing to block this information. They completely accept what the market is
offering them, and they wait for the next edge. CHAP
TER 8

CHAPTER 8
WORKING WITH YOUR BELIEFS
Now the task before you is to properly integrate the five fundamental truths presented in Chapter 7 in
your mental environment at a functional level. To help you do that, we will take an in-depth look at
beliefs—their nature, properties, and characteristics. However, before we do that I will review and
organize the major concepts presented thus far into a much clearer and more practical framework. What
you learn from this and the next two chapters will form the foundation for understanding everything
you need to do to achieve your goals as a trader.
DEFINING THE PROBLEM
At the most fundamental level, the market is simply a series of up and down tics that form patterns.
Technical analysis defines these patterns as edges. Any particular pattern defined as an edge is simply
an indication that there is a higher probability that the market will move in one direction over the other.
However, there is a major mental paradox here because a pattern implies consistency, or, at least, a
consistent outcome. But the reality is each pattern is a unique occurrence. They may look (or measure)
exactly the same from one occurrence to the next, but the similarities are only on the surface. The
underlying force behind each pattern is traders, and the traders who contribute to the formation of one

pattern are always different from the traders who contribute to the next; so the outcome of each pattern
is random relative to one another.
Our minds have an inherent design characteristic (the association mechanism) that can make this
paradox difficult to deal with. Now these edges, or the patterns they represent, flow by in every time
frame, making the market a never-ending stream of opportunities to get in, get out (scratch a trade),
take profits, cut losses, or add to or detract from a position. In other words, from the market's
perspective, each moment presents each one of us traders with the opportunity to do something on our
own behalf.
DEFINING THE TERMS
What prevents us from perceiving each "now moment" as an opportunity to do something for ourselves
or to act appropriately even when we do? Our fears! What is the source of our fears? We know its not
the market, because from the market's perspective, the up and down tics and the patterns they create are
neither positively or negatively charged.
As a result, the up and down tics themselves have no capacity to cause us to enter into any particular
state of mind (negative or positive), lose our objectivity, make errors, or take us out of the opportunity
flow. If it's not the market that causes us to experience a negatively charged state of mind, then what
does cause it? The way we define and interpret the information we perceive. If that's the case, then
what determines what we perceive and how we define and interpret that information? What we believe
or what we assume to be true. Our beliefs working in conjunction with the association and painavoidance mechanisms act as a force on our five senses, causing us to perceive, define, and interpret
market information in a way that is consistent with what we expect. What we expect is synonymous
with.what we believe or assume to be true. Expectations are beliefs projected into some future moment.
Each moment from the market's perspective is unique; but if the information being generated by the
market is similar in quality, properties, or characteristic to something that is already in our minds, the
two sets of information (outside and inside) automatically become linked. When this connection is
made, it triggers a state of mind (confidence, euphoria, fear, terror, disappointment, regret, betrayal,
etc.) that corresponds to whatever belief, assumption, or memory the outside information was linked.
This makes it seem as if what is outside is exactly the same as whatever is already inside of us. It's our
state of mind that makes the truth of whatever we're perceiving outside of us (in the market) seem
indisputable and beyond question.
Our state of mind is always the absolute truth. If I feel confident, then I am confident. If I feel afraid,
then I am afraid. We can't dispute the quality of energy flowing through our mind and body at any
given moment. And because I know as an indisputable fact how I feel, you could say that I also know
the truth of what I'm perceiving outside of me in the same moment. The problem is that how we feel is
always the absolute truth, but the beliefs that triggered our state of mind or feeling may or may not be
