Within such a cycle, there is obviously a substantial amount of intraday and intraweek volatility,
reﬂecting swings in market sentiment. Traditionally, economists have either ignored such shortterm periods or suggested they could not be predicted. While ﬂow and technical analysis have
done much to dispel such a view, recent work on the relationship between “risk appetite” and
asset prices has made a real breakthrough in terms of being able to predict those short-term
swings in sentiment and in turn how they affect currency and asset prices. Risk appetite or
market sentiment are not easily deﬁnable concepts given that what these are focusing on is the
investor’s willingness or otherwise to invest — which is not always based on logic! Despite
such difﬁculties, the private sector has over the past few years been hard at work creating
“risk appetite indicators” to measure overall conditions for risk tolerance across currency and
asset markets. Within the investment banks, JP Morgan created its “LCPI Index” Bank of
America has its “Global Hazard Indicator” and Salomon Smith Barney its “Instability Index”.
For the purpose of an example, we will focus on the Instability Index. The index was originally
created to track levels of risk appetite or conversely “instability” for ﬁxed income investors.
However, because it uses cross-market indicators for this purpose, we can also use it for
managing and trading currency risk.
Risk appetite has become an increasingly important concept, not just because of the need
to create more accurate models for forecasting short-term currency moves, but also because
the last few years have shown a marked pick-up in cross-asset market volatility. Indeed, one
can go as far as to suggest that as the globalization of capital ﬂows has proceeded, so volatility
has increased. Risk appetite is essentially a capital ﬂow event and its relationship is directly
proportional to the size of capital ﬂows involved. For this very reason, just as capital ﬂows across
borders have grown exponentially, so the degree to which capital ﬂows affect currency markets
has grown proportionately. A crisis in one country is no longer isolated but is transmitted
instantly around the global ﬁnancial system. Investors who face losses in that one market may
seek to take proﬁt on other positions in order to offset those losses, thus creating a domino
effect in hitherto unrelated markets.
Extreme bouts of cross-market volatility such as were seen in the wake of the ERM, Mexican
and Russian currency crises prompted interest in creating risk appetite indicators which, if not
predicting actual crises themselves, would at least be able to predict signiﬁcant moves in terms
of general investor risk tolerance. For this purpose, categories or levels of risk tolerance also had
to be created. The three generally accepted categories within most such risk appetite models
for this purpose are:

r Risk-seeking
r Risk-neutral
r Risk-aversion

54

Currency Strategy

As the focus of the Instability Index is on market volatility and “instability” for the purpose
of alerting investors to such bouts of unwanted volatility, these categories can be modiﬁed
slightly for the purpose of focusing on such instability:

r Stable
r Neutral
r Unstable
When market conditions are perceived as stable according to the market indicators used by the
index, they are of necessity optimum for investors to be in risk-seeking mode. Equally, when
market conditions are unstable, this is synonymous with investor risk-aversion or avoidance.
The focus for such an analytical tool has been the investor community. However, currency
speculators and corporations can also use a risk appetite or instability indicator with which to
trade or manage their currency risk.
Using the context of the 1997–1998 crisis period, the Instability Index seeks to measure
risk appetite using leverage, credit spreads and cross-market (equity, ﬁxed income and foreign
exchange) options’ volatilities as its three benchmarks. The period of June 1997–September
1998 accelerated the focus in trying to measure risk appetite as ﬁrst the Asian countries
experienced currency crises one after another and then Russia devalued and defaulted in August
1998. Conceptually, everyone knew what it meant to be risk-averse, but measuring it was
another matter, let alone trying to use that measurement to predict future phases of risk appetite.
While investment banks needed analytical tools to track the overall risk appetite of clients across
markets, particularly in times of stress, academics and policymakers also needed such a tool
for the purpose of measuring just how orderly or disorderly market conditions were in order
to help guide future policy responses. The Instability Index, which was formalized in 1999, is
just such a guide and includes three main components:

r De-leveraging — There are two parts to this. The ﬁrst looks at the relationship in the currency
market between the US dollar (as an equity-linked, higher yielding asset) and the likes of
the Swiss franc (as a traditional safe-haven currency) and Japanese yen (as a low interest
rate, funding currency). During times of market stress, the US dollar tends to lose ground
against these as “leverage” or risk is cut. The second component looks at US and European
bank equities as a measure of market “leverage”.
r Credit spreads — In the US dollar credit markets, this tracks the spreads between BBBrated industrial credits, emerging market Brady bonds and swaps to Treasuries, while it
also tracks Euro swap spreads to Bunds. The overall reading gives a very good indicator of
investor risk-tolerance.
r Implied volatilities — Across the three asset classes of equities, debt and currencies, tracking three-month implied volatilities gives a good idea as to demand levels for option-related
protection structures from investors. Option implied volatility tends to rise more sharply
during asset market slumps than when asset prices are rising.
The advantage with the readings within this index is that they are relatively easily available
and updated daily. Thus, using these three components to represent the degree of “stability”
or “instability” in the market, we can have a daily indicator of risk appetite, which can in turn
be used as a forecasting tool for currency markets.
The parameters of these readings were set in large part by the global market crisis that
happened in the autumn of 1998. During that time, the Instability Index hit an all-time high of

Currency Economics

55

100
90
80
70
60
50
LAST; 38.9

40
30
20
10
0
Jul-98

Dec-98

May-99

Oct-99

Mar-00

Aug-00

Jan-01

Jun-01

Figure 2.2 SSB Instability Index
Source: Citigroup.

95.6 on October 8, 1998. This crisis also lifted the index onto a higher plateau. Before the crisis,
the index averaged 16.1 from January 1997 through July 1998. Since January 1999 through
mid-2001, the index averaged around 45, spending much of the time between levels of 30 to
60. Since January 1997, the index has only spent 2.5% of the time above levels of 60–65. At
such levels, we would expect to see extreme volatility and price action and that is indeed what
happened. If we analyse the history of the index from July 1998–October 2001 (see Figure 2.2),
we can clearly discern a corridor when market conditions have been in risk-neutral mode, that
is when they were neither stable nor unstable. Indeed, a majority of the observations appear to
have occurred in a corridor of between 40 and 50 according to this chart.
By creating a corridor for a risk-neutral stance, we can in turn create speciﬁc index parameters
for both “risk-seeking/stable” and “risk-aversion/unstable” market conditions. Thus:

r Risk-seeking/stable: <40
r Neutral: 40–50
r Risk-aversion/unstable: >50
In turn, if we compare this index with a number of exchange rates, we ﬁnd an important
and speciﬁc correlation. During “risk-seeking/stable” market conditions, investors tend to
buy credit product as opposed to Treasuries, equities as opposed to money market funds and
in the currency world high carry emerging market currencies as opposed to low carry “safe
havens” such as the Swiss franc or Japanese yen. When risk appetite conditions shift from riskseeking/stable (below 40) in the index to neutral (40–50), many of these high carry currencies
such as the Polish zloty, Hungarian forint, Slovak koruna, Mexican peso and Brazilian real
tend to lose ground as investors become slightly more cautious, paring back their exposure.
Frequently, the yen or the Swiss franc are used as funding currencies with which to buy
these high yielders, hence as risk appetite is reduced so they tend to recover some ground as
@Team-FLY

56

Currency Strategy

Table 2.1 Currency decision template using a risk appetite/instability indicator
Risk-seeking/stable
(<40)

Neutral
(40–50)

Risk-aversion/unstable
(>50)

Asset
managers

• Raise currency exposure
to high carry currencies

Currency
speculators

• Buy high carry
currencies
• Short low carry safe
haven currencies
• Hedge high carry
currency strategically

• Reduce currency
exposure to high carry
currencies
• Close positions

• Eliminate currency
exposure to high carry
currencies
• Short high carry
currencies
• Buy low carry safe
haven currencies
• Only hedge high carry
currency exposure
tactically

Corporations

• Only hedge high carry
currency exposure
tactically

long high carry/short funding currency positions are reduced. Finally, when market conditions
deteriorate to the extent the index moves into “risk-aversion/unstable” territory (above 50),
high carry currencies are cut across the board, to the increasing beneﬁt of safe havens such as
the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen.
The relationship between risk appetite and speciﬁc currency performance has been proven
statistically within academic research using correlation analysis. From this, we can come up
with a rough template for currency trading, hedging and investing decisions using the index
(Table 2.1). Note that this is not meant to be an exact list of recommendations. As with any
model, there will be exceptions. Rather, it is meant as a template against which speciﬁc currency
exposures should be measured on a case-by-case basis.
There is actual fundamental grounding for using a risk appetite indicator for currency hedging, trading or investing. Since the end of the Cold War, there has been much greater emphasis
on tightening ﬁscal and monetary policies in order to bring inﬂation down. As a result, real
interest rates have been rising. In the developed markets, capital ﬂows over the medium to
long term to those currencies with high real rates. The discipline associated with membership
of the EU and the Euro has exacerbated this process, and the same should happen in Central
and Eastern Europe ahead of accession to the EU. As a result of such global macroeconomic
forces, the trend has been to hold high carry currencies in all conditions — risk-seeking/stable
and neutral — apart from risk-aversion/unstable.
The link between risk appetite or instability and currencies comes through capital ﬂows and
therefore through the balance of payments. Countries with high current account deﬁcits are
dependent on capital ﬂows and therefore dependent on high levels of risk appetite. Conversely,
countries with current account surpluses are not dependent on capital ﬂows or risk appetite.
Therefore, during periods of risk-seeking, it should be no surprise that currencies whose
countries have current account deﬁcits tend to outperform. Equally, during periods of riskaversion or avoidance, currencies whose countries have current account surpluses tend to
outperform by default as capital ﬂows are reduced or even reversed.
In the developed economies, currencies such as the US dollar, UK pound sterling, Australian
dollar and New Zealand dollar are seen as risk-dependent currencies because of their current
account deﬁcits. Conversely, currencies such as the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen are not
dependent on risk appetite because they have current account surpluses and therefore are seen
as “safe havens” in times of risk-aversion. This is not an exact science, because there are

Currency Economics

57

exceptions such as the Canadian dollar, which tends to prosper during periods of risk-seeking
despite the fact that Canada has historically run current account surpluses. Generally, however,
within the developed economies the relationship between risk appetite and the current account
tends to hold.
The principles that we have described here work for the developed market currencies. They
also work very well within emerging market currencies, albeit with some caveats. Emerging
market economies and currencies have some speciﬁc characteristics which need to be considered when using a risk appetite or instability indicator:

r Most emerging market economies have current account deﬁcits — Because of high cap-

ital inﬂows, most emerging market economies run trade and current account deﬁcits. As a
result, most are risk-dependent, though one would assume this anyway.
r Emerging market economies tend to have structurally high levels of inﬂation — Due to
economic inefﬁciencies and higher growth levels, emerging market economies have tended
to be characterized by higher inﬂation levels.
r Emerging market interest rates are more volatile — Capital inﬂows to the emerging
markets are frequently substantially larger than the ability to absorb them without consequent
major ﬁnancial and economic imbalances. Such inﬂows artiﬁcially depress market interest
rates until such time as economic imbalances become unsustainable, at which point the
currency collapses and interest rates rise sharply. Thus, such inﬂows can cause substantial
interest rate volatility.
r Political, liquidity and convertibility risk add to emerging market volatility — Politics
is no longer seen as a primary risk consideration within the developed markets, but it still is
within the emerging markets however, given higher levels of political instability. Emerging
markets are also considerably less liquid and some are not convertible on the capital account,
both of which affect market pricing.
These caveats notwithstanding, asset managers, leveraged investors or corporations can use
a risk appetite instability indicator as a benchmark for managing or trading emerging market
as well as developed market currency risk. High carry currencies such as the Polish zloty,
Hungarian forint, Brazilian real and Mexican peso tend to outperform when market risk appetite conditions are in risk-seeking/stable mode, while equally underperforming when market
conditions are in risk-aversion/unstable mode. Similarly, low carry emerging market currencies
such as the Singapore dollar and the Czech koruna tend to underperform during periods of
risk-seeking/stable market conditions and outperform during periods of risk-aversion/unstable
market conditions.
Neither the speculative cycle of exchange rates nor the risk appetite indicator is meant
to represent exact science in terms of predicting exchange rates. They do however have the
advantage of focusing on capital account rather than trade ﬂows, in line with the elimination
of barriers to free movement of capital. In addition, they are speciﬁcally useful for focusing
on short-term exchange rate moves, an area where the traditional exchange rate models fall
down. Finally, the results can be used speciﬁcally rather than just generally and tailored to the
individual currency risk needs of asset managers, leveraged investors and corporations.

2.2 CURRENCY ECONOMICS
So far in this chapter, the focus has been on trying to create new exchange rate models based on
capital ﬂows to try to improve forecasting accuracy. As necessary as this is, it does not mean

58

Currency Strategy

we abandon the traditional exchange rate models. Classical economic theory has provided the
foundations for exchange rate analysis. The purpose of establishing a framework known as
currency economics is to be able to combine the new with the exchange rate models and use
both in a more targeted and focused way. Any major differences between this framework of
currency economics and classical economics are more methodological than ideological. The
traditional exchange rate models, focusing as they do on such factors as trade, productivity,
prices, money supply and the current account balance, help provide the long-term exchange
rate view. Capital ﬂow-based models are considerably more helpful and accurate in terms of
predicting short-term exchange rate moves.
However, these two types of exchange rate model should not necessarily be viewed as polar
opposites. The very purpose of establishing a speciﬁc framework known as currency economics
is to create an integrated approach to exchange rate analysis, which is capable of answering
the riddles of short-, medium- and long-term exchange rate moves. The two sides do have some
common ground, and it should be no surprise that this common ground is to be found in the
balance of payments model — given that it focuses both on trade and capital ﬂows. Within this,
there are three speciﬁc analytical tools which should be of use to currency market practitioners
in bridging the gap between short- and long-term exchange rate analysis:

r The standard accounting identity for economic adjustment
r The J-curve
r The REER
2.2.1 The Standard Accounting Identity for Economic Adjustment
We looked at this brieﬂy in Chapter 1, but to recap it is expressed as:
S−I =Y −E = X−M
where:
S = Savings
I = Investment
Y = Income
E = Expenditure
X = Exports
M = Imports
This can actually be expanded by breaking down “savings” into public and private savings
such that:
(Sp + Sg ) − I = X − M
where:
Sp = Private savings
Sg = Government savings
Here, government “dis-saving” reﬂects having a budget deﬁcit. Thus, from this, we can see
immediately that there is a possible link between a budget deﬁcit and a trade deﬁcit. If a
country’s budget deﬁcit continues to rise, this is reﬂected on the left-hand side of the equation
by an increasingly negative value for Sg . Unless this is offset by a rise in private savings or
a fall in investment, this will eventually mean that the left-hand side of the equation turns

Currency Economics

59

negative. Of necessity in this circumstance, the right-hand side of the equation must also be
negative, which in turn means that the country has a trade deﬁcit. Thus, a budget deﬁcit can
lead to a trade or a current account deﬁcit. The link is not necessarily automatic. However,
it should be assumed that widening budget deﬁcits, if sustained over time, lead to widening
trade and current account deﬁcits. If we extend this, we see that at some stage widening
current account deﬁcits will become unsustainable, requiring a real exchange rate depreciation.
Thus, widening budget deﬁcits may eventually require real (and thus nominal) exchange rate
depreciation.
Economists are not generally thought of as prone to high emotion. Yet, one has to say that
the accounting identity is like a work of great art, hiding great intricacy and complexity behind
the veneer of apparent simplicity. From this accounting identity, we can see how economies
adjust to changes in fundamental conditions and therefore how exchange rates should adjust
to those conditions. Again, this is probably best shown through an example.
Example 1
For the purpose of this exercise of showing how the accounting identity can work in practice,
imagine a purely theoretical example whereby you are the corporate Treasurer of a South
African mining company. For argument’s sake, the company mines and exports precious metals
to Europe, the US and Asia. Of course, those precious metals are for the most part priced in
US dollars. However, the company is based in South Africa, thus its export revenues are in
US dollars and its cost base is in South African rand. This may be an oversimpliﬁcation but
let’s assume for the sake of this example that it is the case. In terms of currency risk, the
Treasurer’s main decision is whether to hedge forward receivables or alternatively allow them
to be translated at designated intervals depending on exchange rate developments. In this
speciﬁc example, it has to be pointed out that South African exporters have a regulated limit
of a period of 180 days with which to repatriate export receivables.
If we look back at the ﬁrst half of 2001, South Africa was recording tremendous trade
surpluses, which is to say that the balance of exports to imports was robustly positive to the
tune of over 20 billion rand in that period. Using our accounting identity, this can be expressed
by:
(Sp + Sg ) − I = +ZAR20.5 billion
Just as the right-hand side of the equation is strongly positive, so the same must be the case for
the left-hand side. Thus, the inescapable conclusion from this is that the sum of (Sp + Sg ) must
of necessity be considerably higher than I . At the same time, South Africa was actually running
a budget deﬁcit of around 2% of GDP. This represents government dis-saving, meaning that
Sg is actually negative. Thus, we can in turn extrapolate from this that either South Africa’s
private savings (Sp ) had become extraordinarily high or investment (I ) was either low or
negative. Those familiar with the South African economy know that low private savings has
been a perennial structural weakness of that economy. Thus, the ﬁrst suggestion is extremely
unlikely. If we accept this, then in turn we must conclude from the accounting identity that low
or negative domestic investment (I ) in South Africa was the reason why the left-hand side of
the equation was also strongly positive.
While precious metal exports have declined as a percentage of total South African exports
in recent years, they still make up a considerable proportion at around 15%. Thus, the rising

60

Currency Strategy

overall trade surplus may also reﬂect rising precious metal exports. Our corporate Treasurer,
seeing mounting export receipts in US dollars, may presume that the sheer weight of the rising
trade surplus may cause the rand to appreciate. If he or she does so, they may in turn decide
to sell US dollars forward for rand to lock in at favourable levels and avoid having to hedge
forward later at slightly less favourable levels. However, this may not in fact be the right
decision to take. If we look again at the accounting identity in this speciﬁc example, we see
a picture of low or negative domestic investment in the economy. Domestic investment in an
economy is not the same concept as inward portfolio or capital investment. However, we may
assume that if domestic investment is low or negative, inward investment is also likely to be
low or negative. A currency market practitioner thinks not just in terms of trade or capital
ﬂows, but rather in terms of total ﬂows going through the market; the common ground between
the new capital ﬂow-based and the traditional trade ﬂow-based exchange rate models. Thus, in
this example capital ﬂows may be low or negative, potentially offsetting the positive impact on
the rand of trade ﬂows. As a result, the corporate Treasurer should think twice before hedging
by selling US dollars for rand until such time as they have to since any trade-related beneﬁt to
the rand may be offset by investment-related losses.
In practice, the dollar–rand exchange rate traded in a relatively tight range through the ﬁrst
half of 2001, apparently conﬁrming that net positive trade ﬂows were offset by net negative
investment outﬂows. Subsequently, of course, South Africa’s trade balance swung from a substantial surplus to an even more substantial deﬁcit due to the combination of strong domestic
demand, boosted by loose monetary policy, and weak external demand. With domestic investment rising but inward investment still weak, those net negative trade ﬂows became the
dominating factor in subsequent rand weakness. From August 2001 through to the end of
the year, the rand fell from around 8 to the US dollar to a low of 13.85. Ill-informed people
have said it was due to speculation. The truth is somewhat less sinister, which is that it was
due to fundamental factors at work that were evident within the standard accounting identity
for economic adjustment.
This is an example of how a corporation can use the accounting identity to analyse their
currency exposures. For good measure, we should try the same exercise for an investor.
Example 2
An institutional investor may also be concerned with currency risk, albeit from a slightly
different perspective. Instead of mining precious metals out of the ground, our investor may
be buying a portfolio of international equity and ﬁxed income securities. Whether our investor
likes it or not, the very act of international investment automatically assumes not only currency
risk but also a speciﬁc currency view. What do I mean by this? If an investor in the UK decides
to buy a 10-year US Treasury note, in order to do that they have to buy US dollars. In market
parlance, they are whether they like it or not “long dollars, short sterling”. If during the time in
which they hold the investment, sterling falls against the dollar, this is a very favourable
development which should help enhance the total return of the investment. Why? Because
when the US dollar proceeds are translated back into sterling, a fall in sterling against the
dollar means that the dollar is worth more sterling. The ensuing currency proﬁt should thus
boost the total return.
Say, however, that sterling actually appreciates signiﬁcantly against the US dollar. In this
case, any proﬁt earned on the original investment in the US Treasury note may be reduced
or even eliminated when the proceeds are translated back into sterling. The rise in sterling
@Team-FLY
