
***
A few months later, a moment came when it looked as though Howard’s time might have arrived. On the
morning of July 1, 1954, news came from Washington that Nebraska’s senior Senator, Hugh Butler, had been
rushed to the hospital with a stroke and was not expected to live. The deadline for entering the primary
election that would fill his Senate seat was that very night. Howard’s sense of propriety was such that he
refused to file the papers to run until Butler had actually died, so the Buffetts waited anxiously all day for
news. They knew that Howard’s name recognition in Douglas County meant that if he ran in a special
election without having to go through the party nominating process, even though the party bigwigs were
disenchanted with him, the odds were excellent that he could win.
Word of Butler’s death came in the early evening, after Secretary of State Frank Marsh’s office had closed at
its usual five p.m. Howard threw his candidacy filing in the car and he and Leila drove to Lincoln, assuming
that they had plenty of time because the deadline was midnight. They tried to file the papers at Marsh’s
home, but he refused them, even though Howard had paid the filing fee earlier in the day. Infuriated, they
returned to Omaha.
The state Republican convention was in session at the time, and on the news of Butler’s death, delegates on
the floor elected a temporary successor to serve out his term.16 Anyone serving would more or less
automatically be elected to Butler’s job in November. As the ranking Republican in the state, Howard was an
obvious choice. But he was seen as a zealot, as a guy who tilted at windmills, unyielding on trivial ethical
matters and disloyal to his own party for not supporting Eisenhower. Instead, the convention elected Roman
Hruska, the well-liked Congressman who had taken Howard’s seat when he retired. Howard and Leila sped
back to Lincoln and quickly filed suit with the State Supreme Court to force the party to accept his
nomination. But twenty-four hours later, they gave up the futile fight and dropped the lawsuit.
Warren was furious when he heard the news about Hruska. “They slit Daddy’s throat from ear to ear,” he
said. How dare the party repay Howard’s decades of loyalty this way?
At fifty-one years of age, Howard had just seen his future disappear. As his anger ebbed, his depression grew.
Until now, a retired senior party politician like him would have had a role to play, but he had been shut out of
the arena that was the center of his life, that made him feel useful in the world. He tried to get a teaching
position at the University of Omaha, which the family felt was reasonable given his business experience and
tenure as a Congressman. But Howard was considered such an oddball locally that the school would not hire
him, even though his own son taught there and Doc Thompson was dean of the College of Arts and Sciences.
He ended up going back to work at Buffett-Falk. Eventually, he found a part-time teaching job as a lecturer
at Midland Lutheran College, thirty miles from Omaha.17 The family harbored bitter feelings toward the local
establishment, which it felt had essentially run Howard out of town.
Leila dissolved in a pool of misery. Through the reflected glory it bestowed on her, Howard’s position in the
world may have meant even more to her than it did to him. Her sister Edie was now living in Brazil, Bertie
lived in Chicago, and her relationships with Doris and Warren were unsettled at best, so she had only twentytwo-year-old Susie to lean on. But Susie was a busy, pregnant young mother, who had her hands full caring
for Warren as well.
And soon, Susie would no longer be in Omaha. For two years, Warren had kept corresponding with Ben
Graham. He suggested stock ideas like Greif Bros. Cooperage, a company he and his father had bought for
their partnership. He traveled to New York periodically and dropped in on Graham-Newman.
“I would always try to see Mr. Graham.”
Surely it wasn’t typical for former students to hang about at Graham-Newman.
“No, well, I was persistent.”

By the time the local Republican Party slammed the door to the Senate nomination in his father’s face,
Warren was already on his way to New York. “Ben wrote and said, ‘Come on back.’ His partner, Jerry
Newman, explained it by saying, ‘You know, we just checked you out a little further.’ I felt I’d struck the
mother lode.” Whether he would accept the position was never in question. And this time, the National
Guard said yes.
Warren was so excited about being hired that he arrived in New York on August 1, 1954, and showed up at
his new job at Graham-Newman on August 2, a month before his official starting date. There, he discovered
that a week earlier, tragedy had struck Ben Graham. Four weeks shy of his own twenty-fourth birthday,
Warren wrote his father: “Ben Graham’s son Newton (26) who was in the Army in France committed suicide
last week. He had always been a little unbalanced. However Graham didn’t know it had been a suicide til he
read it in the New York Times on an Army release, which of course is really tough.”18 When he went to
France to collect his son’s remains, Ben met Newton’s girlfriend, Marie Louise Amingues, known as Malou,
who was several years older than Newton. He returned a few weeks later but was never quite the same
afterward. He also began to correspond with Malou and made periodic visits back to France. But in those
days Warren knew nothing of his idol’s personal life.
Instead, he had to attend to his own, for one of his first tasks was to find his family a place to live. Susie and
Little Susie had remained in Omaha during his first month in New York City. “I tried to live at Peter Cooper
Village first, one of two big projects built by Metropolitan Life immediately after World War Two. My
friend Fred Kuhlken from Columbia lived in Peter Cooper. Walter Schloss lived in Peter Cooper.
Everybody wanted to get into Peter Cooper. Under some kind of special section of the law, it was really
reasonable, seventy or eighty bucks a month, and very nice. I applied before I went and got a postcard
about two years later saying I’d been accepted. If I had been accepted earlier I would have lived in the
city.”
Instead, Warren searched far and wide for a cheap apartment. Discounting the impersonal location and long
commute, he finally settled on a three-bedroom apartment in a white-brick building in the middle-class
suburb of White Plains, about thirty miles away in Westchester County, New York. When Susie and Little
Susie arrived a few weeks later, the apartment was still not ready, so the family moved into a room in a house
in Westchester that was so cramped they had to devise a makeshift crib from a dresser drawer. The Buffetts
stayed there only a day or two.
But such were the tales that would later be told about Warren’s frugal habits that this story grew arms and
legs and scuttled into the legend that he was too cheap to buy Little Susie a crib, and she therefore slept in a
drawer throughout much of her White Plains infancy.19
As the pregnant Susie unpacked and arranged her new household while taking care of their baby and getting
to know the neighbors, Warren rose every morning and took the New York Central train to Grand Central. In
that first month, he had parked himself in the file room at Graham-Newman and, eager to know everything
about how the company worked, begun to read through every single piece of paper in every single drawer in
an entire room filled with big wooden files.
Only eight people worked there: Ben Graham; Jerry Newman; his son Mickey Newman; Bernie Warner, who
was the treasurer; Walter Schloss; two women secretaries; and now Warren. The thin gray laboratory-style
jacket Warren had coveted was at last his. “It was a big moment when they gave me my jacket. We all wore
them. Ben wore it, Jerry Newman wore it. We were all equal in our jackets.”
Well, not quite. Warren and Walter sat at desks in a windowless room that contained the ticker machine, the
direct lines to the brokerage houses, some reference books and files. Walter sat next to the direct lines and
made most of the calls to brokers. Ben, Mickey Newman, or, most commonly, Jerry Newman appeared
periodically from their private offices to check a quote on the ticker machine. “We would look up stuff and
read. We would go through Standard & Poor’s or a Moody’s Manual and look at companies selling below
working capital. There were a lot then,” recalls Schloss.
These companies were what Graham called “cigar butts”: cheap and unloved stocks that had been cast aside

like the sticky, mashed stub of a stogie one might find on the sidewalk. Graham specialized in spotting these
unappetizing remnants that everyone else overlooked. He coaxed them alight and sucked out one last free
puff.
Graham knew that a certain number of cigar butts would turn out foul, and thought it futile to spend time
examining any individual cigar butt’s quality. The law of averages said most of them were good for a puff. He
was always thinking in terms of how much companies would be worth dead—what their assets would be
worth if liquidated. Buying at a discount to that value was his “margin of safety”—his backstop against the
percentage that presumably would go bankrupt. As a further backstop, he bought tiny positions in a huge
number of stocks—the principle of diversification. Graham’s idea of diversification was extreme; some of his
positions were as small as $1,000.
Warren, who had such confidence in his own judgment, saw no reason to hedge his bets this way and
inwardly rolled his eyes at diversification. He and Walter collected numbers from the Moody’s Manuals and
filled out hundreds of the simple forms that Graham-Newman used to make decisions. Warren wanted to
know all the basic information about every company. Once he had looked over the field, he narrowed it
down to a handful of stocks worth even more careful study, then concentrated his money on what he
considered the best bets. He was willing to put most of his eggs in one basket, as he had done with GEICO.
By that time, however, he had sold his GEICO shares, because he never seemed to have enough money to
invest. Every decision had an opportunity cost—he had to compare each investing opportunity with the next
best one. As much as he liked GEICO, he had made the wrenching decision to sell it after finding another
stock that he coveted even more, called Western Insurance. This company was earning $29 a share, and its
stock was selling for as little as three bucks.
This was like finding a slot machine that would come up cherries every time you played. If you put in
twenty-five cents and pulled the handle, the Western Insurance machine was virtually guaranteed to pay at
least two bucks.20 Anyone sane would play that slot as long as she could stay awake. It was the cheapest
stock with the highest margin of safety he’d ever seen in his life. He bought as much of it as he could, and he
cut his friends in on the deal.21
Warren was a bloodhound for anything free or cheap. With his prodigious ability to absorb numbers and to
analyze them, he quickly became the fair-haired boy of Graham-Newman. It came so naturally to him; Ben
Graham’s cigar butts resembled his old hobby of stooping at the racetrack for cast-off winning tickets.
He paid close attention to what was going on in the back where the partners—Ben, Jerry, and Mickey
—worked. Ben Graham was on the board of Philadelphia and Reading Coal & Iron Company, and GrahamNewman controlled the company. Warren had discovered this stock on his own, and by the end of 1954 he
had put $35,000 into it. His boss would have been appalled, but Warren was confident—and eavesdropped
with fascination.22 Philadelphia and Reading—which sold anthracite coal and owned the supposedly valuable
culm banks—actually wasn’t worth much as a business. Over time, it was going nowhere. But it was throwing
off extra cash, which it could use to transform itself into a better business by buying another company.
“I was just a peon sitting in the outer office. A guy named Jack Goldfarb came in to the office to see
Graham-Newman. He negotiated with them and they bought the Union Underwear Company from him for
Philadelphia and Reading Coal and Iron, creating what became Philadelphia and Reading Corporation.23
That was the beginning of the company’s transformation into something more diversified. I was not in the
inner circle, but I was terribly interested, knowing something was going on.”
What Warren was learning about by keeping his ears open was the art of capital allocation—placing money
where it would earn the highest return. In this case, Graham-Newman was using money from one business to
buy a more profitable business. Over time, it could mean the difference between bankruptcy and success.
Transactions like this made Warren feel that he was sitting on the windowsill looking in at high finance as it
was taking place. Yet, as he soon found, Graham did not behave like anyone else on Wall Street. He was
always mentally reciting poetry or quoting Virgil and was apt to lose packages on the subway. Like Warren,

he was indifferent to how he looked. When someone observed, “That’s an interesting pair of shoes,” Graham
looked down at the brown oxford on one foot and the black one on the other and said, without blinking,
“Yes, as a matter of fact, I’ve got another pair just like them at home.”24 Unlike Warren, however, he cared
nothing about money for its own sake, nor was he interested in trading as a competitive game. To him, stockpicking was an intellectual exercise.
“One time, we were waiting for an elevator. We were going to eat in the cafeteria down at the bottom of the
Chanin Building at Forty-second and Lex. And Ben said to me, ‘Remember one thing, Warren: Money isn’t
making that much difference in how you and I live. We’re both going down to the cafeteria for lunch and
working every day and having a good time. So don’t worry too much about money, because it won’t make
much difference in how you live.’”
Warren was in awe of Ben Graham, but nonetheless he was preoccupied with money. He wanted to amass a
lot of it, and saw it as a competitive game. If asked to give up some of his money, Warren responded like a
dog fiercely guarding its bone, or even as though he had been attacked. His struggle to let go of the smallest
amounts of money was so apparent that it was as if the money possessed him, rather than the other way
around.
Susie had learned this only too well. Even within their apartment building, Warren had quickly earned a
reputation for tightfistedness and eccentricity. It was only after he was embarrassed by the state of his shirts
at work—for Susie never ironed more than the collar, front placket, and cuffs—that he allowed her to send
the shirts to a laundry.25 He made a deal with a local newsstand to buy week-old magazines at a discount as
they were about to be thrown away. He had no car, and when he borrowed that of a neighbor, he never filled
up the tank. (When he finally got a car, he washed it only when it was raining, so the rain could do the
manual labor of rinsing.)26
For Warren, holding on to every penny this way, since he had sold that first pack of chewing gum, was one of
the two things that had made him comparatively rich at age twenty-five. The other was collecting more cash.
Since Columbia, he had started making money at an accelerating rate. Now, much of his time Warren spent
in a reverie, statistics about businesses and their stock prices swirling in his head. When he wasn’t studying
something, he was teaching it. To keep his Dale Carnegie skills limber so he would not freeze in front of an
audience, he got a gig teaching investing for the Scarsdale Adult School at the high school in a nearby suburb.
Meanwhile, the Buffetts’ social set consisted of couples whose breadwinners were mainly interested in
stocks.
Now and then he and Susie were invited to a country club or to dinner parties with other young Wall Street
couples. Bill Ruane had introduced him to several new acquaintances like Henry Brandt, a stockbroker who
looked like a disheveled Jerry Lewis and had graduated at the top of his class from Harvard Business School,
and his wife, Roxanne. Among the Wall Street set, Warren struck people as the “hickiest person you ever
saw,” as one of them put it. But when he started holding forth about stocks, the others sat transfixed at his
feet, like “Jesus and the apostles,” said Roxanne Brandt.27
The wives sat by themselves and had their own conversations, and there Susie stood out as much as her
husband did among the men. Warren wove his financial spells, and Susie charmed the wives with her
engaging simplicity. She wanted to know all about their children, or their plans to have children. She knew
how to get people to open up to her. She would ask about some big life decision, then, with a soulful look,
say, “Any regrets?” Out would come pouring the other person’s most intimate feelings. Soon someone she
had met half an hour before felt she had a new best friend, even though Susie never confided intimacies in
return. People loved her for being so interested in them.
But mostly Susie was on her own as she waited for their second child to be born, her days filled with laundry,
shopping, cleaning, and cooking, as well as feeding, changing, and playing with Little Susie. All this felt right
and normal to both of them. As Ricky Ricardo had said in the first season of I Love Lucy three years before,
“I want a wife who’s just a wife.”28 Lucy’s ambitions and her fruitless efforts to fulfill them made the show
comical. So, as Susie fed Warren dinner, she supported him at his work as if it were a daily sacrament; she

recognized the reverence he felt for Mr. Graham. But she also observed from a distance. Warren didn’t share
the details of his job, which in any case didn’t interest her. She continued the patient work of bolstering his
confidence, and of “putting him together” by showering him with affection and teaching him about people.
One thing she was firm about at home was the importance of his bonding with their daughter. Warren was not
the type to play peekaboo or take over the diaper changing, but he would sing to Little Susie every night.
“I sang ‘Over the Rainbow’ all the time. It got to be hypnotic, almost like Pavlov’s dogs. I don’t know
whether it was too boring or what—but she’d fall asleep as soon as I started. I’d put her up on my shoulder,
and, basically, she would just sort of melt in my arms.”
Having hit on a reliable system, Warren never messed with it. While singing, he could easily be off
rummaging around in his mental files. So “Over the Rainbow” it was, night after night.
On her own, housekeeping, raising a baby, and taking care of Warren in a sterile suburb of New York, Susie
may have welcomed anybody who showed up at the door. One day in late 1954, a salesman for Parents
magazine dropped by the apartment. Whatever the salesman told Susie, when Warren got home he concluded
that the paperwork she’d signed committed them to less favorable terms than she had thought. He was
incensed that his wife had been misled. He called several times and talked to the magazine’s representatives,
but they apparently said “nothing doing” when he asked for his money back.
Warren mounted a crusade. He wanted more than his $17 back; he wanted to right an injustice, to bring the
reprobate Parents magazine to its knees. He went around the apartment building and found a number of
others willing to join the cause. He sued the magazine in small-claims court in Manhattan and looked forward
to testifying on behalf of all the allegedly swindled subscribers of Parents magazine. He clicked his heels with
glee at the thought of the magazine’s lawyers running their meter. There was a bit of his father in this
episode, but with a pecuniary slant and better odds of winning, so that his mother would have approved.
But to his chagrin, before the trial took place he got a check in the mail. Parents magazine had settled. The
crusade was foiled.
On December 15, 1954, Warren had come home from work because Susie’s labor was beginning, and then
came a ring at the door. Susie answered it and found a door-to-door missionary who had come to call. She
politely invited him to sit down in the living room. And she listened.
So did Warren, who was thinking to himself that only Susie would have let the man inside. Warren began to
encourage the conversation to wind down. Agnostic for a number of years, he had no interest in being
converted, and his wife was in labor. They needed to get to the hospital.
Susie continued listening. “Tell me more,” she said. Now and then she pulsed and moaned slightly as the
missionary kept talking.29 She ignored Warren’s signals, obviously feeling it more important to be polite to
the visitor and make him feel understood than to get to the hospital. The caller seemed oblivious to the fact
that she was in labor. Warren sat there, helpless and increasingly agitated, until the preacher ran out of steam.
“I wanted to kill the guy,” he says. But they made it to the hospital in ample time, and Howard Graham
Buffett arrived early the next morning.

21
The Side to Play
New York City • 1954–1956

Howie was a “difficult” baby. Whereas Little Sooz had been quiet and placid, Howie was like an alarm
clock you couldn’t turn off. His parents kept waiting for the clamor to lessen, but it only increased. The
apartment suddenly seemed full and noisy all the time.
“He had some kind of digestive problem. We experimented with all these different kinds of milk bottles. I
don’t know whether he was getting air in or not, but he was up all the time. Compared to Little Sooz, Howie
was a trial.”
It was Big Susie who jumped to the sound of the alarm clock. Since Warren had grown up between a
speechifying father and a mother who alternated grotesque rages with pitter-patter chatter, perhaps it was not
surprising that he had learned to shut his ears to what was going on around him. Not even Howie’s howling
nights distracted him much. In his little office in the apartment’s third bedroom, he could lose himself for
hours in his thoughts.
At work he had become absorbed in a complicated new project that would become a seminal event in his
career. Shortly after Warren joined Graham-Newman, the price of cocoa suddenly spiked from a nickel to
more than fifty cents a pound. Over in Brooklyn, Rockwood & Co., a chocolate maker “of limited
profitability,”1 faced a dilemma. Its number one product was Rockwood chocolate bits, the kind of nuggets
used in chocolate chip cookies, and the company couldn’t raise its prices much on this grocery item, so it
began running a huge loss. However, with cocoa-bean prices so high, Rockwood also had a chance to unload
the cocoa beans it already owned to reap a windfall profit. Unfortunately, the ensuing tax bill would eat up
more than half those profits.2
Rockwood’s owners approached Graham-Newman as a possible buyer of the company, but GrahamNewman wouldn’t pay the asking price. So they turned instead to the investor Jay Pritzker, who had spotted
a way to avoid the huge tax bill.3 What he realized was that the 1954 U.S. Tax Code said that if a company
was reducing the scope of its business, it could pay no tax on such a “partial liquidation” of its inventory. So
Pritzker bought enough stock to take control of Rockwood, choosing to keep the company going as a maker
of chocolate bits, and to get out of the cocoa-butter business. He attributed thirteen million pounds of cocoa
beans to the cocoa-butter side of the business, the amount of beans that would be “liquidated.”
Rather than sell the beans for cash, however, Pritzker offered them to the other shareholders in exchange for
stock. He did so because he wanted their shares to increase his ownership of the company. So he offered
them a good deal as an incentive—$36 worth of beans4 for shares that were trading at $34.5
Graham spotted a way to make money from this offer—Graham-Newman could buy Rockwood stock and
swap it to Pritzker for cocoa beans it could sell to make a $2 profit on every share. This was arbitrage: two
nearly identical things trading at a different price, which enabled a canny trader to simultaneously buy one
and sell the other and profit on the difference, with virtually no risk. “In Wall Street the old proverb has been
reworded,” as Buffett wrote later. “Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to arbitrage
and you feed him forever.”6 Pritzker would give Graham-Newman a warehouse certificate, which is just
what it sounds like: a piece of paper that says the holder owns so many cocoa beans. It could be traded like a
stock. By selling the warehouse certificate, Graham-Newman would make its money.
$34 (G-N’s cost for a share of Rockwood—which it turns in to Pritzker)
$36 (Pritzker gives G-N a warehouse receipt—which it sells at this price)
$ 2 (Profit on each share of Rockwood stock)
Virtually no risk, however, means there is at least some risk. What if the price of cocoa beans dropped, and
the warehouse receipt was suddenly worth only $30? Instead of making two dollars, Graham-Newman would
lose four bucks for every share of stock. To lock in its profit and eliminate that risk, Graham-Newman sold
cocoa “futures.” It was a good thing, too—for cocoa prices were about to drop.
