
Doctor Kiev has authored fourteen books, including TraJiMg to Ww,
(kg Psychology of Mostcrmg tbc Markets, and the forthcoming TraJiwg iw
288

the Zone, based on his experience working with professional traders; the
best-selling A Strategy for Daily Living and a popular anthropology text,
Magic, Faith, and Healing: Studies in Primitive Psychiatry Today.
I interviewed Doctor Kiev at his Manhattan office. (No, I didn't ask
him to lie down on the couch.)

You began your career working with suicidal and depressed
patients and then ended up working with Olympic athletes and
traders. That's quite a transition. It doesn't sound like there
would be much of a connection.
One of the therapies for depressed and suicidal patients is to help
them become more sell-reliant and assertive. These same skills are
applicable to athletes and traders as well.
How did you get involved in working with Olympic athletes?
My kids went to a health club that was run by the head of the U.S.
Olympic Sports Medicine Committee, and I met some Olympic athletes there. As a result of that association, 1 became the first psychiatrist on the committee.
What sports did the athletes you worked with participate in?
Bobsledcling—my son was on the U.S. world team in 1981—basketball, archery, fencing, kayaking, sculling, and a number of others.
That's quite a range of sports. Are there common denominators
among the sports or are different approaches required for different types of athletes?
There are some common denominators, but different sports require
different mental frameworks. For example, in bobsledding, you need
to start off with a maximum amount oi exertion as you run and push
the sled. But as soon as you get into the sled, you have to slow down
your adrenaline so that you are calm and centered while steering the
sled down the course. A similar transition is required in the biathlon,
where the athletes race on cross-country skis, with their heart rate
exceeding 120 beats per minute, and then have to stop and focus on
shooting a target, with their heartbeat ideally slowing clown to 40
beats per minute. These types of athletes can condition themselves
by practicing abrupt mental shifts between exertion and relaxation.

AfiiilEV, M . D .

In a sport like archery, however, the critical element is for the athletes to be able to empty their minds. For example, I worked with an
archer who had won the gold medal in the previous Olympics, and
that achievement was interfering with his ability to have his mind
totally empty and centered on the target. He needed to develop the
skill of letting go of the thought of his previous gold medal win so that
he could be relaxed and completely focused on the target.
How do you accomplish that?
By relaxation and imagery. There are many techniques, but the essential idea is that you want to notice a thought and then let it go. For
example, you might picture, the thought in a bubble and then visualize
it lading off and disappearing.
Are there some winning traits that are common across all sports?
In any sport, it's very difficult to win a gold medal unless you decide
you're going to win it. Making the Olympic team and winning a gold
medal may be a ten-year quest. If you're going to make it, then you
have to start today to do those things that are compatible with what
someone who is performing at that level is doing. Most people don't
believe it is possible and settle for not succeeding, or at least not succeeding at the level they have chosen. You have to be willing to put
yourself on the line and go for it, even with the thought that you will
feel humiliated if you don't make it after you have promised that you
would.
Promised yourself or promised the world?
Promised the world—that makes it much more powerful. Promising
the result commits you to doing it and leaves you no alternative but to
do it if you are going to live by your word. Letting others know that
you have set a goal and are committed to achieving it makes it more
likely you will achieve that goal, whether it is in the realm of athletics,
trading, or something else.
One procedure I introduced at S.A.C. seven years ago was to go
around the room and have each trader promise his results. In the
early years, I got a lot of resistance from just about everyone except
Steve Cohen, who was always very willing to promise an extraordinary
result. It took a long time lor people to accept this process, but now it
is ama/ing how much it has become part of the company culture.

M I N D OF A WiNfl!

Almost everyone is willing to commit to making more than he or she
did in the previous year, often promising to double the amount. It's
not a matter of making positive affirmations; the key is promising to
do something, and then on a daily basis doing what you need to do to
realize that result.
Steve Cohen set a target for this year that was off the charts. He
had to plan a strategy consistent with that target. He starts working at
four in the afternoon on Sunday and works until ten that night. "I
don't want to do that," he says, "but I have to in order to play at this
level. I don't want to come into the office at seven-thirty every morning. I don't want to go through all these charts every night. But it's
what I have to do if I'm going to be true to my goal."
Are you implying that simply committing to a higher target
makes it possible?
Believing that an outcome is possible makes it achievable. The classic
example is Roger Bannister's penetration of the four-minute mile
mark. Before he ran his sub-four-minute mile in 1954, this feat was
considered an impossible barrier that was beyond human physical
capabilities. After he ran his so-called magic mile, many other runners suddenly began breaking this once seemingly impossible barrier.
As the barriers are being broken down by Steve, other traders at
his firm are discovering that they can make a lot more than they once
thought possible. One trader who was a clerk five years ago is on target to make $70 million this year.
What are the implications of setting a target and then not reaching it? Certainly not everyone who sets a higher target makes it.
The objective of setting a target is not necessarily to reach it, but
rather to establish a standard against which to measure your performance. If you are not reaching your target, it forces you to focus on
what you are doing wrong or what you may not be doing that you
should. The target holds you to a higher standard of performance.
Why do some athletes or traders excel, whereas others with
equal skill manage only moderate success?
Sometimes when people reach their target and nothing happens, they
stop paying attention to whatever the commitment was to get there.
This explains why some people begin to lose after they succeed. They

A R I KIEV, M.D,

can't sustain the effort. When someone achieves his goal, the question is often, "What now?" My answer, which is based on comparing
athletes who have won gold medals with those who haven't, is to set
up another target that will provide a challenge. The gold medal winners are always stretching for a goal that is uncertain.
Failing to redefine the goal can limit success. For example, one ski
jumper prepared for the Olympic trials for years by visualizing himself
doing perfect jumps over and over. He came to the trials, made the
perfect jump, and achieved his goal of making the Olympic team. The
problem was that the qualifying jumps ended up being his best performance because he hadn't visualized or mentally prepared himself
for going beyond the trials.
Some traders have trouble maintaining the discipline that made
them successful once they get ahead by a certain amount. One trader I
worked with did well at the beginning of each month, but whenever he
got ahead by $300,000, he would revert to bad habits. When I pressed
him to explain the reasons for the deterioration in his performance during the latter part of each month, he said, "I begin trading each month
from the perspective that I am flat. Therefore, I am very selective about
my trades and use strict risk control. Once there is money in the till, I
get lax. I become overconfident. I stop having respect for the market."
What else impedes skilled athletes and traders from excelling?
There are people who hold the world record but have never won a
gold medal. One athlete held the world record in his event and participated in four Olympics, but never won the gold medal. It turns out
that the time he set the world record, he had a beesting that distracted him from thoughts like: "I'm not winning. I have to win."
Is there an applicable lesson to trading?
Yes, being preoccupied with not losing interferes with winning. Trading not to lose is not a good strategy. You need to trade to win.
How did you get involved working with traders?
Steve Cohen had heard of my work with Olympic athletes and
thought it would be relevant to traders. I've been working with his
firm for seven years. When I started, they were a $25 million hedge
fund; they have now grown to $1.5 billion. I know that you interviewed Steve Cohen. I'm curious, what was your impression of him?

I was struck by his casualness in trading. He was throwing out
100,000-share orders with the same level of emotion that he
might use ordering a sandwich for lunch. He also seemed to
maintain a constant sense of humor while trading. Another
thing I noticed about Steve that I've also seen in a number of
other great traders is that he can look at the same one hundred
facts everyone else sees—some of which are bullish and some of
which are bearish—and somehow pick out the one or two elements that are most relevant to the market at that moment in
time.
You saw that? I think part of it is preparation and part of it is experience. The trades he's doing are not new trades. He has a vast repertoire of trades and is able to access them. Great traders like Steve are
also able to notice when the sweet spot is visible and to pile in.
According to S.A.C.'s risk manager's statistics, 5 percent of his trades
account for virtually all of his profits. He is also willing to cut his position when he is wrong.

Do you work with just professional traders, or do you also work
with ordinary people who want to become successful traders?
Just professional traders. I see myself as a trading coach—helping
someone who is a trader improve, not teaching someone who is not a
trader to be a trader. My job is to diagnose how a trader might be
trapped by his own emotional response to the market and then help
tweak his approach to correct the problem.
For example.
One trader came to me and said, "When I'm winning, I keep winning—I can do no wrong; when I'm losing, I keep losing—I can't do
anything right." The solution was to create the same state of mind
when he was losing as when he was winning.
How do you do that?
By getting him to re-create the same mind-set that he has on a winning streak. When he is on a winning streak, he is fearless, intuitive,
and makes the right choices. When he is on a losing streak, he needs
to visualize, remember, and feel those same positive traits so that
when he comes into the office, he has the same attitude toward his
trading as when he is in the middle of a winning streak. You repeat-

fUE MIND OF A W I N N E R

edly hear traders say that when they are in a hot streak, they ean do
no wrong. I'm suggesting that people ean re-create that hot streak in
their mind.
Is that what you did with athletes as well—get them to imagine
doing their particular event perfectly?
I once worked with an ice skater who couldn't do a triple j u m p .
Every time he attempted the third t u r n , he would l a l i . I asked him if
he could begin to do it in his mind. At first, when he attempted
doing it in his mind, he would also fall, i had him keep practicing
the jump in his mind until he felt comlortable doing it mentally. In
order to be able to do it physically on the ice, he had to first have a
mental image of his doing the jump successfully. Not long alter he
became comfortable doing the jump in his mind, he was able to do it
on the ice.
Another athlete I worked with was a bobsled driver who had
crashed at Zigzag in Lake Placid, which is a ninety-degree turn. Subsequently, every time he made that turn, he overcompensatecl. 1 had
him visualize the perfect run. The actual bobsled r u n lakes about a
minute, and you can run through the entire course in your m i n d in
about ten seconds. He practiced coming clown the period route i n
his mind hundreds of times. This mental imaging allowed him to
overcome his anxiety, and he was ultimately able to make the t u r n
without overcompensating.
I don't want to make this sound simple or magical. 1 don't mean to
suggest that all that is involved is learning some set ol visualization
techniques. What I do is better described as a dialogue process to
find out what is impeding a person's performance.
Do people know the answer to that question?
They frequently do. I worked with one trader who whenever he
decided it was time to liquidate his position would hold on to a small
part of it, just in case the market continued to move in his direction.
On balance, these remnant positions were costing him money. He
had to learn to get rid of his entire position when he decided it was
time to liquidate, which at first was anxiety producing.
I'm not trying to badger people. I'm just trying to get them to do

what is in their best self-interest. Human beings want to feel comfortable. My job is to be a bit of a gadfly so that I can get them to
make the necessary changes.
Any other examples of personal flaws that prevented a trader
from reaching his full potential?
One trader who runs a large hedge fund is never willing to buy a stock
at the market; he is always trying to bid it lower. As a result, he misses
a lot of trades.
How did this flaw come to light?
I asked him, "How did things go today?"
"Not so good. I just missed getting into a big trade in XYZ. I tried
to buy it, but I couldn't get into the position because the price was too
high. I put in a bid, but the market was already up one dollar, and I
didn't want to pay up for it."
I'm trying to get him into a different mental perspective. He has
been successful for a number of years. He wins on the vast majority
of his trades. Why is he being such a penny-pincher?
Why do you think he is?
I think that's his personality. It's the way he was brought up. He nickelsand-dimes everything.
And it's getting in his way?
It's getting in his way of greater success. All I'm trying to do is hear
where a trader is at and then help him see what is holding him back.
What is another example of a behavioral pattern that was holding a trader back?
One trader selected his stocks fundamentally and then scaled into
the position as the stock declined. Even though he had chosen to
enter his positions by averaging down, when a stock got back to even,
he was so relieved that he would often get out.
Didn't he realize that his entry approach would always lead to an
initial loss?
He knew it intellectually, but psychologically he was still experiencing
it as a loss. Therefore, when a stock got back to even, he was just glad
to get out. The first step was to get him to perceive what he was
doing. Now he can stay in much longer. Consciousness is one of the

A R I KIEV, M.D.

most critical tools I use. In this case, the trader needed to be confronted because he was fooling himself.
Did he change what he was doing?
Yes, he now catches himself when he is tempted to get out of a stock
when it goes back to even. Not only does he catch it, but I can identify this same tendency in other traders.
Has his trading improved as a result?
Dramatically. Last year he made $28 million. At the start of this year,
I asked him, "What is your goal for this year?"

"Fifty [million]," he answered.
"Fifty?" I asked.
"Well . . ."
I hear that "well" and I say, "Let's amplify that well. How much is

in the well?"
"I probably could make more."
"How much more?" I asked
"I don't want to say," he replied.
"Come on, say it."
"I don't want to say it, or else you'll make me do it."
"I'm not going to make you do it. But how much do you think you

could make?"
"I think I can make a hundred," he whispered.
"Well, then say it."
"Okay, I'm going to make a hundred."
I tell him, "We're going to get the guys who work with you in here.
We call them in and he says, "I was just talking to Ari and we're
going to make one hundred million this year."
Three weeks ago he came in and told me that he had reached a
hundred million for the year. The key was getting him to recognize his
own hesitation when he said that fifty million was his target. If the
conversation had ended there, he would not have made a hundred
million. There had to be an exchange for me to sense where he was
really at. One hundred million wasn't my number; it was my number
for him. If there's anything unique in what I do, it's hearing that bit of
uncertainty that reflects where a trader is holding back.

IHE M I N D O F A W I N N E R

You've written an entire book about the psychology of trading.
What if I asked you for your advice on how to win at trading, but
required you to say it in twenty-five words or less.
Define a target, a strategy consistent with the target, a set of disci-

plines to follow, and risk management guidelines. Then trade, track,
and evaluate your performance.

Doctor Kiev's advice regarding goal achievement in general and
trading success in particular can be summarized as follows:
> Believing makes it possible.
> To achieve a goal, you not only have to believe it is possible, but
you also have to commit to achieving it.
>• A commitment that promises the goal to others is more powerful than a commitment made to oneself.
> Extraordinary performers—Olympic gold medal winners, supertraders—continually redefine their goals so they are a stretch.
Maintaining exceptional performance requires leaving the
comfort zone.
*• After setting a goal, the trader or athlete needs to define a strategy that is consistent with the target.
> Traders, athletes, and other goal-oriented individuals need to
monitor their performance to make sure they are on track with
their target and to diagnose what is holding them back if they
are not.

WIZARD LESSONS

and a day trader. Choose an approach that is comfortable for you. Minervini offers similar advice: "Concentrate on mastering one style that
suits your personality, which is a lifetime process."
Successful traders invariably gravitate to an approach that fits their personality. For example, Cook is happy to take a small profit on a trade but
hates to take even a small loss. Given this predisposition, the methodologies he has developed, which accept a low return/risk ratio on each trade in
exchange for a high probability of winning, are right for him. These same
methods, however, could be a mismatch for others. Trading is not a onesize-fits-all proposition; each trader must tailor an individual approach.

WIZARD LESSONS

1. There Is No Single True Path

4. Failure and Perseverance

There is no single true path for succeeding in the markets. The methods
employed by great traders are extraordinarily diverse. Some are pure fundamentalists; others use only technical analysis; and still others combine
the two methodologies. Some traders consider two days to be long term,
while others consider two months to be short-term. Some are highly
quantitative, while others rely primarily on qualitative market decisions.

Although some of the traders in this book were successful from the start,
the early market experiences of others were marked by complete failure.
Mark Cook not only lost his entire trading stake several times, but on one
of these occasions he also ended up several hundred thousand dollars in
debt and a hair away from personal bankruptcy. Stuart Walton wiped out
once with money borrowed from his father and several years later came
close to losing not only all his trading capital, but also the money he borrowed on a home equity loan. Mark Minervini lost not only all his own
money in the markets, but some borrowed money as well.
Despite their horrendous beginnings, these traders ultimately went
on to spectacular success. How were they able to achieve such a complete metamorphosis? Of course, part of the answer is that they had the
inner strength not to be defeated by defeat. But tenacity without flexibility is no virtue. Had they continued to do what they had been doing
before, they would have experienced the same results. The key is that
they completely changed what they were doing.

2. The Universal Trait
Although the traders interviewed differed dramatically in terms of their
methods, backgrounds, and personalities, there were numerous traits
common to many of them. One trait that was shared by all the traders is
discipline.
Successful trading is essentially a two-stage process:
1. Develop an effective trading strategy and an accompanying trading
plan that addresses all contingencies.
2. Follow the plan without exception. (By definition, any valid reason for an
exception—for example, correcting an oversight—would become part of
the plan.) No matter how sound the trading strategy, its success will
depend on this execution phase, which requires absolute discipline.

3. You Have to Trade Your Personality
Cohen emphasizes that it is critical to adopt a trading style that matches
your personality. There is no single right way to trade the markets; you
have to know who you are. For example, don't try to be both an investor
298

5. Great Traders Are Marked by Their Flexibility
Even great traders sometimes have completely wrongheaded ideas when
they start. They ultimately succeed, however, because they have the flexibility to change their approach. Benjamin Franklin said, "One of the
greatest tragedies of life is the murder of a beautiful theory by a gang of
brutal facts." Great traders are able to face such "tragedies" and choose
reality over their preconceptions.

WIZARD LESSONS

Walton, for example, started out by selling powerhouse stocks and
buying bargain stocks. When his empirical observations of what actually
worked in the market contradicted this original inclination, he was flexible enough to completely reverse his approach. As another example,
when Minervini was a novice trader he favored buying low-priced stocks
that were making new lows, an approach that was almost precisely the
opposite of the methodology he ended up using.
Markets are dynamic. Approaches that work in one period may cease
to work in another. Success in the markets requires the ability to adapt to
changing conditions and altered realities. Some examples:
*• Walton adjusts his strategy to fit his perception of the prevailing market environment. As a result, he might be a buyer of momentum
stocks in one year and a buyer of value stocks in another. "My philosophy" he says, "is to float like a jellyfish, and let the market push me
where it wants to go."
>• Even though Lescarbeau has developed systems whose performance
almost defy belief, he continues his research to develop their replacements so that he is prepared when market conditions change.
>• Fletcher's primary current strategy evolved in several stages from a
much simpler earlier strategy. As competitors increase in the current approaches he is utilizing, Fletcher is busy developing new
