
Table 2-1

Popular Things for Day Traders to Trade

Item

Main
Exchange

Risk/Reward

Characteristics

Stock index
futures

CME

Zero sum/
leverage

Benefits from
movements of
broad markets

Treasury bond
futures

CBT

Zero sum/
leverage

Best way for day
traders to play the
bond market

Foreign exchange

OTC

Zero sum/
leverage

Markets open all
day, every day

Corn

CBT

Zero sum/
leverage

An agricultural
market liquid
enough for day
traders

Large-cap stocks

NYSE,
NASDAQ

Upward bias

Good stocks for
day trading; large
and volatile

Exchange-traded
funds

NYSE,
NASDAQ

Depends on the
fund’s structure

Offer plays on
indices and
­different market
strategies

Key: CME = Chicago Mercantile Exchange, CBT = Chicago Board of Trade (a subsidiary of the
CME Group), OTC = Over the counter, NYSE = New York Stock Exchange

25

26

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
What do zero sum, leverage, and upward bias mean? Well, zero sum means
that for every winner, there is a loser. The market has no net gain. Leverage is
the use of borrowed money, which increases potential return as well as risk.
Upward bias means that, in the long run, the market is expected to increase in
price, but that doesn’t mean it will go up on any given day that you’re trading.
The characteristics of the different markets and assets affect both your
business plan and your trading plan. The business plan should include
information on what you’ll trade and why, as well as what you hope to learn
to trade in the future. The trading plan looks at what you want to trade each
day and why so that you can channel your efforts.
Many day traders work in several different markets, depending on their
temperament and trading conditions, but successful traders have narrowed
the field down to the few markets where they want to concentrate their
efforts. Start slowly, working just one or two different securities, and consider
adding new markets as your experience and trading capital grows.

Fixing hours, vacation, and sick leave
The markets are open more or less continuously. Although many exchanges
have set trading hours, you can find traders working after hours who are
willing to sell if you want to buy. Some markets, such as foreign exchange,
take only the briefest of breaks over the course of a week, which gives
day traders incredible flexibility. No matter what hours and what days are
best for you to trade, you can find something that works for you. If you’re
sharpest in the evenings, for example, you may be better off trading Asian
currencies, because those markets are active when you are. Of course, an
always-open market can be a disadvantage, because no one is setting limits
for you. Few markets are great places to trade every hour of every day.
If you want to, you can trade almost all the time. But you probably don’t
want to. To keep your sanity, maintain your perspective, and have a life
outside of your trading, you should set regular hours and stick to them. In
your business plan, determine when you’re going to trade, how often you’re
going to take a vacation, how many sick days you’ll give yourself, and how
you’ll know to take a day off. One of the joys of self-employment is that you
can take time off when you need to, so give yourself that little perk in your
business plan.
Trading is a stressful business. You need to take time off to clear your head,
and you’ll probably find that working while sick is a sure-fire route to losses.
Build in some sick and vacation time — and read Chapter 14 for more
information on how to manage the stress of the markets.

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader

Getting yourself set up
Part of your business plan should cover where you work and what equipment
you need. (Chapter 12 has some ideas on that subject.) What can you afford
now, and what is on your wish list? Do you have enough computing equipment,
the right Internet connection, and a working filing system? Determining what
you have and how you’ll get what you need is part of your plan for getting your
business underway, so put some thought into your infrastructure.
And yes, setting up business space and investing in equipment are important.
You don’t want to lose a day of trading because your computer crashes, nor
do you want to be stuck with an open position because your Internet service
provider has a temporary outage. And you certainly don’t want to lose your
concentration because you’re trying to work in the family room while other
members of your household are playing video games.

Investing in your business
You won’t have the time and money to do everything you want to do in your
trading business, so part of your business plan should include a list of things
that you want to add over time. A key part of investing in your business is
continuous improvement: No matter how good a trader you are now, you
can always be better. Furthermore, the markets are always changing. New
products come to market, new trading regulations are passed, and new
technologies appear. You need to continuously absorb new things, and
part of your business plan should consider that. Ask yourself
✓ What percentage of your time and trade gains will go into expanding
your knowledge of trading?
✓ Do you want to gain this additional knowledge by taking seminars or
by allocating the time to simulation test (head to Chapter 16 for more
on that)?
✓ What upgrades will you make to your trading equipment? How about to
your programming capabilities?
✓ How are you going to set yourself up to stay in trading for the long haul?
It takes money to make money — another cliché. This maxim doesn’t mean,
however, that you should spend money willy-nilly on any nifty gadget or fancy
video seminar that comes your way. Instead, it means that an ongoing,
thoughtful investment in your trading business will pay off in a greater
likelihood of long-run success.

27

28

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Evaluating and revising your plan
One component of your business plan should be a plan for revising it. Things
are going to change. Since the first edition of this book came out, exchanges
have merged, the market has crashed, and high-frequency trading has
become the norm. You may be more or less successful than you hope, market
conditions may change on you, and you may simply find out more about how
you trade best. So set a plan for updating your business plan to reflect where
you are and where you want to be as you go along. At least once a year, and
more often if you feel the need for a change, go through your business plan
and revise it to reflect where you are now. What are your new goals? What
are your new investment plans? What are you doing right, and what needs
to change?
Business plans are living documents. Use your plan to run your trading
business; as your business runs, use the results to update your plan. You can
keep the old ones around to show you how much progress you have made, if
you’re so inclined.

A sample business plan
Not sure what should be in a business plan?
Here’s a sample to get you thinking about how
to plan your trading business.
Where I Am Now
I am about to start a career as a day trader. I
have $50,000 in capital that I can risk without
affecting my livelihood. I will rely on my spouse’s
job to cover our family spending needs and our
health insurance. This trading account will be
used to meet our long-term goals: paying off
the mortgage, sending the children to college,
paying for our retirement, and ultimately buying
a vacation house in the mountains.
This business plan covers what I need to get
started.
My Business Goals
In three months, I will have spent $5,000 of my
capital on a functional office and will have
a tested trading strategy that works well in
simulation.

In six months, I will be trading daily. I will have
lost no more than $5,000 of my trading capital.
In nine months, I will be trading daily, and I will
have more winning trades than losing trades.
In a year, I will have gained 10 percent on my
account. I will withdraw $1,000 to pay toward
our mortgage and another $1,000 toward an
ergonomic chair and other office equipment
upgrades. I will have learned to program,
­mastered my first trading system, and will be
testing a second one in order to expand my
trading opportunities.
In three years, my trading account will have
$150,000 in it from my trading successes, after
making investments in my business and paying
an additional $10,000 in principal on the mortgage. I will be trading three different systems
with satisfactory success.
In five years, I will have $300,000 in my trading
account. I will have made enough money to

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader

have paid off our mortgage, after making regular payments on principal and interest every
month, paying $10,000 in year three, and paying
off the rest with the profits that I expect to earn
between years three and five. I will be known
as a successful trader.
In ten years, I will have a second house, and
I will continue my record of trading success. I
will take $100,000 out of my trading account to
cover college tuition.
Markets Traded
My primary trading strategy will involve
momentum trades on the E-Mini S&P 500 and
E-Mini NASDAQ futures contracts traded on
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. I will put no
more than 10 percent of my capital into any one
trade, and I will close out positions each night.
I am interested in news-driven swing trading
(holding for short periods of time but longer
than a day) in large technology companies, so
I will research and test strategies with those. I
am also interested in trading Asian currencies,
so I will make time to learn more about those
markets and determine whether I can trade
them effectively during my preferred trading
hours.
Trading Hours and Days
Because my primary strategy is equity driven,
I will trade only while the equity markets are
open, from 9:30 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday. I will spend an hour before the
markets open researching current trends and
news events so that I know what people will be
looking for that day. I will spend an hour after
the market closes doing paperwork and reviewing the day’s trades.
I will take off three full weeks for vacation: the
week of my children’s spring break, a week in
August for a family vacation, and the last week
of December. I will also take off any day that I
am ill so that I can maintain my health and my
concentration.

My Business Setup
I work from a home office. I use my startup
funds to purchase two monitors working off of
one computer, with a second clone computer
on hand in case something goes wrong. I have
cable Internet access with a mobile application
on my phone as a backup. I have a wireless
router so that I can check my e-mail and instant
messages through a third computer, a laptop,
instead of through my trading computer.
I have an account with a full-service online
brokerage firm that can offer me the necessary
research services. I also subscribe to Investor’s
Business Daily and The Wall Street Journal,
which I read each morning to help me gauge
sentiment.
I track my trades on a paper form that I collect
in ring binders. I collect my other paperwork in
ring binders that I keep on the shelf in my office.
Investing in My Business
To stay successful in the long run, I need to
keep my skills sharp. To do this, I will read one
book on trading psychology or a successful
trader’s memoir each month. I will also work
on simulation trading for swing trading in technology stocks because I plan to add that to my
trading system.
As my trade profits grow, I will invest some of
them in trying new trading techniques, knowing
that I may have short-term losses until I understand a market better. I will spend one day at
the end of each quarter on backtesting and
simulation of new strategies.
My wish list includes a more comfortable chair
for my office.
Evaluating My Business Plan
Before each vacation, I will read over this business plan. I will use the time away from the
markets to think about what changes I need
to make in it and will revise the plan upon my
return.

29

30

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Planning Your Trades
A good trader has a plan. She knows what she wants to trade and how to
trade it. She knows what her limits are before she places the order. She’s not
afraid to take a loss now in order to prevent a bigger loss in the future, and
she’s willing to sit out the market if nothing is happening that day. Her plan
gives her the discipline to protect her capital so that she has money in her
account when the opportunities present themselves.
In this section, I cover the components of trade planning. When you start
trading, you’ll probably write notes each day to set up a trading plan that
covers what you expect for the day, what trades you hope to make, and
what your profit goals and loss limit are. As you develop experience, trade
planning may become innate. You develop the discipline to trade according
to plan without needing to write it all down — although you may find it useful
to tape a list of the day’s expected announcements to your monitor.
Like a business plan, a trading plan is flexible. The markets don’t know what
you’ve planned, and you’ll probably end up deviating on more than one
occasion. The key thing is knowing why you deviated: Was it because of the
information that you saw when you were looking at your screen, or was it
because you became panicky?

What do you want to trade?
The first step in your trading plan should also be addressed in your
business plan: What do you want to trade? Many traders work in more
than one market, and each market is a little different. Some trade different
products simultaneously, whereas others choose one for the day and work
only on that.
You need to figure out which markets give you the best chance of getting a
profit that day, and this changes regularly. Some days, no trades will be good
for you in one market, and you’ll be better off sitting out. If you’re too antsy
to sit out, then find another market to keep you busy so that you don’t trade
just to stay awake. (Of course, many traders report that the big money
opportunities are in the slower, less glamorous markets.)
As a day trader, you’re self-employed. You don’t answer to a boss, and you
don’t have to trade on any particular day if you don’t want to. So if you
have a headache, if no good trades are available to you, or if recent losses
have gotten you down, take the day off and do something fun.

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader

How do you want to trade?
Figuring out how to trade an asset involves a lot of considerations: What is
your mood today? What will other traders be reacting to today? How much
risk do you want to take? How much money do you want to commit? These
considerations represent the nitty-gritty stage of trade planning that can help
you manage your market day better.

Starting the day with a morning review
Before you start trading, take some time to determine where your head is
relative to the market. Is today a day that you can concentrate? Are things
happening in your life that may distract you, are you coming down with the
flu, or were you out too late last night? Or are you raring to go, ready to take
on whatever the day brings? Your mindset should influence how aggressively
you want to trade and how much risk you want to take. You have to pay
attention to do well in the markets, but you also have to know when to hang
back during the day’s activities. For example, many traders find that their
strategies work best at certain times of the day, such as at the open or before
major news announcements.
After you determine your own mindset, think about what people will be
reacting to that day. Go through the newspapers and check the online newswires to gather information. Then figure out the answers to these questions:
✓ Are big news announcements scheduled for today? At what time? Do you
want to trade ahead of the news, or do you want to wait and see what
the market does?
✓ Did something happen overnight? Will that event affect trading on the
open, or is it already in the markets? Do you want to trade on the open
or wait?
✓ What are the other people — those who trade the same future,
commodity, stock, or currency that you do — worried about today?
How are they likely to respond? Do you want to go with the market or
strike a contrary position?

Drawing up a sample order
After you have a sense of how you’re going to tackle the day, determine how
much you’re going to trade. Following are the key considerations:
✓ Do you want to be long or short? That is, do you want to bet that the
asset you are trading is going up in price or down?
✓ Do you want to borrow money? If so, how much? Borrowing — also
known as margin or leverage — increases your potential return as well
as your risk. (I discuss margin, leverage, and short selling in Chapter 9.)

31

32

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
		Some contracts, such as futures, have built-in leverage. As soon as you
decide to trade them, you’re borrowing money.
✓ How much money do you want to trade? Think about this both in
dollars and as a percentage of your total account size. (I discuss
money management in detail in Chapter 6.)
With these items detailed, you’re in good shape to get started for the day.

Figuring out when to buy and when to sell
After you get insight into what the day may be like and how much money you
want to allocate to the markets, your next step is to figure out when you’ll
buy and when you’ll sell. Ah, but if deciding when to buy and sell were easy,
do you think I’d be revising a book on day trading? No. I’d be too busy taking
private surfing lessons in front of my beachfront mansion on Maui.
The very best traders aren’t selling trading advice, because they’re already
retired. Everyone else is figuring it out as they go along, with varying degrees
of success.
Many traders rely on technical analysis, which involves looking at patterns
in charts of the price and volume changes (I discuss technical analysis in
Chapter 7). Other traders look at news and price information as the market
changes rather than looking at price patterns (you can find a discussion of
this in Chapter 8). Still others care only about very short-term price discrepancies (covered in Chapter 10). But the most important thing, no matter what
approach you prefer, is that you backtest and simulate your trading before
you commit real dollars. That way, you have a better sense of how you’ll
react in real market conditions. You can find backtesting in Chapter 16.

Setting profit goals
When you trade, you want to have a realistic idea how much money you can
make. What’s a fair profit? Do you want to ride a winning position until the end
of the day, or do you want to get out quickly after you make enough money to
compensate for your risk? This question has no one single answer because so
much depends on market conditions and your trading style. In this section are
some guidelines that can help you determine what’s best for you.
Your profit goals can be sliced and diced a few different ways. The first is the
gain per trade on both a percentage basis and an absolute basis. The second

Chapter 2: Planning to Succeed As a Day Trader
is the gain per day on both a percentage basis and an absolute basis. What
do you have to do to reach these goals? How many successful trades will
you have to make? Do you have the capital to do that? And what is right for
the trade you are making right now, regardless of what your longer-term
goals are?
No one ever lost money taking a profit, as the cliché goes. (The trading
business is rife with clichés, if you haven’t noticed.) The newer you are to
day trading, the more sense it makes to be conservative. Close your positions
and end your day when you reach a target profit and then make note of what
happens afterward. Can you afford to hold on to your positions longer to
make a greater profit?

The language of money
Profits are discussed differently in different
markets, and you may as well have the right
lingo when you write your plan:
✓ Pennies: Stocks trade in decimal form, so
each price movement is worth at least a
penny — one cent. It’s an obvious way to
measure a profit.
✓ Pips: A pip is the smallest unit of currency
that can be traded. In foreign exchange
markets (forex), a pip is generally equal to
one one-hundredth of a cent. If the value of
the euro moves from $1.2934 to $1.2935, it
has moved a pip.
		
Note: Do not confuse a pip in the forex
market with an investment scheme
known as PIP, sometimes called People
in Profit or Pure Investor. (The fraud also
operates as HYIP, for High Yield Investment
Program.) PIP has been promoted as a trading system with a guaranteed daily return,
but it’s really a pyramid scheme that takes
money from participants and returns little or
nothing. You can get more information from
the SEC’s website, http://sec.gov/
divisions/enforce/primebank.
shtml.

✓ Points: A point is a single percentage. A
penny is a point, as is a 1 percent change
in a bond price. A related number, a basis
point, is a percent of a percent, or 0.0001.
✓ Teenies: Many securities, especially
bonds and derivatives on them, trade in
increments of ⅛ of a dollar. Half of an eighth
is a sixteenth, also known as a teeny.
✓ Ticks: A tick is the smallest trading increment in a futures contract. It varies from
product to product. How much it works out
to be depends on the contract structure.
For the CME Group’s E-Mini S&P 500 contract, a tick is equal to $12.50, calculated
as a 0.25 change in the underlying S&P
500 index multiplied by $50 multiplier. A tick
on an E-Mini soybean contract is $1.25,
calculated as ⅛ cent on a bushel of soybeans in a contract covering 1,000 bushels.
You can get information on the tick size of
contracts that interest you on the website
of the offering exchange (exchanges are
listed in Chapter 3).

33

34

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Setting limits on your trades
Setting a loss limit along with a profit goal is a good idea. For example, many
futures traders have a rule to risk two ticks in pursuit of three ticks. That
means that they’ll sell a position as soon as it loses two ticks in value and as
soon as it gains three ticks in value. And for anything in between? Well, they
close out their positions at the end of the day, so whatever happens happens.
Even traders who do not have a rule like that often set a limit on how much
they’ll lose per trade. Other traders use computer programs to guide their
buys and their sells, so they sell their positions automatically. Brokers make
setting limits easy by giving customers the choice of a stop order or a limit
order to protect their positions.
You want to limit your loss per trade as well as your loss per day. If today is
not a good one, close up shop, take a break, and come back fresh tomorrow.
