
Burniske 03.indd 212

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

213

functioning of our computers. Mining with this method hogged the resources
of the computer. And although a CPU is a good multitasker, it’s not the most
efficient chip for doing the same task over and over, which is exactly what
searching for the golden hash involved.
Theoretically, a better chip for mining is the graphical processing unit
(GPU). As its name implies, GPUs are used to generate the graphics that
appear on screens, but they are now also widely used for machine learning
applications. GPUs are massively parallel processing units, meaning they can
run similar calculations in parallel because they have hundreds or thousands
of mini-processing units, as opposed to CPUs that have just a handful of processing units.4
While the little units within a GPU cannot perform the wide range of
abstract operations that a CPU can, they are good enough for hashing together
data. Since there are thousands or more of these cores, in aggregate a GPU
chip can make many more attempts at the golden hash per second than a CPU
chip can.
However, to use GPUs a new version of the Bitcoin software needed to
be created that could instruct a GPU how to go about the process, and writing that code took time. It was finally released in the summer of 2010, after
Jeff Garzik offered a reward of 10,000 bitcoin to the originators—a mining
operation known as puddinpop—to open source the software for all to use.5
While he may not have expected the price to rise so much in the coming years,
Garzik’s donation now totals more than $10 million.
While GPUs were a vast improvement over CPUs, two more iterations of
technology occurred to produce a more efficient chip for faster guessing of
golden hashes. First came field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA), an interim
chip, before the granddaddy of them all appeared: application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). As the name implies, ASICs are application-specific,
meaning that the physical hardware must be designed and manufactured with
the application in mind. CPUs, GPUs, and FPGAs can all be bought generically and, with proper engineering, be applied to a specific purpose after the
purchase. The physical layout of ASICs, on the other hand, needs to be etched
into the chip at the semiconductor fabrication factory.
Designing and manufacturing such a specific chip requires a significant initial investment, and it was only when Bitcoin’s network became big enough
and bitcoin worth enough that a company could fully pursue this opportunity. The first computer—or mining rig—with ASIC chips that were specifically manufactured for the process was connected in January 2013.6 Currently,

Burniske 03.indd 213

9/9/17 2:41 PM

214 CRYPTOASSETS

top-of-the-line ASICs have a hash rate of 14 TH/s, meaning these machines
crunch data and output a hash 14 trillion times a second.7
Collectively, the more computers attached to the Bitcoin network, the
higher the odds of one of them discovering a golden hash. Without any adjustment, more computers would increase the supply rate of new bitcoin, leading to runaway supply inflation. For that reason, Satoshi built into Bitcoin’s
software the rule that as more compute power is added to the network, the
network makes it harder to find the golden hash by increasing the number of
zeros the hash is required to start with. This adjustment is made every 2,018
blocks, or every two weeks, with the target of miners finding a golden hash
every 10 minutes, and thereby controlling the rate at which new bitcoin is
minted. As a result, more and more people are competing for a smaller and
smaller prize, which while still profitable for professional miners is largely out
of reach of Bitcoin hobbyists. For perspective, the combined compute power of
Bitcoin’s network is over 100,000 times faster than the top 500 supercomputers
in the world combined.8

Mining Beyond Bitcoin
While the strength of Bitcoin’s mining network is legendary, most other
crypto­assets are less daunting. If so inclined, mining within networks such as
Ethereum, Zcash, and others is still open to enthusiastic and dedicated hobbyists, and none of these networks is dominated by ASICs (yet).9 In fact, recall
that one of the frequent adjustments subsequent assets made was to the block
hashing algorithm to fight against centralization of miners. For that reason,
ether, zcash, and many other cryptoassets are mostly mined wtih GPUs. As
these assets grow in value, though, their mining networks become more
competitive because the potential profit of getting paid in the native asset
becomes more desirable. Conceptually, mining networks are a perfect competition, and thus as margins increase, new participants will flood in until
economic equilibrium is once again achieved. Thus, the greater the value of
the asset, the more money miners make, which draws new miners into the
ecosystem, thereby increasing the security of the network. It’s a virtuous cycle
that ensures the bigger the network value of a cryptoasset, the more security
there is to support it.
Whether it be Bitcoin, Ethereum, or Zcash, many miners join mining pools,
which means they connect with other miners and collectively the pool con-

Burniske 03.indd 214

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

215

tributes their hash power to finding golden hashes. The pool then shares in
the profits, with different models for how the profits are split.10 A single miner
might find only a block once a month, or worse. By being part of a pool, miners get a more predictable revenue stream.
There are a few major costs to mining: equipment, physical space necessary
for the machines, electricity, and labor. For Bitcoin, dedicated mining devices
are available, such as those from Antminer and Avalon, and the key metric
to look for is the efficiency of the machine. In other words, how many hashes
are generated for a certain amount of power, expressed in the ratio watts per
gigahash (W/GH). To help better understand these cost calculations, refer to
mining profitability calculation websites, such as CoinWarz.11

Cloud-Based Mining Pools
Innovative investors may consider a cloud-based mining pool service. Here, an
investor buys into an existing mining pool and shares in the rewards from its
mining efforts. There’s no need for owning and maintaining dedicated hardware, just as cloud-based software such as Salesforce doesn’t require maintaining all the back-end hardware. Investors simply buy a share of the processing
power provided by mining efforts performed in a remote data center.
Thorough due diligence and research are needed before buying into a
cloud-based mining pool service because a fair share of fraud and scams have
occurred. A study of Bitcoin-based scams by Professors Marie Vasek and
Tyler Moore from SMU included findings that several cloud-based mining
operations were Ponzi schemes that “take payments from ‘investors’ but never
deliver product.” Their research even identified specific mining scams. “Active
Mining and Ice Drill are operations that raised money to purportedly make
ASICs and share the profits but never delivered. AsicMiningEquipment.com
and Dragon-Miner.com are fraudulent mining e-commerce websites.”12
Before investing in a cloud-based mining pool, conduct research on the
potential investment. If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is. Verify
that the operation has a physical location, a listing of existing equipment, and a
track record of past projects. Genesis Mining is one of the largest cloud-based
bitcoin mining pool services.13 It’s been in business since 2013 and offers mining in bitcoin, litecoin, zcash, and ether.14 On its website it shows photos and
videos of its data centers; many are in Iceland where electricity costs are low
due to its geothermal power.

Burniske 03.indd 215

9/9/17 2:41 PM

216 CRYPTOASSETS

Proof-of-Stake
Outside of proof-of-work, other consensus mechanisms exist, such as proof-ofstake (PoS). Proof-of-stake can be thought of as an alternative form of mining,
one that doesn’t require lots of hardware and electricity, but instead requires
people to put their reputation and assets at risk to help validate transactions.
Logistically, proof-of-stake requires transaction validators to “stake” a balance
of the cryptoasset and then attest to the validity of transactions in blocks. If
validators are lying or otherwise deceiving the network, they will lose their
staked assets. As the name implies, in “proving they have something at stake,”
the validators are incentivized to be honest.
Often these systems provide an interest rate, like 5 percent, that rewards the
validators who have staked their assets to help in the transaction validation
process. There are also hybrid proof-of-work, proof-of-stake mining ecosystems and other variations, but proof-of-work is the most well-proven consensus mechanism, and the majority of cryptoassets use it. However, Ethereum
will potentially switch to proof-of-stake early in 2018, as it is more efficient
from an energy perspective, and therefore many claim is more scalable. When
Ethereum switches from proof-of-work to proof-of-stake, it will be a major
proving point for the viability of this consensus mechanism to secure largescale cryptoasset networks.

CRYPTOASSET EXCHANGES AND OTC DESKS
Once bitcoin and other cryptoassets are minted, miners can exchange them
for other cryptoassets or the fiat currency of their choice. To do so, the miner
must sell the cryptoasset to someone else, either over-the-counter (OTC) or
through an exchange.
Many miners, and large investors, choose OTC services like those provided by Cumberland Mining, Genesis Trading, or itBit. OTC is not quite an
exchange because the buy and sell orders are not out in the open. Instead,
an entity like the aforementioned services matches large buys with large sells,
which allows big trades to be made without moving the order books within
an exchange. OTC is a potential path for accredited innovative investors that
want to deploy large amounts of capital.
Most investors, however, acquire cryptoassets through an exchange.
Depending on the exchange, they can connect their bank account, credit card,
or deposit bitcoin. Trading in the more novel cryptoassets most often requires

Burniske 03.indd 216

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

217

that the investor already has bitcoin, as the exchanges that offer these crypto­
assets often don’t have fiat currency onramps.
During the tumultuous beginning of bitcoin, when it was the only crypto­
asset in existence, numerous exchanges opened and subsequently closed, and
the reasons often weren’t pretty: financial difficulties, hacks, criminal activities,
and actions of various regulatory authorities, to name a few.15 It’s important to
recognize that in the early days of bitcoin, there was no exchange infrastructure, and since bitcoin was still in its infancy, people attempting to provide
exchange services were often not equipped to do so.
The first exchange on record was seeded with a transfer of 5,050 bitcoin for
$5.02, and actually ended up shutting down a few months later due to a lack of
interest.16 Mt. Gox was the first mainstream exchange, but it took two weeks for
a customer’s account to be cleared, and initially fiat currency had to be wired
to Japan. However, as the assets and underlying technology have matured, so
too have the means of buying and selling them. To this end, today numerous
quality exchanges are available to investors looking to gain and transact the
more than 800 cryptoassets that currently exist.17
Some of the most popular Western exchanges include Bitstamp, Bittrex,
Global Digital Asset Exchange (GDAX), Gemini, itBit, Kraken, and Poloniex.
BTCC, OKCoin, and Huobi dominate China, but also offer services in other
geographic locations. There are country-specific exchanges, such as Bitso in
Mexico, Unocoin in India, and BitBay in Poland.18
When deciding which exchange to use, a key trade-off needs to be considered: security versus access. Security is self-explanatory. By access we refer
to the diversity of cryptoassets on offer. The most regulated exchanges, such
as Bitstamp, GDAX, and Gemini, offer the fewest cryptoassets because they
wait to ensure an asset is past a certain level of maturity before adding it to
their platform. Other exchanges, such as Poloniex or Bittrex, add assets much
earlier in their lives, so more aggressive or adventurous traders tend to use
these platforms. Not only do these exchanges not have the same consumer
protections in place, but the assets they offer are much more prone to wild
price swings. Exchanges such as Bitfinex and Kraken provide a mix of security,
regulatory adherence, and access. We are not discouraging use of any of these
exchanges. It all depends on the balance of security and access the innovative
investor is looking for.
To better understand some of the paranoia around exchange security and
reliability, it’s important to know that over time exchanges have been a weak
point because they are centralized repositories of cryptoassets, which makes

Burniske 03.indd 217

9/9/17 2:41 PM

218 CRYPTOASSETS

them targets for hacking. Unlike a bank heist which requires physical force
and puts the thieves’ lives at risk, thefts of cryptoassets from an exchange can
be accomplished with (relatively) clean hands from anywhere in the world.
Beyond the ability to steal assets from afar, the irreversible nature of crypto­
asset transactions makes them even more enticing to hackers. If someone
steals a credit card or hacks into a bank account, the associated institution can
reverse the transactions. With cryptoassets, there is no centralized intermediary to come to the rescue.
THE HIDDEN COST OF CHARGEBACKS
Chargebacks occur when a customer disputes a credit card charge and that
charge is reversed. Often, when the charge is reversed, it is the merchant that
takes the loss. Processing and investigating these chargebacks incur a cost
for the credit card company, which are then often levied as fees against the
merchant. Due to these extra costs, merchants may need to adjust prices to
protect themselves from both legitimate and illegitimate disputed charges.
Cryptoasset transactions are irreversible; therefore chargebacks are impossible. While an irreversible transaction may sound scary, it actually benefits
the efficiency of the overall system. With credit card chargebacks, everyone
has to bear the cost, whereas with cryptoassets only those who are careless
bear the cost.

Many claim that hacked exchanges are proof that cryptoassets are insecure,
but this displays a fundamental misunderstanding of the software architecture.
Recall the four layers of any blockchain ecosystem that we discussed in Chapter
2: decentralized hardware, cryptoasset software, applications, and users. It is
the third layer, applications, that are targeted in the majority of hacks. Thus, an
exchange, which is an application that runs on top of the cryptoasset software,
gets hacked. The underlying blockchain performs its job perfectly and remains
uncompromised. The same analogy can be applied to applications that run on
Apple’s operating systems. Just because one of the apps is hacked doesn’t mean
Apple’s underlying operating system or hardware is insecure.
Understanding that it’s the applications and exchanges that use and trade
cryptoassets that are most susceptible to hacks, it’s all the more important for
the innovative investor to be diligent when deciding which exchange to use.
The following should be taken into consideration.

Burniske 03.indd 218

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

219

What Is the Reputation of the Exchange?
The best way to ascertain reputation is to investigate the management, venture
capital investors, and regulatory approvals. Search reputable online sites to see
what others are saying about the exchanges. Are there frequent customer complaints? In particular, look for whether an exchange has experienced a hack
or had business problems in the past. This can be as easy as just typing the
name of the exchange and the word “hack” into Google. For instance, “Bitfinex
hack.” While having been hacked can be a concern, consider what changes the
exchanges have made since any security breach. One other good thing to note
is where the exchange is physically headquartered. If that information isn’t
available, it’s probably best to avoid the exchange.

What Cryptoassets Are Available for Trading?
For investors seeking specific assets, make sure the exchange offers trading in
the desired cryptoasset. It’s critical to understand that exchanges with a large
number of cryptoassets are at greater operational risk. They typically perform
less due diligence on those assets, which then passes that risk and responsibility on to the investor.

Are Extra Capabilities Offered,
Like Derivatives or Margin Trading?
As with the variety of cryptoassets, exchanges also differ in the capabilities
they offer. Some provide derivatives products such as futures contracts, while
others specialize in boutique derivatives. For example, a boutique derivative
offering by BitMEX was an option on whether the Winklevoss ETF would
be approved by the SEC in March 2017. Similarly, margin trading is another
functionality to investigate, and not all margin trading is made equal. Some
exchanges offer extreme levels of margin trading, like 30 to 1, while others are
much more reserved, like 3 to 1. Also referred to as leverage, 30 to 1 margin
trading means an investor only has to put down $1,000 to trade with $30,000 of
money. While gains can be astronomical, so can losses, and the same applies to
derivatives. Some exchanges “socialize losses” for leverage gone wrong because
there is no other way the products can be offered.19 Socializing losses means
that all investors on the exchange take a loss for a few investors’ foolhardiness.

Burniske 03.indd 219

9/9/17 2:41 PM

220 CRYPTOASSETS

What Funding Mechanisms Are Available to Open an Account?
Funding mechanisms will dictate whether the innovative investor can use the
service to begin with. Investors who already own bitcoin have more options
because exchanges will accept a direct transfer of bitcoin that will allow for
immediate trading of the cryptoassets offered on the platform. Funding an
account with fiat currency typically requires links to bank accounts or credit
cards. They will require a more extensive account opening process that may
extend over several days and run into local restrictions. When providing bank
account information to an exchange, it’s especially important to have done the
research on that entity to ensure security. Providing bank account information
to any financial entity online is not to be taken lightly.

Is the Service Geographically Constrained?
Some exchanges are restricted by geography, and thus will require an address
for access to certain aspects of their services. This is particularly relevant for
New York residents, where the BitLicense has made it considerably harder
for cryptoasset startups to operate. The BitLicense was a piece of regulation
put in place in 2015 that required companies interfacing with cryptoassets
to go through a lengthy and expensive regulatory process to operate in New
York, which led the majority of cryptoasset startups to cease operations in
the state.

What Are the KYC and AML Requirements?
Know your customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) regulations
are increasingly mandatory for cryptoasset exchanges in the United States and
are designed to protect against illegal and/or fraudulent activity. In opening
an account, consider the amount of personal information required. Exchanges
such as Bitstamp, GDAX, and Gemini have been proactive in working with
regulators to require more detailed information on customers signing up for
an account. Such information can delay the opening of an account, often by a
couple of days. Those who feel that privacy is a benefit to cryptoassets, which
are supranational by nature, might avoid exchanges that require this level of
documentation. In general, a higher level of regulation may benefit the consumer protections of the investor and ensure the stability of an exchange.20

Burniske 03.indd 220

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Investing Directly in Cryptoassets: Mining, Exchanges, and Wallets

221

Does the Exchange Provide Insurance?
As the use of bitcoin and cryptoasset exchanges have grown, there has also
been the growth of insurance plans for exchanges. One such insurer is Mitsui
Sumitomo Insurance, which offers loss protection to a number of exchanges.21
Other insurers are planning to enter this space as well, and it’s beneficial for
innovative investors to research whether the exchange they choose has this
insurance. Coinbase was one of the first companies to offer insurance for its
clients’ bitcoin holdings, which includes the bitcoin in GDAX, the exchange
it operates.22 In part, Coinbase is able to insure its clients’ bitcoin because it
keeps less than 2 percent of customer funds online; the rest is in highly secure
offline storage.23

HOT WALLET VERSUS COLD STORAGE
Let’s turn to the distinction between hot wallets and cold storage, and why it’s
important to understand both. The acquisition and storage of cryptoassets are
two separate considerations. While exchanges, by default, will store the assets
they trade, that is not always the safest place to store the asset long-term.
Cryptoassets are stored in either a hot wallet or cold storage. The hot in hot
wallet refers to the connection to the Internet. A wallet is hot when it can be
directly accessed through the Internet or is on a machine that has an Internet
connection. If the innovative investor can access his or her cryptoassets directly
through a web browser, or through a desktop or mobile application on a
machine where that machine is connected to the Internet, then it’s a hot wallet.
Cold storage, on the other hand, means the machine that stores the crypto­
asset is not connected to the Internet. In this case, a hacker would have to
physically steal the machine to gain access to the cryptoassets. Some methods require that the machine storing the cryptoasset has never touched the
Internet. Not once. While that sounds extreme, it is a best practice for firms
that store large amounts of cryptoassets. It is not necessary for all but the most
security-conscious investor.
What does it even mean to store a cryptoasset? This refers to storage of the
private key that allows the holder to send the cryptoasset to another holder of
a private key. A private key is just a string of digits that unlocks a digital safe.
The private key allows for the holder of that key to mathematically prove to the
network that the holder is the owner of the cryptoasset and can do with it as he
or she likes.24 That digital key can be placed in a hot wallet or in cold storage,
and there are a variety of services that provide for such storage.
