
TABLE

11-4

Portfolio Performance with Best In-Sample Parameters
in the Optimization and Verification Samples

for

Each

Test

246

Portfolio Performance with Best In-Sample Parameters for
in the Optimization and Verification Samples (Continued)

Each

Test

ues: PI = the threshold, P2 = the number of the neural network within the group
of networks trained for the model (these numbers correspond to the numbers used
in the file names for the networks shown in Tables 1 l-l through 1 l-3), P3 = not
used. In all cases, the threshold parameters (column Pl) shown are those that
resulted in the best in-sample performance. Identical parameters are used for verification on the out-of-sample data.
The threshold for the time-reversed Slow %K model was optimized for each
order type by stepping it from 50 to 90 in increments of 1. For the top and bottom
predictor models, the thresholds were stepped from 20 to 80 in increments of 2. In
each case, optimization was carried out only using the in-sample data. The best
parameters were then used to test the model on both the in-sample and out-of-sample data sets. This follows the usual practice established in this book.
Trading Results for the Reverse Slow %K Model
The two networks that were selected as most likely to hold up out-of-sample, based
on their shrinkage-adjusted multiple correlations with the target, were analyzed for

trading performance, The first network was the smaller of the two, having 3 layers
(18-6-l network). The second network had 4 layers (18-14-4-l network).

Results Using the 18-6-I Network. In-sample, as expected, the trading results
were superb. The average trade yielded a profit of greater than $6,000 across all
order types, and the system provided an exceptional annual return, ranging from
192.9% (entry at open, Test 1) to 134.6% (entry on stop, Test 3). Results this
good were obtained because a complex model containing 114 free parameters
was fitted to the data. Is there anything here beyond curve-fitting? Indeed there
is. With the stop order, out-of-sample performance was actually slightly profitable-nothing very tradable, but at least not in negative territory: The average
trade pulled $362 from the market. Even though losses resulted out-of-sample
for the other two order types, the losses were rather small when compared with
those obtained from many of the tests in other chapters: With entry at open, the
system lost only $233 per trade. With entry on limit (Test 2), it lost $331. Again,
as has sometimes happened in other tests of countertrend models, a stop order,
rather than a limit order, performed best. The system was profitable out-of-sample across all orders when only the long trades were considered. It lost across all
orders on the short side.
In-sample performance was fabulous in almost every market in the portfolio,
with few exceptions, This was true across all order types. The weakest performance was observed for Eurodollars, probably a result of the large number of contracts (hence high transaction costs) that must be traded in this market. Weak
performance was also noted for Silver, Soybean Oil, T-Bonds, T-Bills, Canadian
Dollar, British Pound, Gold, and Cocoa. There must be something about these
markets that makes them difficult to trade, because, in-sample, most markets perform well. Many of these markets also performed poorly with other models.
Out-of-sample, good trading was obtained across all three orders for the TBonds (which did not trade well in-sample), the Deutschemark, the Swiss Franc, the
Japanese Yen, Unleaded Gasoline, Gold (another market that did not trade well insample), Palladium, and Coffee. Many other markets were profitable for two of the
three order types. The number of markets that could be traded profitably out-of-sample using neural networks is a bit surprising. When the stop order (overall, the bestperforming order) was considered, even the S&P 500 and NYFE yielded substantial
profits, as did Feeder Cattle, Live Cattle, Soybeans, Soybean Meal, and Oats.
Figure 1 l-l illustrates the equity growth for the time-reversed Slow %K predictor model with entry on a stop. The equity curve was steadily up in-sample, and
continued its upward movement throughout about half of the out-of-sample period, after which there was a mild decline.

Results of the 18-14-4-l Network. This network provided trading performance
that showed more improvement in-sample than out-of-sample. In-sample, returns

F I G U R E

1 ‘I -1

Equity Growth for Reverse Slow %K 18-6-l Net, with Entry on a Stop

E 2s0m00
HEl,5MK)(l(l

0

Out-oLsampb

.
Y

equity

ranged from a low of 328.9% annualized (stop order, Test 6) to 534.7% (entry at
open, Test 4). In all cases, there was greater than $6,000 profit per trade. As usual,
the longs were more profitable than the shorts. Out-of-sample, every order type
produced losses. However, as noted in the previous set of tests, the losses were
smaller than typical of losing systems observed in many of the other chapters: i.e.,
the losses were about $1,000 per trade, rather than $2,000. This network also took
many more trades than the previous one. The limit order performed best (Test 5).
The long side evidenced smaller losses than the short side, except in the case of
the stop order, where the short side had relatively small losses. The better in-sample performance and worsened out-of-sample performance are clear evidence of
curve-fitting. The larger network, with its 320 parameters, was able to capitalize
on the idiosyncrasies of the training data, thereby increasing its performance insample and decreasing it out-of-sample.
In-sample, virtually every market was profitable across every order. There
were only three exceptions: Silver, the Canadian Dollar, and Cocoa. These markets seem hard to trade using any system. Out-of-sample, several markets were
profitable across all three order types: the Deutschemark, the Canadian Dollar,
Light Crude, Heating Oil, Palladium, Feeder Cattle, Live Cattle, and Lumber. A
few other markets traded well with at least one of the order types.
The equity curve showed perfectly increasing equity until the out-of-sample
period, at which point it mildly declined. This is typical of a curve resulting from
overoptimization. Given a sample size of 88,092 facts, this network may have
been too large.
Trading Results for the Bottom Turning-Point Model

The two networks that were selected, on the basis of their corrected multiple correlations with the target, as most likely to hold up out-of-sample are analyzed for trading
performance below. The tist network was the smaller of the two, having 3 layers (1810-I network). The second nehvork was a network with 4 layers (18-20-6-I network).

Results of the 18-10-I Nefwork.

In-sample, this network performed exceptionally well-nothing unusual, given the degree of curve-fitting involved. Out-ofsample, there was a return to the scenario of a heavily losing system. For all three
order types (at open, on limit, and on stop, or Tests 7, 8, and 9, respectively), the
average loss per trade was in the $2,000 range, typical of many of the losing models tested in previous chapters. The heavy per-trade losses occurred although this
model was only trading long positions, which have characteristically performed
better than shorts.
In-sample, only four markets did not perform well: the British Pound, Silver,
Live Cattle, and Corn. Silver was a market that also gave all the previously tested
networks problems. Out-of-sample, the network was profitable across all three

order types for the S&P 500, the Japanese Yen, Light Crude, Unleaded Gasoline,
Palladium, Soybeans, and Bean Oil. A number of other markets were also profitable with one or two of the orders.
The equity curve showed strong steady gains in-sample and losses out-ofsample.
These results were derived from Tests l&12
(at open, on limit, and on stop, respectively). In-sample performance for this network soared to unimaginable levels. With entry at open, the return was 768%
annualized, with 83% of the 699 trades taken being profitable. The average trade
produced $18,588 profit. Surprisingly, despite the larger size of this network
(therefore, the greater opportunity for curve-fitting), the out-of-sample performance, on a dollars-per-trade basis, was better than the smaller network, especially in the case of the stop entry, where the loss per trade was down to $518.
All markets were profitable across all orders in-sample, without exception.
Out-of-sample, the S&P 500, the British Pound, Platinum, Palladium, Soybean
Meal, Wheat, Kansas Wheat, Minnesota Wheat, and Lumber were profitable
across all three order types.

Results of&e 18-20-6-I Nehvork.

Trading

Results

for

the

Top

Turning-Point

Model

The two networks that were selected as most likely to hold up out-of-sample,
based on their corrected multiple correlations with the target, are analyzed for
trading performance below. The first network was the smaller of the two, having
3 layers (18-10-l network). The second network had 4 layers (18-20-6-l network).
Results of the 18-10-I Network. As usual, the in-sample performance was

excellent. Out-of-sample performance was profitable for two of the orders: entry
at open (Test 13) and on limit (Test 14). There were moderate losses for the stop
order (Test 15). This is slightly surprising, given that the short side is usually less
profitable than the long side.
The market-by-market breakdown reveals that only the Canadian Dollar,
Feeder Cattle, Bean Oil, Wheat, and Cocoa were not profitable across all three
order types, in-sample. Out-of-sample, strong profits were observed across all
three orders for the Deutschemark, the Japanese Yen, Light Crude, Heating Oil,
Feeder Cattle, Live Cattle, and Corn. The Japanese Yen, Light Crude, and, to some
extent, Corn shared profitability with the corresponding bottom (long) turningpoint model; in other words, these markets held up out-of-sample for both the bottom network and the top (short) network.
The equity curve (Figure 1 l-2) for entry at open depicts rapidly rising equity until August 1993, and then more slowly rising equity throughout the remainder of the in-sample period and through about two-thirds of the out-of-sample
period. Equity then declined slightly.

F I G U R E

1 ‘I - 2

Equity Growth for Short Turning Points, 18-l O-l Net, with Entry at Open

In-sample

equity

2500000

~2nooooo
8
%
Y 15oooocl
4

cl

Out-of-sample

equity

Results of the 18-20-6-I Network. As expected, this network, the larger of the
two, produced greater and more consistent in-sample profits due to a higher
amount of curve-fitting. Out-of-sample, this network performed terribly across all
order types (at open, on limit, and on stop, or Tests 16, 17, and 18, respectively).
The least bad results were obtained with the stop order.
In-sample, only Silver, Wheat, Sugar, and Orange Juice did not trade profitably across all orders. Out-of-sample, only Cocoa showed profitability for all
three orders. Surprisingly, all the metals showed strong out-of-sample profitability
for the entry at open and on limit, as did Feeder Cattle, Cocoa, and Cotton.
Portfolio equity showed incredibly smooth and steep gains in-sample, with
losses out-of-sample for all order types.
SUMMARY

ANALYSES

Table 11-5 provides in-sample and Table 11-6 contains out-of-sample performance statistics for all of the neural network models broken down by test and market. The SYM column represents the market being studied. The rightmost column
(COUiV~ contains the number of profitable tests for a given market. The numbers
in the lirst row represent test identifiers. The last row (COUruT) contains the number of markets on which a given model was profitable. The data in this table provides relatively detailed information about which markets are and are not
profitable when traded by each of the models: One dash (-) indicates a moderate
loss per trade, i.e., $2,000 to $4,000; two dashes (--) represent a large loss per
trade, i.e., $4,000 or more; one plus sign (+) means a moderate profit per trade,
i.e., $1,000 to $2,000; two pluses (+ +) indicate a large gain per trade, i.e., $2,000
or more; and a blank cell means that the loss was between $0 and $1,999 or the
profit was between $0 and $1,000 per trade. (For information about the various
markets and their symbols, see Table II-1 in the “Introduction” to Part IL)
In-sample, every order and every model yielded exceptionally strong positive
returns (see Table 1 l-7). When averaged over all models, the entry at open and on
limit performed best, while the entry on stop was the worst; however, the differences are all very small. In-sample, the best dollars-per-trade performance was
observed with the large turning-point networks for the long (bottom) and short
(top) sides. Out-of-sample, the stop order provided the best overall results. The
time-reversed Slow %K and the short (top) turning-point models performed best
when averaged across all order types.
CONCLUSION
When a neural newbie model was tested on an individual market (Katz and
McCormick, November 1996), the conclusion was that such an approach does not
work at all. The out-of-sample behavior in some of the current tests was much bet-

In-Sample Results Broken Down by Test and Market

ter than expected, based on our earlier explorations of simple neural network models. In the current tests, the more encouraging results were almost certainly due to
the large number of data points in the training set, which resulted from training the
model across an entire portfolio, rather than on a single tradable. In general, the
larger the optimization (or training) sample, the greater the likelihood of continued performance in the verification sample. Sample size could be increased by

254

T A B L E

11-S

Out-of-Sample Results Broken Down by Test and Market

going back further in history, which would be relatively easy to accomplish since
many commodities contracts go back well beyond the start of our in-sample period (1985). It could also be increased by enlarging the portfolio with additional
markets, perhaps a better way to bolster the training sample.
A maxim of optimization is that the likelihood of performance holding up
increases with reduction in the number of model parameters. Given the somewhat
positive results obtained in some of the tests, it might be worthwhile to experiment

T A B L E

1 1 - 7

--,

Performance of Neural Network Models Broken Down by Model,
Order, and Sample

with more sophisticated models. Specifically, better input preprocessing, in the
sense of something that could reduce the total number of inputs without much loss
of essential predictive information, would probably lead to a very good trading
system. With a smaller number of inputs, there would be fewer parameters (connection weights) in the network to estimate. Consequently, curve-fitting, an apparently significant issue judging by the results and shrinkage levels, would be less of
a problem.

WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
Under certain conditions, even neural newbie models can work. The critical issue with neural networks is the problem of achieving an adequate
ratio of sample size to free parameters for the purpose of minimizing
harmful (as opposed to beneficial) curve-fitting.
n Curve-fitting is a problem with neural networks. Any methods by which
the total number of parameters to be estimated can be reduced, without
too much loss of predictive information, are worth exploring; e.g., more
sophisticated information-compressing input preprocessing would probably improve out-of-sample performance and reduce the effects of pemicious curve-fitting.
n

a For similar reasons, large samples are critical to the training of successful
neural network trading models. This is why training on whole portfolios
provides better results than training on individual tradables, despite the
loss of market specificity. One suggestion is to increase the number of
markets in the portfolio and, thereby, achieve a larger in-sample training
set. Carrying this to an extreme, perhaps a neural network should be
trained on hundreds of commodities, stocks, and various other trading
instruments, in an effort to develop a “universal market forecaster.” If there
are any universal “technical” price patterns that exist in all markets and
that have predictive validity, such an effort might actually be worthwhile.
. Some markets trade poorly, even in-sample. Other markets tend to hold
up out-of-sample. This has been found with other models in earlier chapters: Some markets are more amenable to trading using certain techniques
than are other markets. Selecting a subset of markets to trade, based on
continued out-of-sample performance, might be an approach to take when
developing and trading neural network systems.

C H A P T E R

T W E L V E

Genetic Algorithms

E

xtrapolating from models of biology and economics, mathematician/psychologist, John Holland, developed a genetic optimization algorithm and introduced it
to the world in his book, Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems (1975).
Genetic algorithms (or GAS) only became popular in computer science about 1.5
years later (Yuret and de la Maza, 1994). The trading community first took notice
around 1993, when a few articles (Burke, 1993; Katz and McCormick, 1994;
Oliver, 1994) and software products appeared. Since then, a few vendors have
added a genetic training option to their neural network development shells and a
few have “industrial strength” genetic optimization toolkits.
In the trading community, GAS never really had the kind of heyday experienced by neural networks. The popularity of this technology probably never grew
due to its nature. Genetic algorithms are a bit difficult for the average person to
understand and more than a bit difficult to use properly. Regardless of their image,
from our experience, GAS can be extremely beneficial for system developers.
As with neural networks, while a brief discussion is included to provide basic
understanding, it is not within the scope of this book to present a full tutorial on
genetic algorithms. Readers interested in studying this subject further should read
Davis (1991), as well as our contributions to the book Virflral Trading (Katz and
McCormick, 1995a, 1995b) and our articles (Katz and McCormick, July/August
1994, December 1996, January 1997, February 1997).

WHAT ARE GENETIC ALGORITHMS?
A genetic algorithm solves a problem using a process similar to biological evolution.
It works by the recombination and mutation of gene sequences. Recombination and
257

mutation are genetic operators; i.e., they manipulate genes. A gene is a string of
codes (the genotype) that is decoded to yield a functional organism with specific
characteristics (the phenotype). A chromosome is a string of genes. In the case of
genetic optimization, as caxried out on such problems as those being addressed here,
the string of codes usually takes the form of a series of numbers.
During the simulated evolutionary process, a GA engages in mating and
selecting the members of the population (the chromosomes). Mating involves
crossover and mutation. In crossover, the elements that comprise the genes of different chromosomes (members of the population or solutions) are combined to
form new chromosomes. Mutation involves the introduction of random alterations
to these elements. This provides additional variation in the sets of chromosomes
being generated. As with the process of biological selection (where less-fit members of the population leave fewer progenies), the less-fit solutions are weeded out
so the more-fit solutions can proliferate, yielding another generution that may contain some better solutions than the previous one. The process of recombination,
random mutation, and selection has been shown to be an extremely powerful problem-solving mechanism.
EVOLVING RULE-BASED ENTRY MODELS
What would happen if a GA were allowed to search, not merely for the best parameters (the more common way a GA is applied by traders), but also for the best
rules? In this chapter, the consequences of using a GA to evolve a complete entry
model, by discovering both the rules and the optimal parameters for those rules,
will be explored. Although somewhat complex, this methodology proved to be
effective in our first investigation (Katz and McCormick, February 1997).
How can a GA be used to discover great trading rules? The garden variety
GA just juggles numbers. It is necessary to find a way to map sets of numbers in
a one-to-one fashion to sets of rules. There are many ways this can be accomplished. A simple and effective method involves the construction of a set of rule
templates. A rule template is a partial specification for a rule, one that contains
blanks that need to be filled in. For example, if some of the rules in previous chapters were regarded as rule templates, the blanks to be filled in would be the values
for the look-backs, thresholds, and other parameters. Using rule templates, as
defined in this manner, a one-to-one mapping of sets of numbers to fully specified
rules can easily be achieved. The first number (properly scaled) of any set is used
as an index into a table of rule templates. The remaining numbers of the set are
then used to fill in the blanks, with the result being a fully specified rule. The code
below contains a C+ + function (Rules) that implements this mapping strategy; it
will be discussed later. Although C+ + was used in the current study, this method
can also be implemented in TradeStation using the TS-EVOLVE software from
Scientific Consultant Services (516-696-3333).

The term genetic search applies to the use of a genetic algorithm to search
through an incredibly large set of potential solutions to find those that are best, i.e.,
that have the greatest fitness. In the current application, the intention is to use the
evolutionary process to discover sets of numbers (genotypes) that translate to rulebased entry models (phenotypes) with the greatest degree of fitness (defined in
terms of desirable trading behavior). In short, we are going to attempt to engage
in the selective breeding of rule-based entry methods! Instead of beginning with a
particular principle on which to base a model (e.g., seasonal@, breakouts, etc.),
the starting point is an assortment of ideas that might contribute to the development of a profitable entry. Instead of testing these ideas one by one or in combinations to determine what works, something very unusual will be done: The
genetic process of evolution will be allowed to breed the best possible entry model
from the raw ideas.
The GA will search an extremely broad space of possibilities to find the best
rule-based entry model that can be achieved given the constraints imposed by the
rule templates, the data, and the limitation of restricting the models to a specified
number of rules (to prevent curve-fitting). To accomplish this, it is necessary to
find the best sets of numbers (those that map to the best sets of rule-based entry
models) from an exceedingly large universe of possibilities. The kind of massive
search for solutions would be almost impossible-certainly impractical, in any
realistic sense-to accomplish without the use of genetic algorithms. There are
alternatives to GAS, e.g., brute force searching may be used, but we do not have
thousands of years to wait for the results. Another alternative might be through the
process of rule induction, i.e., where an attempt is made to infer rules from a set
of observations; however, this approach would not necessarily allow a complex
function, such as that of the risk-to-reward ratio of a trading model, to be maximized. Genetic algorithms provide an efticient way to accomplish very large
searches, especially when there are no simple problem-solving heuristics or techniques that may otherwise be used.
