
218 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

rule's average return is less than or equal to zero, estimation approximates the average return and provides a range of values within which
the rule's true rate of return should lie at a specified level of probability.
For example, it may tell us that the rule's estimated return is 10 percent
and there is a 95 percent probability that it falls within the range of 5
percent to 15 percent. This statement contains two kinds of estimates; a
point estimate, that the rule's return is 10 percent, and an interval estimate, that the return lies in the range 5 percent to 15 percent. The rule
studies discussed in Part Two use estimation as an adjunct to the hypothesis tests.

IIYPOTHESIS TESTS VERSUS INFORMAL INFERENCE
If a rule has been profitable in a sample of historical data, this sample sta-

tistic is an indisputable fact. However, from this fact, what can be inferred
about the rule's future performance? Is it likely to be profitable because it
possesses genuine predictive power or are profits unlikely because its
past profits were due to chance? The hypothesis test is a fonnal and rigorous inference procedure for deciding which of these alternatives is more
likely to be correct, and so can help us decide if it would be rational to use
the rule for actual trading in the future.

Confirmatory Evidence: It's
but It Ain't Sufficient

ice, It's Necessary,

Chapter 2 pointed out that informal inference is biased in favor of confirmatory evidence. That is to say, when we use common sense to test the
validity of an idea, we tend to look for confirma~ory evidence-facts consistent with the idea's truth. At the same time, we tend to ignore or give
too little weight to contradictory evidence. Common sense tells us, and
rightly so, that if the idea is true, instances where the idea worked (confirmatory evidence) should exist. However, informal inference makes the
mistake of assuming that confirmatory evidence is sufficient to establish
its truth. This is a logical error. Confirmatory evidence does not compel
the conclusion that the idea is true. Because it is consistent with the idea's
truth, it merely allows for the possibility that the idea is true.
The crucial distinction between necessary evidence and sufficient evidence was illustrated in Chapter 4 with in the following example. Suppose
we wish to test the truth of the assertion: The creature I observe is a dog. We
observe that the creature has four legs (the evidence). This evidence is consistent with (i.e., confirmatory ot) the creature being a dog. In other words, if

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

219

the creature is a dog, then it will necessarily have four legs. However, four
legs are not sufficient evidence to establish that the creature is a dog. It may
very well be another four-legged creature (cat, rhino, and so forth).
Popular articles on TA will often try to argue that a pattern has predictive power by presenting instances where the pattern made successful
predictions. It is true that, if the pattern has predictive power, then there
will be historical cases where the pattern gave successful predictions.
However, such confirmatory evidence, while necessary, is not sufficient to
logically establish that the pattern has predictive power. It is no more able
to compel the conclusion that the pattern has predictive power than the
presence of four legs is able to compel the conclusion that the creature
is a dog.
To argue that confirmatory instances are sufficient commits the fallacy of affirming the consequent.

If p is true, then q is true.
q is true.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, p is true.
If the pattern has predictive power, then past examples of success
should exist.
Past examples of success exist, and here they are.
Therefore, the pattern has predictive power.
Chapter 3 showed that although confirmatory evidence is not sufficient to prove the truth of an assertion, contradictory evidence-evidence
that is incompatible with an assertion's truth-is sufficient to establish
that the assertion is false. The fact that a creature lacks four legs is sufficient to falsify the assertion that the creature is a dog. This is the valid
form of argument called denial of the consequent.

If p is true, then q is true.
q is not true.
Therefore, p is not true (i.e., p isfalse).
If the creature is a dog, then the creature has four legs.
Creature does not have for legs.
Therefore, creature is not a dog.
The logical basis of the hypothesis test is falsification of the consequent. As such, it is a potent antidote to the confirmation bias of informal
inference and an effective preventative of erroneous belief.

220 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
What Is a Statistical Hypothesis?
A statistical hypothesis is a conjecture about the value of a population parameter. Often this is a numerical characteristic, such as the average return of a rule. The population parameter's value is unknown because it is
unobservable. For reasons previously discussed, it is assumed to have
value equal to or less than zero.
What an observer does know is the value of a sample statistic for a
sample that has been drawn from the population. Thus, the observer is
faced with a question: Is the observed value of the sample statistic consistent with the hypothesized value of the population parameter? If the observed value is close to the hypothesized value, the reasonable inference
would be that the hypothesis is correct. If, on the other hand, the value of
the sample value is far away from the hypothesized value, the truth of the
hypothesis is called into question.
Close and far are ambiguous terms. The hypothesis test quantifies
these terms making it possible to a draw a conclusion about the veracity
of the hypothesis. The test's conclusion is typically given as a number between 0 and 1.0. This number indicates the probability that the observed
value of the sample statistic could have occurred by chance under the
condition that (given that or assuming that) the hypothesized value is
true. For example, suppose it is hypothesized that a rule's expected return
is equal to zero, but the back test produced a return of +20 percent. The
conclusion of the hypothesis test may say something like the following: If
the rule's expected rate of return were truly equal to zero, there is a 0.03
probability that the back-tested return could be equal to or greater than
+20 percent due to chance. Because there is only a 3 percent probability
that a 20 percent return could have occurred by chance if the rule were
truly devoid of predictive power, then we can be quite confident that the
rule was not simply lucky in the back test.

Falsifying a Hypothesis with Improbable Evidence
A hypothesis test begins by assuming that the hypothesis being tested is
true. Based on this assumption, predictions are deduced from the hypothesis about the likelihood of various new observations. In other words, if
the hypothesis is true, then certain outcomes would be probable to occur
whereas other outcomes would be improbable. Armed with this set of expectations an observer is in a position to compare the predictions with
subsequent observations. If predictions and observations agree, there is
no reason to question the hypothesis. However, if low probability outcomes are observed-outcomes that would be inconsistent with the truth
of the hypothesis-the hypothesis is deemed falsified. Thus, it is the oc-

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

221

currence of unexpected evidence that is the basis for refuting a hypothesis. Though this line of reasoning is counterintuitive, it is logically correct
(denial of the consequent) and extremely powerful. It is the logical basis
of scientific discovery.
To give a concrete example, suppose I view myself as an excellent social tennis player. My hypothesis is David Aronson is an exceUent social
tennis player. I join a tennis club with members whose age and years of
play are similar to mine. On the basis of my hypothesis, I confidently predict to other club members that I will win at least three-quarters of my
games (predicted win rate = 0.75). This prediction is merely a deductive
consequence of my hypothesis. I test the hypothesis by keeping track of
my first 20 games. After 20 games I am shocked and disappointed. Not only
have I not scored a single victory (observed win rate = 0), but most losses
have been by wide margins. This outcome is clearly inconsistent with the
prediction deduced from my hypothesis. Said differently, my hypothesis
implied that this evidence had a very low probability of occurrence. Such
surprising evidence forcefully calls for a revision (falsification) of my hypothesis. Unless I prefer feel-good delusions to observed evidence, it is
time to abandon my delusions of tennis grandeur. 2
In the preceding situation, the evidence was overwhelmingly clear. I
lost every one of 20 games. However, what if the evidence had been ambiguous? Suppose I had won two-thirds of my games. An observed win
rate of 0.66 is below the predicted win rate of 0.75 but not dramatically so.
Was this merely a random negative deviation from the predicted win rate
or was the deviation of sufficient magnitude to indicate the hypothesis
about my tennis ability was faulty? This is where statistical analysis becomes necessary. It attempts to answer the question: Was the difference
between the observed win rate (0.66) and the win rate predicted by my hypothesis (0.75) large enough to raise doubts about the veracity of the hypothesis? Or, alternatively: Was the difference between 0.66 and 0.75
merely random variation in that particular sample of tennis matches? The
hypothesis test attempts to distinguish prediction errors that are small
enough to be the result of random sanlpling from errors so large that they
indicate a faulty hypothesis.
Dueling Hypotheses: The Null Hypothesis versus
the Alternative Hypothesis

A hypothesis test relies on the method of indirect proof. That is, it establishes the truth of something by showing that something else is false. Therefore, to prove the hypothesis that we would like to demonstrate as correct,
we show that an opposing hypothesis is incorrect. To establish that hypothesis A is true, we show that the opposing hypothesis Not-A is false.

222 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

A hypothesis test, therefore, involves two hypotheses. One is called
the null hypothesis and the other the alternative hypothesis. The names
are strange, but they are so well entrenched that they will be used here.
The alternative hypothesis, the one the scientist would like to prove, asserts the discovery of important new knowledge. The opposing or null hypothesis simply asserts that nothing new has been discovered. For
example, Jonas Salk, inventor of the polio vaccine, put forward the alternative hypothesis that his new vaccine would prevent polio more effectively than a placebo. The null hypothesis asserted that the Salk vaccine
would not prevent polio more effectively than a placebo. For the TA rules
tested in this book, the alternative hypothesis asserts the rule has an expected return greater than zero. The null hypothesis asserts that the rule
does not have an expected return greater than zero.
For purposes of brevity, I will adopt the conventional notation: HA for
the alternative hypothesis, and Ho for the null hypothesis. A way to remember this is the null hypothesis asserts that zero new knowledge has
been discovered, thus the symbol Ho'
lt is crucial to the logic of a hypothesis test that HA and Ho be defined
as mutually exclusive and exhaustive propositions. What does this mean?
Two propositions are said to be exhaustive if, when taken together, they
cover all possibilities. HA and Ho cover all possibilities. Either the polio
vaccine has a preventive effect or it does not. There is no other possibility.
Either a TA rule generates returns greater than zero or it does not.
The two hypotheses must also be defined as mutually exclusive. Mutually exclusive propositions cannot both be true at the same time, so if Ho
is shown to be false, then HA must be true and vice versa. By defining the
hypotheses as exhaustive and mutually exclusive statements, if it can be
shown that one hypothesis is false, then we are left with the inescapable

I~IGURE 5.1

Null
Hypothesis

Alternative
Hypothesis

Rule Return
Less Than
Or Equal to
Zero

Rule Return
Greater Than
Zero

Mutually exclusive and exhaustive hypotheses.

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

223

conclusion that the other hypothesis must be true. Proving truth in this
fashion is called the method of indirect proof. These concepts are illustrated in the Figure 5.1.

RATIONALE OF 'rUE HWOTUESIS TEST
Two aspects of the hypothesis test warrant explanation. First, why the
test is focused on the null hypothesis. Second, why the null hypothesis is
assumed to be true rather than the alternative hypothesis. This section explains the reasoning behind both aspects.

Why Is the ull Hypothesis the Target
of the Test?
As discussed in Chapter 3, evidence can be used to logically deduce that

a hypothesis is false, but it cannot be used to deduce that it is true. 3
Therefore, hypothesis testing must be about trying to falsify something.
The question is: Which of the hypotheses, Ho or HAl should be the target
of this effort?
Of the two competing claims, Ho presents a better target for falsification because it can be reduced to a single claim about the value of the parameter. This means that only one test must be performed. If that single
value can be successfully challenged with evidence, Ho will have been falsified. In contrast, the alternative hypothesis represents an infinite number of claims about the parameter's value. With no unique value to shoot
at, an infinite number of tests would have to be performed to falsify the alternative hypothesis.
In fact, both Ho and HA represent an infinite number of claims about
the rule's expected return, but Ho can be reduced to a single claim. First,
let's consider why HA represents an infinite number of claims. In asserting that the rule's return is greater than zero, HA effectively says that the
rule's expected return, over the immediate practical future, might be any
one of an infinite set of values greater than zero: + 0.1 percent, or +2 percent or +6 percent or any other positive value. This is illustrated in Figure
5.2. Given that HA makes an infinite number of claims, an infinite number
of tests would have to be conducted to conclusively refute it. Clearly this
is impractical.
Ho also makes an infinite number of claims about the value of
the population parameter. It asserts that the rule's average return is
equal to zero or some value less than zero. However, only one of these
claims really matters-that the rule's average return is equal to zero.

224 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

• ••

Etc.

Negative Returns

HI Asserts:
Rule's Expected Return> 0%.
FIGURE 5.2 The alternative hypothesis makes an infinite number of claims
about the rule's expected rate of return.

The attempt to falsify a single claim is a practical goal. If the most positive of these claims (return = 0) can be called into question by the rule's
back-test profitability, then all lesser claims (e.g., the rule's return = -1.3
percent) are contradicted but to an even greater degree. This is how Ho
reduces to the single claim that the rule's return is zero. This is illustrated in Figure 5.3.

Etc.

•••

Positive Returns

Ho Asserts:
Rule's Return < or = 0%.
FIGURE 5.3 The null hypothesis makes an infinite number of claims about the
population mean, but only one matters.

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

Why Is the

225

ull Hypothesis Assumed to Be True?

The hypothesis test assumes Ho is true on two grounds: scientific skepticism and the principle of simplicity (parsimony).

Skepticism. The assumption that Ho is true is consistent with science's
skeptical attitude toward all new claims of knowledge. As explained in
Chapter 3, this conservative stance is justified because making claims is
easy but making genuine discoveries is hard. The burden of proof should
be on the claimant.
Science has a legitimate concern with protecting the storehouse of
knowledge from contan1ination with falsehoods and weird beliefs. A useful analogy can be made to the criminal justice system. Free societies
have a legitimate concern with protecting the lone citizen from the vast
prosecutorial power of the state. For this reason the defendant in a criminal prosecution starts off with a presumption of innocence. This places
the burden of proving guilt-falsifying the assumption of innocence-on
the state, and it is indeed a substantial burden. To gain a conviction, the
state must provide evidence of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, a very
high threshold. The initial assumption of innocence and the high threshold of proof can be seen as the legal system's way of preventing the jails
and gallows from being contaminated with innocent citizens.
Following the scientific tradition, the hypothesis test places the burden of proof on those asserting new knowledge. In fact, whenever the
back-tested performance of a rule is greater than zero, the sample evidence actually favors HA-that the rule's expected return is greater than
zero. However, the hypothesis test demands more than merely reasonable
evidence. It demands compelling evidence before abandoning the assumed truth of Hoo Those asserting that a TA rule has predictive power
(H A) must meet a large burden of proof before they can reasonably expect
their claim to be accepted by scientific practitioners of TA.
Simplicity. An additional reason to grant priority to Ho is the principle
of simplicity. This fundamental precept of science says that simpler theories are more likely to capture the true patterns of nature than more elaborate ones. This principle, known as Occam:S Razor, says that if a
phenomenon can be explained by more than one hypothesis, then the simplest hypothesis is more likely to be correct. Ho' which explains a rule's
past success as luck, is simpler than HA, which asserts that profits stem
from a recurring market pattern with predictive power.
Simpler explanations (theories, rules, hypotheses, models, and so
forth) are more likely to be correct because they are less likely to fit data
by chance. The more complex an explanation-that is, the more numerous

226 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS
its assumptions, its conditions, and constraints-the more likely it is to fit
a set of observations by chance. This is illustrated when fitting a mathematical function to a set of data. A function can be thought of as a mathematical hypothesis that explains a given set of observations. In Figure 5.4,
two mathematical functions have been fitted to the same set of data. One
function is linear. It is relatively simple in that it is defined by only two coefficients or degrees of freedom: its slope and where it cuts the vertical
axis (Y-intercept). In other words, the line's fit to the data can be improved by manipulating only these two factors.
The other function is a complex polynomial with 10 coefficients.
Each coefficient allows the curve to make an additional bend. With this
degree of flexibility, the curve can weave and bend so that it touches
every data point. In fact, when a function is fit to data using a method
called least-squares regression, a perfect fit is guaranteed if the function
is allowed to contain as many degrees of freedom (coefficients) as there
are data points. Although the linear function does not manage to touch
every observed point, it does describe the general tendency of the data;
increasing values of X are associated with increasing values of Y. In other
words, the simple function captures the essential feature of the data,
making it more likely that it represents the real relationship between X
and Y. In contrast, the complex function is most likely a detailed description of the data's random fluctuations in addition to the positive correlation between X and Y.

...•...
y

'.
x
FIGURE 5.4 The superiority of simplicity-all else being equal.

Hypothesis Tests and Confidence Intervals

227

This is not to suggest that complex curves are never justified. If there
is enough data and it was generated by a complex process, an elaborate
model may very well be justified. However, all else being equal, the simpler explanation is more likely to be correct.
Strong and Weak Decisions

A hypothesis test leads to one of two decisions; reject Ho or retain Ho' The
decisions are qualitatively different: the first is a strong decision while the
second is a weak one. 4 Rejection is a strong decision because it is compelled by improbable, infomlative evidence that forcefully contradicts Ho'
In contrast, the decision to retain Ho is a relatively weaker choice because
the evidence is nothing more than consistent with what we had already
expected and assumed to be so, that Ho is true. In others words, the observed value of the test statistic is unsurprising and hence uninformative.
Had tests of Salk's polio vaccine shown that recipients of the real vaccine had the same risk of getting the disease as recipients of the placebo,
Ho would be left intact, and no one would have been surprised by the vaccine's failure. Nothing had worked up to that point, so it would have been
just another frustrating day at the lab. Of course this is not what actually
happened, and the course of medical history was changed. Salk's decision
to reject Ho was compelled by a rate of infection in the treated group that
was surprisingly less than the placebo group.
It is in this way that a decision to reject Ho is fundamentally a stronger
decision than one to retain Ho' It is a decision forced by evidence that is
strong enough to rebut an initial and entirely reasonable doubt that new
knowledge has been discovered. In contrast, the decision to retain Ho is
due to an absence of compelling evidence. The absence of compelling evidence does not mean the null is necessarily true or even probably true. 5 It
simply means that it could be true. Because science takes a conservative
stance toward new knowledge, in the absence of compelling evidence, the
more reasonable conclusion is that nothing new has been discovered.
