
Three Types of Gaps

There are three general types of gaps—the breakaway, runaway (or
measuring), and exhaustion gaps.

The Breakaway Gap. The breakaway gap usually occurs at the
completion of an important price pattern, and usually signals the
beginning of a significant market move. After a market has com-
pleted a major basing pattern, the breaking of resistance often
occurs on a breakaway gap. Major breakouts from topping or bas-
ing areas are breeding grounds for this type of gap. The breaking
of a major trendline, signaling a reversal of trend, might also see
a breakaway gap.

Breakaway gaps usually occur on heavy volume. More often
than not, breakaway gaps are not filled. Prices may return to the
upper end of the gap (in the case of a bullish breakout), and may
even close a portion of the gap, but some portion of the gap is often
left unfilled. As a rule, the heavier the volume after such a gap
appears, the less likely it is to be filled. Upside gaps usually act as sup-
port areas on subsequent market corrections. It’s important that
prices not fall below gaps during an uptrend. In all cases a close
below an upward gap is a sign of weakness. (See Figures 4.23a and b.)


Basic Concepts of Trend 95

| | ("" Reversal Top

Exhaustion Gap Downside Breakaway Cap _ --

—_ i

Breakaway Gap _

oly lil
Wl |!

Figure 4.23a The three types of gaps. The breakaway gap signaled the
completion of the basing pattern. The runaway gap occurred at about the
midway point (which is why it is also called the measuring gap). An exhaus-
tion gap to the upside, followed within a week by a breakaway gap to the
downside, left an island reversal top. Notice that the breakaway and run-
away gaps were not filled on the way up, which is often the case.

The Runaway or Measuring Gap. After the move has been under-
way for awhile, somewhere around the middle of the move, prices
will leap forward to form a second type of gap (or a series of gaps)
called the runaway gap. This type of gap reveals a situation where
the market is moving effortlessly on moderate volume. In an
uptrend, it’s a sign of market strength; in a downtrend, a sign of
weakness. Here again, runaway gaps act as support under the mar-
ket on subsequent corrections and are often not filled. As in the
case of the breakaway, a close below the runaway gap is a negative
sign in an uptrend.


96 Chapter 4

05/29/97 (AMAT) Applied Matis Inc 02/24/98
Daily Bar Chart / 7 1 one
rn Lo
| Nh Al i. '
| | Exhaustion fi _
N 7 Measuring Gap le
fl iN
hi , MA | r ' '
I 3244
M yy ye
Exhaustion Gap | | 2”

ae ai in Sep ‘ba ‘er a es

Figure 4.23b = The first box shows an “exhaustion” gap near the end of
the rally. Prices falling below that gap signaled a top. The second box is a
“measuring” gap about halfway through the downtrend. The third box is
another “exhaustion” gap at the bottom. The move back above that gap sig-
naled higher prices.

This variety of gap is also called a measuring gap because it
usually occurs at about the halfway point in a trend. By measur-
ing the distance the trend has already traveled, from the original
trend signal or breakout, an estimate of the probable extent of the
remaining move can be determined by doubling the amount
already achieved.

The Exhaustion Gap. The final type of gap appears near the end
of a market move. After all objectives have been achieved and the
other two types of gaps (breakaway and runaway) have been iden-
tified, the analyst should begin to expect the exhaustion gap. Near
the end of an uptrend, prices leap forward in a last gasp, so to
speak. However, that upward leap quickly fades and prices turn
lower within a couple of days or within a week. When prices close


Basic Concepts of Trend 97

under that last gap, it is usually a dead giveaway that the exhaus-
tion gap has made its appearance. This is a classic example where
falling below a gap in an uptrend has very bearish implications.

The Island Reversal

This takes us to the island reversal pattern. Sometimes after the
upward exhaustion gap has formed, prices will trade in a narrow
range for a couple of days or a couple of weeks before gapping to
the downside. Such a situation leaves the few days of price action
looking like an “island” surrounded by space or water. The exhaus-
tion gap to the upside followed by a breakaway gap to the down-
side completes the island reversal pattern and usually indicates a
trend reversal of some magnitude. Of course, the major signifi-
cance of the reversal depends on where prices are in the general
trend structure. (See Figure 4.23c.)

08/25/97 {PDG) Placer Dome Inc 12/12/97
Daily Bar Chart *
1
Up Gap Il | 4 Down Gap ™
ie |
A ey m
1 i .
li ws
Island Reversal Top Mu
Mal =
(Seo ‘Oa Thor

Figure 4.23c The two gaps on this daily chart form an “island reversal” top.
The first box shows an up gap after a rally. The second box shows a down gap
three weeks later. That combination of gaps usually signals an important top.


98 Chapter 4

CONCLUSION

This chapter introduced introductory technical tools that I con-
sider to be the building blocks of chart analysis—support and
resistance, trendlines and channels, percentage retracements,
speed resistance lines, reversal days, and gaps. Every technical
approach covered in later chapters uses these concepts and tools
in one form or another. Armed with a better understanding of
these concepts, we’re now ready to begin a study of price patterns.


A,

Major Reversal Patterns

INTRODUCTION

So far we’ve touched on Dow Theory, which is the basis of most
trend following work being used today. We've examined the basic
concepts of trend, such as support, resistance, and trendlines. And
we’ve introduced volume and open interest. We're now ready to
take the next step, which is a study of chart patterns. You'll quick-
ly see that these patterns build on the previous concepts.

In Chapter 4, the definition of a trend was given as a series
of ascending or descending peaks and troughs. As long as they
were ascending, the trend was up; if they were descending, the
trend was down. It was stressed, however, that markets also move
sideways for a certain portion of the time. It is these periods of
sideways market movement that will concern us most in these
next two chapters.

It would be a mistake to assume that most changes in
trend are very abrupt affairs. The fact is that important changes in
trend usually require a period of transition. The problem is that

99


100 Chapter 5

these periods of transition do not always signal a trend reversal.
Sometimes these sideways periods just indicate a pause or consol-
idation in the existing trend after which the original trend is
resumed.

PRICE PATTERNS

The study of these transition periods and their forecasting impli-
cations leads us to the question of price patterns. First of all, what
are price patterns? Price patterns are pictures or formations, which
appear on price charts of stocks or commodities, that can be clas-
sified into different categories, and that have predictive value.

TWO TYPES OF PATTERNS:
REVERSAL AND CONTINUATION

There are two major categories of price patterns—reversal and
continuation. As these names imply, reversal patterns indicate
that an important reversal in trend is taking place. The continua-
tion patterns, on the other hand, suggest that the market is only
pausing for awhile, possibly to correct a near term overbought or
oversold condition, after which the existing trend will be
resumed. The trick is to distinguish between the two types of pat-
terns as early as possible during the formation of the pattern.

In this chapter, we’ll be examining the five most com-
monly used major reversal patterns: the head and shoulders, triple
tops and bottoms, double tops and bottoms, spike (or V) tops and
bottoms, and the rounding (or saucer) pattern. We will examine
the price formation itself, how it is formed on the chart, and how
it can be identified. We will then look at the other important con-
siderations—the accompanying volume pattern and measuring
implications.

Volume plays an important confirming role in all of these
price patterns. In times of doubt (and there are lots of those), a
study of the volume pattern accompanying the price data can
be the deciding factor as to whether or not the pattern can be
trusted.


Major Reversal Patterns 101

Most price patterns also have certain measuring techniques
that help the analyst to determine minimum price objectives.
While these objectives are only an approximation of the size of
the subsequent move, they are helpful in assisting the trader to
determine his or her reward to risk ratio.

In Chapter 5, we'll look at a second category of patterns—
the continuation variety. There we will examine triangles, flags,
pennants, wedges, and rectangles. These patterns usually Teflect
pauses in the existing trend rather than trend reversals, and are
usually classified as intermediate and minor as opposed to major.

Preliminary Points Common to
All Reversal Patterns

Before beginning our discussion of the individual major reversal
patterns, there are a few preliminary points to be considered that
are common to all of these reversal patterns.

1. A prerequisite for any reversal pattern is the existence of a
prior trend.

2. The first signal of an impending trend reversal is often the
breaking of an important trendline.

3. The larger the pattern, the greater the subsequent move.

4. Topping patterns are usually shorter in duration and more
volatile than bottoms.

5. Bottoms usually have smaller price ranges and take longer
to build.

6. Volume is usually more important on the upside.

The Need for a Prior Trend. The existence of a prior major trend is
an important prerequisite for any reversal pattern. A market must
obviously have something to reverse. A formation occasionally
appears on the charts, resembling one of the reversal patterns. If
that pattern, however, has not been preceded by a trend, there is
nothing to reverse and the pattern is suspect. Knowing where cer-
tain patterns are most apt to occur in the trend structure is one of
the key elements in pattern recognition.


102 Chapter 5

A corollary to this point of having a prior trend to reverse
is the matter of measuring implications. It was stated earlier that
most of the measuring techniques give only minimum price objec-
tives. The maximum objective would be the total extent of the
prior move. If a major bull market has occurred and a major top-
ping pattern is being formed, the maximum implication for the
potential move to the downside would be a 100% retracement of
the bull market, or the point at which it all began.

The Breaking of Important Trendlines. The first sign of an impend-
ing trend reversal is often the breaking of an important trendline.
Remember, however, that the violation of a major trendline does
not necessarily signal a trend reversal. What is being signaled is a
change in trend. The breaking of a major up trendline might sig-
nal the beginning of a sideways price pattern, which later would
be identified as either the reversal or consolidation type.
Sometimes the breaking of the major trendline coincides with the
completion of the price pattern.

The Larger the Pattern, the Greater the Potential. When we use the
term “larger,” we are referring to the height and the width of the
price pattern. The height measures the volatility of the pattern.
The width is the amount of time required to build and complete
the pattern. The greater the size of the pattern—that is, the wider
the price swings within the pattern (the volatility) and the longer
it takes to build—the more important the pattern becomes and
the greater the potential for the ensuing price move.

Virtually all of the measuring techniques in these two
chapters are based on the height of the pattern. This is the method
applied primarily to bar charts, which use a vertical measuring cri-
teria. The practice of measuring the horizontal width of a price pat-
tern usually is reserved for point and figure charting. That method
of charting uses a device known as the count, which assumes a
close relationship between the width of a top or bottom and the
subsequent price target.

Differences Between Tops and Bottoms. Topping patterns are usu-
ally shorter in duration and are more volatile than bottoms. Price
swings within the tops are wider and more violent. Tops usually
take less time to form. Bottoms usually have smaller price ranges,


Major Reversal Patterns 103

but take longer to build. For this reason it is usually easier and less
costly to identify and trade bottoms than to catch market tops.
One consoling factor, which makes the more treacherous topping
patterns worthwhile, is that prices tend to decline faster than they go
up. Therefore, the trader can usually make more money a lot faster
by catching the short side of a bear market than by trading the
long side of a bull market. Everything in life is a tradeoff between
reward and risk. The greater risks are compensated for by greater
rewards and vice versa. Topping patterns are harder to catch, but
are worth the effort.

Volume is More Important on the Upside. Volume should generally
increase in the direction of the market trend and is an important
confirming factor in the completion of all price patterns. The
completion of each pattern should be accompanied by a notice-
able increase in volume. However, in the early stages of a trend
reversal, volume is not as important at market tops. Markets have a
way of “falling of their own weight” once a bear move gets under-
way. Chartists like to see an increase in trading activity as prices
drop, but it is not critical. At bottoms, however, the volume pick-
up is absolutely essential. If the volume pattern does not show a
significant increase during the upside price breakout, the entire
price pattern should be questioned. We will be taking a more in-
depth look at volume in Chapter 7.

THE HEAD AND SHOULDERS
REVERSAL PATTERN

Let's take a close look now at what is probably the best known and
most reliable of all major reversal patterns—the head and shoulders
reversal. We'll spend more time on this pattern because it is impor-
tant and also to explain all the nuances involved. Most of the
other reversal patterns are just variations of the head and shoul-
ders and will not require as extensive a treatment.

This major reversal pattern, like all of the others, is just a
further refinement of the concepts of trend covered in Chapter 4.
Picture a situation in a major uptrend, where a series of ascending
peaks and troughs gradually begin to lose momentum. The


104 Chapter 5

uptrend then levels off for awhile. During this time the forces of
supply and demand are in relative balance. Once this distribution
phase has been completed, support levels along the bottom of the
horizontal trading range are broken and a new downtrend has
been established. That new downtrend now has descending peaks
and troughs.

Let’s see how this scenario would look on a head and shoul-
ders top. (See Figures 5.1a and b.) At point A, the uptrend is pro-
ceeding as expected with no signs of a top. Volume expands on
the price move into new highs, which is normal. The corrective

100
Left Shoulder Right Shoulder
A
G (2)

80 1
BW Neckline |
{
IF
(1) Y

~ amin | Ht i

Figure 5.la Example of a head and shoulders top. The left and right
Shoulders (A and E) are at about the same height. The head (C) is higher
than either shoulder. Notice the lighter volume on each peak. The pattern is
completed on a close under the neckline (line 2). The minimum objective is
the vertical distance from the head to the neckline projected downward from
the breaking of the neckline. A return move will often occur back to the neck-
line, which should not recross the neckline once it has been broken.


Major Reversal Patterns 105

714195 (NKE) Nike Inc 01/02/98

Weekly Bar Chart —

Left Shoulder | |

|
nll

|, Right Shoulder

H iH
lit
ai f |

a
nm MV

q Head and Shoulders Top

tt

sly!
thu! My!

lysed
ni

Figure 5.1b A head and shoulders top. The three peaks show the head
higher than either shoulder. The return move (see arrow) back to the neckline
occurred on schedule.

dip to point B is on lighter volume, which is also to be expected.
At point C, however, the alert chartist might notice that the vol-
ume on the upside breakout through point A is a bit lighter than
on the previous rally. This change is not in itself of major impor-
tance, but a little yellow caution light goes on in the back of the
analyst’s head.

Prices then begin to decline to point D and something
even more disturbing happens. The decline carries below the top
of the previous peak at point A. Remember that, in an uptrend, a
penetrated peak should function as support on subsequent cor-
rections. The decline well under point A, almost to the previous
reaction low at point B, is another warning that something may
be going wrong with the uptrend.

The market rallies again to point E, this time on even
lighter volume, and isn’t able to reach the top of the previous


106 Chapter 5

peak at point C. (That last rally at point E will often retrace one-
half to two-thirds of the decline from points C to D.) To continue
an uptrend, each high point must exceed the high point of the
rally preceding it. The failure of the rally at point E to reach the
previous peak at point C fulfills half of the requirement for a new
downtrend—namely, descending peaks.

By this time, the major up trendline (line 1) has already
been broken, usually at point D, constituting another danger sig-
nal. But, despite all of these warnings, all that we know at this
point is that the trend has shifted from up to sideways. This might
be sufficient cause to liquidate long positions, but not necessarily
enough to justify new short sales.

The Breaking of the Neckline
Completes the Pattern

By this time, a flatter trendline can be drawn under the last two
reaction lows (points B and D), which is called a neckline (see line
2). This line generally has a slight upward slope at tops (although
it’s sometimes horizontal and, less often, tilts downward). The
deciding factor in the resolution of the head and shoulders top is a deci-
sive closing violation of that neckline. The market has now violated
the trendline along the bottom of points B and D, has broken
under support at point D, and has completed the requirement for
a new downtrend—descending peaks and troughs. The new
downtrend is now identified by the declining highs and lows at
points C, D, E, and F. Volume should increase on the breaking of
the neckline. A sharp increase in downside volume, however, is
not critically important in the initial stages of a market top.

The Return Move

Usually a return move develops which is a bounce back to the bot-
tom of the neckline or to the previous reaction low at point D (see
point G), both of which have now become overhead resistance.
The return move does not always occur or is sometimes only a
very minor bounce. Volume may help determine the size of the
bounce. If the initial breaking of the neckline is on very heavy
trading, the odds for a return move are diminished because the


Major Reversal Patterns 107

increased activity reflects greater downside pressure. Lighter vol-
ume on the initial break of the neckline increases the likelihood
of a return move. That bounce, however, should be on light vol-
ume and the subsequent resumption of the new downtrend
should be accompanied by noticeably heavier trading activity.

Summary

Let’s review the basic ingredients for a head and shoulders top.

LA prior uptrend.

2. A left shoulder on heavier volume (point A) followed by a
corrective dip to point B.

3. A rally into new highs but on lighter volume (point C).

4. A decline that moves below the previous peak (at A) and
approaches the previous reaction low (point D).

5. A third rally (point E) on noticeably light volume that fails
to reach the top of the head (at point C).

6. A close below the neckline.

7. A return move back to the neckline (point G) followed by
new lows.

What has become evident is three well defined peaks. The
middle peak (the head) is slightly higher than either of the two
shoulders (points A and E). The pattern, however, is not complete
until the neckline is decisively broken on a closing basis. Here
again, the 1-3% penetration criterion (or some variation thereof)
or the requirement of two successive closes below the neckline
(the two day rule) can be used for added confirmation. Until that
downside violation takes place, however, there is always the pos-
sibility that the pattern is not really a head and shoulders top and
that the uptrend may resume at some point.

THE IMPORTANCE OF VOLUME

The accompanying volume pattern plays an important role in the
development of the head and shoulders top as it does in all price


108 Chapter 5

patterns. As a general rule, the second peak (the head) should take
place on lighter volume than the left shoulder. This is not a
requirement, but a strong tendency and an early warning of
diminishing buying pressure. The most important volume signal
takes place during the third peak (the right shoulder). Volume
should be noticeably lighter than on the previous two peaks.
Volume should then expand on the breaking of the neckline,
decline during the return move, and then expand again once the
return move is over.

As mentioned earlier, volume is less critical during the com-
pletion of market tops. But, at some point, volume should begin to
increase if the new downtrend is to be continued. Volume plays a
much more decisive role at market bottoms, a subject to be dis-
cussed shortly. Before doing so, however, let’s discuss the measur-
ing implications of the head and shoulders pattern.

FINDING A PRICE OBJECTIVE

The method of arriving at a price objective is based on the height of
the pattern. Take the vertical distance from the head (point C) to
the neckline. Then project that distance from the point where the
neckline is broken. Assume, for example, that the top of the head
is at 100 and the neckline is at 80. The vertical distance, therefore,
would be the difference, which is 20. That 20 points would be mea-
sured downward from the level at which the neckline is broken. If
the neckline in Figure 5.1a is at 82 when broken, a downside objec-
tive would be projected to the 62 level (82 - 20 = 62).

Another technique that accomplishes about the same task,
but is a bit easier, is to simply measure the length of the first wave
of the decline (points C to D) and then double it. In either case,
the greater the height or volatility of the pattern, the greater the
objective. Chapter 4 stated that the measurement taken from a
trendline penetration was similar to that used in the head and
shoulders pattern. You should be able to see that now. Prices trav-
el roughly the same distance below the broken neckline as they
do above it. You'll see throughout our entire study of price pat-
terns that most price targets on bar charts are based on the height or

