
(“State prediction”)

(3.7)

(“State covariance prediction”)

(3.8)

(“Measurement prediction”)

(3.9)

(“Measurement variance prediction”) (3.10)

β̂(t | t) = β̂(t | t − 1) + K(t) * e(t)
R(t | t) = R(t | t − 1) − K(t) * x(t) * R(t | t − 1)

(“State update”)

(3.11)

(“State covariance update”) (3.12)

where K(t) is called the Kalman gain and is given by
K(t) = R(t | t − 1) * x(t)/Q(t)

(3.13)

To start off these recursions, we assume β̂(1 | 0) = 0, R(0 | 0) = 0. But what
about Vw and Ve? There is a method to estimate these variances from data
called autocovariance least squares developed by Rajamani and Rawlings
(2007, 2009). There is even a free Matlab/Octave package for implementing
(Continued )

IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

where R(t | t − 1) is cov(β(t) − β̂(t | t − 1)), measuring the covariance of the error of
the hidden variable estimates. (It is a covariance instead of a variance because
β has two independent components.) Similarly, R(t | t) is cov(β(t) − β̂(t | t)).
Remembering that the hidden variable consists of both the mean of the
spread as well as the hedge ratio, R is a 2 × 2 matrix. e(t) = y(t) − x(t)β̂(t | t − 1)
is the forecast error for y(t) given observation at t − 1, and Q(t) is var(e(t)),
measuring the variance of the forecast error.
After observing the measurement at time t, the famous Kalman filter state
estimate update and covariance update equations are

77

BOX 3.1 (Continued )

this method at http://jbrwww.che.wisc.edu/software/als. But for simplicity,
δ
we will follow Montana and assume v ω = 1−δ
I , where δ is a parameter

between 0 and 1, and I is a 2 × 2 identity matrix. If δ = 0, this means β(t) =
β(t − 1), which reduces the Kalman filter to ordinary least square regression
with a fixed offset and slope. If δ = 1, this means the estimated β will fluctuate
wildly based on the latest observation. The optimal δ, just like the optimal
lookback in a moving linear regression, can be obtained using training data.
With the benefit of hindsight, we pick δ = 0.0001. With the same hindsight,
we also pick Ve = 0.001.

In Example 3.3, we describe the actual implementation of using the
Kalman filter to estimate a dynamic β for the EWA-EWC pair we discussed
in Example 2.7.
Example 3.3: Kalman Filter Mean Reversion Strategy

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

78

We will now implement the Kalman filter equations 3.5 through 3.13
and apply them to the EWA-EWC pair. The code can be downloaded
as KF_beta_EWA_EWC.m. We assume the price series of EWA is stored
in a Tx1 array x, and that of EWC is stored in a Tx1 array y.
% Augment x with ones to accommodate possible offset in the
% regression
% between y vs x.
x=[x ones(size(x))];
delta=0.0001; % delta=0 allows no change (like traditional
% linear regression).
yhat=NaN(size(y)); % measurement prediction
e=NaN(size(y)); % measurement prediction error
Q=NaN(size(y)); % measurement prediction error variance
% For clarity, we denote R(t|t) by P(t).
% initialize P and beta.
P=zeros(2);
beta=NaN(2, size(x, 1));
Vw=delta/(1-delta)*diag(ones(2, 1));
Ve=0.001;
% Initialize beta(:, 1) to zero
beta(:, 1)=0;

Example 3.3 (Continued)
for t=1:length(y)
if (t > 1)
beta(:, t)=beta(:, t-1); % state prediction.
% Equation 3.7
R=P+Vw; % state covariance prediction. Equation 3.8
end
yhat(t)=x(t, :)*beta(:, t); % measurement prediction.
% Equation 3.9
Q(t)=x(t, :)*R*x(t, :)’+Ve; % measurement variance
% prediction. Equation 3.10

% Observe y(t)
e(t)=y(t)-yhat(t); % measurement prediction error
K=R*x(t, :)’/Q(t); % Kalman gain
beta(:, t)=beta(:, t)+K*e(t); % State update.
% Equation 3.11
P=R-K*x(t, :)*R; % State covariance update. Euqation 3.12

79

End

FIGURE 3.5 Kalman Filter Estimate of the Slope

between EWC (y) and EWA (x)

(Continued )

IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

We can see from Figure 3.5 that with δ = 0.0001, the Kalmanupdated slope β(1, t) of a linear fit between EWC (y) and EWA (x)
oscillates around 1.

Example 3.3 (Continued)

FIGURE 3.6 Kalman Filter Estimate of the Intercept

between EWC (y) and EWA (x)

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

80

We can also see from Figure 3.6 that the Kalman-updated
intercept β(2, t) increases monotonically with time.
We can utilize these and other quantities computed from the
Kalman filter to create a mean-reverting strategy. The measurement
prediction error e(t) (previously called the forecast error for y(t)
given observation at t − 1) is none other than the deviation of the
spread EWC-EWA from its predicted mean value, and we will buy
this spread when the deviation is very negative, and vice versa if
it is very positive. How negative or positive? That depends on the
predicted standard deviation of e(t), which is none other than Q (t).
We can plot e(t) and Q (t) on the same chart (Figure 3.7) to see
that Q (t) changes quite slowly given our small δ.
The Matlab code for determining the entry and exit signals follows.
y2=[x(:, 1) y];
longsEntry=e < -sqrt(Q); % a long position means we should
% buy EWC
longsExit=e > -sqrt(Q);
shortsEntry=e > sqrt(Q);
shortsExit=e < sqrt(Q);

Example 3.3 (Continued)
Once the entry and exit signals are determined, the rest of the
code is the same as bollinger.m—just substitute beta(1, :) in place of
hedgeRatio. It has a reasonable APR of 26.2 percent and a Sharpe ratio
of 2.4. Its cumulative returns are plotted on Figure 3.8.

81
IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

FIGURE 3.7 Measurement Prediction Error e(t) and

Standard Deviation of e(t)

FIGURE 3.8 Cumulative Returns of Kalman Filter Strategy on

EWA-EWC

(Continued )

Example 3.3 (Continued)
Instead of coding the Kalman filter yourself as we demonstrated,
you can also use many free open-source MATLAB codes available.
One such package can be found at www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk
/Software/Kalman/kalman.html. Kalman filters are also available
from MATLAB’s Control System Toolbox.
■ Kalman Filter as Market-Making Model
There is another noteworthy application of Kalman filter to a meanreverting strategy. In this application we are concerned with only one
mean-reverting price series; we are not concerned with finding the hedge
ratio between two cointegrating price series. However, as before, we still
want to find the mean price and the standard deviation of the price series
for our mean reversion trading. So the mean price m(t) is the hidden variable here, and the price y(t) is the observable variable. The measurement
equation in this case is trivial:
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

y(t) = m(t) + (t),
∋

82

(“Measurement equation”) (3.14)

with the same state transition equation
m(t) = m(t − 1) + ω(t − 1).

(“State transition”) (3.15)

So the state update equation 3.11 is just
m(t | t) = m(t | t − 1) + K(t)( y(t) − m(t | t − 1)). (“State update”) (3.16)
(This may be the time to review Box 3.1 if you skipped it on first reading.)
The variance of the forecast error is
Q(t) = Var(m(t)) + Ve.

(3.17)

The Kalman gain is
K(t) = R(t | t − 1)/(R(t | t − 1) + Ve),

(3.18)

and the state variance update is
R(t | t) = (1 − K(t))R(t | t − 1).

(3.19)

■ The Danger of Data Errors
Data errors have a particularly insidious effect on both backtesting and executing mean-reverting strategies.
If there are errors, or “outliers,” in the historical data used for backtesting, then these errors usually inflate the backtest performance of
mean-reverting strategies. For example, if the actual trade prices of a
stock at 11:00, 11:01, and 11:02 were $100, $100, and $100, but the
historical data erroneously recorded them as $100, $110, $100, then
your mean-reverting strategy’s backtest is likely to have shorted the
stock at 11:01 ($110), and then covered the position at 11:02 ($100)
and made a tidy but fictitious profit of $10. You can see that data quality
is particularly important for intraday data, because they present much

83
IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

Why are these equations worth highlighting? Because this is a favorite
model for market makers to update their estimate of the mean price of an
asset, as Euan Sinclair pointed out (Sinclair, 2010). To make these equations
more practical, practitioners make further assumptions about the measurement error Ve, which, as you may recall, measures the uncertainty of the observed transaction price. But how can there be uncertainty in the observed
transaction price? It turns out that we can interpret the uncertainty in such
a way that if the trade size is large (compared to some benchmark), then the
uncertainty is small, and vice versa. So Ve in this case becomes a function of t
as well. If we denote the trade size as T and the benchmark trade size as Tmax,
then Ve can have the form
⎛ T
⎞
Ve = R(t | t − 1) ⎜
−1⎟
(3.20)
⎝ Tmax ⎠
So you can see that if T = Tmax, there is no uncertainty in the observed
price, and the Kalman gain is 1, and hence the new estimate of the mean
price m(t) is exactly equal to the observed price! But what should Tmax be? It
can be some fraction of the total trading volume of the previous day, for example, where the exact fraction is to be optimized with some training data.
Note the similarity of this approach to the so-called volume-weighted
average price (VWAP) approach to determine the mean price, or fair value
of an asset. In the Kalman filter approach, not only are we giving more
weights to trades with larger trade sizes, we are also giving more weights to
more recent trade prices. So one might compare this to volume and timeweighted average price.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

84

more numerous opportunities for such errors. That’s why reputable data
vendors took great care in incorporating the exchange-provided canceland-correct codes to correct any trades that may have been canceled due
to transaction prices that are too far from “normal.” (What constitutes a
“normal” price is solely determined, sometimes on a case-by-case basis,
by the relevant exchange.) Thomas Falkenberry (2002) has written more
on data cleansing issues.
However, this type of data error will suppress the backtest performance
of momentum strategies, so it is not as dangerous. In the preceding example, a momentum strategy will likely buy the stock at 11:01 ($110) in
backtest, and may be stopped out at a loss at 11:02 ($100).
The same kind of errors will, of course, trigger wrong trades in live trading as well, often resulting in real-life losses. In the preceding example, if the
prices were bid prices, and we have the erroneous bid at $110 at 11:02, then
our execution program may have sent a short market sell order at that time,
which unfortunately will be filled at $100 instead since there was actually
no bid at $110.
This problem with erroneous live bid/ask quotes is particularly dangerous when trading pairs or other arbitrage strategies, because in these
strategies we often depend on the differences of the price quotes from
various instruments to trigger trading signals. The difference of a pair of
quotes is usually of much smaller magnitude than the quotes themselves,
so any error in the quotes results in a much bigger percentage error in the
spread. For example, if we are trading a pair of stocks X and Y, and X has
a true bid price of $100 and Y has a true ask price of $105, so the spread
Y−X is $5, which may be too small to trigger an market order to buy X
and sell Y. But if data error causes Y to display an ask price of $106, then
the erroneous spread becomes $6, an increase of 20 percent over the real
spread of $5, and this may be enough to trigger an erroneous order to buy
X and sell Y.
I have seen this problem in live trading when I used a broker’s data feed
to drive an equities pair-trading strategy. That data feed quite regularly triggered losing trades that I could not explain, until I switched the data feed
to a third-party provider (nothing fancier than Yahoo! real-time quotes) and
the bad trades stopped. Later on, I had access to Bloomberg’s live data feed,
and it didn’t trigger any of these bad trades either.
Bad ticks in live data will also cause momentum strategies to send
wrong orders. So they are equally loss-inducing to the execution of those
strategies.

KEY POINTS
• Do you want to construct a mean-reverting portfolio with a fixed number
of shares during the duration of a trade? Use price series to determine the
hedge ratios.
• Do you want to construct a mean-reverting portfolio with fixed market
values for each constituent during the duration of a trade? Use log price
series to determine the hedge ratios.
• Ratio, instead of spreads, is often a good indicator for trading currency
pairs.
• Afraid that the hedge ratio, mean, and standard deviation of a spread may
vary in the future? Use a moving look-back period or the Kalman filter.
• A practical implementation of a linear trading strategy is the Bollinger bands
with scaling-in.
• Scaling-in may not be optimal in backtests but is often useful for live trading
where volatilities and probabilities do change.
• Do you want to dynamically update the expected price of an instrument
based on its latest trade (price and size)? Use the Kalman filter.
• Data errors can inflate the backtest results of mean-reverting strategies but
not momentum strategies.
• Strategies based on spreads are particularly sensitive to small data errors,
whether in backtest or live trading.

85
IMPLEMENTING MEAN REVERSION STRATEGIES

CHAPTER 4

Mean Reversion of
Stocks and ETFs
T

he stock market is, in a sense, the most fertile ground for finding meanreverting instruments and for the application of those basic mean reversion trading techniques described in the previous two chapters. In theory,
we can form pairs of stocks belonging to any sector and expect them to
cointegrate due to their exposure to many common economic factors. Their
number is large, so diversification is easy. In practice, though, there are some
serious difficulties with applying these generic techniques to trading stocks
and ETFs.This chapter will examine issues specific to stocks and ETFs. I will
also demonstrate that simple mean-reverting strategies actually work better
for ETF pairs and triplets.
But we need not limit ourselves to those strategies described in Chapter 3 when looking for mean reversion in stocks or ETFs. We find that
in the short term, most stocks exhibit mean-reverting properties under
normal circumstances. (Normal circumstance means there isn’t any news
on the stock, a topic that is taken up in Chapter 7.) This is despite the
fact that stock prices follow geometric random walks over the long term.
We will build a strategy to exploit this short-term, or “seasonal,” mean
reversion.
Index arbitrage is another familiar mean reversion strategy. In this
case, we are counting on the cointegration of stocks versus futures or

87

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

88

stocks versus ETFs. Because little profit is left using the traditional
implementation of index arbitrage, we give an example of a modified
strategy.
As mentioned before, in addition to the familiar time series mean
reversion to which we have devoted all our attention so far, there is the
phenomenon of cross-sectional mean reversion, which is prevalent in
baskets of stocks. Recall that in time series mean reversion, the prices
are reverting to a mean determined by their own historical prices, while
cross-sectional mean reversion means that the cumulative returns of the
instruments in a basket will revert to the cumulative return of the basket. The statistical tests for time series mean reversion are largely irrelevant for cross-sectional mean reversion. This additional type of mean
reversion makes creating any sort of mean-reverting strategy for stocks
even easier.
Because of this ease of finding mean-reverting patterns, the stock market
attracts a large number of traders, often called statistical arbitrageurs, to exploit such patterns. As a result, the returns in such strategies have generally
decreased. We discuss a few simple tricks that can boost their otherwise
declining performances.
Once again, we emphasize that the backtesting results in this book
do not include transaction costs. One reason for this omission is that
transaction costs can depend quite sensitively on the exact execution
method used and the exact stock universe chosen for the stock models.
A more specific pitfall included in the backtesting of the stock models
is the use of data with survivorship bias, since survivorship bias-free
data is more cumbersome and expensive to assemble. The hope is that
the results are not too unrealistic, at least for results in the past year
or two. If you intend to redo the backtests with survivorship bias–free
databases, you should remember that the chosen stock index (typically
Standard & Poor’s [S&P] 500) has a changing composition throughout
its history, too. To do this properly, you would need a database containing the historical daily index compositions. Remember also the issue of
primary versus consolidated stock prices discussed in Chapter 1. The
historical prices used here are all consolidated opens and closes. But if
you implement some of these strategies using market-on-open (MOO)
or limit-on-open (LOO) orders, or similarly market-on-close (MOC)
or limit-on-close (LOC) orders, you will be filled at the primary exchange open or close. Usually, this means that the actual returns will be
lower than those reported here.

■ The Difﬁculties of Trading Stock Pairs

89
MEAN REVERSION OF STOCKS AND ETFS

Pair trading of stocks is the first type of algorithmic mean reversion strategy
institutional traders invented, reportedly by Gerry Bamberger at Morgan
Stanley (Patterson, 2010). Yet nowadays it can be surprisingly difficult to
squeeze profits out of it.
If we test the daily price series of individual stocks, they almost never
meet the definition of stationarity as defined in Chapter 2. The geometric
random walk describes their behaviors fairly well: once they walked away,
they seldom returned to their starting points. (Their intraday and seasonal
mean-reverting properties are special cases to be discussed later on.)
Even if you pair them up in some sensible way (e.g., Exxon versus Chevron, or Citibank versus Bank of America), they are seldom cointegrating out-ofsample. I emphasize out-of-sample because it is quite easy to find cointegrating
stock pairs in any chosen period of time, but they can just as easily lose cointegration in the subsequent out-of-sample period. The reason for this difficulty
is that the fortunes of one company can change very quickly depending on
management decisions and the competition.The fact that two companies are in
the same industry sector does not guarantee that they will be subjected to the
same fortune (think AAPL versus BBRY). The upshot is that it is difficult to be
consistently profitable in trading a single pair of stocks using a mean-reverting
strategy unless you have a fundamental understanding of each of the companies
and can exit a position in time before bad news on one of them becomes public.
What if we trade a large number of pairs of stocks, so that occasional derailment of some pairs would not affect the profitability of the entire portfolio? The law of large numbers will only work in our favor if the expected
return of an individual pair in the out-of-sample period is positive, but I have
not found this to be the case for stock pairs. Apparently, the small profits
gained by the “good” pairs have been completely overwhelmed by the large
losses of the pairs that have gone “bad.”
Other than these fundamental problems with stock pairs trading, there
are two additional technical difficulties.
The first difficulty is short-sale constraint. It is particularly dangerous for
a stock pair that involves shorting a hard-to-borrow stock, because even if
your position is ultimately profitable, you may be forced to liquidate it at
the most unprofitable and inopportune time. This may happen when you are
short this stock and it suddenly jumps up in value due to some unexpected
good news, and many lenders of this stock are eager to sell them. In this
case, your borrowed stock may be recalled, and you will be forced to buy

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

90

to cover this position at a big loss, while selling the long position on the
other leg. This is called the short squeeze.
Under the same heading of short-sale constraint, the new alternative uptick
rule in effect in the U.S. stock markets since 2010 also creates uncertainty in
both backtesting and live executions of stock pairs strategy. Once the circuit
breaker is triggered, we are essentially forbidden to send short market orders.
The second difficulty arises in the intraday trading of stock pairs. Since the
profit margins in stock pairs trading have been decreasing through the years,
it becomes imperative to enter and exit positions intraday to capture the best
prices. Also, if traders refrain from taking overnight positions in stock pairs,
they may be able to avoid the changes in fundamental corporate valuations
that plague longer-term positions mentioned above. However, intraday pair
trading of stocks runs into the problem that the national best bid and offer
(NBBO) quote sizes for stocks (and for ETFs) have become very small. This
may be due to the prevalence of using dark pools or undisplayed “iceberg”
orders by institutional traders, the breaking up of large orders into very small
child orders by smart execution algorithms, the advent of high-frequency
traders submitting small orders that they can cancel and replace frequently,
and, finally, the reluctance of market makers to display large order sizes to
avoid being taken advantage of by high-frequency traders.
For example, it is not unusual for AAPL to have an NBBO size of just
100 shares! Therefore, backtesting a stock pair–trading strategy using either
trade or quote prices is not very realistic unless you trade only 100 shares
or if you include a substantial transaction cost. The same phenomenon leads
to difficulties in live execution also. If we were to submit market orders for
both sides after a trading signal was triggered by the NBBO prices, we could
have suffered a substantial slippage. We are forced to send limit orders for
one side (or for both sides with small fractions of an order and suffer temporary small unhedged positions) and actively manage the possible cancellations and resubmissions of this order in case they are not fully filled.
Why was pair trading stocks so profitable in the past? One general reason
is that the market was much more inefficient back then, so the normal profits
from the pairs that do mean-revert are large enough to cover those losses from
pairs that don’t. This is, of course, a common plague for any profitable strategies, but it is particularly acute for such well-known strategies as pair trading
of stocks. One specific reason for the decline in profits of stock pairs trading is
the decimalization of U.S. stock prices. Decimalization caused bid-ask spreads
to dramatically narrow, so pair traders, who act as a type of market makers,
find that their market-making profits decrease also (Serge, 2008).
