
Another far more important and far less understood way to reach
wrong conclusions is to rely too much on simple comparisons of the
price-earnings ratios of stocks that seem to be offering comparable
opportunities for growth. To illustrate this, let us assume that there are
two stocks with an equally strong prospect of doubling earnings over
the next four years and that both are selling at twenty times earnings,
while in the same market companies which are sound otherwise but
have no growth prospects are selling at ten times earnings. Let us sup-
pose that four years later the price-earnings ratios of stocks as a whole
are unchanged so that generally sound stocks, but ones with no growth
prospects, are still selling at ten times earnings. Let us also suppose that
at this same time, four years later, one of our two stocks has much the
same growth prospects for the time ahead as it had four years before so
that the financial community’s appraisal is that this stock should again
double its earnings over the next four years. This means it would still be
selling at twenty times the doubled earnings of the past four years, or, in
other words, that it had also doubled in price in that period. In contrast,
at this same time, four years after our example had started, the second
stock had also doubled its earnings, just as had been expected, but at
this point the financial community’s appraisal is for flat earnings in an
otherwise sound company over the next four years.’This would mean
that owners of this second stock were in for a market disappomtment
even though the four-year doubling of earnings had come through
exactly as forecast. With an image of “no growth in earnings for the
next four years,” they would now be seeing a price-earnings ratio of
only ten in this second stock. Therefore, while the earnings had dou-
bled, the price of the stock had remained the same. All this can be sum-
marized in a basic investment rule: The further into the future profits
will continue to grow, the higher the price-earnings ratio an investor
can afford to pay.

This rule, however, should be applied with great caution. It should
never be forgotten that the actual variations in price-earnings ratio will
result not from what will actually happen but from what the financial
community currently believes will happen. In a period of general market


220 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

optimism a stock may sell at an extremely high price-earnings ratio
because the financial community quite correctly envisages many years
of great growth ahead. But many years will have to elapse before this
growth is fully realized. The great growth that had been correctly dis-
counted in the price-earnings ratio is likely to become “undiscounted”
for a while, particularly if the company experiences the type of tempo-
rary setback that is not uncommon for even the best of companies. In
times of general market pessimism, this kind of “undiscounting” of
some of the very finest investments can reach rather extreme levels.
When it does, it affords the patient investor, with the ability to distin-
guish between current market image and true facts, some of the most
attractive opportunities common stocks can offer for handsome long-
term profits at relatively small risk.

A rather colorful example of how sophisticated investors attempt to
anticipate a changed investment-community appraisal of a company
occurred on March 13, 1974, The previous day the New York Stock
Exchange closing price of Motorola was 4854. On March 13 the clos-
ing quotation was 60, a gain of almost 25 percent! What had happened
was that after the close of the exchange on the 12th, an announcement
was made that Motorola was getting out of the television business and
was selling its U.S. television plants and inventory to Matsushita, a large
Japanese manufacturer, for approximate book value.

Now it had been known generally that Motorola’s television busi-
ness was operating at a small loss and to that extent was draining the
profits of the rest of the company’s business. This of itself would warrant
the news to cause some increase in the price of the shares, although
hardly the degree of rise that actually occurred. Considerably more
complex reasoning was the main motivation behind the buying. For
some time a considerable body of investors had believed that Motorola’s
profitable divisions, particularly its Communications Division, made this
company one of the very few American electronics companies qualified
as being of truly high-grade investment status. For example, Spencer
Trask and Co. had issued a report by security analyst Otis Bradley that
discussed the investment merits of Motorola’s Communications Divi-
sion in considerable detail. This report took the unusual approach of cal-
culating the current and estimated future price-earnings ratio, not for
Motorola’s earnings as a whole but merely for this one division alone.
The report compared the estimated sales volume and price earnings
ratio of just this one division with those of Hewlett-Packard and


Still More about the Fourth Dimension 221

Perkin-Elmer, generally considered to be among the very finest of elec-
tronics companies from an investment standpoint. From the report the
inference could easily be drawn (this was not specifically stated) that the
investment quality of Motorola’s Communications Division was such
that it was worth, by itself, the then current price of Motorola shares so
that, in effect, a buyer of the stock was getting all the other divisions for
nothing.

With this opinion about Motorola existing in some highly sophis-
ticated places, what may be judged to have induced such eager buying
on the Matsushita news? These Motorola enthusiasts had long known
that many elements of the financial community were inclined to look
with disfavor on the stock because of its television-manufacturing
image. Most of the financial community, upon hearing “Motorola,” first
thought of television and secondly of semiconductors. At the time of
the Matsushita announcement, Standard & Poor's stock guide, in the
small amount of space available for listing the principal business of each
company, described Motorola as “Radio & T.V.: semiconductors,” all of
which, though not inaccurate, was misleading in that it suggested a dif-
ferent sort of company from what, in fact, Motorola really was and com-
pletely overlooked the very important Communications Division,
which at the time comprised almost half of the company.

Some of those buying Motorola on the Matsushita news undoubt-
edly rushed in merely because the news was good and therefore could
be expected to send the stock up. But there is reason to ascribe consid-
erable buying to the belief that the financial community’s appraisal of
the company had been considerably less favorable than the facts war-
ranted. The historical record was such that in the television business
Motorola was regarded more as an “also ran” than as an industry leader
such as Zenith. With the television operations no longer blurring
investors’ vision of what else was there, a new image with a very much
higher price-earnings ratio would arise.

Were those who rushed in to pay these higher prices for Motorola
wise in so doing? Not entirely. In subsequent weeks the shares lost the
immediate gain so that a degree of patience would have paid. In down-
ward markets, a change for the worse in the financial community’s
image of a company gets accepted far more quickly than a change for
the better. Just the opposite is true in rising markets. Unfortunately for
those who rushed in to buy Motorola on this news, the immediately
ensuing weeks saw a sharp upturn in short-term interest rates which


222 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

produced a downward trend in the general market and accentuated the
widespread bear-market psychology then prevailing.

Perhaps another influence was also at work against those who
snapped up Motorola shares overnight. This influence is one of the most
subtle and dangerous in the entire field of investment and one against
which even the most sophisticated investors must constantly be on
guard. When for a long period of time a particular stock has been sell-
ing in a certain price range, say from a low of 38 to a high of 43, there
is an almost irresistible tendency to attribute true value to this price
level. Consequently, when, after the financial community has become
thoroughly accustomed to this being the “value” of the stock, the
appraisal changes and the stock, say, sinks to 24, all sorts of buyers who
should know better rush in to buy. They jump to the conclusion that
the stock must now be cheap. Yet if the fundamentals are bad enough,
it may still be very high at 24. Conversely, as such a stock rises to, say,
50 or 60 or 70, the urge to sell and take a profit now that the stock is
“high” becomes irresistible to many people. Giving in to this urge can
be very costly. This is because the genuinely worthwhile profits in stock
investing have come from holding the surprisingly large number of
stocks that have gone up many times from their original cost. The only
true test of whether a stock is “cheap” or “high” is not its current price
in relation to some former price, no matter how accustomed we may
have become to that former price, but whether the company’s funda-
mentals are significantly more or less favorable than the current financial-
community appraisal of that stock.

As previously mentioned, there is a third element of investment-
community appraisal that also must be considered, along with its
appraisal of the industry and of the particular company. Only after all
three are blended together can a worthwhile judgment be reached as to
whether a stock is cheap or high at any given time. This third appraisal
is that of the outlook for stocks in general. To see the rather extreme
effect such general market appraisals can have in certain periods and
how far these views can vary from the facts, it may be well to review
the two most extreme such appraisals of this century. Ridiculous as it
may seem to us today, in the period from 1927 to 1929, the majority of
the financial community actually believed we were in a “new era.” For
years earnings of most U.S. companies had been growing with monot-
onous regularity. Not only had serious business depressions become a
thing of the past but a great engineer and businessman, Herbert Hoover,


Still More about the Fourth Dimension 223

had been elected President. His competence was expected to assure
even greater prosperity from then on. In such circumstances it seemed
to many that it had become virtually impossible to lose by owning
stocks. And many who wanted to cash in as much as possible on this sure
thing bought on margin to obtain rnore shares than they could other-
wise afford. We all know what happened when reality shattered this
particular appraisal. The agony of the Great Depression and the bear
market of 1929 to 1932 will be long remembered.

Contrary in outlook, but similar in being spectacularly wrong, was
the investment community’s appraisal of common stocks as an invest-
ment vehicle in the three years from mid-1946 to mid-1949, Most
companies’ earnings were extremely pleasing. However, pursuant to the
then current appraisal, stocks were selling at the lowest price-earnings
ratios in many years. The financial community was saying that “these
earnings don’t mean anything,’ that they were “just temporary and
would shrink sharply or disappear in the depression that must come.”
The financial community remembered that the Civil War had been fol-
lowed by the panic of 1873, which marked the onset of a very severe
depression that lasted until 1879. Following World War I had come the
even worse crash of 1929 and another six years of major depression.
Since World War II had involved a vastly greater effort and therefore a
greater distortion of the economy than World War I, it was assumed that
an even bigger bear market and an even worse depression were on the
horizon. As long as this appraisal lasted, most stocks were so much on
the bargain counter that when it began to dawn on the investment
community that this image was false and that no severe depression lay
in wait, the foundations had been laid for one of the longest periods of
rising stock prices in USS. history.

Since the bear market of 1972-1974 brought with it the only other
time in this century when most price-earnings ratios were about as low as
they were in the 1946-1949 period, the question obviously arises as to the
soundness of the financial community’s appraisal that brought this about.
Are the fears engendering these historically low price-earnings ratios valid?
Could this be another 1946-1949 all over again? An attempt will be made
to throw some light on these matters in a later section of this book.

There is a basic difference between the factors that affect changes in
the general level of all stock prices and those that affect the relative price-
earnings ratio of one stock compared to another within that general
level. For reasons already discussed, the factors at any given moment that


224 CONSERVATIVE INVESTORS SLEEP WELL

affect this relative price-earnings ratio of one stock to another are sole-
ly matters of the current image in the investment community of the
particular company and the particular industry to which that company
belongs. However, the level of stocks as a whole is not solely a matter of
image but results partly from the financial community’s current apprais-
al of the degree of attractiveness of common stocks and partly from a
certain purely financial factor from the real world.

This real-world factor is mainly involved with interest rates. When
interest rates are high in either the long- or short-term money markets,
and even more so when they are high in both, there is a tendency for a
larger part of the pool of investment capital to flow toward those markets,
so the demand for stocks is less. Stocks may be sold to transfer funds to
these markets. Conversely, when rates are low, funds flow out of those
markets and into stocks. Therefore, higher interest rates tend to lower the
level of all stocks and lower interest rates to raise that level. Similarly, when
the public is in a mood to save a larger percentage of its income, more
funds flow into the total capital pool and there is a more bullish pull on
stock prices than when the pool of capital funds is rising more slowly.
However, this is a much smaller influence than is the level of interest rates.
An even smaller influence is the degree of fluctuation in new stock issues,
which are a drain on the capital pool available to the stock market, The
reason the new-issue supply is not a bigger factor on the general level of
stock prices is that when other influences cause stocks to be in favor, the
new-issue volume rises to take advantage of this situation. When com-
mon-stock prices reach low levels, supply of new issues tends to diminish
drastically. As a result, fluctuations in new-issue volume are much mote a
result of other influences than an influencing factor themselves.

This fourth dimension to stock investing might be summarized in
this way: The price of any particular stock at any particular moment is
determined by the current financial-community appraisal of the partic-
ular company, of the industry it is in, and to some degree of the gener-
al level of stock prices. Determining whether at that moment the price
of a stock is attractive, unattractive or somewhere in between depends
for the most part on the degree these appraisals vary from reality.
However, to the extent that the general level of stock prices affects the
total picture, it also depends somewhat on correctly estimating coming
changes in certain purely financial factors, of which interest rates are by
far the most important.



Part Three

DEVELOPING AN
INVESTMENT
PHILOSOPHY


Dedication to Frank E. Block

This book was first published at the request of the Institute of Chartered
Financial Analysts made under the C. Stewart Shepard Award. This
award was conferred on Frank E. Block C.F A. in recognition of his out-
standing contribution through dedicated effort and inspiring leadership
in advancing the Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts as a vital force
in fostering the education of financial analysts, in establishing high eth-
ical standards of conduct, and in developing programs and publications
to encourage the continuing education of financial analysts.


Origins of a Philosophy

jo understand any disciplined approach to investment, it is first nec-

essary to understand the objective for which the methodology is

designed. For any part of the funds supervised by Fisher & Co.,
except for funds temporarily in cash or cash equivalents awaiting more
suitable opportunities, it is the objective that they be invested in a very
small number of companies that, because of the characteristics of their
management, should both grow in sales and more importantly in prof-
its at a rate significantly greater than industry as a whole. They should
also do so at relatively small risk in relation to the growth involved. To
meet Fisher & Co. standards, a management must have a viable policy
for attaining these ends with all the willingness to subordinate immedi-
ate profits for the greater long-range gains that this concept requires. In
addition, two characteristics are necessary. One is the ability to imple-
ment long-range policy with superior day-to-day performance in all the
routine tasks of business operation. The other is that when significant
mistakes occur, as is bound at times to happen when management strives
for unique benefits through innovative concepts, new products, etc., or
because management becomes too complacent through success, these
mistakes are recognized clearly and remedial action is taken.

Because I believe I best understand the characteristics of manufac-
turing companies, I have confined Fisher & Co. activities largely to
manufacturing enterprises that use a combination of leading edge tech-
nology and superior business judgment to accomplish these goals. In
recent years, I have confined Fisher & Co. investments solely to this
group, because on the few occasions when I have invested outside it,


228 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

I have not been satisfied with the results. However, I see no reason why
the same principles should not be equally profitable when applied by
those with the necessary expertise in such fields as retailing, transporta-
tion, finance, etc.

No investment philosophy, unless it is just a carbon copy of some-
one else’s approach, develops in its complete form in any one day or
year. In my own case, it grew over a considerable period of time, partly
as a result of what perhaps may be called logical reasoning, and partly
from observing the successes and failures of others, but much of it
through the more painful method of learning from my own mistakes,
Possibly the best way of trying to explain my investment approach to
others is to use the historical route. For this reason I will go back into
the early, formative years, attempting to show block by block how this
investment philosophy developed.

THE BIRTH OF INTEREST

My first awareness of the stock market and the opportunities which
changing stock quotations might make possible occurred at a fairly carly
age. With my father the youngest of five and my mother the youngest
of eight, at my birth I had only one surviving grandparent. This may
have been one of the reasons why I felt particularly close to my grand-
mother. At any rate, I went to see her one afternoon when I was bare-
ly out of grammar school. An uncle dropped in to discuss with her his
views of business conditions in the year ahead, and how this might affect
the stocks she owned. A whole new world opened up to me. By saving
some money, I had the right to buy a share in the future profits of any
one I might choose among hundreds of the most important business
enterprises of the country. If I chose correctly, these profits could be
truly exciting. | thought the whole subject of judging what makes a
business grow an intriguing one, and here was a game that if I learned
to play it properly would by comparison make any other with which I
was familiar seem drab, meaningless and unexciting. When my uncle
left, my grandmother turned to me and said how sorry she was that he
happened to come in when I was there, forcing her to spend time on
matters which could not possibly interest me.I told her that, to the con-
trary, the hour he spent with her had seemed like ten minutes, and that
I had just heard something that interested me tremendously. Years later


Origins of a Philosophy 229

I was to realize how very few were the shares she owned and how
extremely superficial were the comments I heard that day, but the
interest that was kindled by that conversation has continued all during
my life.

With this degree of interest and ‘in a period when most businesses
were far less concerned with the legal hazards of dealing with minors
than is the case today, I was able to make a few dollars for myself dur-
ing the roaring bull market of the middle 1920's. I was strongly dis-
couraged from this, however, by my physician father, who felt that it
would simply teach me gambling habits. This was unlikely, as | am not
by nature inclined to take chances merely for the sake of taking chances,
which is the nature of gambling. On the other hand, as I look back upon
it, my tiny scale stock activities of that period taught me almost noth-
ing of any great value so far as investment policies were concerned.

FORMATIVE EXPERIENCES

Before the Great Bull Market of the 1920’s was to come to its crashing
end, I did have an experience, however, that was to teach me much of
real importance for use in the years ahead. In the 1927-28 academic year
I was enrolled as a first-year student in Stanford University’s then fledg-
ling Graduate School of Business. Twenty per cent of that year’s course,
that is one day a week, was devoted to visiting some of the largest busi-
ness enterprises in the San Francisco Bay area. Professor Boris Emmett,
who conducted this activity, had not been given this responsibility
because of the usual academic background. In those days, the large mail
order companies obtained a significant part of their merchandise through
contracts with suppliers whose sole customer was one or the other of
these firms. These contracts frequently were so hard on the manufactur-
er and afforded him so little profit margin that from time to time a man-
ufacturer would find himself in severe financial difficulty. It was not in
the interest of the mail order houses to see their vendors fail. Professor
Emmett had for some years been the expert employed by one such mail
order firm with the job of salvaging these faltering companies when they
had been squeezed too tightly. As a result, he knew a great deal about
management. One of the rules under which this course was conducted
was that we would visit no company that would just take us through the
plant. After “seeing the wheels go around,” the management had to be

