
Market Sentiment
Day traders also depend on market sentiment more than swing traders. Since currencies and equities react to the same things, it should not be
surprising that the two markets move in lockstep. If there is no news or economic data released, the currency market will take its cue from stocks,
particularly if the Dow Jones Industrial Average or other indices are moving significantly. On a day-to-day basis, risk appetite or the nervousness of
investors often dictates how currencies will trade. If stocks are rallying, it generally means that traders are optimistic and willing to take on risk,
which is positive for high-yielding currencies. If stocks are down materially, that is usually synonymous with risk aversion, which encourages forex
traders to seek safety in low-yielding currencies and reduce exposure to high-yielding ones.

Technicals Matter, Too
Lastly, day traders have a soft spot for technical analysis. Technical analysis or chart reading is another popular way to pinpoint entry and exit levels
in currencies. Chapters 6 through 9 explain just how that can be done. The break of important prices can cause sharp movements in currencies
during quiet times when there are no economic reports or news releases. Many trading orders such as stops and limits are set at round numbers
for the same reasons we celebrate our 10th and 20th wedding anniversaries and not our 9th and 19th anniversaries—because they are
psychologically palatable levels. The most common places to put orders are at round numbers and at 50 pip increments—the more zeros, the
better. This means that 100.00 or 1.1000 is a level at which many traders, investors, and companies that are hedging will place orders. A round
number is basically a price level where the last two decimal points are zeros—so 105.00 is a round number as well as 1.0200. Every 100-pip
increment will attract stops, and a break of those levels can trigger a sharp burst in price action as brokers process orders that either get their
clients into new positions or out of old ones.
Aside from the big stories, the direction of interest rates, economic data, stocks, and technicals, other factors such as option expirations,
mergers, and acquisitions of companies can also trigger small blips in price action. However, their impact is generally small and does not last, so if
you hear these terms used to explain price movements, don’t worry about them because they are not generally sustainable.
Knowing what moves currencies is important but this does not necessarily help traders determine where to enter and exit their trades, the
biggest mystery of trading. There are many different ways to trade currencies on an intraday or swing basis. The next chapter will introduce some
super simple strategies and tools to make it easier to identify your next great trade.

Get It? Got It? Good!
If an event is big enough to take up space on page 1 of your newspaper, it’s big enough to impact your trading. Consider these events when placing a trade.
When there’s news of political instability, currency traders usually sell first and ask questions later.
The most important long-term driver for currencies is interest rates. Whether rates are going up, going down, or stuck like glue, it means something.
Listen to central bank officials. What they say can impact currencies.
Know when countries are releasing economic data or reports and be ready to trade.
Chart reading (also known as technical analysis) is a good way to find your way into a trade. Remember, people love to put their orders near round numbers.

Chapter Six

The Investor versus the Trader
Finding the Right Approach for You
Over the next few chapters, we spend plenty of time talking about trading tactics and strategies, but first let me introduce to you my dear friends
Andrew and Steven, whose polar opposite personalities can teach us a great deal about how we should approach the forex market. There are a
million different ways to trade currencies—some involve holding onto a position for a few minutes while others involve holding it for days. Both
strategies can be effective if the person who implements it (yes, YOU) is the right person for the job.

Meet Andrew and Steven
Andrew and Steven are brothers who live in New York City. Steven is a dentist with a thriving practice in downtown Manhattan. He has two beautiful
daughters with perfect teeth and impeccable manners. Andrew, who is three years younger, is a talented architect with his own business that
focuses on servicing small-property developers. Both brothers are diehard Yankees fans who share a passion for golf and all things made by Steve
Jobs, but when it comes to investing, they could not be any more different.
Being a dentist who makes a very good living drilling teeth, Steven needs to work only 35 to 40 hours a week. His 10-hour days are as long as
most people’s, but his practice is open only four days a week. The rest of the time, Steven plays golf, fiddles with his large number of iPad apps,
and manages his investments. With a great deal of spare time between patients and workdays, he often instant messages me about his trades and
investment ideas. As a devout Mac fanatic, his favorite stock is, of course, Apple. I have long advised Steven to stick with what he knows and so he
usually focuses on trading the stocks of medical supply companies and Apple. Although most people would think that dentists are extremely patient,
my friend Steven is not. Over the course of a week, he may buy and sell Apple a number of times on both the long and short side. Usually it is ahead
of earnings announcements, product releases, or the annual World Wide Developers Conference. Whenever there is a rumor about what Apple
may or may not do, such as offering the iPhone through Verizon, Steven is always on top of the news and has an opinion. However, as well as
Steven may know Apple and its current and future product offerings, he always ends up selling too early and buying too late. To his credit, he still
returned more than 65 percent on his money in 2009 and 2010.
Andrew, on the other hand, works 60 to 70 hours a week. He has no kids but has a few investment properties that he is always doing handiwork
on and volunteers often to tutor underprivileged kids in the Bronx. Like Steven, he has a Mac at home and at work, an iPhone, a Shuffle for the gym,
and an iPad for his other miscellaneous activities. Andrew also believes that Apple will one day rule the world and every household will have some
invention made by Steve Jobs. However, he does not have the same amount of spare time as Steven has to stare at his trading screen and visit
CNET, MacRumors, and Engadget multiple times a day. He has held Apple stock since the beginning of 2007 and added small amounts whenever
he is paid for an architectural project. By mid-2010, the value of his Apple shares has more than doubled. He has far fewer gray hairs than Steven
and not only because he is younger!
One time Steven picked me up in his blue BMW and as we were driving up Sixth Avenue to pick up a cake for a daughter’s birthday; a taxicab,
trying to switch lanes to pick up a passenger cut us off, causing Steven to slam on his brakes and curse violently. That moment is characteristically
Steven, meaning that he can be hotheaded and impatient. Therefore, it should not come as a surprise that he is unable to hold a position in a stock
for much longer than a few hours because he spends much of his free time staring at his trading screen, reacting emotionally to each and every
half-point move for or against him. In fact, Steven’s office is next to his patients’ rooms and sometimes when he is waiting on his assistants to do
preparatory work, he will run back and forth to check on his trades.
Andrew is the complete opposite of Steven. He is very Zen when it comes to both driving and trading. In New York, getting cut off by other cars is
a part of life. In fact, New York drivers have to avoid cars, pedestrians jaywalking, skaters, and bicyclists—it is almost like navigating a safari.
Whenever a car cuts Andrew off, he calmly presses on the brakes, barely reacts, and continues to drive. As a long-standing yoga practitioner, he is
the epitome of patience. This made me realize that the difference in Andrew’s and Steven’s investment behaviors may be partly due to their amount
of spare time and partly to their personalities. Impatient Steven is much more of a trader while Zen-like Andrew only cares to be an investor.
Despite their different temperaments, both Steven and Andrew have done a fantastic job of managing their investment portfolios. Books such as
Jack D. Schwager’s Market Wizards (New York Institute of Finance, 1989; Harper’s Business, 1993) and Millionaire Traders: How Everyday
People Beat Wall Street at Its Own Game (John Wiley & Sons, 2007), which I wrote with Boris Schlossberg, have featured very successful traders
who have diametrically opposite approaches to the market. The secret to trading is as much in the strategy as it is in the psychology. Successful
traders do not fit their personalities to their trading activities but rather find trading approaches that are in line with their personalities. If you have
ever tried to trade long term but cringed at every 10th of a percent move against you, then it is time to realize that long-term trading is probably not
right for you. At the same time, if you can only check your trading screen once a day and cannot get up early to trade active market hours, then
longer term or swing trading may be more suitable for you. Many people have traded successfully on the short or long term—the decision to
become a trader or an investor should be determined by your own personality and time.

Quiz: Instant Gratification or Willing to Wait?

Here is a quick quiz to help you decide whether trading or investing is right for you.
What do you do when Apple releases a brand-new iPhone? Your choices are:
A. Get up at 4 a.m. on a Saturday morning and wait hours on line in the hot sun to get your hands on the new iPhone the day it is released.
B. Order the iPhone online and wait three weeks for it to arrive.
If you picked A, it means that you have more of a trading mind-set because you seek instant gratification and are willing to pay the price of waiting hours on line in the heat
begging someone to hold your space in line during bathroom breaks to get your hands on Apple’s latest gadget.
If you chose B, you are likely to be more long term–oriented and are willing to delay your desire for fast cash in order to live a less-demanding lifestyle.

The Waiting Game of Taxi Drivers
We can also learn a lot about trading from the personalities of taxicab drivers. Living in New York City, I take taxis frequently and have always been
fascinated by the different choices made by taxi drivers. A taxi medallion, which is an aluminum cap that is bolted to the hood of each cab and
gives the drivers the right to operate the taxi, is the priciest piece of aluminum in New York City. The cost of an individual medallion is a jawdropping $588,000, while a company-owned medallion costs nearly $780,000. Calling this overpriced would be an understatement, particularly
since the corporate medallion only cost $339,000 in 2004. When they were introduced in the 1930s, the cost per medallion was only $10. It has one
of the best bull markets with the most consistent returns. Why are medallions so expensive? They are limited and have provided annual returns
between 15 and 20 percent, even during the global financial crisis. This staggering price should make you wonder how in the world can an average
taxi driver afford to pay for the right to operate a cab—and the answer is that most of them can’t. Owners of taxi medallions usually rent out their
medallions for as much as $800 per week for one shift. For the poor taxi driver, this means that in order to turn a profit each night, he or she needs
to pick up more than $115 in fares and tips. This explains why taxi drivers are so aggressive, cutting off buses and cars driven by people like
Steven and Andrew.
However, not all taxi drivers choose to dart around the city looking for a fare. If you have ever flown into a New York City airport, you may have
seen hundreds of cabs waiting in the taxi holding area for the dispatcher to release them. The wait is usually between two and three hours. You
might be asking why some taxi drivers who have rented out a 12-hour shift are willing to waste hours in a line instead of darting around the city
picking up different passengers. The answer is personality and patience.
According to the American Master Cabbie Taxi Academy, which conducts weekly surveys of the income of taxi drivers, the average amount that
a full-time night shift driver pulls in per week is approximately $1,000. The income of a daytime driver is slightly less. Assuming that taxi drivers work
seven days a week and most of them have to, it puts their daily income at approximately $143. A typical cab ride within the city costs $12 to $15
before tips and $15 to $18 with tips. This means that a taxi driver darting around the city needs to pick up at least nine people to make $140 per
day. A cab ride from JFK airport to the city has a flat rate of $45; with tips and toll it usually comes to $60. This means that the taxi driver only needs
to pick up two airport fares and one to two city fares to make $140—not only is this less work, but it also saves gas. However, if all taxi drivers just
waited at the airport, there would be no cabs in the city. The reason some drivers wait and others don’t boils down to patience and the need for
instant gratification. Some taxi drivers will sit around for hours waiting for the best fares while others will speed down New York City streets trying to
pick up as many lower value fares as possible.
In many ways the psychology of traders is very similar to that of taxi drivers. There are traders who prefer to hang out and wait for the perfect
opportunity and others who cannot resist being in the market and participating even if it means smaller profits.

Are You Jack Shephard or John Locke?
One of the most popular TV shows of the twenty-first century is Lost. The essence of Lost is that a band of people constantly operates in a highly
dangerous environment without any helpful information. In short, every character must make life-or-death decisions with imperfect knowledge of the
situation at hand. No one exemplifies this idea better than Locke. Not the new “smoky” Locke played with great malevolence by Terry O’Quinn, but
the old, bumbling John Locke who is always trying to do the right thing but inevitably ends up making the wrong decision. The old Locke is
presented as a man of faith who is ultimately a follower; he is juxtaposed with Jack Shephard’s man of reason who questions everything he is
confronted with. Jack and John are the quintessential examples of two types of traders—faders and followers.
The Jack Shephards of the world are the faders and contrarians who question everything they are confronted with. If Jack were a trader, he would
probably look at every 1 percent drop in the EUR/USD as a better opportunity to buy in anticipation of a bottom. The John Lockes and the followers
of the world would probably ride a move until there is a sign that tells him that it is time to change. If Locke were a trader and the EUR/USD was
selling off, he would probably sell the currency pair until it finally reverses. Skeptics and contrarians are more suited for range trading because, as
much as Locke may try to get Jack to see his ways, he simply can’t. For everyone else, trend following is probably more appropriate since it is the
stronger dynamic in the forex market. Neither of these tactics are wrong—they are just two different approaches to the market suitable for traders
with different personalities.
To new traders, this idea of determining your trading style based upon your personality may seem completely illogical, but the real point is to stick
with your strengths. Would it have been smart for Babe Ruth, one of baseball’s most prolific hitters, to return to pitching? Should Mario Batali, one of
America’s best Italian chefs, hinge his career and savings on a Chinese restaurant? Should Tiger Woods try his chance on “Dancing with the
Stars”? Probably not. Although they could have become successful, the foundation of their careers should be rooted in what they know and do best.
My colleague Boris Schlossberg said it well in his book Technical Analysis of the Currency Market:

The cold hard truth of life is that we do not really change; we just grow older. The most successful businesspeople in the world learn how to
utilize their strengths while minimizing their weaknesses by having their more skilled colleagues perform those tasks, which they cannot do
well. Trading is very much the same. Successful traders choose those strategies that are most aligned with their psychological profiles
while staying out of the market when conditions aren’t suitable for their style. It isn’t a matter of doing the easy thing or the difficult thing. All
trading is difficult. Rather it’s a matter of doing the natural thing. Why is this concept so important? Couldn’t you simply learn proper trading
habits with enough practice and discipline? No. No matter how much discipline you possess, if you are trading contrary to your natural

impulses you will eventually sabotage your trading plan and you will fail.
When trying to figure out which type of trading style is right for you, keep in mind that short and long term in the forex market is very different from
short and long term in the stock market because leverage magnifies profits and losses.
Short-term currency traders generally hold their positions for only a few minutes, a few hours, or a few days. Any longer and it would be
considered an investment. A position held for a few minutes or hours is typically called a day trade, while a position held for a few days or at most a
few weeks is referred to as a swing trade. Day and swing traders approach the market in very different ways. Swing traders look to latch onto
themes in the market that can turn into multiday moves, while day traders like to take advantage of small bursts in price movements.

Get It? Got It? Good!
Being a good trader is about finding the right strategy that fits your personality.
We’re all adults. Don’t expect to easily mold your personality to a trading style.
If you don’t have much patience, you might be best suited to day trading.
If you don’t mind waiting it out, you might be best suited for medium-term trading or something bordering on investing.
Short- and long-term trading in the forex market is very different from short- and long-term trading in the stock market; remember, leverage magnifies profits and losses.

Chapter Seven

What All Winners Do
Must-Follow Rules for Everyone in Forex
Successful people usually have a few common traits—such as being a hard worker and forward thinker. So it shouldn’t surprise you that the people
who have invested or traded successfully in the forex market also have a few things in common. I talk to profitable and unprofitable traders on a
regular basis and here are some tips drawn from their experience and mine that will benefit everyone—regardless of whether you are an investor or
trader.
Everyone talks about the value of following the trend, but almost no one actually does it. This is one of the great ironies of forex trading. So how
are potential profits made?
Katz’s Delicatessen is a New York institution that has been selling the most delectable pastrami sandwiches since 1888. Both locals and tourists
pack the restaurant night and day for a taste of their famous juicy black pepper–coated pastrami. In 1990, a pastrami sandwich cost approximately
$7.50. By 2010, the price had more than doubled. So how was Katz’s able to double their prices and still keep customers? It’s because they have
always had a sufficient number of buyers.
Profits are made in trading when the majority of the market is on the side of your position. If you are long, the price moves up when there are
more buyers; if you are short, the price moves down when there are more sellers. The more people that favor your trade, the more likely it will
continue to move in your favor, and the more money you could potentially make. By instinct, many people choose to go against the grain and pick
tops and bottoms. Surprisingly, it is rarely a question of value and mostly just a matter of ego. Every time we fade, we say, “I know better! You, Mr.
Market, are wrong! I’m smarter than you and will not follow you like all the rest of these suckers!” When we are right, the feeling is intoxicating, but
when we are wrong, the results can be debilitating. The secret of forex trading is to give yourself the greatest edge possible by staying with the
trend, bagging your winners quickly, and knowing when to say no.

Stay with the Trend
In the first few chapters of this book, we went into great length about why currencies spend more time in trend than in range. (A range is defined as
the high and low of a currency pair; when a currency trades in a range, it remains within certain highs and lows. In a trend, on the other hand, we
usually see a currency pair make new highs or new lows.) Pull up any weekly or monthly chart of the EUR/USD and you will see that for the past 10
years, there have been more months where the EUR/USD continued its prior move than it has reversed it. How currencies behave reflect how
investors feel about the country’s economic outlook; the economy of a country typically gets progressively better or progressively worse with time.
Take the EUR/USD, for example. Exhibit 7.1 shows how the EUR/USD traded between 2006 and the first half of 2010. In the first few months of
2010, the EUR/USD fell six months in a row. Between June and October 2009, the EUR/USD rose for five months straight. In 2008, the EUR/USD
made consecutive monthly lows for only four months, but in that period the currency pair lost more than 20 percent. In 2006 and 2007, the trend was
even more obvious. Although weekly and daily charts will show areas where profits can be made from reversals, the greater and less stressful
opportunities were in the direction of the trend.
