
other than a certain unwillingness to emerge from our bond trading shell.
We were well positioned to enter the business; what with our access to
the nation's lenders we should have been a leader in the financing of
take-overs. Of course, we had an excuse; we had to have an excuse for
missing such a huge opportunity. Our excuse was that junk bonds were
evil. Henry Kaufman made speech after speech arguing that corporate
America was overborrowing and that junk bond mania would end in ruin.
He may have been right, but that's not why we didn't leap into junk
bonds. We didn't underwrite junk bonds because our senior management
didn't understand them, and in the midst of the civil war on the fortyfirst floor, no one had the time or the energy to learn.
John Gutfreund could pretend that he had avoided the business because
he disapproved of its consequences, highly leveraged companies. But that excuse wore thin when he later plunged like a kamikaze
pilot into the business of leveraging companies and brought ruin upon us
and a few of our clients. (It also didn't help that both he and Henry
Kaufman purchased junk bonds for their personal accounts at the same
time they were preaching corporate austerity.) In any case, whether
Salomon Brothers participated or Salomon Brothers abstained, every
company was by now a potential target for Milken's raiders, including
Salomon Brothers Inc. That was the final irony of Ronald Perelman's bid.
We were being raided by a man financing himself with junk bonds
because we had neglected to enter the business of raiding companies and
financing the raids with junk bonds.
Soon after the news broke of Perelman's ambitions, Gutfreund made a
speech to the firm saying that he didn't approve of hostile raiders and
that he intended to shun Perelman, but apart from that, which we could
have guessed on our own, we were left, as usual, uninformed. We relied
on the investigative reporting of James Sterngold of The New York
Times and the staff of the Wall Street Journal to learn the blow-byblow of the event.
The story was this: The tears had first flowed on Saturday morning,
September 19, a few days before the news broke. On that morning John
Gutfreund received a telephone call at his apartment from his friend and
lawyer Martin Lipton, the man whose office he had used two months
before to sack Lewie Ranieri. Lipton knew that Salomon's largest
shareholder, Minorco, had found a buyer for its 14 percent stake in the

company. The identity of the buyer, however, was still a mystery.
Gutfreund must have been badly embarrassed. He had known for months
that Minorco wanted to sell its holdings but had been slow to
accommodate it. This was bad judgment; as a result, he lost control of
the process. Fed up with Gutfreund, Minorco advertised its Salomon
shares through other Wall Street bankers.
On Wednesday, September 23, Gutfreund learned from the president of
Minorco the bad news that the buyer was Revlon Inc. It was clearly the
beginning of a take-over attempt. Revlon's Perelman said that in addition
to Minorco's shares, he wanted to buy a further 11 percent stake in
Salomon, which would bring his stake to 25 percent. If Perelman
succeeded, Gutfreund, for the first time, would lose his grip on the firm.
Gutfreund scrambled to find an alternative to Revlon for Minorco.
He called his friend Warren Buffett, the shrewd money manager.
Buffett, of course, expected to be paid to rescue Gutfreund, and
Gutfreund offered him a surprisingly sweet deal. Instead of Buffett's
purchasing our shares outright, Gutfreund proposed only that Buffett
lend us money. We, Salomon, would buy in our own shares. We needed
$809 million. Buffett said he'd lend us $700 million of that, by
purchasing what was in effect a Salomon Brothers bond. That was just
enough. Gutfreund could tap $109 million of our capital to make up the
difference.
Investors around the world envied Warren Buffett, for he had it both
ways. His security-known as a convertible preferred-bore an interest
rate of 9 percent which was in itself a good return on his investment. But
in addition, he could trade it in at any time before 1996 for Salomon
common stock at thirty-eight dollars a share. In other words, Buffett
got a free play, over the next nine years, in the shares of Salomon. If
Salomon Brothers continued to falter, Buffett would take his 9 percent
interest and be content. If somehow Salomon Brothers recovered,
Buffett could convert his bond into shares and make as much money as if
he had stuck his neck out and bought our stock in the first place. Unlike
Ronald Perelman, who was willing to commit himself to the future of
Salomon Brothers by buying a large chunk of equity, Buffett was making
only the safe bet that Salomon would not go bankrupt.
The arrangement had two consequences: It preserved Gutfreund's job,
and it cost us, or, rather, our shareholders, a great deal of money. Our

shareholders, after all, would pay for Buffett's gift. The simplest way to
determine its cost to them was to value Buffett's bond. Buffett paid
Salomon Brothers 100, or par. I punched a few numbers into my HewlettPackard calculator. I reckoned (very conservatively) that Buffett could
sell it immediately for 118. The difference between 100 and 118, or 18
percent of Buffett's total investment, was pure windfall. That comes to
$126 million. Why should Salomon Brothers shareholders (and employees,
if we assume some of it at least might well come out of our bonuses) foot
the bill to save a group of men who had taken their eyes off the ball?
That was the first question that crossed my mind and the minds of many
of our managing directors.
For the good of Salomon Brothers, explained Gutfreund. "I was
shocked," Gutfreund said of Perelman's bid. "Perelman was just a name
to me, but I felt that the structure of Salomon Brothers, in terms of our
relationships with clients, their trust and confidence, would not do well
with someone deemed to be a corporate raider."
Except for the first sentence, this statement rings false from the
beginning to end. Let's take the last part first. Our relationship with
clients hadn't suffered from having a South African as a shareholder;
why should it suffer from an association with a hostile raider? I don't
care to dwell on the morality of either apartheid or hostile take-overs.
But at the very minimum, it must be agreed, the former is at least as
dangerous to be associated with as the latter. Our business may even
have benefited from an association with a hostile raider. Corporations
fearing raids, when they saw our backers, might well have kept us on
retainer, just as they kept Drexel Burnham on retainer, as a sort of
protection fee. Once Perelman was a major shareholder, we could
credibly promise to keep him (and his friends) off the backs of others.
Perelman, I am sure, was perfectly aware of this synergy when he
contemplated buying into an investment bank.
Second, for a man on Wall Street to refer to Ronald Perelman in
September 1987 as "just a name to ine" is absurd. Everyone knew who
Ronald Perelman was. Christ, I knew who Ronald Perelman was before I
started work at Salomon Brothers. From virtually nothing he had
amassed a fortune of five hundred million dollars. And he had done it by
raiding companies with borrowed money and firing bad management.
Gutfreund no doubt knew that his days were numbered if Perelman

gained control of Salomon Brothers. And if by some miracle of oversight
he did not, he learned quickly when he met with Perelman at the Plaza
Athenee Hotel in New York on September 26. The amazing rumor
circulated in the managing directors' dining room on the forty-second
floor that Gutfreund's replacement would be Bruce Wasserstein.*
In view of the circumstances, the way John Gutfreund persuaded the
Salomon Brothers board to pay Warren Buffett a large sum of money to
serve as our white knight appears marvelously shrewd. The board,
*As Wasserstein, who was advising Perelman, worked for our competitor,
First Boston, it seems incredible that a deal might have been struck
whereby he would quit First Boston to manage Salomon Brothers if
Perelman won the day. It seems more believable once you know how
unhappy Wasserstein was at First Boston. He resigned the following
January to start his own firm, Wasserstein, Perella & Co. There I had a
chance to ask him directly about the incredible rumor. He is a forceful
man who doesn't often stare at his shoes and mumble his answers, but
upon hearing the question, he lowered both his eyes and the tone of his
voice. Then he gave the following answer: "I don't know how these
rumors get started. How could it be true? I was in Japan at the time the
bid was announced." Hmmm.
by law, had to consider the interests of shareholders. On September 28,
Gutfreund told the board that if it rejected the Buffett plan in favor of
Ronald Perelman, he (together with Tom Strauss and a few others) would
resign. "I never stated it as a threat," Gutfreund later told Stern-gold.
"I was stating a fact." •
An aspect of the genius of Gutfreund was his ability to cloak his own
self-interest in the guise of high principle. The two could be, on rare
occasions, indistinguishable. (If there is one thing I learned on Wall
Street, it's that when an investment banker starts talking about
principles, he is usually also defending his interests and that he rarely
stakes out the moral high ground unless he believes there is gold under
his campsite.) It is possible, even probable, that John Gutfreund felt
genuinely appalled by the financial tactics of Ronald Perelman-he is a
feeling man-and no doubt he delivered his statement with the conviction
of a preacher. He was magnificently persuasive. But he was risking
nothing by laying his job on the line; he had nothing to lose and
everything to gain; once Perelman acquired his stake, Gutfreund would

have been fired before he had a chance to resign.
There was ample evidence in Gutfreund's past to justify a cynical
interpretation of his offer of resignation. Years before, in a similar
situation, Gutfreund had made a similar move. In a partnership meeting in
the mid-1970s a strange exchange occurred. William Simon (who was
neck and neck with Gutfreund to succeed Billy Salomon as chairman)
mentioned how rich Salomon Brothers partners could become if they sold
their stakes and transformed Salomon from a privately held concern into
a publicly held corporation.
Billy Salomon thought the partnership was the key to the health of the
firm and the sole mechanism for securing the loyalty of its employees
("It locked them in, like family," he says). When Simon quit talking,
Gutfreund rose and bravely echoed the opinion of his boss. He said that
if the firm were ever sold, the partners could have his resignation; he,
John Gutfreund, would quit because the key to the success of Salomon
Brothers was its partnership. "That's one of the main reasons I picked
him to succeed me," says William Salomon, "because he said he deeply
believed in the partnership."
Once he gained control and had the largest stake in the company,
however, Gutfreund had a change of heart. In October 1981, three years
after the reins had passed into his hands, he sold the firm for $554
million to the commodity dealer Phibro.* As he was chairman, he made
the most money from the sale, about $40 million. He said the firm
needed the capital. William Salomon disagrees. "The firm had more than
enough capital," he says. "His materialism was disgraceful." (In a way,
Gutfreund was now paying for it. Had Salomon remained a partnership,
there could have been no possibility of a take-over.)
Nevertheless, Gutfreund's threat to resign swayed the board members
of Salomon Inc. It diverted their attention from the simple economics of
the situation, which weighed overwhelmingly in Perelman's favor, and
toward the social responsibility of Salomon Brothers. Besides, most of
them had been appointed to their posts by Gutfreund and were his
friends. After two hours they decided to accept Gutfreund's proposal.
Warren Buffett made his investment, Gutfreund kept his job, and Perelman kept his money in his pocket.
Life in our firm almost returned to normal, for a few weeks. But a
fundamental question about Salomon Brothers had been raised. We all

knew our firm was badly managed. But was it so badly managed that even
a buccaneer like Perelman could hope to improve its condition? Actually,
another question was more likely on the minds of the Big Swinging Dicks
of the forty-first floor. People who for so long had viewed money as the
measure of success were bound to envy not only Perelman but
Wasserstein, Perella, and Milken. Especially Michael Milken. The question
of the day on 41 was: How come he makes a billion dollars and I don't?
This question drives us right to the center of what has happened in
financial America over the past few years. For Milken, not Salomon
Brothers, had made the biggest trade of the era. That trade was, of
course, the buying and selling of corporate America. Salomon had missed
the grand shift in its own business from trading bonds to trading entire
industries.
* Control passed back to Gutfreund in 1984, when, on the back of
Salomon's strong performance and Phibro's near collapse, he persuaded
the board of directors to fire David Tendler, Phibro's CEO Gutfreund
then ascended from CEO of the subsidiary, Salomon Brothers, to CEO of
the parent, Phibro Salomon, subsequently to be named Salomon Inc.
Chapter Eleven
When
Bad Things
Happen to
Rich People
OE OF MY favorite sinners, Edwin Edwards, the former governor of my
home state of Louisiana, was fond of saying that hell's hottest fires burn
for hypocrites. But Lord, how I hope it isn't so. No more than two weeks
after Ronald Perelman's take-over bid, I was informed, no, instructed,
that junk bonds were the new priority of Salomon Brothers.* Amazingly,
we had a deal to sell. The Southland Corporation, owners of 7-Eleven
food stores throughout the United States, had been bought in July 1987
by its own management with 4.9 billion borrowed dollars. Salomon
Brothers and Goldman Sachs had extended a short-term loan for the
purpose, known as a bridge loan. Like all bridge loans, our loan was
supposed to be quickly replaced by junk bonds in the name of the
Southland Corporation. The junk was to be sold to investors, and the
money from that sale would remit to us. The only hitch was that
investors, for whatever reason, shied away from the junk. We salesmen

were blamed for not trying hard enough.
Dash Riprock had shrewdly isolated himself by persuading his superiors
long ago that his customers bought only U.S. government bonds. As a
result of his foresight, he wasn't expected to peddle junk. I, on the
other hand, was in the deal up to my eyeballs. I had the same problem as
the man who gives a million dollars to a charity only to find himself
'This change in policy led Henry Kaufman to resign in early 1988.
inundated with demands for more. My sale of Olympia & York bonds had
taken place more than a year before, but it-and other, similar salescontinued to haunt me. It was assumed, not unfairly, that anyone who
could con his customers into buying eighty-six million dollars' worth of
Olympia & York bonds should also be able to sell a large number of bonds
in the Southland Corporation. I was paying for my past by being
sentenced to repeat it. I had no ability whatsoever to evaluate
Southland's bonds on their merits, but since ignorance hadn't stopped
me before, it was not expected to stop me now.
Salomon's junk bond specialists insisted that Southland was a good
investment, but then they would. They had the most to gain if the deal
succeeded (thirty million dollars in profits to the junk bond department)
and the most to lose if it failed (their jobs). If the bonds were dog meat,
no one would have said it. Bonus time was soon upon us, and honesty about
the quality of our merchandise was trading at a discount.
My gut feeling was that Salomon Brothers knew nothing about junk bonds
and that, as a result, any junk we underwrote deserved its name. Salomon
Brothers was, I thought, making a trading mistake typical of a rank
beginner: leaping into a crowded, frenzied marketplace and buying
whatever is for sale at the top. I had no choice but to trust my instincts,
as there was no one who knew anything about Southland whom I could
trust at Salomon Brothers. And my instincts said that these bonds were
doomed.
As my last New Year's resolution, I had stopped selling people things I
didn't think they should buy. For Lent, I had given up my New Year's
resolution. I still felt dishonest about my small role in the world's capital
markets, even if the rule governing those markets was caveat emptor.
And I wasn't the only one. Dash was an expert on the ethics of bond
salesmanship. "You shneak!" he'd shout whenever anyone jammed bonds.
Then he'd go and jam a few himself. More to the point, each time I

jammed bonds into an investor's portfolio they came back to haunt me,
usually in the form of a tenaciously pissed-off customer calling each
morning with some variant on Herman the German's bitter refrain,
"Michael, haf you any more great ideas up your sleef?" I did not sleep
well at night or enjoy falling out of bed in the morning, imagining, as I
did, investors across Europe sticking pins into miniatures of me.
The question concerning the bonds of the Southland Corporation,
then, was how to steer my customers around them. This was more easily
said than done. Not selling bonds was a tricky affair, much trickier than
selling bonds, more like playing squash with your boss, because you had to
appear to want to win at the same time you intended to lose. Southland
was especially tricky because it was Gutfreund's bid to show that
Salomon Brothers was a force to be reckoned with in junk bonds. I
received telephone calls from several New York managers, whose job it
was to pester salesmen and who were galvanized by Gutfreund's interest
in their project. They asked what luck I was having. I lied. I said that I
was giving Southland my best shot when in fact I had not placed a single
sales call. Still, they would not let me be.
It seemed that I, like a golfer, needed to improve my lie. Either it
sounded unconvincing, or more likely, other salesmen were telling much
better ones ("My customer is away for a week on vacation." "My
customer is dead"). One of the junk bond specialists insisted on actually
watching me place a sales call to my biggest client, my Frenchman.
Mercifully he did not insist on listening in. He only wanted to be able to
say that he saw me try. We sat at the corner of the trading desk, he
beside me, while I did the dirty work.
"Oui," said my Frenchman.
"Hi, it's me," I said.
"But who else?"
"There is a deal you should have a look at," I began, measuring each word.
"It's extremely popular with American investors." (My Frenchman was
intensely suspicious of anything popular.)
"Then we shall let them buy it all," he said, having caught on.
"I'm sitting here with one of our high-yield bond specialists, who thinks
Southland bonds are cheap," I continued.
"But you don't," he said, and laughed.
"Right," I said, and then launched into a long-winded sales pitch that

greatly pleased both the junk bond man from Salomon and my customer,
though for different reasons.
"No, thanks," said my Frenchman at the end of it.
The junk bond specialist praised me for a job well done. He didn't know
how right he was, but he'd soon find out, for Southland was indeed
doomed. In the middle of October 1987 Salomon Brothers, still retching
from its brief encounter with Ronald Perelman, underwent the most
concentrated trauma in its history. Over a period of eight days,
event followed event like too many hairy rides in an amusement park. I
watched the firm take blow after blow, each more confusing and
disorienting than the last. Hundred of not particularly innocent victims
were crushed in the avalanche of misery.
Monday, October 12, 1987: Day One • The eight days that shook Salomon
began, appropriately, with what appeared to be a misjudgment at the
very top of the firm. An unnamed board member of Salomon Brothers,
sometime during the weekend, told a New York Times reporter that the
firm was planning to fire a thousand people. The news was completely
unexpected. We all knew Salomon Brothers had been conducting a review
of its business. But we had been assured that absolutely, under no
circumstances, would the review put anyone's job at risk. Either the
bosses who peddled this line were lying or they were ignorant, and I
don't know which I'd prefer to believe. This morning the head of the
London office called us together in our auditorium (which, though less
than a year old, we have already outgrown) and said that "no decisions
have been made" regarding personnel, implying that no one was to be
fired.
In that case, someone in New York made some pretty quick decisions,
because later today two entire departments on 41, municipal bonds and
money markets, consisting of around five hundred people, were summarily
dismissed. It was as much a shock to them as it was to me. The boss of
the money market sales department on 41, a nice, soft-spoken man,
walked into the midst of his troops at 8:30 A.M. and said, "Well, boys, it
looks as though we're history." Then his boss, the head of all sales on 41
and a card-carrying Big Swinging Dick, came rushing over beside him and
shouted, "Stay where you are, goddammit. Nobody's going anywhere,
nobody's losing his job." Then, just as the whole money market
department was settling back into their seats, an internal memo flashed

across their Quotron machines that said, in effect, "You are fired.
Anyone who still wishes to work at Salomon let us know and maybe we'll
be in touch. But don't hold your breath."
Neither municipal bonds nor money markets were profitable. Does that
mean we should have dropped them completely? The firm could, at little
expense, have kept a small staff in both markets. That would have
appeased the customers who had come to depend on us in these areas
and were now furious with us. And it would have enabled us to profit in
the event that either of the two markets recovered. Why dump whole
businesses? Why not, at the very least, sift through the people and keep
the best for other jobs? A star municipal bond salesman could easily
become a star government bond salesman. Salomon Brothers was the
nation's leading underwriter of municipal bonds and among the leaders of
the money markets; the people employed by these departments were by
no means losers. *
The men who made the decision were practicing their favorite anatomical
trick of thinking with their balls. In other words, they weren't thinking
at all but trading. Bill Simon used to shout at his young traders, "If you
guys weren't trading bonds, you'd be driving a truck. Don't try to get
intellectual in the marketplace. Just trade." When a trader is long and
wrong he cuts and runs. He drops his position, cuts his losses, and moves
on. He only hopes he hasn't sold at the bottom, which is what people do
who buy at the top.
What jarred the intellect even more than the treatment of fully formed
businesses as trading fodder was the excuse Gutfreund gave for the
bailout. He told the firm, and the press, that he had intended to prune
intelligently but had been forced by events outside his control to take
quick action. Once the news hit the papers, he said, he had to get out
immediately. The New York Times, in other words, affected policy at
Salomon Brothers. Either that, or the chairman was using The New York
Times as an excuse for what he had done.
That made the biggest mystery of the day even more mysterious: Who
leaked? From his first day as a trainee to his last day as a Big Swinging
Dick, a Salomon Brothers employee believes it is a cardinal sin to speak
to the press. In general our people kept clear of reporters. As a result,
nothing of what went on in our firm ever made it into the newspapers. It
was inconceivable to me that the leak was a mere indiscretion; it must
