One Up on Wall Street 

 Acknowledgments 
 Several individuals and organizations deserve recog nition for their gracious and adept assistance in preparing this updated version of One Up on Wall Street: for general support—Doe Coover, literary agent; Paula Caputo, marketing director, Fidelity Capital; and Ellen Hoffman, Devonshire Publishing; for gathering and checking data—Ned Davis Research; FactSet; Dow Jones; Scott Machovina from Fidelity Market Research; and the Fidelity Technical Group, especially Patricia Mulderry, Denise Russell, Shawn Bastian, and Krista Wilshusen; for editorial assistance—Airié Dekidjiev and Doris Cooper at Simon & Schuster. 
 Since the 1960s I have had the wonderful fortune to be a member of a special family, Fidelity Management and Research, affectionately known as Fido. Fido is a corny, old-fashioned sort of place, appropriately located in an ancient nine-story building complex in Boston, where people get along in spite of their differences, where debates over stocks do not escalate into cubicle wars, and where birthdays are still celebrated with parties and cakes. 
 So many individuals have inspired me that it would take an entire chapter to list all their names. Below I’ve named a few, and I apologize sincerely to people I’ve omitted. 
 Over the past fifteen to twenty years, and in some cases back to 1966, I would like to thank: the late Mike Allara, Sam Bodman, Donald Burton, Bill Byrnes, the late Warren Casey, Sandy Cushman, Leo Dworsky, Dorsey Gardner, Joe Grause, Allan Gray, Barry Greenfield, Dick Haberman, Bill Hayes, Bob Hill, the late Mr. Johnson II, Ned Johnson, Bruce Johnstone, Caleb Loring, Malcolm MacNaught, Jack O’Brien, Patsy Ostrander, the late Frank Parrish, Bill Pike, Dick Reilly, Dick Smith, Cathy Stephenson, the late D. George Sullivan, John Thies, and George Vanderheiden. 
 I’ve been helped immeasurably by another group of dedicated Fidelity money managers, including: the late Jeff Barmeyer, Gary Burkhead, William Danoff, George Domolky, Bettina Doulton, Bill Ebs-worth, Rich Fentin, Karie Firestone, Bob Haber, Steve Kaye, Alan Leifer, Brad Lewis, Steve Peterson, Ken Richardson, Bob Stansky, Beth Terrana, and the late Ernest Wiggins. 
 I have also been helped by an outstanding group of securities traders who buy and sell stocks for the Magellan Fund, and I would especially like to thank those who made the smooth transition from a small fund to a multibillion-dollar enterprise: Robert Burns, Carlene De Luca O’Brien, and Barry Lyden. 
 Outside Fidelity, and in spite of everything I’ve said about the foibles of Wall Street professionals, I’ve been aided by friends and colleagues from two groups: industry analysts from the brokerage community and managers of other funds. Again I mention just a few, and I apologize to many more I’ll think of later. 
 Analyst List 
 John Adams, Adams, Harkness & Hill 
 Mike Armellino, Goldman, Sachs & Co. 
 Steve Berman 
 Allan Bortel 
 Jon Burke 
 Norm Caris, Gruntal & Co. 
 Tom Clephane, Morgan Stanley & Co. 
 Art Davis 
 Don DeScenza (deceased), Nomura Securities 
 David Eisenberg, Sanford Bernstein 
 Jerry Epperson 
 Joe Frazzano 
 Dick Fredericks 
 Jonathan Gelles 
 Jane Gilday, McKinley Allsopp 
 Maggie Gilliam 
 Tom Hanley 
 Herb Hardt, Monness, Crespi, Hardt & Co., Inc. 
 Brian Harra, Brean Murray, Foster Securities 
 Ira Hirsch, The Fourteen Research Corp. 
 Ed Hyman 
 Sam Isaly 
 Lee Isgur 
 Robert Johnson 
 Joe Jolson 
 Paul Keleher 
 John Kellenyi 
 Dan Lee 
 Bob Maloney, Wood Gundy Corp. 
 Peter Marcus 
 Jay Meltzer, Goldman Sachs & Co. 
 Tom Petrie 
 Larry Rader 
 Tom Richter, Robinson Humphrey 
 Bill Ritger, Dillon Reed & Co. 
 Elliot Schlang 
 Elliot Schneider, Gruntal & Co. 
 Rick Schneider 
 Don Sinsabaugh, Swergold, Chefitz & Sinsabaugh 
 Stein Soelberg, Baird, Patrick & Co. 
 Oakes Spalding 
 Stewart Spector 
 Joseph Stechler, Stechler & Co. 
 Jack Sullivan (deceased), Van Kasper & Co. 
 David Walsh 
 Skip Wells, Adams, Harkness & Hill 
 Fund Manager List 
 James Roger Bacon, Putnam Management 
 George Boltres, Tiedman, Karlin, Boltres 
 Tom Cashman, Massachusetts Financial Services 
 Ken Cassidy, Cassidy Investments 
 Tony Cope 
 Richard Corneliuson 
 Gerald Curtis, Webster Management 
 Peter deRoetth, Account Management 
 Tom Duncan, Frontier Capital Management 
 Charles Flather, Middlegreen Associates 
 Richard Frucci, Putnam Management 
 Mario Gabelli, Gabelli & Company 
 Bob Gintel, Gintel & Company 
 Dick Goldstein, Richard Goldstein Investments 
 Jon Gruber, Gruber Capital Management 
 Paul Haagensen, Putnam Management 
 Bill Harris (retired), Massachusetts Financial Services 
 Ken Heebner, Capital Growth Management 
 Philip Hempleman, Ardsley Partners 
 Ed Huebner (deceased), Hellman, Jordan Management 
 Richard Jodka 
 H. Alden Johnson, Jr. (deceased), Massachusetts Financial Services 
 Donald Keller, Rollert & Sullivan 
 David Knight, Knight, Bain, Seath & Holbrook 
 Kathy Magrath, Valuequest 
 Terry Magrath, Valuequest 
 Ed Mathias, The Carlyle Group 
 Joe McNay, Essex Investment Management 
 Bill Miller, Legg Mason 
 Neal Miller, Fidelity 
 David Mills 
 Ernest Monrad, Northeast Investors 
 John Neff (retired), Wellington Management 
 Michael Price, MFP Investors, LLC 
 Jimmy Rogers 
 Binkley Shorts, Wellington Management 
 Rick Spillane, Eaton Vance (now Fidelity) 
 Richard Strong, Strong Corneliuson 
 Eyk Van Otterloo, Grantham, Mayo, Van Otterloo 
 Ernst H. von Metzch, Wellington Management 
 Wally Wadman, Constitution Research & Management Inc. 
 Matt Weatherbie, M.A. Weatherbie & Co., Inc. 
 I owe special gratitude to an outstanding man who has been a friend of my family for over forty years: Father John J. Collins, S.J., of Boston College. As chairman of the finance department when I attended the school, he taught me many useful things. Later he baptized all three of our children and has been a constant source of support to me and to hundreds of other B.C. students and graduates. 
 This book would never have been written without the hard work and persistence of Peggy Malaspina of Malaspina Communications. Thanks, also, to Jane Lajoie, and author Derrick Niederman who spent months researching and checking facts for this book. Many thanks to Cathy Davis and Jack Cahill, the Fidelity Research Library, Robert Hill of the Fidelity Technical Department, several individuals from the Fidelity Equity Research Department and other fund managers, Bettina Doulton for her special help, my four secretaries who so graciously contributed long and late extra hours, Paula Sullivan, Evelyn Flynn, Natalie Trakas, and Karen Cuneo. 
 Special thanks to Bob Bender, senior editor, Simon & Schuster, and Doe Coover of the Doe Coover Agency for their assistance on this project from beginning to end. 
 Finally I must pay the greatest tribute to John Rothchild for making this book possible. His attitude, talent, flexibility, and extraordinary hard work have been invaluable to me over the last year.

One Up on Wall Street 

 P ETER L YNCH is vice chairman of Fidelity Management & Research Company—the investment advisor arm of Fidelity Investments—and a member of the Board of Trustees of the Fidelity funds. Mr. Lynch was portfolio manager of Fidelity Magellan Fund, which was the best performing fund in the world under his leadership from May 1977 to May 1990. He is the co-author of the bestselling Beating the Street and Learn to Earn, a beginner’s guide to the basics of investing and business. He lives in the Boston area. 

 J OHN R OTHCHILD has written for Time, Fortune, Worth, and The New York Times Book Review. The author of A Fool and His Money and Going for Broke, he is also the co-author, with Peter Lynch, of Beating the Street and Learn to Earn. He lives in Miami Beach, Florida. 

 Cover design by Tom Lau Cover photograph by Sigrid Estrada 
 Register online at www.simonsays.com for more information on this and other great books.

One Up on Wall Street 

 P eter Lynch is America’s number-one money manager. His mantra: Average investors can become experts in their own field and can pick winning stocks as effectively as Wall Street professionals by doing just a little research. 
 Now, in a new introduction written specifically for this edition of One Up on Wall Street, Lynch gives his take on the incredible rise of Internet stocks, as well as a list of twenty winning companies of high-tech ’90s. That many of these winners are low-tech supports his thesis that amateur investors can continue to reap exceptional rewards from mundane, easy-to-understand companies they encounter in their daily lives. 
 Investment opportunities abound for the layperson, Lynch says. By simply observing business developments and taking notice of your immediate world—from the mall to the workplace—you can discover potentially successful companies before professional analysts do. This jump on the experts is what produces “tenbaggers,” the stocks that appreciate tenfold or more and turn an average stock portfolio into a star performer. 
 The former star manager of Fidelity’s multibillion-dollar Magellan Fund, Lynch reveals how he achieved his spectacular record. Writing with John Rothchild, Lynch offers easy-to-follow directions for sorting out the long shots from the no shots by reviewing a company’s financial statements and by identifying which numbers really count. He explains how to stalk tenbaggers and lays out the guidelines for investing in cyclical, turnaround, and fast-growing companies. 
 Lynch promises that if you ignore the ups and downs of the market and the endless speculation about interest rates, in the long term (anywhere from five to fifteen years) your portfolio will reward you. This advice has proved to be timeless and has made One Up on Wall Street a number-one bestseller. And now this classic is as valuable in the new millennium as ever.

One Up on Wall Street 

 1 
 The Making of a Stockpicker 
 There’s no such thing as a hereditary knack for pick ing stocks. Though many would like to blame their losses on some inbred tragic flaw, believing somehow that others are just born to invest, my own history refutes it. There was no ticker tape above my cradle, nor did I teethe on the stock pages in the precocious way that baby Pelé supposedly bounced a soccer ball. As far as I know, my father never left the pacing area to check on the price of General Motors, nor did my mother ask about the ATT dividend between contractions. 
 Only in hindsight can I report that the Dow Jones industrial average was down on January 19, 1944, the day I was born, and declined further the week I was in the hospital. Though I couldn’t have suspected it then, this was the earliest example of the Lynch Law at work. The Lynch Law, closely related to the Peter Principle, states: Whenever Lynch advances, the market declines. (The latest proof came in the summer of 1987, when just after the publisher and I reached an agreement to produce this book, a high point in my career, the market lost 1,000 points in two months. I’ll think twice before attempting to sell the movie rights.) 
 Most of my relatives distrusted the stock market, and with good reason. My mother was the youngest of seven children, which meant that my aunts and uncles were old enough to have reached adulthood during the Great Depression, and to have had firsthand knowledge of the Crash of ’29. Nobody was recommending stocks around our household. 
 The only stock purchase I ever heard about was the time my grandfather, Gene Griffin, bought Cities Service. He was a very conservative investor, and he chose Cities Service because he thought it was a water utility. When he took a trip to New York and discovered it was an oil company, he sold immediately. Cities Service went up fiftyfold after that. 
 Distrust of stocks was the prevailing American attitude throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s, when the market tripled and then doubled again. This period of my childhood, and not the recent 1980s, was truly the greatest bull market in history, but to hear it from my uncles, you’d have thought it was the craps game behind the pool hall. “Never get involved in the market,” people warned. “It’s too risky. You’ll lose all your money.” 
 Looking back on it, I realize there was less risk of losing all one’s money in the stock market of the 1950s than at any time before or since. This taught me not only that it’s difficult to predict markets, but also that small investors tend to be pessimistic and optimistic at precisely the wrong times, so it’s self-defeating to try to invest in good markets and get out of bad ones. 
 My father, an industrious man and former mathematics professor who left academia to become the youngest senior auditor at John Hancock, got sick when I was seven and died of brain cancer when I was ten. This tragedy resulted in my mother’s having to go to work (at Ludlow Manufacturing, later acquired by Tyco Labs), and I decided to help out by getting a part-time job myself. At the age of eleven I was hired as a caddy. That was on July 7, 1955, a day the Dow Jones fell from 467 to 460. 
 To an eleven-year-old who’d already discovered golf, caddying was an ideal occupation. They paid me for walking around a golf course. In one afternoon I would outearn delivery boys who tossed newspapers onto lawns at six A.M. for seven days in a row. What could be better than that? 
 In high school I began to understand the subtler and more important advantages of caddying, especially at an exclusive club such as Brae Burn, outside of Boston. My clients were the presidents and CEOs of major corporations: Gillette, Polaroid, and more to the point, Fidelity. In helping D. George Sullivan find his ball, I was helping myself find a career. I’m not the only caddy who learned that the quickest route to the boardroom was through the locker room of a club like Brae Burn. 
 If you wanted an education in stocks, the golf course was the next best thing to being on the floor of a major exchange. Especially after they’d sliced or hooked a drive, club members enthusiastically described their latest triumphant investment. In a single round of play I might give out five golf tips and get back five stock tips in return. 
 Though I had no funds to invest in stock tips, the happy stories I heard on the fairways made me rethink the family position that the stock market was a place to lose money. Many of my clients actually seemed to have made money in the stock market, and some of the positive evidence actually trickled down to me. 
 A caddy quickly learns to sort his golfers into a caste system, beginning with the rare demigods (great golfer, great person, great tipper), moving down through the so-so golfers and so-so tippers, and eventually hitting bottom with the terrible golfer, terrible person, terrible tipper—a dreaded untouchable of the links. Mostly I caddied for average golfers and average spenders, but if it came down to a choice between a bad round with a big tipper, or a great round with a bad tipper, I learned to opt for the former. Caddying reinforced the notion that it helps to have money. 
 I continued to caddy throughout high school and into Boston College, where the Francis Ouimet Caddy Scholarship helped pay the bills. In college, except for the obligatory courses, I avoided science, math, and accounting—all the normal preparations for business. I was on the arts side of school, and along with the usual history, psychology, and political science, I also studied metaphysics, epistemology, logic, religion, and the philosophy of the ancient Greeks. 
 As I look back on it now, it’s obvious that studying history and philosophy was much better preparation for the stock market than, say, studying statistics. Investing in stocks is an art, not a science, and people who’ve been trained to rigidly quantify everything have a big disadvantage. If stockpicking could be quantified, you could rent time on the nearest Cray computer and make a fortune. But it doesn’t work that way. All the math you need in the stock market (Chrysler’s got $1 billion in cash, $500 million in long-term debt, etc.) you get in the fourth grade. 
 Logic is the subject that’s helped me the most in picking stocks, if only because it taught me to identify the peculiar illogic of Wall Street. Actually Wall Street thinks just as the Greeks did. The early Greeks used to sit around for days and debate how many teeth a horse has. They thought they could figure it out by just sitting there, instead of checking the horse. A lot of investors sit around and debate whether a stock is going up, as if the financial muse will give them the answer, instead of checking the company. 
 In centuries past, people hearing the rooster crow as the sun came up decided that the crowing caused the sunrise. It sounds silly now, but every day the experts confuse cause and effect on Wall Street in offering some new explanation for why the market goes up: hemlines are up, a certain conference wins the Super Bowl, the Japanese are unhappy, a trendline has been broken, Republicans will win the election, stocks are “oversold,” etc. When I hear theories like these, I always remember the rooster. 
 In 1963, my sophomore year in college, I bought my first stock—Flying Tiger Airlines for $7 a share. Between the caddying and a scholarship I’d covered my tuition, living at home reduced my other expenses, and I had already upgraded myself from an $85 car to a $150 car. After all the tips that I’d had to ignore, I finally was rich enough to invest! 
 Flying Tiger was no wild guess. I picked it on the basis of some dogged research into a faulty premise. In one of my classes I’d read an article on the promising future of air freight, and it said that Flying Tiger was an air freight company. That’s why I bought the stock, but that’s not why the stock went up. It went up because we got into the Vietnam War and Flying Tiger made a fortune shunting troops and cargo in and out of the Pacific. 
 In less than two years Flying Tiger hit $32¾ and I had my first five-bagger. Little by little I sold it off to pay for graduate school. I went to Wharton on a partial Flying Tiger scholarship. 
 If your first stock is as important to your future in finance as your first love is to your future in romance, then the Flying Tiger pick was a very lucky thing. It proved to me that the bigbaggers existed, and I was sure there were more of them from where this one had come. 
 During my senior year at Boston College I applied for a summer job at Fidelity, at the suggestion of Mr. Sullivan, the president—the hapless golfer, great guy, and good tipper for whom I’d caddied. Fidelity was the New York Yacht Club, the Augusta National, the Carnegie Hall, and the Kentucky Derby. It was the Cluny of investment houses, and like that great medieval abbey to which monks were flattered to be called, what devotee of balance sheets didn’t dream of working here? There were one hundred applications for three summer positions. 
 Fidelity had done such a good job selling America on mutual funds that even my mother was putting $100 a month into Fidelity Capital. That fund, run by Gerry Tsai, was one of the two famous go-go funds of this famous go-go era. The other was Fidelity Trend, run by Edward C. Johnson III, also known as Ned. Ned Johnson was the son of the fabled Edward C. Johnson II, also known as Mister Johnson, who founded the company. 
 Ned Johnson’s Fidelity Trend and Gerry Tsai’s Fidelity Capital outperformed the competition by a big margin and were the envy of the industry over the period from 1958 to 1965. With these sorts of people training and supporting me, I felt as if I understood what Isaac Newton was talking about when he said: “If I have seen further...it is by standing upon the shoulders of Giants.” 
 Long before Ned’s great successes, his father, Mister Johnson, had changed America’s mind about investing in stocks. Mister Johnson believed that you invest in stocks not to preserve capital, but to make money. Then you take your profits and invest in more stocks, and make even more money. “Stocks you trade, it’s wives you’re stuck with,” said the always quotable Mister Johnson. He wouldn’t have won any awards from Ms. magazine. 
 I was thrilled to be hired at Fidelity, and also to be installed in Gerry Tsai’s old office, after Tsai had departed for the Manhattan Fund in New York. Of course the Dow Jones industrials, at 925 when I reported for work the first week of May, 1966, had fallen below 800 by the time I headed off to graduate school in September, just as the Lynch Law would have predicted. 
 RANDOM WALK AND MAINE SUGAR 
 Summer interns such as me, with no experience in corporate finance or accounting, were put to work researching companies and writing reports, the same as the regular analysts. The whole intimidating business was suddenly demystified—even liberal arts majors could analyze a stock. I was assigned to the paper and publishing industry and set out across the country to visit companies such as Sorg Paper and International Textbook. Since the airlines were on strike, I traveled by bus. By the end of the summer the company I knew most about was Greyhound. 
 After that interlude at Fidelity, I returned to Wharton for my second year of graduate school more skeptical than ever about the value of academic stock-market theory. It seemed to me that most of what I learned at Wharton, which was supposed to help you succeed in the investment business, could only help you fail. I studied statistics, advanced calculus, and quantitative analysis. Quantitative analysis taught me that the things I saw happening at Fidelity couldn’t really be happening. 
 I also found it difficult to integrate the efficient-market hypothesis (that everything in the stock market is “known” and prices are always “rational”) with the random-walk hypothesis (that the ups and downs of the market are irrational and entirely unpredictable). Already I’d seen enough odd fluctuations to doubt the rational part, and the success of the great Fidelity fund managers was hardly unpredictable. 
 It also was obvious that Wharton professors who believed in quantum analysis and random walk weren’t doing nearly as well as my new colleagues at Fidelity, so between theory and practice, I cast my lot with the practitioners. It’s very hard to support the popular academic theory that the market is irrational when you know somebody who just made a twentyfold profit in Kentucky Fried Chicken, and furthermore, who explained in advance why the stock was going to rise. My distrust of theorizers and prognosticators continues to the present day. 
 Some Wharton courses were rewarding, but even if they’d all been worthless, the experience would have been worth it, because I met Carolyn on the campus. (We got married while I was in the Army, on May 11, 1968, a Saturday when the market was closed, and we had a week-long honeymoon during which the Dow Jones lost 13.93 points—not that I was paying attention. This is something I looked up later.) 
 After finishing that second year at Wharton, I reported to the Army to serve my two-year hitch required under the ROTC program. From 1967 to 1969, I was a lieutenant in the artillery, sent first to Texas and later to Korea—a comforting assignment considering the alternative. Lieutenants in the artillery mostly wound up in Vietnam. The only drawback to Korea was that it was far away from the stock exchange, and as far as I knew, there was no stock market in Seoul. By this time I was suffering from Wall Street withdrawal. 
 I made up for lost time during infrequent leaves, when I’d rush home to buy the various hot stocks that friends and colleagues recommended. They were buying high-flying issues that kept going up, but for me they suggested conservative issues that kept going down. Actually I made some money in Ranger Oil, but I lost more in Maine Sugar, a sure-win situation that flopped. 
 The Maine Sugar people had gone around to all the Maine potato farmers to convince them to grow sugar beets in the off-season. This was going to be extremely profitable for Maine Sugar, not to mention for the Maine farmers. By planting the sugar beets—the perfect companion crop to potatoes—farmers could make extra money and revitalize the soil at the same time. Moreover, Maine Sugar was footing the bill for planting the beets. All the farmers had to do was haul the grown-up beets to the huge new refinery that Maine Sugar had just built. 
 The hitch was that these were Maine farmers, and Maine farmers are very cautious. Instead of planting hundreds of acres of sugar beets, the first year they tried it on a quarter acre, and then when that worked, they expanded to a half acre, and by the time they got to a full acre, the refinery was shut for lack of business and Maine Sugar went bankrupt. The stock fell to six cents, so one share could buy you six gumballs from a Lions Club machine. 
 After the Maine Sugar fiasco I vowed never to buy another stock that depended on Maine farmers’ chasing after a quick buck. 
 I returned from Korea in 1969, rejoined Fidelity as a permanent employee and research analyst, and the stock market promptly plummeted. (Lynch Law theorists take note.) In June of 1974, I was promoted from assistant director of research to director of research, and the Dow Jones lost 250 points in the next three months. In May of 1977, I took over the Fidelity Magellan fund. The market stood at 899 and promptly began a five-month slide to 801. 
 Fidelity Magellan had $20 million in assets. There were only 40 stocks in the portfolio, and Ned Johnson, Fidelity’s head man, recommended that I reduce the number to 25. I listened politely and then went out and raised the number to 60 stocks, six months later to 100 stocks, and soon after that, to 150 stocks. I didn’t do it to be contrary. I did it because when I saw a bargain I couldn’t resist buying it, and in those days there were bargains everywhere. 
 The open-minded Ned Johnson watched me from a distance and cheered me on. Our methods were different, but that didn’t stop him from accepting mine—at least as long as I was getting good results. 
 My portfolio continued to grow, to the point that I once owned 150 S&L stocks alone. Instead of settling for a couple of savings-and-loans, I bought them across the board (after determining, of course, that each was a promising investment in itself). It wasn’t enough to invest in one convenience store. Along with Southland, the parent company at 7-Eleven, I couldn’t resist buying Circle K, National Convenience, Shop and Go, Hop-In Foods, Fairmont Foods, and Sunshine Junior, to mention a few. Buying hundreds of stocks certainly wasn’t Ned Johnson’s idea of how to run an equity fund, but I’m still here. 
 Soon enough I became known as the Will Rogers of equities, the man who never saw a stock he didn’t like. They’re always making jokes about it in Barron’s —can you name one stock that Lynch doesn’t own? Since I own 1,400 at present, I suppose they have a point. Certainly I can name plenty of stocks I wish I hadn’t owned. 
 Meanwhile, however, the assets in Fidelity Magellan have grown to $9 billion, which makes this fund as large as the gross national product of half of Greece. In terms of return on investment, Fidelity Magellan has done much better than Greece over the eleven years, although Greece has an enviable record over the preceding 2,500. 
 As for Will Rogers, he may have given the best bit of advice ever uttered about stocks: “Don’t gamble; take all your savings and buy some good stock and hold it till it goes up, then sell it. If it don’t go up, don’t buy it.”
