
Volume and Open Interest 179

P COPPER - WEEKLY
F ‘Nearest Futures Contract aa of Friday's Close 150;
aly peeked
/ 140
~ 130)

oo on oe ee _ AL. ate
__ |__| Major Sell Signals AWE 100

CTS Financial Publishing
800-331-1 069

Figure 7.14 This weekly chart of copper futures shows three sell signals
marked by the arrows. Each sell signal shows net long positions by the two
categories of speculators and a net short position by the commercials. The
commercials were right.

COMBINE OPTION SENTIMENT
WITH TECHNICALS

Options traders use open interest and volume put/call figures to
determine extremes in bullish or bearish sentiment. These senti-
ment readings work best when combined with technical measures
such as support, resistance, and the trend of the underlying mar-
ket. Since timing is so crucial in options, most option traders are
technically oriented.

CONCLUSION

That concludes our coverage of volume and open interest, at least
for now. Volume analysis is used in all financial markets—futures,


180 Chapter 7

options, and stocks. Open interest applies only to futures and
options. But, since futures and options are traded on so many
stock market vehicles, some understanding of how open interest
works can be useful in all three financial arenas. In most of our
discussions so far, we’ve concentrated on daily bar charts. The
next step is to broaden our time horizon and to learn how to
apply the tools we’ve learned to weekly and monthly charts in
order to perform long range trend analysis. We’ll accomplish that
in the next chapter.


INTRODUCTION

Of all the charts utilized by the market technician for forecasting
and trading the financial markets, the daily bar chart is by far the
most popular. The daily bar chart usually covers a period of only six
to nine months. However, because most traders confine their inter-
est to relatively short term market action, daily bar charts have
gained wide acceptance as the primary working tool of the chartist.

The average trader’s dependence on these daily charts,
however, and the preoccupation with short term market behavior,
cause many to overlook a very useful and rewarding area of price
charting—the use of weekly and monthly charts for longer range trend
analysis and forecasting.

The daily bar chart covers a relatively short period of time
in the life of any market. A thorough trend analysis of a market,
however, should include some consideration of how the daily
market price is moving in relation to its long range trend struc-
ture. To accomplish that task, longer range charts must be employed.
Whereas on the daily bar chart each bar represents one day’s price

181


182 Chapter 8

action, on the weekly and monthly charts each price bar repre-
sents one week’s and one month’s price action, respectively. The
purpose of weekly and monthly charts is to compress price action in
such a way that the time horizon can be greatly expanded and much
longer time periods can be studied.

THE IMPORTANCE OF LONGER
RANGE PERSPECTIVE

Long range price charts provide a perspective on the market trend that
is impossible to achieve with the use of daily charts alone. During our
introduction to the technical philosophy in Chapter 1, it was
pointed out that one of the greatest advantages of chart analysis
is the application of its principles to virtually any time dimension,
including long range forecasting. We also addressed the fallacy,
espoused by some, that technical analysis should be limited to
short term “timing” with longer range forecasting left to the fun-
damental analyst.

The accompanying charts will demonstrate that the prin-
ciples of technical analysis—including trend analysis, support and
resistance levels, trendlines, percentage retracements, and price
patterns—lend themselves quite well to the analysis of long range
price movements. Anyone who is not consulting these longer range
charts is missing an enormous amount of valuable price information.

CONSTRUCTION OF
CONTINUATION CHARTS
FOR FUTURES

The average futures contract has a trading life of about a year and
a half before expiration. This limited life feature poses some obvi-
ous problems for the technician interested in constructing a long
range chart going back several years. Stock market technicians
don’t have this problem. Charts are readily available for individ-
ual common stocks and the market averages from the inception
of trading. How then does the futures technician construct longer
range charts for contracts that are constantly expiring?


Long Term Charts 183

The answer is the continuation chart. Notice the emphasis
on the word “continuation.” The technique most commonly
employed is simply to link a number of contracts together to
provide continuity. When one contract expires, another one is
used. In order to accomplish this, the simplest method, and the
one used by most chart services, is to always use the price of the
nearest expiring contract. When that nearest expiring contract
stops trading, the next in line becomes the nearest contract and
is the one plotted.

Other Ways to Construct
Continuation Charts

The technique of linking prices of the nearest expiring contracts
is relatively simple and does solve the problem of providing price
continuity. However, there are some problems with that method.
Sometimes the expiring contract may be trading at a significant
premium or discount to the next contract, and the changeover to
the new contract may cause a sudden price drop or jump on the
chart. Another potential distortion is the extreme volatility expe-
rienced by some spot contracts just before expiration.

Futures technicians have devised many ways to deal with
these occasional distortions. Some will stop plotting the nearest
contract a month or two before it expires to avoid the volatility in
the spot month. Others will avoid using the nearest contract alto-
gether and will instead chart the second or third contract.
Another method is to chart the contract with the highest open
interest on the theory that that delivery month is the truest rep-
resentation of market value.

Continuation charts can also be constructed by linking
specific calendar months. For example, a November soybean
continuation chart would combine only the historic data pro-
vided by each successive year’s November soybean contract. (This
technique of linking specific delivery months was favored by
W.D. Gann.) Some chartists go even further by averaging the
prices of several contracts, or constructing indices that attempt
to smooth the changeover by making adjustments in the price
premium or discount.


184 Chapter &

THE PERPETUAL CONTRACT™

An innovative solution to the problem of price continuity was
developed by Robert Pelletier, president of Commodity Systems,
Inc., a commodity and stock data service (CSI. 200 W. Palmetto
Park Road, Boca Raton, FL 33422), called the Perpetual Contract.™
(“Perpetual Contract™ ” is a registered trademark of that firm.)

The purpose of the Perpetual Contract™ is to provide years
of futures price history in one continuous time series. That is
accomplished by constructing a time series based on a constant
forward time period. For example, the series would determine a
value three months or six months into the future. The time peri-
od varies and can be chosen by the user. The Perpetual Contract™
is constructed by taking a weighted average of two futures con-
tracts that surround the time period desired.

The value for the Perpetual Contract™ is not an actual
price, but a weighted average of two other prices. The main advan-
tage of the Perpetual Contract™ is that it eliminates the need for
using only the nearest expiring contract and smoothes out the
price series by eliminating the distortions that can take place dur-
ing the transition between delivery months. For chart analysis pur-
poses, the nearest-month continuation charts published by chart
services are more than adequate. A continuous price series, how-
ever, is more useful for back-testing trading systems and indicators.
A more complete explanation of ways to construct continuous
futures contracts is provided by Greg Morris in Appendix D.

LONG TERM TRENDS DISPUTE
RANDOMNESS

The most striking features of long range charts is that not only are
trends very clearly defined, but that long range trends often last for
years. Imagine making a forecast based on one of these long range
trends, and not having to change that forecast for several years!
The persistence of long range trends raises another inter-
esting question that should be mentioned—the question of ran-
domness. While technical analysts do not subscribe to the theory
that market action is random and unpredictable, it seems safe to


Long Term Charts 185

observe that whatever randomness does exist in price action is
probably a phenomenon of the very short term. The persistence of
existing trends over long periods of time, in many cases for years, is a
compelling argument against the claims of Random Walk Theorists
that prices are serially independent and that past price action has no
effect on future price action.

PATTERNS ON CHARTS: WEEKLY
AND MONTHLY REVERSALS

Price patterns appear on the long range charts, which are inter-
preted in the same way as on the daily charts. Double tops and bot-
toms are very prominent on these charts, as are head and shoul-
der reversals. Triangles, which are usually continuation patterns,
are frequently seen.

Another pattern that occurs quite frequently on these
charts is the weekly and monthly reversal. For example, on the
monthly chart, a new monthly high followed by a close below the
previous month’s close often represents a significant turning
point, especially if it occurs near a major support or resistance
area. Weekly reversals are quite frequent on the weekly charts.
These patterns are the equivalent of the key reversal day on the
daily charts, except that on the long range charts these reversals
carry a great deal more significance.

LONG TERM TO SHORT
TERM CHARTS

It’s especially important to appreciate the order in which price charts
should be studied in performing a thorough trend analysis. The
proper order to follow in chart analysis is to begin with the long
range and gradually work to the near term. The reason for this
should become apparent as one works with the different time
dimensions. If the analyst begins with only the near term picture, he
or she is forced to constantly revise conclusions as more price data
is considered. A thorough analysis of a daily chart may have to be
completely redone after looking at the long range charts. By starting


186 Chapter 8

with the big picture, going back as far as 20 years, all data to be con-
sidered are already included in the chart and a proper perspective is
achieved. Once the analyst knows where the market is from a longer
range perspective, he or she gradually “zeros in” on the shorter term.

The first chart to be considered is the 20 year monthly chart.
The analyst looks for the more obvious chart patterns, major trend-
lines, or the proximity of major support or resistance levels. He or she
then consults the most recent five years on the weekly chart, repeat-
ing the same process. Having done that, the analyst narrows his or
her focus to the last six to nine months of market action on the daily
bar chart, thus going from the “macro” to the “micro” approach. If
the trader wants to proceed further, intraday charts can then be con-
sulted for an even more microscopic study of recent action.

WHY SHOULD LONG RANGE
CHARTS BE ADJUSTED
FOR INFLATION?

A question often raised concerning long term charts is whether or
not historic price levels seen on the charts should be adjusted for
inflation. After all, the argument goes, do these long range peaks
and troughs have any validity if not adjusted to reflect the
changes in the value of the U.S. dollar? This is a point of some
controversy among analysts.

I do not believe that any adjustment is necessary on these
long range charts for a number of reasons. The main reason is my
belief that the markets themselves have already made the necessary
adjustments. A currency declining in value causes commodities
quoted in that currency to increase in value. The declining value of
the dollar, therefore, would contribute to rising commodity prices.
A rising dollar would cause the price of most commodities to fall.

The tremendous price gains in commodity markets during
the 1970s and declining prices in the 1980s and 1990s are classic
examples of inflation at work. To have suggested during the 1970s
that commodity price levels that had doubled and tripled in price
should then be adjusted to reflect rising inflation would make no
sense at all. The rising commodity markets already were a mani-
festation of that inflation. Declining commodity markets since


Long Term Charts 187

the 1980s reflect a long period of disinflation. Should we take the
price of gold, which is now worth less than half of its value in
1980, and adjust it to reflect the lower inflation rate? The market
has already taken care of that.

The final point in this debate goes to the heart of the tech-
nical theory, which states that price action discounts everything,
even inflation. All financial markets adjust to periods of inflation
and deflation and to changes in currency values. T! he real answer
to whether long range charts should be adjusted for inflation lies
in the charts themselves. Many markets fai] at historic resistance
levels set several years earlier and then bounce off support levels
not seen in several years. It’s also clear that falling inflation since
the early 1980s has helped support bull markets in bonds and
stocks. It would seem that those markets have already made their
own inflation adjustment. (See Figure 8.1.)

01/31/79 (*DWI X) Dow Industrials 02/27/98

Dow industrials

Gold

eB aL se se ee ee ee

feo

Figure 8.1 The gold price peak in 1 980 ushered in two decades of low
inflation. Low inflation normally causes falling gold prices and rising stock
prices as this chart shows. Why adjust the charts again for inflation? It’s
already been done.


188 Chapter 8

LONG TERM CHARTS NOT
INTENDED FOR TRADING
PURPOSES

Long term charts are not meant for trading purposes. A distinc-
tion has to be made between market analysis for forecasting pur-
poses and the timing of market commitments. Long term charts
are useful in the analytical process to help determine the major
trend and price objectives. They are not suitable, however, for the
timing of entry and exit points and should not be used for that
purpose. For that more sensitive task, daily and intraday charts
should be utilized.

EXAMPLES OF LONG
TERM CHARTS

The following pages contain examples of long term weekly and
monthly charts (Figures 8.2-8.12). The drawings on the charts are
limited to long term support and resistance levels, trendlines, per-
centage retracements, weekly reversals, and an occasional price
pattern. Be aware, however, that anything that can be done on a
daily chart can also be done on a weekly or monthly. We’ll show
you later in the book how the application of various technical
indicators to these long term charts is accomplished, and how sig-
nals on weekly charts become valuable filters for shorter term tim-
ing decisions. Remember also that semilog chart scaling becomes
more valuable when studying long range price trends.


05/17/96 (*SOX) Phix Semiconductor Index 02/27/98

Weekly Bar Chart fi

|
PES Ee Bee es

460

a a

Figure 8.2 This chart of semiconductor stocks shows the valuable per-
spective of a weekly chart. The late 1997 price fall stopped right at the 62%
retracement level and bounced off chart support formed the previous spring
(see circle).

frovoares (GM) General Mirs Corp 02/27/88 |

Weekly Bar Chart

\

|
i K Three Year Up Trendline
= i a =

Figure 8.3. The early 1998 bottom in General Motors began right at the
trendline drawn along the 1995-1996 lows. That's why it’s a good idea to
track weekly charts.


07/29/88 12/3197

“A if
"| i Ne
: HA | i i ‘wt | -

71 a) id

Figure 8.4 = This monthly chart shows the 1997 rally in Burlington
Resources stopping right at the same level that stopped the 1989 and 1993
rallies. The 1995 bottom was at the same level as the 1991 bottom. Who
Says charts don’t have a memory?

‘| i Hy iss -
hy i! |:
i aon

a YS SS SO

Figure 8.5 An investor in Inco Ltd. during the 1997 rally could hav
benefited from the kn owe edge ti that the 1989, 1991, and 1995 tops occurred
right at 38.


01/31/73 (IBM) International Busines. 12/31/97

Monthly Bar Chart

Long Term Support Near 20

3 va 4s Ye 77 ve 7a eo 1 je bs ‘ea ‘es 7 ‘eo bo 31 Wi _'bs bs wr

Figure 8.6 Do long term charts matter? The 1993 bottom in IBM was at
the same level as the bottom formed 20 years earlier in 1974. The break of

an 8 year down trendline (see box) in 1995 confirmed the new major
uptrend.

07/31/79 (HP) Helmerich & Payne Inc 12/3197
Monthly Bar Chart ve
37M
3142
1 Resistance
25
Resistance
4 4. 4. 188
124
pow ei to ws we 5 bo Wy te Wo bo oss te

Figure 8.7 Helmerich & Payne finally broke out above 19 in 1996 after
failing in 1987, 1990, and 1993. The late 1996 pullback at 28 occurred
near the 1980 peak.



Nh
Mv

N 1 yl ( Ky ; \ he i id .
iy Oo i i i NW Sonar

Figure 8.8 = This monthly chart of Dow Jones shows a head and shoulders
bottom forming for 10 years from 1988 to 1997. The right shoulder also has
the shape of a bullish ascending triangle. The breakout over the neckline at

42 completed the bottom.

04/30/91 {LUV) Southwest Airis Co

02/27/98

Monthly Bar Chart

3 1/2 Year Symmetrical Triangle

‘at
| .

Z

bs. 7 es be.

7,
i

te

Figure 8.9 A bullish symmetrical triangle was easy to spot on the
monthly chart of Southwest Airlines. But you probably wouldn’t have spotted

it on a daily chart.



03/30/73 {*DWU) Dow Utilities 02/27/98

Monthly Bar Chart

20 Year Up Trendline

WS eT ee ee es

Figure 8.10 The 1994 bottom in the Dow Utilities bounced off a trend-
line lasting 20 years. There are those who claim that past price action has no
bearing on the future. If you still believe that, go back and look at these long
term charts again.

01/31/79 ("TNA) Tokyo Nikkei Dow 02/27/98

Monthly Bar Chart
Linear

Scale

4000

a TZ Th

Figure 8.11 On this linear-scaled chart of the Japanese stock market, the
long term up trendline (line 1) drawn under the 1982 and 1984 lows was broken
in early 1992 (see circle) near 22,000. That was two years after the actual peak.


194 Chapter 8

01/31/79 (*TNA) Tokyo Nikkei Dow 02/27/98
Monthly Bar Chart Log 3800
Scale sno
2500
f Aine 2 "m0
1500,
Line 1
1000

70 eo 31 esse ee
ST SHE Pea ag Vt © Ong RSS TY

Figure 8.12 The same Japanese chart from Figure 8.11 using log scaling.
Line 1 is the trendline from the previous figure. The steeper line 2 was broken
in mid-1990 (see box) at 30,000. Up trendlines on log charts are broken
sooner than linear up trendlines.


INTRODUCTION

The moving average is one of the most versatile and widely used of
all technical indicators. Because of the way it is constructed and
the fact that it can be so easily quantified and tested, it is the basis
for many mechanical trend-following systems in use today.

Chart analysis is largely subjective and difficult to test. As
a result, chart analysis does not lend itself that well to computer-
ization. Moving average rules, by contrast, can easily be pro-
grammed into a computer, which then generates specific buy and
sell signals. While two technicians may disagree as to whether a
given price pattern is a triangle or a wedge, or whether the volume
pattern favors the buil or bear side, moving average trend signals
are precise and not open to debate.

Let’s begin by defining what a moving average is. As the sec-
ond word implies, it is an average of a certain body of data. For
example, if a 10 day average of closing prices is desired, the prices
for the last 10 days are added up and the total is divided by 10.
The term moving is used because only the latest 10 days’ prices are

195


196 Chapter 9

used in the calculation. Therefore, the body of data to be averaged
(the last 10 closing prices) moves forward with each new trading
day. The most common way to calculate the moving average is to
work from the total of the last 10 days’ closing prices. Each day
the new close is added to the total and the close 11 days back is
subtracted. The new total is then divided by the number of days
(10). (See Figure 9.1a.)

The above example deals with a simple 10 day moving
average of closing prices. There are, however, other types of mov-
ing averages that are not simple. There are also many questions as
to the best way to employ the moving average. For example, how
many days should be averaged? Should a short term or a long
term average be used? Is there a best moving average for all mar-
kets or for each individual market? Is the closing price the best
price to average? Would it be better to use more than one average?

11/14/97 (*SPX) S&P 500 Stock Index 03/02/98

H

Daily Bar Chart

1020

1000

10 Day Moving
Average

Figure 9.la_ A 10 day moving average applied to a daily bar chart of the
S&P 500. Prices crossed the average line several times (see arrows) before final-
ly turning higher. Prices stayed above the average during the subsequent rally.



Moving Averages 197

Which type of average works better—a simple, linearly weighted
or exponentially smoothed? Are there times when moving aver-
ages work better than others?

There are many questions to be considered when using
moving averages. We'll address many of these questions in this
chapter and show examples of some of the more common usages
of the moving average.

THE MOVING AVERAGE:
A SMOOTHING DEVICE WITH
A TIME LAG

The moving average is essentially a trend following device. Its pur-
pose is to identify or signal that a new trend has begun or that an
old trend has ended or reversed. Its purpose is to track the
progress of the trend. It might be viewed as a curving trendline. It
does not, however, predict market action in the same sense that
standard chart analysis attempts to do. The moving average isa
follower, not a leader. It never anticipates; it only reacts. The mov-
ing average follows a market and tells us that a trend has begun,
but only after the fact.

The moving average is a smoothing device. By averaging
the price data, a smoother line is produced, making it much easi-
er to view the underlying trend. By its very nature, however, the
moving average line also lags the market action. A shorter mov-
ing average, such as a 20 day average, would hug the price action
more closely than a 200 day average. The time lag is reduced with
the shorter averages, but can never be completely eliminated.
Shorter term averages are more sensitive to the price action,
whereas longer range averages are less sensitive. In certain types
of markets, it is more advantageous to use a shorter average and,
at other times, a longer and less sensitive average proves more
useful. (See Figure 9.1b.)
