8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page i

Jesse

LIVERMORE
WORLD’S
G R E AT E S T
STOCK
TRADER
Richard Smitten

JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.
New York • Chichester • Weinheim • Brisbane • Singapore • Toronto

fcopyebk.qxd 10/17/01 12:09 PM Page ii

Copyright © 2001 by Richard Smitten. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All excerpts from the New York Times copyright © 2001 by the New York
Times Company. Reprinted with permission.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under
Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either
the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 7504744. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New
York, NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-6011, fax (212) 850-6008, E-Mail:
PERMREQ@WILEY.COM.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that
the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional
advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional person should be sought.
This title is also available in print as ISBN 0-471-02326-4. For more
information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.Wiley.com.

8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page iii

This book is dedicated to my father, Louis Smitten.
Without him there would be no book. He is a
man who has done close to the impossible: He has
balanced worldly success with spiritual success.

8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page iv

8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page v

In 1923, seven men who had made it to the top of the financial success pyramid met together at the Edgewater Hotel in
Chicago. Collectively, they controlled more wealth than the entire United States Treasury, and for years the media had held
them up as examples of success.
Who were they? Charles Schwab, president of the world’s
largest steel company, Arthur Cutten, the greatest wheat speculator of his day, Richard Whitney, president of the New York
Stock Exchange, Albert Fall, a member of the President’s
Cabinet, Jesse Livermore, the greatest bear on Wall Street,
Leon Fraser, president of the International Bank of Settlement,
and Ivan Kruegger, the head of the world’s largest monopoly.
What happened to them? Schwab and Cutten both died
broke; Whitney spent years of his life in Sing Sing penitentiary; Fall also spent years in prison, but was released so
he could die at home; and the others Livermore, Fraser, and
Kruegger, committed suicide.
Donald McCullogh,
Waking from the American Dream
The steps of a short sale are defined as a sale of stock you don’t
own, in anticipation of a drop in price. Stock is borrowed from
your broker for delivery to the purchaser. Later, stock is purchased in the open market and returned to the broker to complete the transaction. In other words, the stock is sold first then
bought later, hopefully at a lower price. This is the reverse of a
normal buy-first, sell-later transaction.
Louis Smitten, speculator

8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page vi

Contents

Preface
Acknowledgments

ix
xiii

chapter one
The Great Bear of Wall Street

1

chapter two
The Back Story

19

chapter three
The San Francisco Earthquake Rumbles in New York

39

chapter four
The Crash of 1907

63

chapter five
The Cotton King

85

chapter six
Back on His Game

107

chapter seven
Perfecting His Market Theory

127

chapter eight
Stock Pools and Scandals

151

chapter nine
Boston Billy

175

• viii •

CONTENTS

chapter ten
The Crash of 1929

191

chapter eleven
When to Hold and When to Fold

205

chapter twelve
Livermore’s Money-Management Rules

223

chapter thirteen
Livermore’s Luck Sours

245

chapter fourteen
The Shooting of Jesse Livermore Jr.

265

chapter fifteen
Facing the Grim Reaper

277

appendix
Livermore’s Laws and Trading Secrets Revealed

301

Sources
Bibliography

315
317

Preface

There is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous
to conduct, or more uncertain in its success than to take the lead
in the introduction of a new order of things.
Niccolo Machiavelli
WHEN I WAS 13, MY FATHER TOLD ME ABOUT THE GREAT-

est stock trader who ever lived, Jesse Livermore. I sat and listened
as my father informed me that Livermore had set a new standard
for the trading of stocks. Fascinated, I began reading about Livermore before I was 14.
I did not know that 40 years later Livermore and I would have
a date with destiny—or that I would devote more than a year of
my life to investigating his life. I did not know that I would ultimately get to know him as well as anyone ever did get to know
him.
Livermore was a person of great secrecy, mystery, and silence.
He strove to control his emotions and thereby overcome the
human frailty of passions that we all suffer from. Above all, he
wanted to beat the game, solve the puzzle, best the stock market.
Many readers will be familiar with Jesse Livermore under the
name Larry Livingston, from the best-selling book Reminiscences of
a Stock Operator by Edwin LeFevre, a financial journalist. First published in 1923, Reminiscences of a Stock Operator is the fictionalized
biography of Livermore. There is no question that Reminiscences is
one of the best financial books ever written. Generations of
traders, investors, and market watchers have turned to it for insight

• x •

PREFACE

into the strategies of a great trader and for understanding of crowd
psychology and market timing.
After reading Reminiscences and Livermore’s own book, How to
Trade in Stocks, I realized that there was a lot more to Livermore’s
story. The published record revealed almost nothing about the real
Jesse Livermore. I embarked on a two-year journey that would
take me into Livermore’s world—both professional and personal. I
was able to interview Paul Livermore, Jesse’s surviving son, who
spoke for the record for the first time about his father. I also spoke
to Patricia Livermore, the wife of Jesse Livermore Junior and close
confidant of Dorothy Livermore, Livermore’s second wife and the
mother of his two children.
Just like the famous financier J.P. Morgan, Livermore suffered
from great bouts of depression throughout his life. In the period he
lived there were no remedies for this condition, and finally, in
1940, he ended his life by his own hand.
Livermore was quiet and secretive, yet lived a very opulent and
exciting life, moving in the highest social circles. He was personally blamed for the great crash of 1929, and received numerous
death and kidnapping threats. He married a beautiful Ziegfeld Follies showgirl and fathered two children, one of whom would
eventually be shot by his own mother.
This book is a complete biography of Jesse Livermore, the man
and the trader. It chronicles his life in fine detail and also reveals
many new aspects of his groundbreaking trading techniques,
which were revolutionary then and which remain revolutionary
today.
There are four simple themes to this book.
First, human nature never changes. Therefore, the stock market
never changes. Only the faces, the pockets, the suckers and the
manipulators, the wars, the disasters, and the technologies change.
The market itself never changes. How can it? Human nature never

PREFACE

• xi •

changes, and human nature runs the market—not reason, not economics, and certainly not logic. It is our human emotions that
drive the market, as they do most other things on this planet.
Second, the achievement of material goals and career ambitions
does not equal the achievement of happiness in life. There is no
correlation between success and happiness. There is no automatic
balance between worldly riches and emotional fulfillment.
Third, it is our will that allows each of us to accomplish our
goals, not our intellect. Talent is not enough. Luck is not enough.
Only the will to suffer hard work and incredible persistence leads
to the attainment of the impossible. There are no shortcuts; there
is no easy way. Especially, as you’ll find out, in the stock market.
Finally, it is the individual, not the group, that has led to the
great discoveries of humanity. The great ideas, the great fortunes,
and the giant steps forward in technology, politics, and medicine
have all come from individuals, not groups.
There are many ways to play the market, hundreds of theories,
techniques, systems, and strategies. This book covers Livermore’s
approach. It reveals for the first time in one volume his secrets on
how to successfully speculate and make money. A great deal of the
research conducted on Livermore’s life was based on interviews
with his family, personal papers, newspaper accounts, and Livermore’s own writings. Some poetic license was taken in recreating
dialogue to paint a more vibrant picture of Jesse Livermore, the
man, and his times. In certain parts of the book I have replicated
conversations as they were told to me by family members.
And I think you will agree, after reading this book, that there
never was another stock market speculator like Jesse Livermore.

8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page xii

8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page xiii

Acknowledgments

Special thanks to Paul Livermore for his kind cooperation in going
back in time in such great detail to revisit a sometimes painful past
and to Paul’s beautiful wife, Ann, who was so gracious with her
time.
Thanks to Patricia Livermore, who also had to travel back to the
years she was married to Jesse Livermore Jr. and relive so much
heartbreak, tragedy, and sorrow.
Special thanks to my father for introducing me to the Livermore
story when I was a young man and for his brilliant technical assistance and editing of the book. Also thanks must go to my fabulous
daughter, Kelley Smitten, for her constant support and help in
editing this book.
I also must thank Ed Dobson at Trader’s Press for his great
encouragement during preparation of the original edition of this
book. Ed shares with me, and many other people, an endless fascination with Livermore’s life and times.
Thanks to Debi Murray of the Historical Society of Palm Beach
County for guiding me through the society’s precious archives and
letting me have a glimpse into Palm Beach life at the turn of the
last century.
Finally, thanks to Jesse Livermore for trying to do the impossible—beat the game and master the stock market.

8467_Smitten_fm_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:32 PM Page xiv

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 1

*

chapter one

*

The Great Bear of Wall Street

Chaos is come again.

Shakespeare, Othello

Early on the morning of Tuesday, October 29th, the canyons of
Wall Street were thronged with thousands of excited thrillseekers who had come to witness the anticipated carnage. Policemen on horseback and detectives in uniform attempted to
keep the mob clear of the entrance to the New York Stock Exchange, but it was no use; every time they succeeded in opening
a pathway, the jostling crowd immediately closed ranks again.
Inside, on the floor of the exchange, one could actually feel
the tension and fear in the air as the hands of the clock crawled
toward 10:00 and the opening gong. Less than a week earlier
on Black Thursday, the stock market had suffered the most disastrous decline in its history, and the staggering plunge of prices
on the following Monday afternoon had only increased the prevailing sense of panic.
In broker’s rooms across the country, investors visited nervously and coughed and shifted their feet as they stood and stared
in hypnotic fascination at the silent stock ticker, the mechanical
courier that would soon deliver, with cold indifference, a verdict
of survival or—more likely—utter ruin.
William Klingaman, 1929:The Year of the Great Crash

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 2

• 2 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

ON THAT SAME MORNING, AT EXACTLY 7:20, NOT 7:19 OR

7:21, Jesse Livermore stood at the massive entrance to his 29-room
mansion in King’s Point, Long Island, waiting to see the flyingmaiden hood ornament on his black Rolls-Royce. The chauffeur
knew the drill, he had to enter the driveway at seven twenty. Jesse
Livermore was a precise man.
A light gray fog wafted in from Long Island Sound. It accentuated the cold air, the change of seasons, and added an ominous feel
to the air. As usual, the car rolled down the long circular drive at
precisely 7:20 and stopped in front of Livermore. He nodded
silently to the chauffeur, opened his own door, and slipped into
the back seat, the newspapers folded under his arm. He placed
them on the leather seats as he did every morning: the New York
Times, the London Times, the Wall Street Journal. He glanced at the
headlines again; they were basically all the same—“Stock Markets
Plummet Throughout the World.”
As the car made its way down the driveway, Livermore clicked
on his reading lamp and pulled the side-window curtains closed.
He wanted to study the newspapers in dark silence. There were no
surprises in these newspapers for him. In fact, he had been waiting
for these very headlines for almost a year now. He had planned
carefully for this day, and he had been patient.
When the car crossed into Manhattan, the driver did not drop
the window between them. Instead, he used the microphone.
“Mr. Livermore, we’ve passed into Manhattan. You asked me to
tell you.”
Livermore pushed open the thick black curtain and let the light
of the sun stream into the darkness of the back of the limo. He
thought about telling the chauffeur to drive down to Wall Street so
he could see, could feel, the atmosphere in the Wall Street
canyons.

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 3

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 3 •

But that might somehow affect the way he played it from here
on out, affect his emotions, his objectivity. Was this the bottom?
Was it just a pause in a steep decline? Would confidence in the
market return and stop the free fall? Should he cover his short
positions? His fortune would rest on the answers to these questions, and he had long ago realized that it was what people actually
did in the stock market that counted—not what they said they
were going to do.
Some people might want to see the human chaos, feel the desperate financial pandemonium that occurred when the fear-devil
rose up and conquered the greed-god that had appeared so strong
and indestructible—but not Livermore; he wanted to stay
untouched by these human reactions. He would be able to see
everything clearly soon enough. He would listen to the quiet
clicking verdict of the stock tickers in his office suite when the
market opened for trading.
He slid the black curtain back across the window and began to
study the newspapers again in the darkness. He spoke without
looking up. “Harry, we’ll go straight to the office.”
Before the automated traffic-light system was installed, a New
York City police officer would sit in a booth and operate the
lights. When the Livermore limousine approached, this officer
would make sure the light was green so Livermore would have no
interruptions on his journey from King’s Point to his office in
Manhattan.
Once a week, Harry the chauffeur would retrace the route, stopping at each traffic-light booth. There he would pass out a cash gratuity to the police officer in charge for the officer’s kind
consideration in making sure the financier always had a green light
when he passed. Livermore was a person who demanded precision.
Livermore exited his car at 730 Fifth Avenue, the Hecksher

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 4

• 4 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Building. He stepped into the private express elevator that stopped
on the eighteenth floor, the penthouse. Livermore demanded a
straight shot to his office. He chose not to speak with anyone, if he
could avoid it.
There was no name on the door of Livermore’s office suite. He
opened it with his key and entered the small waiting room, an
anteroom where Harry Edgar Dache sat during office hours. It
was difficult to get past Dache, who stood 6 foot 6, weighed 275
pounds, and was considered by the press to be pug-ugly as well as
not very friendly.
At this hour, however, the office suite was empty. Livermore
was always first. He opened the second door with a special key
kept in a safe. Only he and Dache had the combination. Dache
even supervised the cleaning people when they cleaned Livermore’s offices. Many considered them the most palatial in New
York City, with hand-carved arches, custom bookshelves, and
walls paneled in beautiful mahogany and carved oak. Livermore
had first seen this paneling in the library of an old English manor
house. He had paid to have the paneling dismantled and shipped to
New York, where it was reassembled in his offices.
The office suite itself consisted of an anteroom; the trading
room with its green chalkboard that covered the entire wall, along
with the walkway for the board men; the conference room; and
finally Livermore’s huge private office. The chalkboard was visible
from all the rooms.
Livermore usually employed a staff of seven, six board men plus
Dache. The primary job of his employees was to post stock quotes
on the green chalkboards that stretched the length of the office area.
Dache oversaw all activities in the office and did whatever else he
was asked. The board men were sworn to secrecy and paid well. The
rule in the offices was no talking during market hours. Livermore

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 5

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 5 •

wanted no distractions while the market was open. The quotes had
to be posted immediately and accurately; millions were riding.
There were several ticker-tape machines in each room. The
snaking tape was like the blood that flowed through his veins. It
was life itself. He was never out of arm’s reach of a stock ticker.
There were tickers in the main rooms of all his homes: Lake Placid,
Long Island, the Manhattan apartment, the suite of rooms in the
Breakers Hotel in Palm Beach, even on his 300-foot yacht.
Livermore read the numerous New York Times articles that he
had saved from the recent editions. All the papers blamed him for
the calamitous crash, personally blamed him for initiating the
decline—the precipitous free fall which now seemed to have no
bottom. But he believed that business—in his case, the stock market—was like war. In war, you died if you made a mistake; in the
stock market, if you made a mistake, you could go broke very fast.
One could die, financially, in a heartbeat.
Livermore was a serious person, and on this day he planned to
do some serious business. He was impeccably dressed, as he was
every day, in a handmade suit from Saville Row in London. His
shirts were the latest style, made of the finest Egyptian cotton,
monogrammed on the cuff. His suit hung perfectly from his slim
frame, his silk tie subtly striped to blend in with it. His blond hair
was combed back, parted on the left side. He used pince-nez
glasses, which were perched on his nose. He wore a vest with a
gold chain that spanned the pockets. On one end of the chain
hung a thin gold pencil, on the other, a small golden penknife. He
often fidgeted with the pen or the knife, spinning one or the other,
while he was talking.
He was the most famous bear on Wall Street, a trader who was
as likely to sell short as to buy long. He didn’t care; he knew that
stocks went down as often as they went up—but when they

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 6

• 6 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

declined, they did it twice as fast as when they went up, and that
was what was going on today.
He had a line out at the present time of over a million shares,
well over $100 million. It had been placed months ago, slowly,
secretly, and silently, using more than 100 stockbrokers, so nobody
could tell what he was doing. He was short the market—he had
sold stock that he would later supply, at a much lower price. He
was living up to his reputation as the Great Bear of Wall Street.
Today, he was like a lone wolf stalking the arctic tundra, looking
for prey—and looking out for other predators that might kill him.
There were plenty of Wall Street players he knew who could do
just that—end his financial life with one deadly, hammering blow.
He picked up one of the New York Times articles he had saved
from October 20, and read the headline: “Stocks Driven Down in
Wave of Selling.” He was careful not to gloat. There was no one
who knew better than Livermore how fast things could change in
the stock market. He read on:
In the two hours in which trading was limited on the New
York Stock Exchange active issues passed through one of the
wildest breaks in history. Final quotations revealed net losses
ranging from 5 to 20 points and the aggregate depreciation in
open market values was estimated at $1,000,000,000 (one billion) or more.
The total turnover was 3,488,100 shares which represented
the second heaviest volume for a Saturday since the Stock
Exchange was established. During the first half hour trading
took place at a rate of more than 8,500,000 shares for a full
five-hour day. The stock market community did not know
until an hour and twenty-three minutes after the 12 o’clock
closing gong what the final prices were, so late was the overburdened ticker.

8467_Smitten_01_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:38 PM Page 7

THE GREAT BEAR OF WALL STREET

• 7 •

PIVOTAL STOCKS HIT

One of the stories which gained wide circulation wherever
stock market tickers clicked yesterday was that Jesse L. Livermore, formerly one of the country’s biggest speculators, is
the leader of the bear clique that has been hammering away
at the market for weeks, and that the particular weakness
which developed in high priced and pivotal stocks was to be
attributed, in part at least, to his activities.
Arthur W. Cutten of Chicago, the recognized leader of the
bull party, watched the ticker from his hotel in Atlantic City
yesterday and told close friends that nothing has developed to
change his opinion about the market—that good stocks
would eventually sell higher.
Reports of a struggle between Livermore and Cutten for
stock market supremacy, which have circulated widely in
Wall Street for the last three or four days, were discredited.
Livermore is presumed to be heavily short of leading stocks
and Cutten heavily long of the same group of issues. The
ascendency of Livermore to the position he once held as the
country’s leading market operator on the bear side, after several years of eclipse, is one of the most interesting developments in the market.
The short selling which it was generally agreed was the
principal factor in today’s decline, served to induce further
liquidation of stocks and the cumulative effect was reflected
in a demoralized market in certain issues. It was plain that the
market was receiving no organized support. Stocks which
ordinarily have powerful backing were allowed to shift for
themselves.
With stocks driving higher during the last few months following each downward reaction, the situation was ready
made for Livermore. The Street stories are that he went short
