
260/396

exterior–dirty interior, or clean form and
dirty content—is very much a part of the German national character,” he wrote.
Dundes confined himself mainly to the
study of low German culture. (For those hoping to examine coprophilia in German high
culture he recommended another book, by a
pair of German scholars, called The Call of
Human Nature: The Role of Scatology in
Modern German Literature.) Still, it was
hard to come away from his treatise without
the strong sense that all Germans, high and
low, were a bit different from you and me—a
point he made in the introduction to the paperback version of his book. “The American
wife of a German-born colleague confessed
to me that she understood her husband
much better after reading the book,” he
wrote. “Prior to that time, she had wrongly
assumed that he must have some kind of peculiar psychological hang-up inasmuch as he

261/396

insisted upon discussing at great length the
state of his latest bowel movement.”
The Hamburg red-light district had caught
Dundes’s eye because the locals made such a
big deal of mud wrestling. Naked women
fought in a ring of filth while the spectators
wore plastic caps, a sort of head condom, to
avoid being splattered. “Thus,” wrote
Dundes, “the audience can remain clean
while enjoying dirt!” Germans longed to be
near the shit, but not in it. This, as it turns
out, is an excellent description of their role
in the current financial crisis.
A WEEK EARLIER, in Berlin, I had gone to see

Germany’s deputy minister of finance, a
forty-four-year-old career government official named Jörg Asmussen. The Germans
now are in possession of the only Finance
Ministry in the big-time developed world
whose leaders don’t need to worry whether
their economy will collapse the moment investors stop buying their bonds. As

262/396

unemployment in Greece climbs to the
highest on record (16.2 percent, at last
count), it falls in Germany to twenty-year
lows (6.9 percent). Germany appears to have
experienced a financial crisis without economic consequences. They’d donned head
condoms in the presence of their bankers,
and avoided being splattered by their mud.
As a result, for the past year or so the financial markets have been trying and failing to
get a read on the German people: they can
obviously afford to pay off the debts of their
fellow Europeans, but will they actually do
it? Are they now Europeans, or are they still
Germans? Any utterance or gesture by any
German official anywhere near this decision
for the past eighteen months has been a
market-moving headline, and there have
been plenty of them, most of them echoing
German public opinion, and expressing incomprehension and outrage that other
people can behave so irresponsibly.

263/396

Asmussen is one of the Germans now being
obsessively watched. Along with his boss,
Wolfgang Schäuble, he’s one of two German
officials present in every conversation
between the German government and the
deadbeats.
The Finance Ministry, built in the
mid-1930s, is a monument to both the Nazis’
ambition and their taste. A faceless butte, it
is so big that if you circle it in the wrong direction it can take you twenty minutes to find
the front door. I circle it in the wrong direction, then sweat and huff to make up for lost
time, all the while wondering if provincial
Nazis in from the sticks had the same experience, wandering outside these forbidding
stone walls trying to figure out how to get in.
At length I find a familiar-looking courtyard:
the only difference between its appearance
now and in famous old photographs is that
Hitler is no longer marching in and out of
the entryway, and the statue of the eagle

264/396

perched atop the swastika has been removed.
“It was built for Göring’s Air Ministry,” says
the waiting Finance Ministry public relations
man, who is, oddly enough, French. “You can
tell from the cheerful architecture.” He explains that the building is so big because
Hermann Göring wanted to be able to land
planes on its roof.
I have arrived about three minutes late, but
the German deputy minister of finance runs
a full five minutes later, which, I will learn, is
viewed by Germans almost as a felony. He
apologizes a great deal more than he needs
to for the delay. He wears the slender framed
spectacles of a German film director, and is
extremely fit and bald, but by choice rather
than circumstance. Extremely fit white men
who shave their heads are making a statement, in my experience of them. “I don’t
need body fat and I don’t need hair,” they
seem to be saying, while also implying that
anyone who does is a wuss. The deputy

265/396

finance minister even laughs just as all extremely fit men with shaved heads should
laugh, if they want to remain in character.
Instead of opening his mouth to allow the air
to pass, he purses his lips and snorts the
sound out through his nose. He may need
laughter as much as other men, but he needs
less air to laugh with. His desk is a template
of self-discipline. Alive with implied activity—legal pads, Post-it notes, manila
folders—every single object on it is perfectly
aligned with all the others and with the edges
of the desk. Every angle is precisely ninety
degrees. But the most striking optional décor
is a big white sign on the wall beside the
desk. It’s in German but translates easily
back into the original English:
THE SECRET OF SUCCESS IS TO UNDERSTAND
THE POINT OF VIEW OF OTHERS.

—Henry Ford

266/396

This surprises me. It’s not at all what an extremely fit bald man should have as his mantra. It’s soft. The deputy German finance
minister further disturbs my wild assumptions about him by speaking clearly, even
recklessly, about subjects most finance ministers assume it is their job to obscure. He offers up, without much prompting, that he
has just finished reading the latest unpublished report by IMF investigators on the
progress made by the Greek government in
reforming itself. “They have not implemented the measures they have promised to implement,” he says simply. “They are not making the agreed-upon reforms.”
“The people at the IMF put it that clearly?”
I ask.
He turns to page seven of the IMF report,
where it recommends not giving the Greeks
the next tranche of the money the government needs to avoid defaulting on its bonds.
“They have a massive problem still with

267/396

revenue collection. Not the tax law itself. It’s
the collection which needs to be overhauled.”
The Greeks are still refusing to pay their
taxes, in other words. But it is only one of
many Greek sins. “Their labor market isn’t
changing as it needs to.” I ask him for an example. “They had very clearly as a tradition a
thirteenth or fourteenth monthly salary,” he
says instantly. “Due to developments in the
last ten years, a similar [civil service] job in
Germany pays fifty-five thousand euros. In
Greece is it seventy thousand.” To get around
pay restraints in the calendar year, the Greek
government simply paid employees for
months that didn’t exist. “They need to
change the relationship of the people to the
government,” he continues. “It is not a task
that can be done in three months.” Changing
the relationship between any people and its
government, he added, was not a trivial matter. The Greeks needed to change their culture. He couldn’t have put this more bluntly:

268/396

if the Greeks and the Germans were to coexist in a currency union, the Greeks needed to
change who they are.
This is unlikely to happen soon enough to
matter. The Greeks not only have massive
debts but are still running big deficits.
Trapped by an artificially strong currency,
they cannot turn these deficits into surpluses, even if they do everything outsiders
want them to do. Their exports, priced in
euros, remain expensive. The German government wants the Greeks to slash the size of
their government, but that will also slow economic growth and reduce tax revenues. And
so one of two things must happen. Either the
Germans must agree to integrate Europe
fiscally, so that Germany and Greece bear the
same relationship to each other as, say, Indiana and Mississippi—the tax dollars of ordinary Germans would go into a common
coffer and be used to pay for the lifestyle of
ordinary Greeks—or the Greeks (and

269/396

probably, eventually, every non-German)
must introduce “structural reform,” a euphemism for magically and radically transforming themselves into a people as efficient
and productive as the Germans. The first
solution is pleasant for Greeks but painful
for Germans. The second solution is pleasant
for Germans but painful, possibly even suicidal, for Greeks.
The only economically plausible scenario is
that the Germans, with a bit of help from a
rapidly shrinking population of solvent
European countries, suck it up, work harder,
and pay for everyone else. But what is economically plausible appears to be politically
unacceptable. The German people all know
at least one fact about the euro: that before
they agreed to trade in their deutsche marks
their leaders promised them, explicitly, they
would never be required to bail out other
countries. The rule was created with the
founding of the European Central Bank and

270/396

was violated in 2010. Public opinion turns
more against the violation every day—so
much so that Chancellor Angela Merkel, who
has a reputation for reading the public
mood, hasn’t even bothered to try to go before the German people to persuade them
that it might be in their interest to help the
Greeks.
That is why Europe’s money problems feel
not just problematic but intractable. It’s why
Greeks are now mailing bombs to Merkel,
and thugs in Berlin are hurling stones
through the windows of the Greek consulate.
And it’s why European leaders have done
nothing but delay the inevitable reckoning,
by scrambling every few months to find cash
to plug the ever growing holes in Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, and praying that bigger
and more alarming holes in Spain, Italy, and
even France do not reveal themselves.
Until now the European Central Bank, in
Frankfurt, has been the main source of this

271/396

cash. The ECB was designed to behave with
the same discipline as the Bundesbank but
has been redesigned by the financial crisis
into something else. Already, it has bought,
outright, something like $80 billion in Greek
and Irish and Portuguese government bonds,
and lent another $450 billion or so to various European governments and European
banks, accepting virtually any collateral, including Greek government bonds. But the
ECB has a rule—and the Germans think the
rule very important—that they cannot accept
as collateral bonds classified by the U.S. rating agencies as in default. Given that the
ECB once had a rule against buying bonds
outright in the open market, and another
rule against government bailouts, it’s a little
odd that they have gotten so hung up on this
technicality. But they have. If Greece defaults
on its debt, the ECB not only will lose a pile
on its holdings of Greek bonds but must return the bonds to the European banks, and

272/396

the European banks must fork over $450 billion in cash. The ECB itself might face insolvency, which would mean turning for funds to
its solvent member governments, led by Germany. (The senior official at the Bundesbank
told me they have already thought about how
to deal with the request. “We have thirtyfour hundred tons of gold,” he said. “We are
the only country that has not sold its original
allotment [from the late 1940s]. So we are
covered to some extent.”)
The bigger problem with a Greek default is
that it might well force other European countries and their banks themselves into default.
At the very least it would create panic and
confusion in the market for both sovereign
and bank debt, at a time when a lot of banks
and at least two big European debt-ridden
countries, Italy and Spain, cannot afford
panic and confusion.
At the bottom of this unholy mess, from
the point of view of the German Finance

273/396

Ministry, is the unwillingness, or inability, of
the Greeks to change their behavior. That
was what the currency union always implied:
entire peoples had to change their way of life.
Conceived as a tool for integrating Germany
with Europe, and preventing the Germans
from dominating others, the euro had become the opposite. For better or worse, the
Germans now control the financial fate of
Europe. If the rest of Europe was to continue
to enjoy the benefits of what was essentially
a German currency they’d need to become
more German. And so, once again, all sorts
of people who would rather not think about
what it means to be “German” are compelled
to do so.
Jörg Asmussen offers the first hint of an
answer in his personal behavior. He was a
type familiar in Germany but absolutely
freakish in Greece or, for that matter, the
United States: a keenly intelligent, highly
ambitious civil servant who had no other

274/396

ambition but to serve his country. His sparkling curriculum vitae was missing a line that
would be found on the résumés of men in his
position almost everywhere else in the
world—the line where he leaves government
service for Goldman Sachs to cash out. When
I asked another prominent German civil servant why he hadn’t taken time out of public
service to make his fortune working for some
bank, the way every American civil servant
who is anywhere near finance seems to want
to do, his expression changed to alarm. “But
I could never do this,” he said. “It would be
illoyal!” Asmussen echoes this sentiment
when I ask him why he hasn’t bothered to get
rich.
He then addresses the German question
more directly. The curious thing about the
eruption of cheap and indiscriminate lending
of money between 2002 and 2008 was the
different effects it had from country to country. Every developed country was subjected

275/396

to more or less the same temptation, but no
two countries responded in precisely the
same way. Much of Europe had borrowed
money cheaply to buy stuff it couldn’t honestly afford. In effect, lots of non-Germans
had used Germany’s credit rating to indulge
their material desires. The Germans were the
exception. Given the chance to take
something for nothing, the German people
simply ignored the offer. “There was no credit boom in Germany,” says Asmussen. “Real
estate prices were completely flat. There was
no borrowing for consumption. Because this
behavior is totally unacceptable in Germany.
This is what the German people are. This is
deeply in German genes. It is perhaps a
leftover of the collective memory of the Great
Depression and the hyperinflation of the
1920s.” The German government was equally
prudent because, he went on, “there is a consensus among the different parties about
this: if you’re not adhering to fiscal

276/396

responsibility you have no chance in elections, because the people are that way.”
In the moment of temptation Germany became something like a mirror image to Iceland and Ireland and Greece—and the United States. Other countries used foreign
money to fuel various forms of insanity. The
Germans, through their bankers, used their
own money to enable foreigners to behave
insanely.
This is what makes the German case so peculiar. If they had been merely the only big,
developed nation with decent financial morals, they would present one sort of picture, of
simple rectitude. But they had done
something far less common: during the
boom German bankers had gone out of their
way to get dirty. They lent money to American subprime borrowers, to Irish real estate
barons, to Icelandic banking tycoons, to do
things that no German ever would do. The
German losses are still being toted up, but at

277/396

last count they stand at $21 billion in the
Icelandic banks, $100 billion in Irish banks,
$60 billion in various U.S. subprime-backed
bonds, and some yet to be determined
amount in Greek bonds. The only financial
disaster in the last decade German bankers
appear to have missed was investing with
Bernie Madoff (perhaps the only advantage
to the German financial system of having no
Jews). In their own country, however, these
seemingly crazed bankers behaved with restraint. The German people did not allow
them to behave otherwise. It was another
case of clean on the outside, dirty on the inside. The German banks that wanted to get a
little dirty needed to go abroad to do it.
About this the deputy finance minister has
not that much to say, though he does wonder, idly, how a real estate crisis in Florida
ends with massive financial losses in Germany. That such a thing has happened seems
genuinely to puzzle him.

278/396

A GERMAN ECONOMIST named Henrik Ender-

lein, who teaches at the Hertie School of
Governance in Berlin, has described the radical change that occurred in German banks
beginning about 2003. In a paper in progress, Enderlein points out, “Many observers
initially believed German banks would be relatively less exposed to the crisis. The contrary turned out to be the case. German
banks ended up being among the most affected in continental Europe and this despite
relatively favorable economic conditions.”
Everyone thought that German bankers were
more conservative, and more isolated from
the outside world, than, say, the French. And
it wasn’t true. “There had never been any innovation in German banking,” says Enderlein. “You gave money to some company, and
the company paid you back. They went [virtually overnight] from this to being American. And they weren’t any good at it.”

279/396

What Germans did with money between
2003 and 2008 would never have been possible within Germany, as there was no one to
take the other side of the many deals they
did that made no sense. They lost massive
sums, in everything they touched, from U.S.
subprime loans to Greek government bonds.
Indeed, one view of the European debt
crisis—the Greek street view—is that it is an
elaborate attempt by the German government on behalf of its banks to get their
money back without calling attention to what
they are up to. The German government
gives money to the European Union rescue
fund so that it can give money to the Irish
government so that the Irish government can
give money to Irish banks, so the Irish banks
can repay their loans to the German banks.
“They are playing billiards,” says Enderlein.
“The easier way to do it would be to give German money to the German banks and let the

280/396

Irish banks fail.” Why they don’t simply do
this is a question worth trying to answer.
THE TWENTY-MINUTE WALK from the German

Finance Ministry to the office of the chairman of Commerzbank, one of Germany’s two
giant private banks, is punctuated by officially sanctioned memories: the new Holocaust Memorial, two and a half times the
acreage occupied by the U.S. Embassy; the
new street beside it, called Hannah Arendt
Street; the signs pointing to Berlin’s new
Jewish Museum; the park that contains the
Berlin Zoo, where, after spending decades
denying they had ever mistreated Jews, the
authorities have newly installed, on the
Antelope House, a plaque commemorating
their Nazi-era expropriation of shares in the
zoo owned by Jews. Along the way you also
pass Hitler’s bunker, but you’d never know it
was there, as it has been paved over by a
parking lot, and the small plaque that commemorates it is well hidden. The streets of

281/396

Berlin can feel like an elaborate shrine. It’s
as if history stopped and assigned roles to
people, and the Germans have been required
to accept that they will always play the villain. On the other hand, it’s easier to express
contrition about just about everything the
less personally responsible one feels. The
guilt is being so loudly expressed precisely
because it is no longer personal and searing.
Hardly anyone still alive is responsible for
what happened here: everyone is. But when
everyone is guilty, no one is.
At any rate, if some Martian landed on the
streets of Berlin knowing nothing of its history, he might wonder: who are these people
called “the Jews,” and how did they come to
run this place? But there are no Jews in Germany, or not many. “The German people
never see Jews,” says Gary Smith, the director of the American Academy in Berlin. “Jews
are unreal to them. When they think of Jews
they think of victims.” The further away the

282/396

German people get from their victims, the
more conspicuously they commemorate
them. Of course no German in his right mind
actually wants to sit around remembering
the terrible crimes committed by his ancestors—and there are signs, including the memorials, that they are finding ways to move
on. A good friend of mine, a Jew whose family was driven out of Germany in the 1930s,
recently visited a German consulate in the
United States to apply for a passport. He
already held one European passport, but he
worried that the European Union might one
day fall apart, and he wanted access to Germany, just in case. The German official in
charge—an Aryan out of central casting,
wearing a Sound of Music vest—handed him
a copy of a pamphlet titled A Jew’s Life in
Modern Germany.
“Would you mind if we take a picture?” he
asked my friend, after processing his passport application.

283/396

“No problem,” said my friend.
“Can we do it in front of the flag?” asked
the official.
My friend stared at the German flag.
“What’s this for?” he asked.
“Our website,” said the German official,
then added that the government hoped to
post the photo with a sign that read: This
man is the descendant of Holocaust survivors and he has decided to return to
Germany.
COMMERZBANK WAS THE first private bank that

the German government had to rescue during the financial crisis, with an injection of
$25 billion, but that’s not why it had caught
my attention. I’d been walking around
Frankfurt one night with a German financier
when I noticed the Commerzbank building
on the skyline. There’s a law in Germany
prohibiting buildings higher than twenty
stories, but Frankfurt allows exceptions. The
Commerzbank Tower is fifty-three stories

284/396

high and unusually shaped: it resembles a giant throne. The top of the building, the arms
of the throne, are more decorative than useful. The interesting thing, said the German
financier, who visited often, is the glass room
at the top, from which one looks down over
Frankfurt. It is a men’s toilet. Commerzbank
executives had taken him there to show him
how, in full view of the world below, he could
shit on Deutsche Bank.
The Commerzbank chairman, Klaus-Peter
Müller, actually works in Berlin, inside another very German kind of place. His office is
attached to the side of the Brandenburg
Gate. The Berlin Wall once ran, roughly
speaking, right through the middle of it. One
side of his building was once a field of fire for
East German border guards, the other a
backdrop for Ronald Reagan’s famous
speech. (“Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate. Mr.
Gorbachev, tear down this wall!”) From looking at it you would never guess any of this.
