
c05.indd 115

11/2/07 12:19:02 PM

116

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 5.7 Technical Indicator Overload

Mistake 8: Unrealistic Expectations
Use your imagination for a moment with us. Let’s assume that you
went to Wal-Mart and purchased enough 12-inch rulers to lay end
to end along the equator. That’s right—you’ve just set down a line
of rulers measuring 24,900 miles long. On the back of one of these
rulers, you place a red dot and then you turn the ruler back over.
Your friend comes along and starts at any point on the equator
and begins to walk. His objective is to select a stopping point, bend
down, and turn over the ruler. Is it realistic to expect that he will
walk 1, 100, 1,000, or 10,000 miles along the ruler path and happen
to reach for the very ruler that you marked with a red dot? If this
picture sounds absurd to you, then why do thousands of people
each day play the lottery? The Mega Millions lottery, played in 12
U.S. states, has a jackpot with lower odds of winning than finding
our marked ruler.
In the trading world, unrealistic expectations don’t take the
form of expecting to get $100 million from a $1 investment. That
stretches the believability factor too much for us. But 700 percent
returns each month start to enter our thinking. We once had a trader
come to us with a $2,000 trading account. He wanted to know which
strategies he could employ that would let him live off of his trading
account. We first questioned him about how much he needed to
live. Based on the size of his trading account, we were intrigued that
he thought he could live on $50 per month. Instead, he told us

c05.indd 116

11/2/07 12:19:02 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

117

that he needed at least $5,000 each month for his living expenses.
He actually thought he could cash flow $5,000 each month from
his $2,000 trading capital. That’s $60,000 annually for a whopping
3,000 percent return. We told him that if he could figure out how
to consistently draw a 3,000 percent return, he should immediately
open a hedge fund and we’d be the first investors.
The first and most realistic expectation from trading the markets
is simply to outperform the broad market. If the Dow Jones Industrial
Average is up 10 percent, your trading should be up more than 10
percent after commissions and expenses. If the Nasdaq 100 is down
5 percent, your trading should be up or at least down less than 5 percent. The bottom line is: If you can’t outperform the broad market,
stop trading! It’s much easier and profitable for you to place your
money in a broad market exchange-traded fund (DIA, SPY, QQQQ)
or an index mutual fund. These, at least, will track the market and
you don’t have to make any buy and sell decisions.
Remember this rule: If you want to get rich quickly, go somewhere
else. If you want to get poor quickly, keep trading with the belief that
you can get rich quickly. Even the ancient King Solomon recognized
this fact of building wealth when he wrote, “ The plans of the diligent
lead to profit as surely as haste leads to poverty” (Proverbs 21:5).

Mistake 9: Using Software Crutches
Software can be a great tool, or it can be a monumental waste of time.
We’ve watched countless traders fiddle with their trading software in
a classic case of going nowhere fast. Activity should not be confused
with productivity in the markets. Traders who are using software as
a crutch would be completely lost if they were handed a printed
copy of a chart. They couldn’t tack on their favorite indicator, toggle
between time frames, or pull up the latest news on the stock. There
are many great software packages available to traders. As we warned
in Mistake 7 (Overcomplicating the Analysis), you don’t have to use
all of the available tools.
Software can also become a crutch when a trader ceases to learn
the language of technical analysis and instead attempts to program
his own trading robot. Countless hours are spent refining a trading
system and back-testing it against historical market data. This trader
is not developing any useful trading skills; rather, he’s spinning his
wheels in pursuit of the black box, which doesn’t exist. For him, the

c05.indd 117

11/2/07 12:19:02 PM

118

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

software has become the goal. His every effort and motivation is
mastering the software, and he rarely, if ever, actually trades.
Software should never be a substitute for learning, either.
Unfortunately, technical analysis is sometimes too quick and easy on
contemporary trading platforms. We can easily trick ourselves into
thinking that we have an advantage in the market simply because
we have the latest and greatest charting/programming/scanning
package. If all of trading boiled down to the software, we wouldn’t
have charts, indicators, screens, and the like. We would turn on
the computer, launch the software, and select one of two buttons
that appear on the screen: “Buy the Stock” or “Sell the Stock for a
Profit.” The more advanced software platforms would be equipped
with two more buttons: “Buy the Option” and “Sell the Option for a
Profit.” Ah, that the world of trading were that easy.

Mistake 10: Trading without a Plan
We covered the importance of a trading plan in detail in Chapter 1,
but we want to add just a couple more thoughts to this point. Be sure
that you learn from your successes and failures. If you record both
as part of your trading plan, you’ll be able to adjust your actions
and strategies twice as effectively. Remember, also, to occasionally
ask yourself the question, “Why am I trading?” Your trading plan
is built around the answer to this fundamental question. For most
traders, the answer to this question will evolve or completely change
over time. It will follow the shifting of goals and priorities that occur
throughout life. Be sure that your plan lives and breathes with you.
Your plan should serve your purposes rather than your becoming a
slave to your plan. Sometimes walking the well-worn path is not the
best. Learn from the mistakes made by others before you, and grow
on your journey toward trading success.

c05.indd 118

11/2/07 12:19:02 PM

II

P O I N T

ESTABLISH A CLEAR
SUPPORT LEVEL
Pinpoint Support

c06.indd 119

11/2/07 12:19:49 PM

c06.indd 120

11/2/07 12:19:49 PM

6

C H A P T E R

The Role Reversal
W O RKIN G T H E BUY ER / SEL L ER B ATTL E L INE

C

hapter 3 covered the mechanics behind the steps in drawing a
support level on a price chart, which is nothing more than identifying areas where buyers have displayed a history of buying. Here, we
will be discussing the reasons why buyers buy when they do. You will
see that as you continue to hone your technical analysis skills, certain
price patterns will seem to jump out of the chart at you.
One of these patterns is the role reversal support pattern. We
have found that this pattern can be seen on virtually every chart you
look at. Day traders will see this pattern on intraday charts that measure increments of minutes while swing traders will find this pattern
on daily charts over the course of the year. Even the long term investor will find this on weekly charts that include many years of data,
so it doesn’t really matter what time frame you are using, it will be
there.
In our examples we will be using simple line charts that track the
closing price of the stock each and every day. There are a couple of
reasons why we use line charts. First, they’re clean and simple, which
makes it easier on the eye when going through your chart scans. Second, we put more weight in the closing price than any other price
point. In order to understand the reasons why so many analysts favor
the closing price over all of the other data points, we have to get
into the mind of a professional trader. There is an old saying that
the amateurs open the market each day, while the professionals close
121

c06.indd 121

11/2/07 12:19:49 PM

122

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

the market. At the end of each trading day, mutual fund companies
go through the routine of settling their positions to calculate net asset
value (NAV) for each fund they manage. This process includes teams
of people who go through each and every company held in the fund
to ensure that there are no price errors or mistakes made that would
affect the NAV; otherwise, this could be costly to the fund company.
There are times when news, either positive or negative, is released
on one or more of the companies held in the fund, at which time
the fund manager has to determine whether this news adds any risk
to the fund and if, after consulting with the risk managers, the fund
manager feels the risk outweighs the rewards of holding the position,
the manager will liquidate some or all of the position to limit that
risk. If you take our example of just one mutual fund company and
multiply this by the many thousands of mutual funds that are traded
each day, you will see why there are volume surges in the last hour of
the trading day.

Market Mechanics
Risk managers are doing what they do best which is minimizing
downside exposure to the companies they work for. Along with
the mutual fund companies, the market makers and hedge fund
managers are adding to the closing volume of the market as they
assess positions to determine whether they are comfortable with
holding a particular long or short position overnight.
Before the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) began
phasing in their special order handling rules in 1997, market makers had an easier time making money for the firms they worked for.
The way it would work is if you, the investing public, entered an
order to buy or sell a particular security, your order was entered
through your broker and then routed to a market maker, who would
then execute the transaction for you. The market makers had special privileges that allowed them to either take the opposite side
of your order—meaning if you were a buyer of a stock, they could
sell you that stock out of their inventory—or they could just show
your order to the rest of the market makers, allowing them to take
the other side of your buy order. The one thing you may not have
known if you were an investor back in those days is that your market
maker had the ability to buy stock for their account at prices below
the price you were bidding. Understand that this is when stocks

c06.indd 122

11/2/07 12:19:49 PM

The Role Reversal

123

were trading in fractions of a dollar, so here is an example of what
this might have looked like:
A particular market for a stock you may have been interested
in might have shown a bid price of $24 and an offering price of
$24½, at which time you may have entered an order to buy stock
somewhere in the middle for 24¼. Your market maker was not obligated to show your buy order, and most of the time they wouldn’t
show your order to the open market. Instead, what they would do is
post a bid for their own account through a system known as Instinet,
which was a trading system reserved primarily for market makers and
institutions. If the market maker posted a bid for $241⁄8, there was a
good chance they could buy stock an eighth of a dollar cheaper than
your buy price. Therefore, if you were trying to buy 1,000 shares for
24¼, they would buy 1,000 shares for their own account at 241⁄8 on
Instinet, then quickly sell you your shares at 24¼ and pocket a quick
profit of $125 with no risk at all to their own account. On top of this
you were being charged a hefty commission for the transaction and
in the end you probably thought you were getting a good deal from
your broker.
For example:
1. Market for ABC stock is 24 bid offered at 24½.
2. You enter an order to buy 1,000 shares of ABC stock at 24¼.
3. Market maker buys 1,000 shares at 241⁄8 on Instinet.
4. Market maker sells 1,000 shares to you at 24¼.
5. Realized profit for market maker is 1⁄8 ⫻ 1,000 ⫽ $125.
This would happen many thousands of times each day, but thanks
to the SEC this abuse has, for the most part, been eliminated. What the
SEC order handling rules have also done is force the market makers to
take risk for their own accounts. This means that market makers now
have to take open positions in the market in order to profit, and this
opens them up to more risk.
What does this mean for you, the individual trader? It means that
if you want to cut down on your own risk exposure, you don’t want to
be on the opposite side of these market makers. They see order flow
better than you do, and they also have much deeper pockets than
you do. In other words, although the SEC order-handling rules allow
for full transparency for most small orders, not all orders are being
shown. Larger orders, particularly those entered by the institutions,

c06.indd 123

11/2/07 12:19:50 PM

124

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

are not being displayed to the general public, and they like it this
way. If you were an institutional trader looking to move a very large
amount of money and you were thinking about buying a stock, do
you think you would want to have everyone in the world knowing
what your intentions were? Of course you wouldn’t. If you entered
a large buy order into the market that represented many millions
of dollars in buying power, what do you think that would do to the
price of the stock if everyone knew there was a big buyer coming in?
First of all, it would scare away any of the smaller sellers. Second,
it would cause any larger sellers to raise their sell limits to see how
far the buyers would chase them. Finally, momentum traders would
jump on the bandwagon and try to jump ahead of the big buy order
to take a short ride with the intentions of making a quick profit on
a price rally brought on buy this new demand in the stock. It would
be the same on the sell side. If an institution decided to show a large
sell order in the open market, the buyers would run for the hills and
the price would drop like a rock.
Many times, the market makers are given discretion to complete the order over a series of days or even weeks. This allows them
to fill the order little by little without drawing too much attention to
themselves. They would just stay on the bid price if they had a big
institutional buy order, or they would just stay on the offering price
if they had a large sell order they were working. When market makers are not working any large institutional orders, they spend most
of their day reading order flow. If they see that there is good news
on a stock, chances are the majority of orders that come into their
book that day will be buy orders. This is because the general pubic
act like sheep and will react to this good news by buying the stock
on the day the news is released. Market makers will favor the buy side
in a situation like this because the good news adds to the price support as the news creates short-term demand for the shares. Also,
should there be an unexpected price drop during the day, they can
quickly get out by selling to the next buy order they have sitting in
their pending order file. This allows them to efficiently manage loss
to their own account. What they are doing here is using the public order flow as a stop loss feature. With the click of the mouse
they can quickly sell out of their entire position if they feel the buy
orders are starting to slow down. This is one of the great benefits of
being a market maker, and it’s a luxury you will have to live without
as an individual trader.

c06.indd 124

11/2/07 12:19:50 PM

The Role Reversal

125

Here is an example of how a market maker would use their order
flow to profit in the market:
The market for a particular stock is 24 bid offered at 24.02. The
market maker sees that he has a large number of buyers in his
order book who are stacked up on the bid side. There are a
total of 10,000 shares in this pending order file, all bidding $24.
So the market maker buys 10,000 shares at 24.02 for his own
account. If the price of the stock goes up, the market maker will
realize a profit. If the price of the stock does not go up, then the
market maker will sell 10,000 shares from his account to those
looking to buy stock at $24.

As you can see, this would cost the market maker only $200 if he is
wrong. However, when he is right, he will make a lot more than $200
because as the price of the stock goes up, those buyers he had in his
book will most likely chase the market. This is when people who were
trying to buy the stock at $24 move their limits up because they did
not get to buy the stock when it was lower. You may have done this
yourself. Market makers count on the general public’s chasing the
market. There is even a term that’s used to describe this action. It’s
called stepping up. Professional traders who trade for market making
firms love it when you step up on your limit order. This allows them
to capture profits pretty effortlessly.
Before you make a decision to day trade for a living, remember
that your odds aren’t even close to being as good as a market maker
who earns a good living trading the markets. We want to reiterate the
importance of having a fine-tuned discipline when managing risk
in the market. Learning about how a market maker profits in the
market will help you increase the odds in your favor when you are
taking a position in the market for your own account.
From the examples we have given you so far with regard to how
professional traders deal with risk in the market, you can see that a market maker will be siding with the order flow. If the order flow is on the
buy side of the market, then chances are the market maker is going to
be a buyer. If the order flow is on the sell side of the market, perhaps
owing to bad news, then the market maker is going to be playing the
short side of the market. If the market maker is aggressively attacking
the long side of a trade, you can be certain that they have their eye
on the downside risk and will be quick to take a loss if the buyers start

c06.indd 125

11/2/07 12:19:50 PM

126

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

to thin out in their pending book of orders. They are good at what they
do, and they make money because they are reading the market with a
trained eye and a strict set of rules for trading.

Your Opinion Won’t Move a Market
So why is it that so many traders who trade their own accounts from
home lose money? The number one reason most people lose money
trading their own accounts is that they have developed an opinion for
the stock and this opinion draws them away from the obvious signals
given through the price charts. Adding an opinion to a trading strategy will most likely doom the strategy from the very beginning.
From what we are seeing in our travels, there are still far too many
people out there who are trying to buy stocks on yearly lows thinking
that they have found the bottom. They do just enough research to
justify the price as one of value, and at first glance this idea might
seem sensible. But many times this bargain-hunting strategy quickly
sours after this same stock drops to another 52-week low a short week
later. The next thing they do is dig into the financial reports searching for a reason why they should hold on to this new losing position.
Then they search the analyst reports, and after a while they commit
to the good old strategy of “Just hold on; it will get better.” From
there, it develops into a “Hold on until I can get out at my breakeven
point.” There are price levels at which the general public reaches
their goal in this amazing pursuit of breakeven, and we call it the
role reversal point.
Our objective for this chapter is to bring you to a place where you
have realized that the support line on the chart is also your financial
lifeline. If you follow these easy steps in constructing a proper support
line, you will find that this will allow you to absorb small losses when
you are wrong, while allowing you to stay in the market by preserving
your buying power. This will give you more opportunities to be right,
which in turn means more profits down the road. We also encourage
you to make sure you are buying your stocks as close as you can to a
support level and not a resistance level. Should you do this, then you
have once again increased the odds in your favor.

Defining Role Reversal
In order to help you understand the ideas behind the role reversal
point, we need to get into the minds of those who consistently

c06.indd 126

11/2/07 12:19:50 PM

The Role Reversal

127

lose money when trading the markets. One of the most popular
misconceptions around is that in order to make money in the stock
market you need to buy low and sell high. We have all heard it
before, but what does this really mean? For most people this means
that you should try to buy a stock at a lower price than where it is currently trading. Then the intention is to sell this position for a profit
after the stock has gone up. If you dig deeper into this practice, you
will find that in order for you to buy a stock at a lower price, the
stock will have to fall to the price at which you are trying to buy it.
Immediately, you are stacking the odds against you. Remember, the
market makers are going to be happy to sell you the stock they own
at this point because you are helping them limit their losses. Playing
this scenario out, we will take this strategy to the next level, which
is what the amateur traders do once they have realized that they
were not lucky enough to pick the bottom. Once the buyer of this
depressed stock suffers a downturn in the market, they justify the
position by digging into the fundamentals of the company. After
another round of analysis, they jump into the popular strategy called
cost averaging down.

Dollar Cost Averaging versus Cost Averaging Down
You may have heard of an investment strategy called dollar cost
averaging. This is where investors deposit small amounts of money
each month into an account that has been set up to automatically
purchase shares in a mutual fund equal to the amount deposited.
The goal is to accumulate shares in a retirement portfolio without
having to suffer the pain of enduring extreme price swings brought
on by market volatility. The most attractive thing about this strategy
is that is allows us to accumulate more shares of the fund as the price
drops, and over time we find that the shares we’ve accumulated
at the lower price levels add to the performance of our portfolio
when the price of the shares goes up to a new high. However, there
is one catch: We need the mutual fund to go up in price for this to
work. Otherwise, we have accumulated a lot of worthless shares in
a retirement account designed to help us with a long-term plan for
our golden years.
So with a dollar cost averaging strategy, it is wise to make sure
your money is going into a fund that is in a steady, yet not too aggressive, upward trend. Notice in Figure 6.1 how a $250 per month
