
Since all butterflies are worth their maximum amount when the underlying
contract is right at the inside exercise price at expiration, both a call and put butterfly
with the same exercise prices and the same expiration date desire exactly the same
outcome, and therefore have identical characteristics. Both the March 95/100/105 call
butterfly and the March 95/100/105 put butterfly will be worth a maximum of 5 with
the underlying contract right at 100 at expiration, and a minimum value of zero with
the underlying contract below 95 or above 105. If both butterflies are not trading at the


148 Chapter &

same price, there is a sure profit opportunity available by purchasing the cheaper and
selling the more expensive.2

Ifa trader foresees a quiet market, why might he choose a long butterfly over some
other type of strategy, for example a short straddle? An important characteristic of a
butterfly is its limited risk. Ifa trader initiates a long butterfly in the belief that the market
is unlikely to move very far from the current price, the most he can lose if he is wrong
is the amount he laid out to purchase the butterfly. On the other hand, if a trader sells
a straddle and the market makes a large move, his potential risk is unlimited. Regardless
of theoretical considerations, some traders are not comfortable with the possibility of
unlimited risk. If given the choice between purchasing butterflies and selling straddles,
they will prefer the former strategy to the latter.

Of course the straddle, while riskier, also has greater profit potential. If a trader
intends to purchase butterflies but wants a potential profit commensurate with that of
a short straddle, he will have to trade butterflies in much greater size. A trader who is
considering the sale of 25 straddles might decide instead to buy 100 butterflies (100 x
200 x 100). While trading 100 spreads may appear riskier than trading 25 spreads, 100
butterflies may tn fact be much less risky than 25 straddles because of the risk
characteristics associated with a butterfly. A trader should never confuse size and risk.
Risk often depends on the characteristics of the strategy, not on the size in which the
Strategy is executed.

TIME SPREAD
{also referred to as a calendar spread or horizontal spread)

If all options in a spread expire at the same time, the value of the spread is simply a
function of the underlying price at expiration. If, however, the spread consists of options
which expire at different times, the value of the spread cannot be determined until both
options expire. The spread’s value depends not only on where the underlying market is
when the short-term option expires, but also on what will happen between that time
and the time when the long-term option expires. Time spreads, sometimes referred to
as calendar spreads or horizontal spreads,’ consist of opposing positions which expire
in different months.

The most common type of time spread consists of opposing positions in two options
of the same type (either both calls or both puts] where both options have the same
exercise price. When the long-term option is purchased and the short-term option ts
sold, a trader is long the time spread; when the short-term option is purchased and the
long-term option is sold, the trader is short the time spread. Since a long-term option
will have more time value, and therefore a higher price than a short-term option, this is
consistent with the practice of referring to any spread which is executed at a debit
(credit) as a long (short) spread position.

2. This is not necessarily the case if the spreads consist of American options, where there Is a possjbility
of early exercise. A sure profit would exist only if one were certain of carrying the position to expiration.

3. Expiration months were originally listed horizontally on exchange option displays. Hence the term
horizontal spread.


Volatility Spreads 149

Although time spreads are most commonly executed one-to-one (one contract
purchased for each contract sold}, a trader may ratio a time spread to reflect a bullish,
bearish, or neutral market sentiment. For the present we will assume that all time
spreads will be ratioed delta neutral. Typical long and short time spreads are shown in
Figures 8-11 and 8-12.

A time spread has different characteristics from the other spreads we have dis-
cussed, because its value depends not only on movement in the underlying market, but
also on other traders’ expectations about future market movement as reflected in the
implied volatility. If we assume that the options making up a time spread are approxi-
mately at-the-money, time spreads have two important characteristics.

A long time spread always wants the underlying market to sit still. An important
characteristic of an at-the-money option’s theta (time decay) is its tendency to become
increasingly large as expiration approaches. As time passes, a short-term at-the-money
option, having less time to expiration, will lose its value at a greater rate than a long-term
at-the-money option. (Note the value of at-the-money options in Figures 6-13 and 6-14,
and the theta values in Figure 6-15.) This principle has an important effect on the value
of a time spread,

For example, suppose two at-the-money calls, one with three months to expiration
and one with six months to expiration, have values of 6 and 714, respectively. The value
of the spread is therefore 14%. If one month passes and the underlying market is
unchanged, both options will lose value. But the short-term option, with its greater
theta, will lose a greater amount. If the long-term option loses '/, the short-term option

Figure 8-11: Long Time Spread (Value at Near Term Expiration)

tong 10 June 95 puts (-31)

long 20 June 100 calls (51) short 10 March 95 puts (21)

short 20 March 100 calls (61)

Profit

buy a long term option
at one exercise price

Loss

sell a short term option
of the same type
at the same exercise price



150 Chapter 8

Figure 8-12: Short Time Spread (Value at Near Term Expiration)

buy a short term option
at one exercise price

= sell a long term option
2 of the same type
o at the same exercise price
|
|
|
- |
8 *long 10 March 105 calls (24) | long 25 March 100 puts (-48)
4 short 10 June 110 cails (23) short 25 June 100 puts (-47)
|

“technically a diagonal spread, but with many of the
same characteristics as a time spread

may lose a full point. Now the options are worth 5 and 7%, and the spread is worth
2%. If another month passes and the market is still unchanged, both options will
continue to decay, But, again, the short-term option, with less time remaining to
expiration, will decay at a greater rate. If the long-term option loses %4, the short term
option may lose 2 points. Now the options are worth 3 and 6%, and the spread has
increased in value to 3%, Finally, if at expiration the market is still unchanged, the
short-term option, since it is still at-the-money, will lose all of its remaining value of 3
points. The long-term option will continue to decay but will do so at a slower rate. If
the long-term option loses %, it will be worth 6 points, and the spread will be worth 6
points (Figure 8-13).

What will happen if the underlying market makes a larger move? Assume as before
that both options are at-the-money and have values of 7% and 6. As the underlying
market rises and options move more deeply into-the-money, they begin to lose their time
value. If the move is large enough, it won’t matter that the long-term option has three
more months remaining to expiration. Both options will eventually lose all their time
value (see Figures 6-15 and 6-16). If the time spread consists of calls, both of which have
exercise prices of 100, and the underlying market moves from 100 to 150, both options
might trade at parity (intrinsic value), or 50 points. The spread will then go to zero. Even
if the long-term option retains as much as 44 point, the spread will still have collapsed to 44.

What about a large downward move in the underlying market? The situation is
almost identical to an upward move. As an option moves further out-of-the-money its


Volatility Spreads 151

Figure 8-13: The Effect of Time Passage on Time Spreads
Time to Expiration

Long-term option 6 months 5 months 4 months 3 months
Short-term option 3 months 2 months 4 month none
Option Value

Long-term option Tip ™% 6% 6
Short-term option 6 5 3 0
Spread Vaiue 1% 2M 3% 6

time value also begins to shrink. Here, however, neither option will have any intrinsic
value, so that if the market moves down far enough both options will eventually be
worthless. If that happens, the time spread will be worthless. If, as above, the long-term
option retains even 1% point in value, the spread will still collapse to 14 point.

Since a short-term at-the-money option always decays more quickly than a long-
term at-the-money option, regardless of whether the options are calls or puts, both a
long call time spread and a long put time spread want the underlying market to sit still.
Ideally, both spreads would like the short-term option to expire right at-the-money so
that the long-term option will retain as much time value as possible while the short-term
option expires worthless.

Ifa long time spread wants the market to sit still, logically a short time spread wants
the market to move. It may therefore seem that, as with backspreads and ratio vertical
spreads, the major consideration in deciding whether to initiate a long or short time
spread is the likelinood of movement in the underlying market. Certainly time spreads
are sensitive to movement in the price of the underlying, but time spreads are also
sensitive to changes in implied volatility.

A long time spread always benefits from an increase in implied volatility. Look
again at Figure 6-18, the relationship between an option’s vega (sensitivity to a change
in volatility) and the time remaining to expiration. As time to expiration increases, the
vega of an option increases. This means that a long-term option is always more sensitive
in total points to a change in volatility than a short-term option with the same exercise
Price.

For example, assume again that a 100 call time spread is worth 114 (long- and
short-term options with values of 714 and 6, respectively). Assume also that the value
of the spread is based on a volatility of 20%. What will happen to the value of the spread
if we raise volatility to 25%? Both options will increase in value since an increase in
volatility increases the value of all options, But the long-term option, with more time
Temaining to expiration and therefore a higher vega, will gain more value as a result of
the increase in volatility. If the short-term option gains 14, the long-term option may
gain a full point. Now the options will be worth 814 and 614, and the spread will have
widened from 11% to 2 (Figure 8-14).


152 Chapter 8

Figure 8-14: The Effect of Volatility on Time Spreads

Voiatility 15% 20% 25%
Option Value

Long term option 6% 7% 8%
Short term option 5% 6 6%
Spread Vaiue 1 1% 2

Conversely, if we lower our volatility estimate to 15%, both options will lose value.
But the long-term option, with more time remaining to expiration, will be more sensitive
to the change in volatility and will lose a greater amount. The new option values might
be 6!4 and 514, causing the spread to narrow to | point.

The effects of volatility on a time spread become especially evident when there is
a change in implied volatility in the option market. When implied volatility rises, time
spreads tend to widen; when implied volatility falls, time spreads tend to narrow. This
effect can often be great enough to offset either a favorable or unfavorable move in the
underlying market. A trader who is long a time spread expects to lose money if the
underlying market makes a swift move in either direction. He knows that time spreads
begin to collapse as the options move into- or out-of-the-money. But if this movement
is accompanied by a sufficient increase in implied volatility, the increase in the spread’s
price due to the increase in implied volatility may actually be greater than the loss due
to market movement. In that case the trader may find that the spread has actually
widened. Conversely, if the market sits still, the trader expects the spread to widen
becatise of the short-term option’s greater time decay. But if, at the same time, there is
a collapse in implied volatility, the decline in the spread’s price due to the decline in
implied volatility may more than offset any gain from the passage of time. If this happens,
the trader may find that the spread has narrowed.

These two opposing forces, the decay in an option’s value due to the passage of
time and the change in an option’s value due to changes in volatility, give time spreads
their unique characteristics. When a trader buys or sells a time spread, he is not only
attempting to forecast movement in the underlying market. He is also trying to forecast
changes in implied volatility. The trader would like to forecast both inputs accurately,
but often an error in one input can be offset by an accurate forecast for the other input.

Ideally, the trader who is long a time spread wants two apparently contradictory
conditions in the marketplace. First, he wants the underlying market to sit still so that
time decay will have a beneficial effect on the spread. Second, he wants everyone to
think the market is going to move so that implied volatility will rise. This may seem an
impossible scenario, the market remaining unchanged but everyone thinking it will
move. In fact, this happens quite often because events which don’t have an immediate
effect on the underlying market could be perceived to have a future effect on the market.

Suppose an announcement is made that the finance ministers of the major indus-
trialized countries plan to meet to discuss exchange rates. If no one knows what the


Volatility Spreads 153

outcome of the meeting will be, there is unlikely to be any significant move in the
currency markets when the initial announcement is made. On the other hand, all
traders will assume that major changes in exchange rates could result from the meeting.
This possibility will result in an increase in implied volatility in the currency option
market. The lack of movement in the underlying market, together with the increase in
implied volatility, will cause time spreads to widen.

Suppose that, as a result of the meeting, the finance ministers decide to maintain
the status quo. Now expectations of a major change in exchange rates fade, implied
volatility falls, and, as a result, time spreads narrow.

Scenarios with similar consequences also occur in the interest rate options market
when a policy statement is expected from the Federal Reserve in the United States, or
when a company’s earnings are due to be reported in the stock option market. These
events are unlikely to have an effect on the underlying market before the fact, but they
could have significant repercussions after the fact.

The effect of implied volatility is what distinguishes time spreads from the other
types of spreads we have discussed. Backspreads (including long straddles, long stran-
gles, and short butterflies) and ratio vertical spreads (including short straddles, short
strangles, and long butterflies) want real volatility (price movement in the underlying
market) and implied volatility (a reflection of expectations about future price movement
in the underlying market} to either both rise or both fall. A swift move in the underlying
market or an increase in implied volatility will help a backspread. A quiet market or a
decrease in implied volatility will help a ratio vertical spread. With time spreads,
however, real and implied volatility have opposite effects. A big move in the underlying
market or a decrease in implied volatility will help a short time spread, while a quiet
market or an increase in implied volatility will help a long time spread. This opposite
effect is what gives time spreads their unique characteristics.

While the foregoing characteristics of time spreads apply to all option markets,
there may be other considerations, depending on the specific underlying market. We
previously assumed that the price of the underlying contract for both the short- and long-
term option was the same. In the stock option market this will always be true because
the underlying for every expiration is the same stock. The underlying contract for all
IBM options, regardless of the expiration month, is always IBM stock. And IBM stock
can only have a single price at any one time. In contrast, the underlying for a futures
option is a specific futures contract. Consider this situation for Eurodollar futures and
options traded at the CME:

March Eurodollar Futures = 93.90
June Eurodollar Futures = 93.75

Suppose a trader initiates a long time spread:

long 10 June 94.00 calls
short 10 March 94.00 calls

The underlying for March Eurodollar options is a March Eurodollar futures con-
tract; the underlying for June Eurodollar options is a June Eurodollar futures contract.


154 Chapter 8

While the March and June Etrodollar futures contracts are related, they are not
identical. It is not impossible fo' one futures contract to go up while the other goes
down. As a result, in additior to volatility considerations, a trader who buys a
June/March Eurodollar option all time spread also has to worry about the risk of the
June futures contract falling whib the March futures contract is rising. Is there any way
to offset this risk?

If, in our example, the sprad between the March and June futures contracts,
which is currently .15, begins b widen, the option spread will narrow regardless of
volatility considerations. If, however, when the trader initiates the option spread, he
also executes a futures spread bypurchasing March futures and selling June futures, he
will have a position which wiiloffset any loss to the option spread resulting from a
widening in the futures spread.

How many futures spreads should the trader execute? He ought to trade the
number of futures spreads requird to be delta neutral. If the delta of both options is 40
and the trader executes the optien spread ten times, he will be long 400 deltas in June
and short 400 deltas in March. Tierefore, he should buy 4 March futures contracts and
sell 4 June futures contracts, “he entire spread will look like this (deltas are in
parentheses):

long 10 June 94.00calls (40) short 4 June futures (100)
short 10 March 94.)0 calls (40) long 4 March futures (100)

This type of balancing is 10t necessary, indeed not possible, in stock options
because the underlying for all maths is identical. There is no such thing as March IBM
stock or June IBM stock.

THE EFFEC] OF CHANGING INTEREST
RATIS AND DIVIDENDS

Thus far we have considered ony the effects of changes in the price of the underlying
market and changes in volatility2n the value of volatility spreads. What about changes
in interest rates and, in the case f stocks, dividends?

Because there is no carrying cost associated with the purchase or sale of a futures
contract, interest rates have onlya minor impact on futures options, and, consequently,
a negligible effect on the value o futures option volatility spreads.4 If, however, we are
trading stock options and changethe interest rate, we change the forward price of stock
(the current stock price plus th carrying cost on the stock to expiration). When all
options expire at the same time as they do in backspreads and ratio vertical spreads,
the forward stock price for all optons remains the same, so that the effects of the change
are practically negligible. If, on te other hand, we are considering stock options with
different expiration dates, we mut consider two different forward prices. And these two
forward prices may not he equaly sensitive to a change in interest rates. For example,
consider the following situation:

4, Interest rates can of course affect tie relative value of different futures months. As noted, we can offset
this risk by trading a futures spreal along with the futures option time spread.


Volatility Spreads 155

Stock price=100 Interestrate=12% Dividend =0
Suppose a trader initiates a long time spread:

long 10 June 100 calls
short 10 March 100 calls

If there are three months remaining to March expiration and six months remaining to
June expiration, the forward prices for March and June stock are 103 and 106,
respectively. If interest rates drop to 8 percent, the forward price for March will be 102
and the forward price for June will be 104. With more time remaining, the June forward
price is more sensitive to a change in interest rates. Assuming the deltas of both options
are approximately equal, the June option will be more affected in total points by the
decline in interest rates than the March option, and the time spread will narrow. In the
same way, ifinterest rates increase, the time spread will widen because the June forward
price will rise more quickly than the March forward price. Therefore, a long (short) call
time spread in the stock option market must have a positive (negative) rho.

Changes in interest rates have just the opposite effect on stock option puts. In our
example, if interest rates fall from 12% to 8% the March forward price will fall from 103
to 102, while the June forward price will fall from 106 to 104. Again, if we assume that
the deltas of both options are approximately equal, and recalling that puts have negative
deltas, the June put will show a greater increase in value than the March put. The put
time spread. will therefore widen. In the same way, if interest rates increase, the put
time spread will narrow. Therefore, a long (short) put time spread in the stock option
market must have a negative (positive) rho.

The degree to which stock option time spreads are affected by changes in interest
rates depends primarily on the amount of time between expiration dates. If there are six
months between expiration dates (e.g., March/September) the effect will be much
greater than if there is only one month between expiration dates (e.g., March/April).

Changes in dividends can also affect the value of stock option time spreads.
Dividends, however, have the opposite effect on stock options as changes in interest
rates (see Chapter 3). An increase (decrease) in dividends lowers (raises) the forward
price of stock. If all options in a volatility spread expire at the same time (backspreads,
ratio vertical spreads), the forward stock price will be identical for all options and the
effect on the spread will be negligible. But in a time spread, if a dividend payment is
expected between expiration of the short-term and long-term option, the long-term
option will be affected by the lowered forward price of the stock. Hence, an increase in
dividends, if at least one dividend payment is expected between the expiration dates,
will cause call time spreads to narrow and put time spreads to widen. A decrease in
dividends will have the opposite effect, with call time spreads widening and put time
spreads narrowing. The effect of changing interest rates and dividends on stock option
time spreads is shown in Figure 8-15.
