
PART TWO

60

F I G U R E

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

3.2

Trading Fed days.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

movers, but a narrow set of repetitive dynamics has been hardwired into
the price action, both ahead of and after the 2:15 p.m. New York time news
release. Notably, these cycles of activity haven’t changed much in the last
two decades, which proffers upon them almost legendary status as rock
solid market influences.
Price action into a Fed decision shows a mildly positive bias (1 in
Figure 3.2) with a choppy tape encouraging public traders to take on risk,
even though there can be a massive disconnect between pattern development prior to and after the news. This is another example of technical
analysis failing its constituency because our nifty tools just can’t predict
how big money will respond later in that session or throughout the week.

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

61

The general rule here is simple. Get back to the sidelines just before the
announcement, or be willing to live with the consequences, which can
be unpredictable. There’s no need to sell or cover long-term positions
into the news, but options protection can be used to dampen volatility,
especially when the decision might place broad sentiment at risk. On the
flip side, any position bought or sold short ahead of the release just to
play the market’s reaction is a lottery ticket that has no place in a mature
trading strategy.
Price action following the decision routinely tracks the actionreaction-resolution cycle outlined in the second chapter. Referring back to
Figure 3.2, the first or action phase (2) usually triggers a wide range surge,
higher or lower, on the 15-minute index charts. This impulse may be faded
two, three, or more times in the 105 minutes between the news and the
U.S. closing bell. The major indices can post new highs or lows during this
period, but the activity still marks the first phase. The directional impulse
into the close (3) sucks in public money, routinely triggering a reversal (4)
in the following session, often through an opening trap. This turnaround
marks the start of the second or reaction phase, which can continue
through the entire session and even the following day. Support-resistance
boundaries get tested during this impulse, which, in turn, provides
actionable information for the third or resolution phase (5), which is likely
to start prior to Friday’s close during the week of the meeting.
A moment of clarity characterizes this final phase because institutional money comes pouring into the market, and the major indices take
off in a trend day that carries the indices well beyond the boundaries of
the first two phases. Fighting this last phase can be extremely hazardous
to your trading account. Of course, the flip side is also true. If you’ve
done your homework and paid attention to the quality of the testing
process during the second phase, you’ll often have a low risk opportunity to get positioned on the right side of the market, just ahead of the
emerging trend.
The challenge for traders, from meeting to meeting, is relatively
simple: the pre- and post-Fed decision dynamics often kick in perfectly, but
sometimes they don’t. When they don’t, the market usually goes through a
variation of these hardwired themes rather than discarding them entirely.
The trick when that happens is to look for divergences. For example, if
the indices take off after the news and don’t reverse as expected, that’s a
divergence. Or, if the market goes dead as a doornail right after the release
and doesn’t wake up through that session’s close, all bets are off, and it’s
best to raise cash until the next good trade comes along.

62

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

Options Expiration
Options expiration has taken on new meaning in this brave new millennium, with a full-scale death match characterizing order flow in the
majority of these monthly events. Traders can take advantage of these
seasonal impulses if they know exactly what to expect and are willing
to wait for the best opportunities. Their first job is to identify broad sentiment heading into the Friday prior to expiration week. Start by asking a
few basic questions. Are bulls in firm control? Has negativity gotten ahead
of reality? Are the majority of market players euphoric, fearful, anxious,
or just plain paralyzed? Next, compare the overriding sentiment with
relative positioning of the major indices. In a nutshell, the strongest expiration influence occurs in strongly trending markets, when sentiment has
pushed firmly into one side of the bell curve. Alternatively, a weeklong
chopfest is likely when neither side controls the tape and systemic conflict
keeps most players in defensive mode. In both environments, however,
strongly trending stocks and futures contracts are still vulnerable to
contrary and sometimes violent price behavior.
Expiration places a target on whichever side of the market is leaning
too hard at the time, so bulls are at risk during broad rallies, while bears
are at risk during broad selloffs. In addition, follow-through in the direction
of the underlying trend is far less likely during this period. This contrary
behavior makes perfect sense due to the market dynamic known as Max
Pain, which tells us that stocks and indices will move in whatever direction
causes the most options to expire worthless on expiration Friday. This misunderstood mechanism goes hand in hand with the attraction of magnetic
strikes. Simply stated, stocks and indices will move toward price levels
that attract the highest open interest. These magnets tend to occur with the
greatest frequency at round number intervals like 30, 40, or 50 or at half
rounds like 25, 35, and 45. This attraction can proceed gently, with a mild
trend that pushes into the magnetic price, or violently, with a vertical jolt
that leaves unsuspecting shareholders in a state of shock.
First and foremost, don’t expect rallies or selloffs to follow through
during expiration week. Nearly every move is a tease, because hidden
forces are engaged in balancing their order books rather than acting or
reacting to the underlying trend. In fact, the period often triggers at least
one sharp rally day and an equally sharp selloff day. Not surprisingly, the
net result of these volatile sessions can leave index prices at exactly the
same levels they traded just before total insanity hit the tape. Also consider
that each options or futures contract is tied to an underlying equity or

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

63

index, so the unwinding of one instrument has a direct and significant
effect on the other. This is especially true with index and exchange-traded
fund options because they represent hundreds of component stocks.
Stocks trading near 52-week highs or lows are especially vulnerable
to expiration week shakeout games because these issues attract major
public interest that induces lopsided call or put buying. A stock will often
break out to a new high just prior to expiration and set up a bullish-looking
continuation pattern. Then, despite the positive tone, it drops like a rock
with little or no warning just before expiration Friday, leaving bulls with
worthless calls. Flip over this price action for stocks breaking down ahead
of expiration week and you’ll see how put holders get burned in exactly
the same way. This unwieldy magnetism warns shareholders and short
sellers to use options as protective rather than speculative instruments
during expiration periods. In other words, a little put protection on long
equity positions and call protection on short equity positions will ease the
impact of this monthly nightmare, while placing directional bets is a great
way to get your throat ripped out.
Expiration week can set up excellent opportunities that take advantage of the magnetic strike mechanism. Two aggressive trading strategies,
in particular, work extremely well during these periods:
• Buy between Wednesday and Friday afternoon after a strong stock
sells off into a strike, or sell short after it rallies into a strike.
• Identify highly liquid stocks under or over magnetic levels early
in the week, and then get on board for a trip into the magic
number.
It’s best when the magnet isn’t situated at a new high for a strong
stock or a new low for a weak stock, because that conflicts with the expiration mechanism that inhibits trending markets. The most favorable
scenario in an uptrend occurs when a stock has retraced significantly off
a high and is in recovery mode, posting a series of higher lows. Issues
that are trading toward eights or nines, i.e., 28–29, 38–39, and 48–49, are
almost perfectly positioned, with the profit target at the round number
strike. Keep in mind this is an opportunistic trade. Sharp reversals often
follow vertical spikes into magnetic strikes, so it’s important to take your
profits aggressively. One of the easiest ways to accomplish this task is to
place a dynamic trailing stop, which rises or falls a fixed length behind the
instrument as soon as price reaches within 20 to 30 cents of the magnetic
number.

PART TWO

64

F I G U R E

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

3.3

Strong stocks dropping into magnetic strikes during expiration week can offer great trading opportunities. Sears
Holdings rallies strongly off the March 2009 low and stalls in the lower sixties at the beginning of May. The stock
then drops more than 13 points in seven sessions and closes right at the magnetic 50 strike on expiration Friday.
Long positions taken at the end of that session benefit from an immediate 7-point recovery rally.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

Keep track of open interest on the ETF proxies for the S&P 500,
Nasdaq-100, and Russell 2000 indices rather than trying to decipher the vast
array of stocks and futures contracts. These instruments often settle into the
nearest round or half round number with the highest open interest, such as
30, 35, or 40. Of course, open interest is a moving target during expiration
week, so a little common sense is required. Classically, the market does a look
ahead at 2:15 p.m. New York time on the Thursday prior to Friday expiration,
with those numbers pointing to the expected print for each instrument.

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

65

Midweek during options expiration is notorious for a volatile
shakeout session. For years, market players expected this whipsaw to
occur on Wednesday, but it now dances around between Tuesday and
Thursday, perhaps as a consequence of our overly deconstructed environment. You’ll recognize the event, whenever it unfolds, through intraday
sawtooth and range expansion patterns on the major indices. The best plan
during these dangerous sessions, unless you’re a day trader, is to step back
to the sidelines and wait patiently for large scale magnetic numbers to get
hit, in line with the strategies outlined in this chapter.
Narrow-minded technicians face especially high risk during expiration week because they believe too intently in their magic numbers. This
contrary period routinely violates support or resistance levels that will stay
intact during other times of the month. As diabolical as it might sound, it
isn’t wise to expect a reversal during expiration week until the market
does the exact thing you assume it can’t possibly do. In other words, price
action follows the failure dynamics that have become the status quo in our
modern markets.
Triple witching is a special incarnation of expiration, taking place
during the third month of each quarter with the simultaneous expiration of equities, options, and futures. Its legendary tug and pull actually
starts when the index futures roll over into a new forward month on the
Thursday prior to expiration week. In uptrending markets, the S&P 500
and Nasdaq-100 futures will often pull into notable lows on the day before
the rollover. In this manner, long-term players can buy the forward contracts at more advantageous prices. Flip over this phenomenon in downtrending markets, with the index futures spiking into notable highs just
ahead of the rollover.
Can market forces overcome expiration week influences? Of course
they can. A few times each year, surprisingly persistent trends characterize expiration week action, as we saw during the Bear Stearns
meltdown in March 2008. But the best analogy for this volatile period
comes from classic Superman lore. Avid comic readers may recall that the
Man of Steel had to face the paradox of the irresistible force meeting the
immovable object. So it goes with expiration week. In other words, stocks
and futures can break above or below magnetic strike numbers when
enough force is applied to the system. But how much force is enough
force? No one really knows the answer, but breaking the strike demands
enough vigor to shake up the status quo and alter the common paradigm.
That can happen at any time, as we saw with Bear Stearns, but the odds
tell us it isn’t likely.

PART TWO

66

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

One effective way to bypass expiration influence is to trade stocks
that don’t trade options. This limits your opportunities to small caps and
about 5% of the top 1,200 liquid issues on all U.S. exchanges. A better plan
is to trade lightly or take expiration week off and return to the action after
the fireworks fizzle out. Whatever you do, mark your calendars in advance
so this whirlwind of market activity doesn’t sneak up and bite you in
the backside.
To sum things up, here’s a useful cheat sheet on options expiration week:
• The market’s singular goal is to move equities and indices into
prices that force the most options to expire worthless.
• Prepare by reducing exposure and assuming that breakouts and
breakdowns will not follow through.
• Figure out early which side of the market has the biggest target on
its back.
• Stocks near new highs or lows are most vulnerable to shakeout
games.
• While the period impacts breakouts and breakdowns, it rarely
causes a legitimate change in trend.
• Stocks and indices can break above or below magnetic strikes
when enough force is applied to the system.
• Round numbers near currently traded levels usually hold the
most open interest for that month.
• The triple witching clock starts when index futures roll over into a
new forward contract on the Thursday prior to expiration week.
• Follow open interest in the big exchange-traded funds rather than
trying to decipher the broad array of stocks and futures.
• Midweek usually triggers the most volatile activity. Be on your
guard at this time, or you will lose money.
• Most shakeouts are over by the start of expiration Friday.

Earnings Season
Earnings season increases both opportunity and risk for the survivalist
trader. Unfortunately, most of us get caught up in the excitement during
these volatile periods and make really dumb mistakes. We also fail to
take advantage of the low-hanging fruit because we become hypnotized

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

67

by facts and figures and frozen by fear of the unknown. The most potent
strategy during earnings season is also the hardest one to follow if you’re
vulnerable to the gambling side of the trading game. Simply stated, play
the stock into the minutes ahead of an earnings report, but get out before
the numbers are actually released. Then examine the crowd’s reaction to
the report and trade back into the position when the coast is finally clear.
Yes, you heard that right, get out of the market before the company
releases its earnings report. This small detail stands against the babble
promulgated by analysts, in chat rooms, and on stock boards. In the real
world, no one can accurately predict price action or direction right after an
earnings release. This indefinable element exposes naive market players
to unmanageable risk and career-ending shock losses. And, since seriousminded traders are not gamblers, we have no alternative but to step aside
and let our competition play into the report and initial price swings. Of
course, the majority of traders believe the market is just a roulette table
on which fortunes are made picking the right numbers at the right time,
but nothing could be further from the truth. Our true goal is to take risk
only when it can be quantified into measurable dollars and common
sense. In other words, it’s always a mistake to trade when we have no
exploitable edge. This is exactly the dilemma we face heading into an
earnings report.
Technical analysis fails miserably as a predictor of price direction and
volatility ahead of an earnings report as Figure 3.4, a violent reaction to
a January 2007 release, perfectly illustrates. Knight Capital Group rallied
strongly between July and October 2006. It then dropped into a wellstructured cup and handle breakout pattern, with resistance near round
number 20. The stock surged higher in early January, just six days before
earnings, and broke out. The uptrend hit 21.70, consolidated for four sessions, and poked up to a five-year high in the session ahead of the postmarket release. The chart was firing on all cylinders at the closing bell that
day, with On Balance Volume (OBV), the classic accumulation-distribution
indicator, confirming the breakout with a series of higher highs.
But all that good karma didn’t stop the stock from falling 17% on
the morning after the release and plunging through 50-day EMA support.
Adding insult to injury, the prior day’s high printed the top tick of the sixmonth uptrend and starting point of a decline that cut the stock’s price
in half by the end of that year. To be honest, I don’t know if the company
exceeded, met, or failed to meet analyst expectations. That information
doesn’t really matter, despite all the hype about whisper numbers and
profit growth, because there’s a huge disconnect between an earnings

PART TWO

68

F I G U R E

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

3.4

Nightmare at Knight Capital.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

result and the subsequent reaction. I challenge you to argue the point,
because we’ve all watched in jaw-dropping awe while stocks beating their
numbers sell off violently or while companies confessing gut-wrenching
shortfalls deliver amazing rallies. It’s just another infuriating aspect of our
painfully diabolical markets.
Of course, you’re going to miss profits standing on the sidelines
when upside surprises trigger big gaps or runaway markets. Sadly, those
events will fog your brain about all the times you became the ultimate bag
holder after an earnings report and were forced to hold a loser for months,
just to get even. Simply stated, it comes down to pure discipline because

CHAPTER 3

Revisiting the Market Clock

69

the big score also opens you up to the big loss. Still don’t believe me? Go
back through your trading records, adding up your earnings winners and
subtracting your earnings losers. It’s highly doubtful you’re basking in the
green glow of the plus column after one or two years of holding positions
through these volatile events.
Meanwhile, the speculative period ahead of an earnings release
offers an excellent playing field because we can use the run up or run
down to ride the coattails of trader-gamblers taking unwise positions. This
predatory strategy is simple. Just review upcoming release dates and pull
up the most volatile issues in real time, looking for blind speculation or
other inefficiencies that might yield good trades. The hit rate for this type
of setup can be amazing because there’s a huge amount of dumb money
chasing the market around ahead of big reports. Greed and fear prior to
an earnings release can persuade big crowds to bid prices into extreme
levels, while insiders fan the emotional flames so they’ll have better prices
to buy or sell short after the news. This pre-earnings game starts about
two weeks before the actual release. In a bullish scenario, look for prices
to push into new highs or through resistance levels that force early short
sellers to cover positions. Momentum triggered by a pre-earnings rally can
last into the final minutes ahead of the release, so don’t exit positions too
quickly, because the laziest gamblers in the group will be checking that
day’s calendar and jumping into positions right near the closing bell.
Price action after the news also presents a plethora of trade opportunities on both sides of the market. We get so fixated by an earnings gap
that we fail to notice most of them get filled over time, setting up better
entries than available right after these reports. Of course, strategic entry
a few days later requires patience and a willingness to sit on your hands
until the time is right. Directional movement and volatility tend to wash
out two to three sessions after an earnings report. This is an important
observation. For example, a relatively solid report will often trigger three
days of selling pressure as speculative positions unwind. This cleansing
process should carry into, but not through, intermediate support. Look for
a 60-minute basing pattern at this level, and enter the trade in anticipation
of a buying spike up and through the prerelease high. Likewise, it’s a bad
idea to immediately sell short an earnings warning or a weak report. The
initial downdraft can hit an oversold technical level quickly and yield a
persistent bounce that squeezes shorts mercilessly before the downtrend
finally gathers steam. A better plan in this bearish scenario is to let the
bounce run its course and then sell short when the recovery pulls into a
resistance level, like the opening price of the gap down day.

70

PART TWO

Cycles, Shocks, and Seasonality

How should you handle long-term positions and investments during
earnings season? Well that’s another ball game entirely. Investors in particular can’t worry about short-term price swings since the basis for the
majority of their positions is fundamental, and earning gaps are part of the
risk they assume. However, longer-term players can still lower volatility
and reduce risk, if they choose, by purchasing options pairs that dampen
the impact of sharp movement in either direction after the news.
Realistically, you’re not always going to be on the sidelines when an
earnings report hits the newswires. More likely, you’ll get stuck trading
into one or two reports each quarter because you forget to check the release
schedule, or the company issues an unexpected preannouncement. Unfortunately, SEC full disclosure rules won’t protect technically minded traders
from big losses because they make it less likely that bad news will show
up on the chart prior to the release. For this reason, it’s easy to get sucked
into a bullish pattern but still get crushed by an earnings warning or downside surprise.
