
Exhibit 8.2 Where’s the Value in This Trend? A GBP/USD Daily Chart

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

In the same GBP/USD chart, we can see that prior to movement between June and July, the GBP/USD was in a strong downtrend that brought it
from 1.52 down to 1.43. The move lasted less than a month but it was strong enough to have a big impact on the currency, and anyone caught long
would have most likely been stopped out. In this downtrend, there were also a handful of opportunities to join the move at value. Exhibit 8.2 shows at
least four opportunities on the short side. Selling at the first standard deviation Bollinger Band with a stop slightly above the 15-period moving
average (the dotted line) would have given you a good value point to join the downtrend and yielded positive trades as long as you exited properly.
Now exiting the trade is of course the key. Sometimes buying or selling at the first band will provide the perfect entry that gets us into a multiple-

day move that lasts for a few hundred pips. However, the more common scenario is that the currency pair will rebound that day and retrace the next,
just as it did throughout the months of June and July. The general path of the GBP/USD was upward, but on the way there, the currency pair had
both up and down days. This makes it extremely important to implement the T1-T2 method of exiting the trade. The first half of the position should
be exited at a conservative pip profit of 30 to 60 pips, which may be less than the amount risked, but that is okay because the key to this
methodology is to hit more winners than losers. Then once the profits have been locked in on the first half of the position, the stop on the rest of the
position should be moved to the original entry price. If the currency pair continues to move in our favor, then we would adjust the stop accordingly.
The trailing stop can be set at any amount that you are comfortable with—I personally like to use a trailing stop of 30 pips on the major currency
pairs.

Getting into a New Trend
Finally, the Double Bollinger Bands can also be used to get into a new trend. We have talked about how a currency pair is in an uptrend when it
trades between the two upper Bollinger Bands and in a downtrend when it trades between the two lower Bollinger Bands. Yet at some point it had
to get into the bands first, and the point where it enters the uptrend or downtrend zones creates an opportunity to join a new trend that could be
emerging. When the currency pair ends the NY session (4 p.m. Eastern Time) within the first and second bands, there is a reasonable chance that
it will remain within the bands for days to come.
Take a look again at Exhibit 8.2. Starting from the left to the right of the chart, the first arrow points to a day when the GBP/USD has gone from
the range-trading zone into the downtrend zone, and the next day, there was continuation. The continuation was not very significant because it only
lasted for only 24 hours before the GBP/USD recovered. However, three days later, the same pattern occurs, where the GBP/USD once again
closes within the downtrend zone, but in this case, it becomes a strong move that lasts for almost a month. The first example is the scenario that
occurs more often, but the second scenario is not all that uncommon either. Therefore, it is extremely important to implement the T1-T2
methodology of exiting the trade because we never know if it will become a small move or a large one. We can hope that all of Double Bollinger
Band trades will get us into a new trend that lasts for weeks, but we need to be realistic and recognize that the move may also last for only a few
hours. Therefore, bag your winners quickly and let the market determine whether it wants to give you more profit.
The third arrow from the left in the chart shows another close into the Double Bollinger Bands, but in this case, it is into the uptrend zone.
Unfortunately, this is a failed trade and I always like to show losing trades along with winning ones to remind everyone that no trading strategy will
work 100 percent of the time. Finally, the fourth arrow from the left of the chart shows the GBP/USD once again closing into the uptrend zone; this
time, it indeed marks the beginning of a prolonged uptrend that lasts for almost a month.
The Double Bollinger Bands are my favorite technical indicators and the secret ingredient to my forex trading. I hope they will help you in your
trading as well.

Get It? Got It? Good!
The Bollinger Band Method is great for finding trends. If a currency pair is trading between the upper or lower Double Bollinger Bands, then it is in trend!
When a currency enters the up- or downtrend zone, it’s a signal that a new trend could emerge.
The trend might be exhausting if a currency pair moves outside of the Double Bollinger Bands.
Who wants to pay up when they can wait for a bargain to come to them? Wait to enter a trend until the currency retraces to the inside Bollinger Bands.

Chapter Nine

So You’re a Trader?
Fast and Furious for Quick Profits
Speed sells. Take the movie The Fast and the Furious—surely one of those movies only speed demons could love. If you haven’t seen the original
film, which was released in 1954, or one of the many sequels, it is basically an over-the-top, testosterone-filled, adrenaline-pumping series about
modified street cars that maneuver through daring stunts as part of the illegal underground world of street car racing. Although The Fast and the
Furious: Tokyo Drift only brought in $60 million at the box office, the 2001, 2003, and 2009 versions of the movie raked in more than $100 million
each. Despite being panned by the critics, the franchise is a big success, proving that more than 10 million moviegoers love the series.
Another big hit in the world of entertainment is the Grand Theft Auto video game franchise. With 14 different titles based everywhere from
Chinatown to the fictional state of San Andreas, it has sold over 120 million copies worldwide. These games are such a big hit that in 2009, the
Guinness Book of World Records listed Grand Theft Auto as #3 on their list of Top 50 console games of all time, based upon impact and lasting
legacy, outshined by only Super Mario Kart (#1) and Tetris (#2).
These movies and video games appeal to people who thrive on speed. However, even for those of us who find no pleasure in watching The Fast
and the Furious or playing Grand Theft Auto, we may be more addicted to speed than we think. In a world where many people believe that time is
money, faster is almost always better.
The desire for speed is even more common among traders. Most people don’t have the time or mental capacity to sit in front of their computer
screen, drink loads of coffee, and trade 24 hours a day, which is part of the reason they are attracted to short-term trading. However, it is not just
time that separates those who seek out speed and those who avoid it. Some people just thrive on the adrenaline rush of watching the trade move
rapidly in their favor, while others prefer to put on the trade with stops and limits, go out and play a game of golf, and let the trade work itself out.
Although most people would say that they certainly prefer golfing to sitting in a dark room trading, in reality, some of us cannot peel ourselves away
from the screen when we have a live trade.

Riding Momentum
The idea behind short-term or fast and furious trading is that we want to be in and out of the market quickly. One of the best ways of doing so is to
ride momentum. Short-term trading is usually the most effective when the forex markets are active—generally during the European trading session
(2 a.m. to 12 p.m. EST), which also covers the first half of the New York trading session. Currencies will also be particularly active immediately after
economic data is released.
A number of different technical indicators and strategies can be used to identify a momentum move, but if we look beneath the hood, the moves
are usually triggered by one of two things—the beginning of a trading session or economic data. The way currency traders behave at the market
open can be difficult to predict, but the way they respond to economic data is not rocket science. If the economic data is extremely positive, there is
a good chance that forex traders will drive up the value of the currency. If it is very weak, then there is a good chance that they will sell it
aggressively.
At the end of the day, most short-term trend-following or momentum strategies will set up as a result of an economic release or a strong
sentiment in the forex market, so it may be smart to just trade the event risk. Although looking for reversals or relief rallies are also tactics employed
by short-term traders, the trending nature of currencies tends to favor continuation over reversals.

Sifting through the Headlines
Taking a trade based on a news release can be risky because the markets are exceptionally volatile after the release and brokers could widen
their spreads. However, if we are fast and furious with managing the trade and stick with the major pairs (pairs dominated by the dollar), trading
news releases can still be fruitful.
When trading the news, there are three questions that we need to ask ourselves before every trade: Is the news important? Is the surprise large
enough? And is the surprise in line with the market’s sentiment?
1. Is the news important? The first task at hand is to figure out what matters and what doesn’t. Just because it rains today has no significance
unless we have been in a drought for the past three months. In Chapter 5, we listed the top three pieces of potentially market-moving economic
data for any country, which are the employment reports, retail sales, and manufacturing and service sector activity data, also known as the ISM or
PMI reports. In addition to these, the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) releases and the inflation reports (consumer and producer prices) are also
tradable. What is not tradable are reports like the Beige Book because there is no concrete number for comparison, data is released weekly, and
any Japanese or Swiss economic reports are almost always overshadowed by the general sentiment in the market. If you are having a tough time
figuring out if the data is tradable or not, most forex sites will list the impact that each piece of data may have on the currency. High-impact events

are the ones that we want to trade.

2. Is the surprise large enough? The second question is the trickiest of the three because it is subject to interpretation, but the good thing is
that the market will usually do the interpretation for you. As a rule of thumb, if the number is greater or less than the forecast by more than 5 percent,
it is considered a big surprise, but sometimes a 2 percent surprise is enough to elicit a big reaction in the currency. So what should you do? Just
wait and see how the market responds to the release. If the currency pair barely budges, then most likely, the surprise is not that significant. If the
currency pair immediately shoots higher or falls like a rock, there is a good chance that the market was surprised. The key is to wait five minutes
before getting into the trade to make sure that the currency responds the way that it is supposed to. In other words, a positive surprise should drive
the currency pair higher and a negative surprise should drive it lower.
3. Is the surprise in line with the market’s sentiment? The third question is important because sometimes the economic data is something
that we would normally expect to elicit a big reaction, but for whatever reasons the rally fizzles quickly or traders simply don’t care. This typically
occurs when something else is overshadowing the data and driving the general sentiment in the forex market. It could be anything from the risk
appetite to U.S. data or concerns about problems in Europe. If the economic data surprise or “fundamentals” is in line with the prevailing sentiment
in the market, it is a stronger trade. In other words, if the market wants to buy dollars and retail sales are strong, it normally gives forex traders an
even better reason to send the greenback higher. However, if the market is worried about the outlook of the U.S. economy because the Federal
Reserve is warning that there will be more trouble to come, then good data may not do much for the dollar because it would be looked at with
skepticism.
Quantifying a touchy-feely thing such as the prevailing sentiment in the market can be difficult, but moving averages can help because they
measure the current trend in the market by averaging a certain number of past prices. If the data is good and the currency pair is trading above the
50-period moving average on a 5-minute chart (or the data causes the currency to break above the moving average), then there is a better chance
that sentiment and fundamentals will support the trade. However, if the data is good and the currency pair is trading well below the 50-period
moving average, then it suggests that the prevailing sentiment does not support the economic surprise. In this case, we will not take the trade
because we want to have as many key variables aligned in our favor as possible.
To summarize, we only want to trade economic data that is important, with surprises that are large enough to trigger a reaction in the currency,
and only if the economic data is in line with the general sentiment in the market. With these guidelines in hand, let me show you how fast and furious
news trading works.

How Fast and Furious Trading Works
On July 15, 2010, U.S. producer prices were scheduled for release; before taking the trade, I asked myself the three questions introduced earlier.
Question 1 is whether the news release is important and PPI is a tradable economic release. Question 2 is whether the surprise is large enough
—the forecast was for prices to fall by 0.1 percent and at 8:30 a.m. New York time, we learned that producer prices fell 0.5 percent, which was
significantly worse than the market anticipated. Almost instantaneously, the U.S. dollar fell against the Japanese yen, and after the first 5 minutes of
the release, the currency pair was trading well below the 50-period moving average on the 5-minute chart, providing the answer to the third question
of whether sentiment is now in line with the economic release.
For most people, waiting five minutes before entering the trade can be extremely frustrating because they are eager to press the sell button and
start participating. However, it’s important to wait and let the initial volatility settle and to avoid immediate reversals. In the case of USD/JPY, once I
had seen the 5-minute candle close sharply lower after the weaker economic report, it was time to enter into the trade.
Exhibit 9.1 shows the price action in USD/JPY when PPI was released and where I entered into the short trade, which was around 87.95. Since
the surprise was significant enough and the prevailing sentiment in the market turned bearish dollars as a result of the release, the sell-off in
USD/JPY had strong continuation. Over the next 90 minutes, USD/JPY fell from 87.95 to a low of 87.20, or 75 pips. At this point, you should ask
Where is the stop? because every trade should have one. The best place to put the stop on a short trade is the high of the data candle (in this case
88.26), but if that were too far away, then I would typically use a stop of 30 to 35 pips. If the high of the data candle is very close to the entry price, I
would use a minimum stop of 20 pips.

Exhibit 9.1 A 5-Minute Chart Showing the USD/JPY Reaction to Producer Prices

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

The T1-T2 method of exiting the trade can also be useful for fast and furious news trading because the reaction to a news release can be large or
small; you want to bank profits when you have them. The first half of the position would be closed when the trade moved in your favor by the amount
risked, which was 31 pips in the case of our example, and then a trailing stop could be used on the remainder of the position. I like to trail the stops
on my short-term trades by 20 to 30 pips because it is wide enough to give the trade breathing room but tight enough that it does not eat into a
significant amount of floating profits.
Exhibit 9.2 is an example of why waiting five minutes is so important. On July 23, 2010, Canada was scheduled to release consumer prices. Like
U.S. inflation data, Canada’s inflation report is a tradable release. The forecast at the time was for prices to remain unchanged, but at 7 a.m. EST,
we learned that consumer prices fell 0.1 percent, which should have been bearish for the Canadian dollar and bullish for the U.S. dollar. If we did not
have the 5-minute rule, we would have gone long USD/CAD immediately, but by waiting five minutes, we can see that the market deems the data
insignificant because the 5-minute candle in USD/CAD did not close in positive territory as the data would suggest. Despite the data being bullish,
the rally did not last and the 5-minute candle closed lower, flashing a strong signal to tell us to avoid the trade. It was a good thing that we did
because USD/CAD dropped approximately 40 pips over the next hour.

Exhibit 9.2 A 5-Minute Chart Showing the USD/CAD Reaction to Consumer Prices

Source: GFT Dealbook 360.

Some news trades are generous enough to trigger a significant move in the currency pair like the one in Exhibit 9.1, but that is not always the
case, which is why applying the T1-T2 method to exit the trade can mean the difference between a winning or losing trade. For example, on July 20,
2010, German producer prices printed 0.6 percent against a forecast of 0.2 percent—data worth trading with a surprise large enough to make it
meaningful. Following the guidelines outlined in this chapter, we would have gone long the EUR/USD at 1.2996 with a stop of 20 pips (the low of the
data candle was only 16 pips away). The EUR/USD extended higher but only to 1.3028, which was enough to reach our 20 pip target but not to give
us any additional pips. In this trade, we would have banked 20 pips on the first half of the position and gotten out at breakeven on the remainder. If
we used a 2 to 1 risk/reward ratio, it would not have reached the target because the 20 pip stop would have needed a 40 pip profit target of
1.3036. The secret to fast and furious trading is to pick up as many of these smaller winners as possible while waiting for the economic surprises
that trigger the big movers. Usually with news trading, the first target can be hit within the first hour.
Bear in mind, trading news events can be risky and there could be slippage that occurs when the orders are not filled at the exact price that they
are set at because the markets are moving quickly. To minimize this risk, wait a few minutes after the news is released before taking any trade to
allow volatility to settle.

Get It? Got It? Good!
News moves markets.
If the data is significant and the surprise is big enough, the move in the currency should continue.
Filter out the noise and trade the data only if the sentiment in the market supports it.
It pays to be patient. Wait five minutes before taking the trade to ensure that other traders will react to the number, too.
Use the T1-T2 method to lock in winners by scaling out and managing the trade.

Chapter Ten

Risky Business
Protecting Your Money in Uncertain Times
If you want something good out of life, you’re probably going to have to take a risk. Life (and trading) is just plain risky business. So what’s the
difference between a novice risk taker and a professional? It’s all in the preparation. Let’s say I’ve decided to climb Mount Everest—with no training
or previous experience, my expedition would basically be a suicide mission.
At 29,002 feet, Mount Everest is the highest peak on our planet and it attracts thousands of adventure seekers every year. However, out of the
4,102 people who attempted to climb Mount Everest between 2008 and 2009, 216 did not survive. That’s a 5 percent fatality rate for semiprofessionals, but if the average person on the street were to attempt the climb, their potential fatality rate would be closer to 90 percent.
It is an understatement to say that conditions on the mountain are extreme. Most guide companies aren’t willing to take their chances on the
people who can’t meet a strict set of guidelines. Alpine Ascents, one of the top guide companies, requires potential climbers to participate in a
weeklong training course. In addition, they need to have climbed a series of other high-altitude mountains and prove they are in excellent physical
condition (after all, they must be able to carry a 30-pound backpack for multiple days). Lastly, they must be mentally prepared to deal with strenuous
situations at high altitudes.
The company only has one expedition per year in April or May, when the weather is the most cooperative. Why does Alpine Ascents have so
many rules? Because they know that no matter how many times they have taken groups to the summit, it will still be risky.
Although you may not be planning an expedition up Mount Everest, being as prepared as possible and taking all the right precautions is
something that everyone has experience with. For example, if you have children you will try to give them the best preparation for adult life that you
possibly can. Some parents are so ambitious that certain preschools or kindergartens have waiting lists, requiring that you sign up your child before
he or she is even born; usually these are the schools that charge steep tuition fees! Then as they get older, parents may send their kids to science
camp, weekend prep classes, and tutoring sessions to help them with their homework. By the time they are ready to take the SATs for college
admission, they will have taken a course from Kaplan or Princeton to get them prepared for the actual tests. After all, a good SAT score
significantly improves their chances of getting into an Ivy League university. Getting into a good school is important because it can land them a
good job and secure a good future. This is not to say that every child who goes to private kindergarten and takes Kaplan SAT prep classes will
have a great career, or that those who don’t will flounder, but as parents, we look to do the most that we can to give them their best chance of
success.
Our children are far more important than trading or investing, but the reason Alpine Ascents takes such great precautions with their climbers and
we do the same with our kids is that everyone wants to succeed and not fail. The same thought process needs to be applied to trading and
investing because we want to succeed and not fail. Therefore, we want to find trading opportunities that have low risk.
