
P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

16

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

the reporter picks a pundit who is correct on the direction, that pundit will not stay
with you to manage your trade, and you will likely be stopped out with a loss on
a pullback.
Financial news stations do not exist to provide public service. They are in business to make money, and that means they need as large an audience as possible to
maximize their advertising income. Yes, they want to be accurate in their reporting, but their primary objective is to make money. They are fully aware that they
can maximize their audience size only if they are pleasing to watch. That means that
they have to have interesting guests, including some who will make outrageous predictions, others who are professorial and reassuring, and some who are just physically attractive; most of them have to have some entertainment value. Although
some guests are great traders, they cannot help you. For example, if they interview
one of the world’s most successful bond traders, he will usually only speak in general terms about the trend over the next several months, and he will do so only
weeks after he has already placed his trades. If you are a day trader, this does not
help you, because every bull or bear market on the monthly chart has just about as
many up moves on the intraday chart as down moves, and there will be long and
short trades every day. His time frame is very different from yours, and his trading
has nothing to do with what you are doing. They will also often interview a chartist
from a major Wall Street firm, who, while his credentials are good, will be basing
his opinion on a weekly chart, but the viewers are looking to take profits within a
few days. To the chartist, that bull trend that he is recommending buying will still
be intact, even if the market falls 10 percent over the next couple of months. The
viewers, however, will take their losses long before that, and will never benefit from
the new high that comes three months later. Unless the chartist is addressing your
specific goals and time frame, whatever he says is useless. When television interviews a day trader instead, he will talk about the trades that he already took, and
the information is too late to help you make money. By the time he is on television,
the market might already be going in the opposite direction. If he is talking while
still in his day trade, he will continue to manage his trade long after his two-minute
interview is over, and he will not manage it while on the air. Even if you enter
the trade that he is in, he will not be there when you invariably will have to make
an important decision about getting out as the market turns against you, or as the
market goes in your direction and you are thinking about taking profits. Watching
television for trading advice under any circumstances, even after a very important
report, is a sure way to lose money and you should never do it.
Only look at the chart and it will tell you what you need to know. The chart
is what will give you money or take money from you, so it is the only thing that
you should ever consider when trading. If you are on the floor, you can’t even trust
what your best friend is doing. He might be offering a lot of orange juice calls but

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

17

secretly having a broker looking to buy 10 times as many below the market. Your
friend is just trying to create a panic to drive the market down so he can load up
through a surrogate at a much better price.
Friends and colleagues freely offer opinions for you to ignore. Occasionally
traders will tell me that they have a great setup and want to discuss it with me. I
invariably get them angry with me when I tell them that I am not interested. They
immediately perceive me as selfish, stubborn, and close-minded, and when it comes
to trading, I am all of that and probably much more. The skills that make you money
are generally seen as flaws to the layperson. Why do I no longer read books or articles about trading, or talk to other traders about their ideas? As I said, the chart
tells me all that I need to know and any other information is a distraction. Several
people have been offended by my attitude, but I think in part it comes from me
turning down what they are presenting as something helpful to me when in reality
they are making an offering, hoping that I will reciprocate with some tutoring. They
become frustrated and angry when I tell them that I don’t want to hear about anyone else’s trading techniques. I tell them that I haven’t even mastered my own and
probably never will, but I am confident that I will make far more money perfecting
what I already know than trying to incorporate non-price-action approaches into
my trading. I ask them if James Galway offered a beautiful flute to Yo-Yo Ma and
insisted that Ma start learning to play the flute because Galway makes so much
money by playing his flute, should Ma accept the offer? Clearly not. Ma should continue to play the cello and by doing so he will make far more money than if he
also started playing the flute. I am no Galway or Ma, but the concept is the same.
Price action is the only instrument that I want to play, and I strongly believe that I
will make far more money by mastering it than by incorporating ideas from other
successful traders.
The charts, not the experts on television, will tell you exactly how the institutions are interpreting the news.
Yesterday, Costco’s earnings were up 32 percent on the quarter and above analysts’ expectations (see Figure I.2). COST gapped up on the open, tested the gap
on the first bar, and then ran up over a dollar in 20 minutes. It then drifted down to
test yesterday’s close. It had two rallies that broke bear trend lines, and both failed.
This created a double top (bars 2 and 3) bear flag or triple top (bars 1, 2, and 3), and
the market then plunged $3, below the prior day’s low. If you were unaware of the
report, you would have shorted at the failed bear trend line breaks at bars 2 and 3
and you would have sold more below bar 4, which was a pullback that followed the
breakout below yesterday’s low. You would have reversed to long on the bar 5 big
reversal bar, which was the second attempt to reverse the breakout below yesterday’s low and a climactic reversal of the breakout of the bottom of the steep bear
trend channel line.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

18

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

FIGURE I.2 Ignore the News

Alternatively, you could have bought the open because of the bullish report,
and then worried about why the stock was collapsing instead of soaring the way
the TV analysts predicted, and you likely would have sold out your long on the
second plunge down to bar 5 with a $2 loss.
Any trend that covers a lot of points in very few bars, meaning that there is
some combination of large bars and bars that overlap each other only minimally,
will eventually have a pullback. These trends have such strong momentum that
the odds favor resumption of the trend after the pullback and then a test of the
trend’s extreme. Usually the extreme will be exceeded, as long as the pullback does
not turn into a new trend in the opposite direction and extend beyond the start of
the original trend. In general, the odds that a pullback will get back to the prior
trend’s extreme fall substantially if the pullback retraces 75 percent or more. For a
pullback in a bear trend, at that point, a trader is better off thinking of the pullback
as a new bull trend rather than a pullback in an old bear trend. Bar 6 was about a
70 percent pullback and then the market tested the climactic bear low on the open
of the next day.
Just because the market gaps up on a news item does not mean that it will
continue up, despite how bullish the news is.
As shown in Figure I.3, before the open of bar 1 on both Yahoo! (YHOO)
charts (daily on the left, weekly on the right), the news reported that Microsoft was

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

19

FIGURE I.3 Markets Can Fall on Bullish News

looking to take over Yahoo! at $31 a share, and the market gapped up almost to
that price. Many traders assumed that it had to be a done deal because Microsoft is
one of the best companies in the world and if it wanted to buy Yahoo!, it certainly
could make it happen. Not only that—Microsoft has so much cash that it would
likely be willing to sweeten the deal if needed. Well, the CEO of Yahoo! said that
his company was worth more like $40 a share, but Microsoft never countered. The
deal slowly evaporated, along with Yahoo!’s price. In October, Yahoo! was 20 percent below the price where it was before the deal was announced and 50 percent
lower than on the day of the announcement, and it continues to fall. So much for
strong fundamentals and a takeover offer from a serious suitor. To a price action
trader, a huge up move in a bear market is probably just a bear flag, unless the move
is followed by a series of higher lows and higher highs. It could be followed by a
bull flag and then more of a rally, but until the bull trend is confirmed, you must be
aware that the larger weekly trend is more important.
The only thing that is as it seems is the chart. If you cannot figure out what it is
telling you, do not trade. Wait for clarity. It will always come. But once it is there,
you must place the trade and assume the risk and follow your plan. Do not dial
down to a 1 minute chart and tighten your stop, because you will lose. The problem
with the 1 minute chart is that it tempts you by offering lots of entries with smaller
bars and therefore smaller risk. However, you will not be able to take them all

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

20

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

and you will instead cherry-pick, which will lead to the death of your account because you will invariably pick too many bad cherries. When you enter on a 5 minute
chart, your trade is based on your analysis of the 5 minute chart without any idea
of what the 1 minute chart looks like. You must therefore rely on your five-minute
stops and targets, and just accept the reality that the 1 minute chart will move
against you and hit a one-minute stop frequently. If you watch the 1 minute chart,
you will not be devoting your full attention to the 5 minute chart and a good trader
will take your money from your account and put it into his account. If you want to
compete, you must minimize all distractions and all inputs other than what is on the
chart in front of you, and trust that if you do you will make a lot of money. It will
seem unreal but it is very real. Never question it. Just keep things simple and follow
your simple rules. It is extremely difficult to consistently do something simple, but
in my opinion, it is the best way to trade. Ultimately, as a trader understands price
action better and better, trading becomes much less stressful and actually pretty
boring, but much more profitable.
Although I never gamble (because the combination of odds, risk, and reward
are against me, and I never want to bet against math), there are some similarities with gambling, especially in the minds of those who don’t trade. Gambling is a
game of chance, but I prefer to restrict the definition to situations where the odds
are slightly against you and you will lose over time. Why this restriction? Because
without it, every investment is a gamble since there is always an element of luck
and a risk of total loss, even if you buy investment real estate, buy a home, start a
business, buy a blue-chip stock, or even buy Treasury bonds (the government might
choose to devalue the dollar to reduce the real size of our debt, and in so doing, the
purchasing power of the dollars that you will get back from those bonds would be
much less than when you originally bought the bonds).
Some traders use simple game theory and increase the size of a trade after one
or more losing trades (this is called a martingale approach to trading). Blackjack
card counters are very similar to trading range traders. The card counters are trying to determine when the math has gone too far in one direction. In particular,
they want to know when the remaining cards in the deck are likely overweighed
with face cards. When the count indicates that this is likely, they place a trade (bet)
based on the probability that a disproportionate number of face cards will be coming up, increasing the odds of winning. Trading range traders are looking for times
when they think the market has gone too far in one direction and then they place a
trade in the opposite direction (a fade).
I tried playing poker online a few times without using real money to find similarities to and differences from trading. I discovered early on that there was a deal
breaker for me: I was constantly anxious because of the inherent unfairness due to
luck, and I never want luck to be a large component of the odds for my success.
This is a huge difference and makes me see gambling and trading as fundamentally

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

21

different, despite public perception. In trading, everyone is dealt the same cards so
the game is always fair and, over time, you get rewarded or penalized entirely due
to your skill as a trader. Obviously, sometimes you can trade correctly and lose, and
this can happen several times in a row due to the probability curve of all possible
outcomes. There is a real but microscopic chance that you can trade well and lose
10 or even 100 times or more in a row; but I cannot remember the last time I saw
as many as four good signals fail in a row, so this is a chance that I am willing to
take. If you trade well, over time you should make money because it is a zero-sum
game (except for commissions, which should be small if you choose an appropriate
broker). If you are better than most of the other traders, you will win their money.
There are two types of gambling that are different from pure games of chance,
and both are similar to trading. In both sports betting and poker, gamblers are trying to take money from other gamblers rather than from the house, and therefore
they can create odds in their favor if they are significantly better than their competitors. However, the “commissions” that they pay can be far greater than those that
a trader pays, especially with sports betting, where the vig is usually 10 percent, and
that is why incredibly successful sports gamblers like Billy Walters are so rare: they
have to be at least 10 percent better than the competition just to break even. Successful poker players are more common, as can be seen on all of the poker shows
on TV. However, even the best poker players do not make anything comparable to
what the best traders make, because the practical limits to their trading size are
much smaller.
I personally find trading not to be stressful, because the luck factor is so tiny
that it is not worth considering. However, there is one thing that trading and playing
poker share, and that is the value of patience. In poker, you stand to make far more
money if you patiently wait to bet on only the very best hands, and traders make
more when they have the patience to wait for the very best setups. For me, this
protracted downtime is much easier in trading because I can see all of the other
“cards” during the slow times, and it is intellectually stimulating to look for subtle
price action phenomena.
There is an important adage in gambling that is true in all endeavors, and that is
that you should not bet until you have a good hand. In trading, that is true as well.
Wait for a good setup before placing a trade. If you trade without discipline and
without a sound method, then you are relying on luck and hope for your profits,
and your trading is unquestionably a form of gambling.
One unfortunate comparison is from nontraders who assume that all day
traders, and all market traders for that matter, are addicted gamblers and therefore
have a mental illness. I suspect that many are addicted, in the sense that they are doing it more for excitement than for profit. They are willing to make low-probability
bets and lose large sums of money because of the huge rush they feel when they
occasionally win. However, most successful traders are essentially investors, just

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

22

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

like an investor who buys commercial real estate or a small business. The only real
differences from any other type of investing are that the time frame is shorter and
the leverage is greater.
Unfortunately, it is common for beginners to occasionally gamble, and it invariably costs them money. Every successful trader trades on the basis of rules. Whenever traders deviate from those rules for any reason, they are trading on hope rather
than logic and are then gambling. Beginning traders often find themselves gambling
right after having a couple of losses. They are eager to be made whole again and
are willing to take some chances to make that happen. They will take trades that
they normally would not take, because they are eager to get back the money they
just lost. Since they are now taking a trade that they believe is a low-probability
trade and they are taking it because of anxiety and sadness over their losses, they
are now gambling and not trading. After they lose on their gamble, they feel even
worse. Not only are they even further down on the day, but they feel especially sad
because they are faced with the reality that they did not have the discipline to stick
to their system when they know that discipline is one of the critical ingredients
to success.
Interestingly, neurofinance researchers have found that brain scan images of
traders about to make a trade are indistinguishable from those of drug addicts
about to take a hit. They found a snowball effect and an increased desire to continue, regardless of the outcome of their behavior. Unfortunately, when faced with
losses, traders assume more risk rather than less, often leading to the death of their
accounts. Without knowing the neuroscience, Warren Buffett clearly understood
the problem, as seen in his statement, “Once you have ordinary intelligence, what
you need is the temperament to control the urges that get other people into trouble in investing.” The great traders control their emotions and constantly follow
their rules.
One final point about gambling: There is a natural tendency to assume that
nothing can last forever and that every behavior regresses toward a mean. If the
market has three or four losing trades, surely the odds favor the next one being a winner. It’s just like flipping a coin, isn’t it? Unfortunately, that is not how
markets behave. When a market is trending, most attempts to reverse fail. When
it is in a trading range, most attempts to break out fail. This is the opposite of
coin flips, where the odds are always 50–50. In trading, the odds are more like
70 percent or better that what just happened will continue to happen again and
again. Because of the coin flip logic, most traders at some point begin to consider
game theory.
Martingale techniques work well in theory but not in practice because of the
conflict between math and emotion. That is the martingale paradox. If you double
(or even triple) your position size and reverse at each loss, you will theoretically
make money. Although four losers in a row is uncommon on the 5 minute Emini

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

23

chart if you choose your trades carefully, they will happen, and so will a dozen
or more, even though I can’t remember ever seeing that. In any case, if you are
comfortable trading 10 contracts, but start with just one and plan to double up and
reverse with each loss, four consecutive losers would require 16 contracts on your
next trade and eight consecutive losers would require 256 contracts! It is unlikely
that you would place a trade that is larger than your comfort zone following four or
more losers. Anyone willing to trade one contract initially would never be willing to
trade 16 or 256 contracts, and anyone willing to trade 256 contracts would never be
willing to initiate this strategy with just one. This is the inherent, insurmountable,
mathematical problem with this approach.
Since trading is fun and competitive, it is natural for people to compare it to
games, and because wagering is involved, gambling is usually the first thing that
comes to mind. However, a far more apt analogy is to chess. In chess, you can
see exactly what your opponent is doing, unlike in card games where you don’t
know your opponent’s cards. Also, in poker, the cards that you are dealt are yours
purely by chance, but in chess, the location of your pieces is entirely due to your
decisions. In chess nothing is hidden and it is simply your skill compared to that of
your opponent that determines the outcome. Your ability to read what is in front of
you and determine what will likely follow is a great asset both to a chess player and
to a trader.
Laypeople are also concerned about the possibility of crashes, and because of
that risk, they again associate trading with gambling. Crashes are very rare events
on daily charts. These nontraders are afraid of their inability to function effectively
during extremely emotional events. Although the term crash is generally reserved
for daily charts and applied to bear markets of about 20 percent or more happening
in a short time frame, like in 1927 and 1987, it is more useful to think of it as just
another chart pattern because that removes the emotion and helps traders follow
their rules. If you remove the time and price axes from a chart and focus simply
on the price action, there are market movements that occur frequently on intraday
charts that are indistinguishable from the patterns in a classic crash. If you can get
past the emotion, you can make money off crashes, because with all charts, they
display tradable price action.
Figure I.4 (from TradeStation) shows how markets can crash in any time frame.
The one on the left is a daily chart of GE during the 1987 crash, the middle is a
5 minute chart of COST after a very strong earnings report, and the one on the right
