
71

72
great financial success. I invested the money I made on this venture into the real estate market,
which also proved to be very profitable. As a result, I had all the money I needed and was able to devote my
full time to research.
==== I understand that you're basically a technical systems trader. Why do you believe your track record is
so much better than those of other commodity trading advisors using similar methods? In particular, I'm
interested in how you have managed to avoid the large drawdowns that seem to be almost intrinsic to this
approach. ====
Although I employ technical analysis to make my trading decisions, there are a few important differences
between my method and the approaches of most other traders in this group. First, I think very few other
technical traders have gone back more than thirty years in their chart studies, let alone more than a hundred
years. Second, I don't always interpret the same pattern in the same way. I also factor in where I believe we
are at in terms of long-term economic cycles. This factor alone can lead to very substantial differences
between the conclusions I might draw from the charts versus those reached by traders not incorporating such
a perspective. Finally, I don't simply look at the classical chart patterns (head and shoulders, triangle, and so
on) as independent formations. Rather, I tend to look for certain combinations of patterns or, in other words,
patterns within patterns within patterns. These more complex, multiple-pattern combinations can signal much
higher probability trades.
==== What popular chart patterns are accurate only 50 percent of the time? ====
Most of them. But that's not a drawback. A pattern that works 50 percent of the time can be quite
profitable if you employ it with a good risk control plan.
==== Is technical analysis an art or a science? ====
It's both an art and a science. It's an art in the sense that if you asked ten different traders to define a
head-and- shoulders pattern, you'd come up with ten different answers. However, for any individual trader,
the definition can be made mathematically precise. In other words, chart traders are artists until they
mathematically define their patterns-say, as part of a system structure-at which time they become scientists.
==== Why have you chosen a purely technical approach in favor of one that also employs fundamentals?
====
Many economists have tried to trade the commodity markets fundamentally and have usually ended up
losing. The problem is that the markets operate more on psychology than on fundamentals. For example, you
may determine that silver should be priced at, say, $8, and that may well be an accurate evaluation.
However, under certain conditions-for example, a major inflationary environment-the price could temporarily
go much higher. In the commodity inflation boom that peaked in 1980, silver reached a high of $50-a price
level that was out of all proportion to any true fundamental value. Of course, eventually the market returned
to its base value-in fact, in the history of markets, I can't think of a single commodity that didn't eventually
move back to its base value-but in the interim, anyone trading purely on the fundamentals would have been
wiped out.
==== Do any particularly memorable trades come to mind? ====
Whenever I'm on vacation, I continue to chart the markets. In the summer of 1990, while on vacation in
the Bahamas, I was updating my charts on a picnic table beneath the palm trees. I noticed patterns that
indicated buy signals in all the energy markets. These signals seemed particularly odd because it's very
unusual to get a buy signal in heating oil during the summer. However, I didn't question the trade and simply
phoned in the orders. Three days later, Iraq invaded Kuwait and oil prices exploded.
==== Do you follow your system absolutely, or do you sometimes override the trading signals? ====
I follow the system well over 90 percent of the time, but occasionally I try to do better than the system.
Since I employ such deviations from the pure system very selectively, they have improved performance
overall.
==== Give me an example of a situation in which you overrode the system. ====
In October 1987 when the stock market was in the midst of its crash, I started receiving anxious calls
from my clients who wanted to know if they had suffered a large loss. I calmly explained that we were still up
37 percent for the year and that the total risk on all our open positions was only 4 percent. I had a feeling
that people would be very insecure in the markets and that there would be a resulting flight to T-bills. I
decided to take off my entire short position in T-bills, even though my system had not yet provided any
reversal signal. That proved to be the right action, as the T-bill market took off on the upside almost immediately afterwards.
==== It's obvious from your earlier comments that you consider cycles important. Could you please
elaborate? ====
There are cycles in everything-the weather, ocean waves, and the markets. One of the most important
long-term cycles is the cycle from inflation to deflation. About every two generations-roughly every fortyseven to sixty years-mere's a deflationary market. For example, in respect to me commodity markets, we're
currently in a deflationary phase that began in 1980. Over the past two hundred years, these deflationary
phases have typically lasted between eight and twelve years. Since we're currently in the twelfth year of
commodity price deflation, I think we're very close to a major bottom in commodity prices.
Another important consideration in regard to cycles is that their lengths vary greatly from market to
market. For example, in the grain markets, which are heavily weather dependent, you may get major bull
markets about five times every twenty years. In the gold market, how ever, a major bull cycle may occur

72

73
only three to five times in a century. This consideration could make a market such as gold very
frustrating for traders trying to play for the next bullish wave.
==== What is the single most important statement you could make about the markets? ====
The essential element is that the markets are ultimately based on human psychology, and by charting the
markets you're merely converting human psychology into graphic representations. I believe that the human
mind is more powerful than any computer in analyzing the implications of these price graphs.
Weiss's highly individualistic approach doesn't lend itself readily to generalizations. Certainly his comments
should inspire those inclined to cyclical analysis, but I would add that other expert traders, such as Eck-hardt,
argue the opposite viewpoint rather persuasively. Perhaps his most significant input is that the reliability of
chart analysis can be greatly enhanced by viewing classic chart patterns as parts of more complex
combinations, rather than in isolation, as is typically done. Weiss also emphasizes that students of chart
analysis need to conduct their research much further back in history than is usually the case. In markets in
which he was able to obtain the data, Weiss has extended his chart studies as far back as 150 years ago.
In essence, I think Weiss is successful because of the combination of a vast amount of research in
analyzing charts and a knack for seeing relatively complex patterns. Ultimately, that line of reasoning leads
to the conclusion that you, too, can be successful if you can read a chart with the same skill as Weiss. Not
very helpful information, is it? However, Weiss's consistent streak of high annual returns and low maximum
drawdowns provides compelling proof that pure chart analysis can yield an extraordinarily effective trading
approach.

73

74
PART IV Fund Managers and Timers

74

75
Stanley Druckenmiller: The Art of Top-Down

Investing

Stanley Druckenmiller belongs to the rarefied world of managers who control multibillion-dollar portfolios.
Achieving a near 40 percent return on a $100 million portfolio is impressive, but realizing that performance
level on a multibillion-dollar fund is incredible. In the three years since he assumed active management
control of the Quantum Fund from his mentor and idol, George Soros, Druckenmiller has realized an average
annual return of over 38 percent on assets ranging between $2.0 billion and $3.5 billion.
Druckenmiller has been on a fast track ever since he decided to forsake graduate school for the real world.
After less than one year as a stock analyst for the Pittsburgh National Bank, Druckenmiller was promoted to
the position of director of equity research. Druckenmiller dismisses his sudden promotion as the act of an
eccentric, albeit brilliant, division manager. However, one suspects there was more to it, particularly in light
of Druckenmiller's subsequent achievements. Less than one year later, when the division head who had hired
Druckenmiller left the bank, Druckenmiller was promoted to assume his slot, once again leapfrogging a host
of senior managers maneuvering for the same position. Two years later, in 1980, at the young age of twentyeight, Druckenmiller left the bank to launch his own money management firm, Duquesne Capital
Management.
In 1986, Druckenmiller was recruited by Dreyfus as a fund manager. As part of the agreement, Dreyfus
permitted Druckenmiller to continue managing his own Duquesne Fund. By the time Drucken-miller joined
Dreyfus, his management style had been transformed from a conventional approach of holding a portfolio of
stocks into an eclectic strategy incorporating bonds, currencies, and stocks, with the flexibility of trading any
of these markets from both the short side and the long side. Dreyfus was so enamored with Druckenmiller's
innate market approach that the company developed a few funds around him, the most popular being the
Strategic Aggressive Investing Fund, which was the best-performing fund in the industry from its date of
inception (March 1987) until Druckenmiller left Dreyfus in August 1988.
Druckenmiller's popularity at Dreyfus proved to be too much of a good thing. Eventually, he found himself
managing seven funds at Dreyfus, in addition to his own Duquesne Fund. The strain of all this activity and his
desire to work with Soros, who Druckenmiller considers the greatest investor of our time, prompted him to
leave Dreyfus for Soros Management. Shortly thereafter, Soros turned over the management of his fund to
Druckenmiller, as Soros left to pursue his goal of helping to transform the closed economies of Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The longest-running measure of Druckenmiller's performance in the markets is his own Duquesne fund.
Since its inception in 1980, the fund has averaged 37 percent annually. Druckenmiller stresses that the early
years of Duquesne's performance are not directly relevant since the fund's structure changed completely in
mid-1986 to accommodate the flexible trading approach he now uses. Measured from this later starting point,
Druckenmiller's average annual return has been 45 percent.
I interviewed Druckenmiller at his co-op apartment on a weekend day. I was surprised by his youth; I had
hardly expected someone who had been managing one of the world's largest funds for several years to still
be in his thirties. As we relaxed in the living room, our conversation began with Druckenmiller's story of how
he got started in the business.
I had enrolled in graduate school to study for an economics degree. However, I found the program overly
quantitative and theoretical, with little emphasis on real-life applications. I was very disappointed and
dropped out in the second semester. I took a job as a management trainee at the Pittsburgh National Bank,
with the idea that the program would provide me with a broad overview that would help me to decide on an
area of focus.
I had been at the bank for several months when I received a call from the manager in the trust
department. "I hear you attended the University of Michigan," he said. When I confirmed his statement, he
said, "Great." He asked whether I had an M.B.A. I told him that I did not. He said, "That's even better. Come
on up; you're hired."
==== What job did he give you? ====
I was hired as a bank and chemical stock analyst.
==== Was that the type of position you perceived yourself heading toward? ====
I really had no idea what kind of job I would end up with. Most of the people who entered the
management training program at the bank had an immediate goal of becoming a loan officer. I thought that I
had been doing pretty well when the head of the loan department informed me that I would make a terrible
loan officer. He said that I was too interested in the actual functioning of the companies, whereas a loan officer's job was essentially a sales position. He thought my personality was too abrupt and generally unsuitable
for sales. I remember feeling quite let down by being told that I was going to be a failure, when all along I
had thought that I was doing quite well in the program.
==== Tell me about your early experiences as a stock analyst. ====
The director of investments was Speros Drelles, the person who had hired me. He was brilliant, with a
great aptitude for teaching, but he was also quite eccentric. When I was twenty-five and had been in the
department for only about a year, he summoned me into his office and announced that he was going to make
me the director of equity research- This was quite a bizarre move, since my boss was about fifty years old
and had been with the bank for over twenty-five years. Moreover, all the other analysts had M.B.A.'s and had
been in the department longer than I had.
"You know why I'm doing this, don't you?" he asked.

75

76
"No," I replied.
"For the same reason they send eighteen-year-olds into war."
"Why is that?" I asked.
"Because they're too dumb to know not to charge." Drelles continued, "The small cap [capitalization]
stocks have been in a bear market for ten years [this conversation transpired in 1978], and I think there's
going to be a huge, liquidity-driven bull market sometime in the next decade. Frankly, I have a lot of scars
from the past ten years, while you don't. I think we'll make a great team because you'll be too stupid and
inexperienced to know not to try to buy everything. That other guy out there," he said, referring to my boss,
the exiting director of equity research, "is just as stale as I am."
==== So, essentially, you leapfrogged your boss. Was there any resentment? ====
Very much so, and it was quite unpleasant. Although I now realize that my boss handled himself very well
given the circumstances. He was very bitter, but I certainly understand his sense of resentment much better
now than I did then. I couldn't envision myself responding any better twelve years from now if someone
replaced me with a twenty-five-year-old.
==== Obviously, Drelles didn't just make you head of research because of your youth. There must have
been more to it. ====
I had a natural aptitude for the business, and I think he was impressed with the job I did analyzing the
banking industry. For example, at the time, Citicorp was going crazy with international loans, and I had done
a major bearish piece, which proved to be correct. Although I hadn't taken a business course, I was fairly
lucid in economics and probably made a good impression with my grasp of international money flows.
==== What was done with the research that you generated? ====
The analysts presented their ideas to a stock selection committee, which consisted of seven members.
After the presentation, there was an intense question-and-answer period in which the analysts defended their
recommendations.
==== What happened to the recommendations after the presentation? ====
If a majority of the committee approved the idea, it would be placed on the stock selection list. Once a
stock was placed on the list, the portfolio managers at the bank were permitted to buy that stock. They were
not allowed to purchase any stocks that were not on the list.
==== What happened if you were bearish on a stock? ====
If the recommendation was accepted, the stock would be deleted from the approved list.
==== Did you like being an analyst? ====
I loved it. I came in at six in the morning and stayed until eight at night. Remember, this was a bank, not
a brokerage firm at which such hours represent normal behavior. Interestingly, even though Drelles had been
at the bank for thirty years, he kept similar hours.
==== What kind of analytical approach did you use in evaluating stocks? ====
When I first started out, I did very thorough papers covering every aspect of a stock or industry. Before I
could make the presentation to the stock selection committee, I first had to submit the paper to the research
director. I particularly remember the time I gave him my paper on the banking industry. I felt very proud of
my work. However, he read through it and said, "This is useless. What makes the stock go up and down?"
That comment acted as a spur. Thereafter, I focused my analysis on seeking to identify the factors that were
strongly correlated to a stock's price movement as opposed to looking at all the fundamentals. Frankly, even
today, many analysts still don't know what makes their particular stocks go up and down.
==== What did you find was the answer? ====
Very often the key factor is related to earnings. This is particularly true of the bank stocks. Chemical
stocks, however, behave quite differently. In this industry, the key factor seems to be capacity. The ideal
time to buy the chemical stocks is after a lot of capacity has left the industry and there's a catalyst that you
believe will trigger an increase in demand. Conversely, the ideal time to sell these stocks is when there are
lots of announcements for new plants, not when the earnings turn down. The reason for this behavioral
pattern is that expansion plans mean that earnings will go down in two to three years, and the stock market
tends to anticipate such developments.
Another discipline I learned that helped me determine whether a stock would go up or down is technical
analysis. Drelles was very technically oriented, and I was probably more receptive to technical analysis than
anyone else in the department. Even though Drelles was the boss, a lot of people thought he was a kook
because of all the chart books he kept. However, I found that technical analysis could be very effective.
==== Did the rest of the analysts accept you as the research director, even though you were much younger
and less experienced? ====
Once they realized that Drelles had made a decision and was going to stick with it, they accepted the
situation. However, later that same year, Drelles left the bank, and I suddenly found myself unprotected. I
was only twenty-five years old, while all the other department heads were in their forties and fifties. As soon
as the news broke that Drelles was leaving, a power struggle ensued among the department heads vying for
his position.
Every Monday morning, I and the other department heads would present our views to the head of the
trust department, a lawyer without any investment background. It was understood that he would use these
presentations as input in making an eventual decision on Drelles's replacement. Clearly, everyone assumed
that I was out of the running. The general belief was that I would be lucky to simply hold onto my job as

76

77
research director, let alone inherit Drelles's position.
As it turned out, shortly after Drelles left, the Shah of Iran was overthrown. Here's where my inexperience
really paid off. When the shah was deposed, I decided that we should put 70 percent of our money in oil
stocks and the rest in defense stocks. This course of action seemed so logical to me that I didn't consider
doing anything else. At the time, I didn't yet understand diversification. As research director, I had the
authority to allow only those recommendations I favored to be presented to the stock selection committee,
and I used this control to restrict the presentations largely to oil and defense stocks.
I presented the same strategy to the head of the trust department each Monday morning. Not
surprisingly, the other department heads argued against my position just for the sake of taking the opposite
view. They would try to put down anything I said. However, there are times in your career when everything
that you do is right-and this was one of those times. Of course, now I would never even dream of putting 70
percent of a portfolio in oil stocks, but at the time I didn't know better. Fortunately, it was the ideal position
to have, and our stock selection list outperformed the S&P 500 by multiples. After about nine months, to
everyone's complete amazement, I was named to assume Drelles's former position as the director of
investments.
==== When did you leave the bank? ====
In 1980 I went to make a presentation in New York. After the talk, one of the audience members
approached me and exclaimed, "You're at a bank! What the hell are you doing at a bank?"
I said, "What else am I going to do? Frankly, I think I'm lucky to be there, given the level of my
experience."
After about two minutes of talking, he asked, "Why don't you start your own firm?"
"How can I possibly do that?" I asked. "I don't have any money."
"If you start your own firm," he replied, "I'll pay you $10,000 a month just to speak to you. You don't
even have to write any reports."
To put this in perspective, when I started at the bank in 1977,1 was making $900 a month. When I was
promoted to the research director position, my annual salary was still only $23,000, and all the analysts who
reported to me were making more than I was. Even after my promotion to Drelles's position, I was still
earning only $48,000 a year. In this context, the offer of $10,000 a month, not counting the money I could
potentially earn on managing funds, seemed extremely attractive. I figured that even if 1 fell completely on
my face, I could still get another job that would pay more than I was making at the bank.
hi February 1981, with one other analyst and a secretary, I launched Duquesne Capital Management. We
began with $1 million under management, which generated $10,000 per year in fees. Most of our income
came from the $10,000 per month consulting fee arrangement. We started off extremely well, catching the
sharp upmove in low cap stocks. By mid-1981, stocks were up to the top of their valuation range, while at
the same time, interest rates had soared to 19 percent. It was one of the more obvious sell situations in the
history of the market. We went into a 50 percent cash position, which, at the time, I thought represented a
really dramatic step. Then we got obliterated in the third quarter of 1981.
==== I don't understand. How did you get obliterated if you went into a 50 percent cash position? ====
Well, we got obliterated on the 50 percent position we still held.
==== Yes, but you would have lost only half as much as everyone else. ====
At the bank, the standard procedure had been to always be nearly fully invested. Although I wasn't
working for a bank anymore, I had obviously still maintained some of this same mentality. You have to
understand that I was unbelievably bearish in June 1981. I was absolutely right in that opinion, but we still
ended up losing 12 percent during the third quarter. I said to my partner, "This is criminal. We have never
felt more strongly about anything than the bear side of this market and yet we ended up down for the
quarter." Right then and there, we changed our investment philosophy so that if we ever felt that bearish
about the market again we would go to a 100 percent cash position.
During the fourth quarter of 1981, the stock market partially rebounded. We were still extremely bearish
at that point, and we dumped our entire stock position. We placed 50 percent in cash and 50 percent in long
bonds. We loved the long bond position because it was yielding 15 percent, the Fed was extremely tight, and
inflation was already coming down sharply. It seemed like a gift.
We did very well, and by May 1982 our assets under management had grown to $7 million. One morning,
I came into work and discovered that Drysdale Securities-our consulting client-had gone belly-up. I
immediately called my contact at the firm, but he was no longer there.
I realized that I had an immediate problem. My overhead was $180,000 per year and my new revenue
base was only $70,000 (1 percent on the $7 million we managed). I had no idea how we could possibly
survive. At the time, our firm had assets of just under $50,000, and I was absolutely convinced that interest
rates were coming down. I took all of the firm's capital and put it into T-bill futures. In four days, I lost
everything. The irony is that less than a week after we went bust, interest rates hit their high for the entire
cycle. They've never been that high since. That was when I learned that you could be right on a market and
still end up losing if you use excessive leverage.
At the time, I had a client who had sold out a software company at a very young age. He had given the
proceeds from this sale, which were quite substantial, to a broker who lost half the amount in the options
market. In desperation, this broker had brought him to me, and I ended up doing extremely well for the
account. Since it was an individual account, whereas all my other accounts were pensions, I was actually able
to go short in the stock market. I was also long bonds. Both positions did very well, and his account went up
dramatically.
