Buffett a textile maker in New Bedford, Massachusetts, that was selling at a discount to the value of its
assets. 10 His idea was to buy it and liquidate it, to sell it off piecemeal, and to shut it down. Its name was
Berkshire Hathaway. By the time the hair had grown back on Warren’s head from the shock of his father’s
loss, he was in full pursuit of this new idea.
Buffett began by circling over the company and observing it. He started leisurely accumulating stock in
Berkshire Hathaway. This time, for better or worse, he had chosen a business run by a personality the size of
Massachusetts.
Seabury Stanton, president of Berkshire Hathaway, had reluctantly closed more than a dozen mills, one by
one, over the past decade. The remnants sprawled along the rivers of the gently moldering towns of coastal
New England like empty red-brick temples of a long-lost faith.
He was the second Stanton to oversee the company, and was filled with a sense of destiny. Standing on New
Bedford’s rocky shores, he cast himself as King Canute, telling the tides of devastation to retreat. But unlike
Canute, he actually imagined they would obey. A New England version of American Gothic come to life,
Seabury peered coldly down on visitors from his six-foot two-inch height—peered down if, that is, they
managed to find him. He sat tucked away in a remote penthouse office at the top of a long, narrow staircase,
protected by his secretary’s secretary, far from the din of the looms.
New Bedford, the town that was his headquarters, once shone as the diamond in New England’s crown. For a
while the ships that sailed from its harbor to hunt sperm whales made New Bedford North America’s richest
city.11 Stanton’s grandfather, a whaling captain, had been head of one of the ruling families of the city,
capital of the world’s most swashbuckling business. But in the mid-nineteenth century, as sperm whales grew
scarce, the great harpoon ships had to venture ever farther north in search of the bowhead whale, all the way
to the Arctic Ocean. In the autumn of 1871, the families of New Bedford waited in vain for their sons and
husbands. Twenty-two ships, surprised by an early winter, lay trapped behind the Arctic ice and never
returned.12 New Bedford would never be the same. Nor would the whaling business, once its mainstay, ever
recover. As the supply of whales shrank, demand for their products had dwindled. After 1859, when oil
gushed from the ground in Pennsylvania, kerosene became an increasingly popular substitute for the
ever-scarcer whale oil. The flexible, comblike whale baleen13 used in women’s corsets, hoop skirts, and
fancy parasols, in buggy whips and other mainstays of Victorian life, ceased to find a market as those
products gradually disappeared from the shelves.
In 1888, Horatio Hathaway, whose family had roots in the China tea trade,14 and Joseph Knowles, his
treasurer, organized a group of partners to follow what they saw as the next business trend. They formed a
pair of textile mills, Acushnet Mill Corporation and Hathaway Manufacturing Company.15 One of their
partners was Hetty Green, the notorious “Witch of Wall Street,” a shipping heiress raised in New Bedford
who rode the ferry to New York City from her tenement apartment in Hoboken to make loans and
investments. She stalked through lower Manhattan in an ancient black alpaca gown, swirling cape, and rusty
veiled hat like an elderly bat, her appearance so eccentric and her parsimony so notorious that rumors
circulated that she wore newspapers as underclothes. By the time of her death in 1916, Green would be the
richest woman in the world.16
Financed by such investors, mill after mill sprang up to comb, spin, weave, and dye the deep stacks of cotton
bales unloaded from Southern ships onto the wharves of New Bedford. Congressman William McKinley,
chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, who passed through the region from time to time to
christen new mills, sponsored a tariff to protect the textile mills from foreign trade, for it was already cheaper
to make fabric elsewhere.17 Thus, even from the beginning, the textile mills of the North needed political
help to survive. Early in the twentieth century, a new technology—air-conditioning—revolutionized factories
by allowing precise control of humidity as well as particulate matter in the air, and it was no longer
economically justifiable to ship cotton out of the South, where labor was cheaper, to the chilly shores of New
England. Knowles’s successor, James E. Stanton Jr., watched half his competitors’ mills melt away to the
South.18 Put to the rack by repeated wage cuts, workers at the remaining northern mills went out on a

crippling five-month strike that broke their employers’ backs. James Stanton “hesitated to spend
stockholders’ money on new equipment when business was so bad and the prospects were so uncertain,”
recalled his son.19 He pulled capital out of the business by paying dividends.
By the time Stanton’s son Seabury, a Harvard graduate, took over in 1934, the aged, rickety Hathaway plant
still rattled out a few bolts of cotton cloth each day. Seabury became seized with a vision of himself as the
hero who saved the textile mills. He said “there was a place in New England for a textile company that had
the latest machinery and capable management,” and he and his brother Otis conceived a five-year plan to
modernize.20 They spent $10 million installing air-conditioning, electric lifts, overhead conveyers, better
lighting, and futuristic locker rooms in the company’s venerable red-brick buildings. They shifted from cotton
to rayon, the poor man’s silk, and made rayon parachute cloth during the war, enjoying a temporary boom.
Nonetheless, as time passed, cheap foreign labor kept lowering the price their customers would pay. To
compete, Seabury squeezed the pay of the workers in his modern new plant. But year by year the tides
lapping at his shore—cheaper foreign fabric, better-automated competition, and lower labor costs in the
South—presented a rising threat to his mills.
In 1954, Hurricane Carol’s fourteen-foot storm surge poured into Hathaway’s Cove Street headquarters.
Though the firm’s distinctive clock tower rode out the storm, a sea of muck and debris swamped the looms
and yarn inside the building. Rather than rebuild the mill, the obvious response would have been to join the
march southward. Instead, Seabury Stanton merged Hathaway with another mill, Berkshire Fine Spinning,
trying in effect to build a levee against a tidal wave.21
Berkshire Fine Spinning made everything from the stiffest twills to the sheerest marquisettes, crisp curtain
dimity, and fancy broadcloth shirting. Malcolm Chace, its master, steadfastly refused to sink a nickel into
modernization. His nephew, Nicholas Brady, had written a paper on the business at the Harvard Business
School in 1954, reaching so discouraging a conclusion that he sold his Berkshire stock.
Chace naturally opposed Seabury Stanton’s demand for modernization, but the new Berkshire Hathaway was
governed by Stanton’s sense of destiny. He simplified the product line, focusing on rayon, turning out more
than half the men’s suit linings in the United States.22 As Berkshire Hathaway under Stanton unreeled nearly
a quarter billion yards of fabrics a year, he continued his “relentless” modernizing, pouring another million
dollars into the mills.
By this time, his brother Otis had begun to have doubts about the feasibility of remaining in New Bedford,
but Seabury thought the time for a textile mill to move south had passed,23 and refused to give up his dream
of reviving the mills.24
When Dan Cowin approached Buffett about Berkshire in 1962, Buffett was already aware of it, just as he
was of any U.S. business of a meaningful size. The money that poured into the company meant that Berkshire
was worth—according to its accountants—$22 million as a business, or $19.46 per share.25 And yet, after
nine years of losses, anyone could acquire the stock for just seven and a half bucks. Buffett started buying
it.26
Seabury had been buying Berkshire’s stock as well, using extra cash that was not being poured back into the
mills to make a tender offer for shares every couple of years. Buffett’s theory was that Seabury would
continue, and he could time his own transactions, buying whenever the stock got cheap and selling it back to
the company whenever the price rose.
He and Cowin set about buying stock. Had anyone known Buffett was buying, it might have pushed up the
price, so he bought through Howard Browne of Tweedy, Browne. The firm was a favorite broker of Buffett’s
because everyone there, especially Browne, was closemouthed, of utmost importance to Buffett given his
insistence on secrecy. Tweedy, Browne had code-named the Buffett partnership’s account BWX.27
When Buffett arrived at Tweedy, Browne, which maintained a tiny office at 52 Wall Street, in the same art

deco building where Ben Graham had once worked, it felt like entering an old-fashioned barbershop, with its
black-and-white ceramic tile floor. In a little office to the left sat the firm’s secretary and office manager. To
the right lay the trading room. Past that, in a small rented alcove half filled with a water cooler and a
coatrack—in effect a sort of closet—sat Walter Schloss, running his partnership from a battered desk. Using
Graham’s method without the slightest variation, he had been averaging returns of better than twenty percent
a year since leaving Graham-Newman. To pay his rent to Tweedy, Browne, in lieu of cash he gave the firm
commissions by trading stocks. His trades were few, and he was getting a great bargain on the rent. He
limited his other expenses to the cost of a subscription to Value Line Investment Survey, some paper and
pencils, subway tokens, and nothing else.
Along the center of the trading room ran a twenty-foot wooden table, which the firm had acquired
somewhere on its way to a garbage dump. Its surface bore the marks of generations of schoolchildren armed
with penknives. To write down figures, a tablet had to be placed underneath the paper; otherwise, “Todd
loves Mary” would be embossed into the text.
On one side of the child-scarred table, Howard Browne ruled with benign authority. He and his partners
faced the firm’s trader, who—like all traders—sat, jumpy and restless, waiting for the phone to ring so that he
could trade. Next to him, an empty space at the table served as the “visitors’ desk.” The cheapest of wooden
filing cabinets lined the walls.
Nowhere else in New York did Buffett feel so at home as sitting at the Tweedy, Browne visitors’ desk. The
firm had branched out into arbitrage, workouts (all-but-completed turnaround situations where a little money
remained to be made), and “stubs”(companies being acquired and broken up)—all the sorts of things he
liked. It traded securities such as fifteen-year Jamaica (Queens) Water warrants—rights to buy the water
company’s stock, which rose whenever there was speculation that New York City would someday take over
the waterworks. They fell again when speculation lulled. Tweedy, Browne bought them every time they
dropped and sold them every time they rose, over and over and over again.
The firm also made a specialty of fencing with the managements of these obscure, undervalued businesses,
trying to force out hidden value, as with Sanborn Map. “We were always in court suing,” one partner says.28
All of it reeked of the old Graham-Newman days and bore little similarity to the gargantuan American
Express deal, but Buffett loved the atmosphere. Tom Knapp researched stocks and spent his days plotting
practical jokes when he wasn’t orchestrating trades. He had commandeered a huge storage closet, filling it
with the four-cent Blue Eagle stamps he and Buffett had made the mistake of buying and topographical maps
of the Maine coastline. The pile of maps continually grew, for Knapp was funneling the cash he made from
stocks into buying up the coast of Maine.29 The pile of Blue Eagles slowly shrank as Tweedy, Browne pasted
forty stamps onto each batch of the Pink Sheets they sent to Buffett once a week, every week.
The Pink Sheet quotations for stocks not listed on the New York Stock Exchange were stale the moment they
went to print. Buffett used his Pink Sheets merely as a starting point for the telephonic bazaar in which calls
to numerous brokers might be required to make a trade. He was a master at working this system through his
brokers. The lack of a publicly posted price helped reduce competition. Someone who was willing to call
every market-maker and squeeze them mercilessly had a meaningful advantage over the less energetic or the
more fainthearted.
Browne would call Buffett to let him know they had XYZ stock on offer at $5 a share.
“Hmmm, $43/4 bid,” Buffett would say, without hesitation. This maneuver, Casting the Line, would fish out
how hungry the seller was.
After calling the client to see if he would take a lower price, Browne would call Buffett with the response:
“Sorry. Can’t take less than five bucks.”
“Unthinkable,” Buffett would answer.

A few days later, Browne would call Buffett again. “We got the stock at $43/4. We’ll go along with $43/4
bid.”
“Sorry,” Buffett would now say instantly. “$41/2 bid.”
Browne would go back to the seller, who would say, “What the hell? What happened to the $43/4?”
“We’re just passing along the message. $41/2 bid.”
More calls would go back and forth until a week later, Browne came back to Buffett: “Okay. $41/2 bid,”
he’d say.
“Sorry,” Buffett would say, and drop it another eighth. “$43/8.”
Thus he Buffetted the price ever lower. And rarely—almost never—did he want a stock badly enough to
raise his bid.30
He placed his first order for Berkshire Hathaway through Tweedy on December 12, 1962, for two thousand
shares at $7.50 a share, paying the broker a $20 commission.31 He told Tweedy to keep buying.
Cowin got the scuttlebutt on Berkshire from board member Stanley Rubin, Berkshire’s top salesman, who
happened to be a friend of Otis Stanton, another member of the board. Otis Stanton felt his brother was out of
touch. Protected by his secretaries in his ivory tower, Seabury was doing more and more drinking as the clash
between his lofty vision and reality worsened.32 Otis was by now sharply at odds with Seabury.33 He felt his
brother should have taken a strike rather than giving in to demands for higher wages.34 He also disapproved
of Seabury’s choice of a successor, his son, Jack, who was a pleasant enough young man but not up to the
job—according to Otis. Otis had his own idea about who should succeed Seabury—Ken Chace, the vice
president of manufacturing.
Seabury Stanton responded to Buffett’s purchases as though a takeover threat was imminent, and made
several tender offers for the stock. This was exactly what Buffett wanted, for his purchases were predicated
on the theory that, eventually, Seabury would buy him out. He wanted the Berkshire stock not to keep it but
to sell it. Nevertheless, in every trade there is a buyer and a seller. Seabury Stanton had so far withstood the
forces of cheap foreign fabric and Hurricane Carol. Instead of Seabury getting Buffetted, there was a chance
that Buffett could get Seaburied.
Eventually, Warren drove up to New Bedford to see the place for himself. For once, he was not just dropping
in. Miss Tabor, who was fiercely loyal to Seabury, decided which callers would be allowed through the glass
doors and up the narrow stairs to Stanton’s penthouse office. When she grimly ushered Warren into Stanton’s
palatially furnished, ballroom-size wood-paneled lair, he saw that there was no place anywhere near
Stanton’s desk to sit. This, clearly, was a man used to summoning people to stand before him while he sat
behind his desk and directed them what to do.
The two men seated themselves at the uncomfortable rectangular glass conference table in a corner, and
Buffett asked where Stanton stood on the next tender offer. Stanton looked at him through the wire-rimmed
glasses perched on the tip of his nose. “He was reasonably cordial. But then he said, ‘We’ll probably have a
tender one of these days, and what price would you sell at, Mr. Buffett?’ or words to that effect. The stock
at the time was selling at something like $9 or $10 a share.
“I said I’d sell at $11.50 a share on a tender offer, if they had one. And he said, ‘Well, will you promise me
that if we have a tender offer you’ll tender?’
“I said, ‘Well, you know, if it’s in the reasonably near future, but not if it’s twenty years from now.’ But I
said, ‘Fine.’

“So now I was frozen. I felt that I couldn’t buy any more stock because I knew too much about what he
might do. So I went home, and not too long after, a letter comes from the Old Colony Trust Company, which
was part of First National of Boston, offering $113/8 per share to anyone who would tender their
Berkshire.” That was 121/2 cents less per share than agreed.
Buffett was furious. “It really burned me up. You know, this guy was trying to chisel an eighth of a point
from having, in effect, shaken my hand saying this was the deal.”
Warren was used to doing the Buffetting, and now Stanton had tried to chisel him. He sent Dan Cowin to
New Bedford to try to reason with Stanton not to renege on the deal. The two men argued, and Stanton
denied that he had made a deal with Buffett; he told Cowin that it was his company and he would do as he
pleased. That was a mistake. For trying to chisel Warren Buffett, Seabury Stanton was going to be sorry, very
sorry. Buffett decided that—instead of selling—now, he would buy.
He vowed that he would have Berkshire; he would buy it all. He would own it lock, stock, loom, and spindle.
That Berkshire Hathaway was a failing, futile enterprise daunted him not. It was cheap, and he craved it.
Above all, he wanted Seabury Stanton not to have it. Buffett and the other shareholders deserved it more. In
his determination, he ignored all the lessons learned from the experience at Dempster—save one. And that
was the one he should have ignored.
Buffett sent his scouts out, looking for more chunks of the closely held stock. Cowin got hold of enough to
join Berkshire’s board. But other people began to take notice too. Jack Alexander, Buffett’s old friend from
Columbia, had an investment partnership with his classmate Buddy Fox. “One day we saw that Warren was
buying this Berkshire Hathaway,” he says. “And we started to buy.” On a trip to New York from their office
in Connecticut they told him they were following him in the stock, “He got very upset. ‘Look,’ he said,
‘you’re riding on my coattails. That’s not right. Cut it out.’”
Fox and Alexander were taken aback. What were they doing wrong? Buffett gave them to understand that he
was seeking control. Yet coattail-riding, even in control situations, was a popular pastime among the Graham
crowd. It was considered sporting conduct. In effect, Buffett took their stock. I need it more than you, he
said. They agreed to sell their stock to him at the then-market price, because it clearly mattered to him so
much. He appeared to have some sort of mysterious attachment to Berkshire Hathaway. “It wasn’t that
important to us. It was obviously very important to him,” Alexander says.
Like Fox and Alexander, a few others had also become Buffett-watchers, tracking Warren’s trail like the
spoor of Bigfoot. This created competition for the stock. He made it understood among the Grahamites that
they were to keep their mitts off Berkshire. The only exception was Henry Brandt; he let Brandt—in
recompense for his services—buy it below $8.00. He had begun to carry himself with a bit of swagger, which
some people found irritating. Yet his surefootedness, the way he always seemed to be so right, kept them
fascinated. Even his cheapskate qualities were part of the aura. For years he had been possibly the only
person doing business regularly in New York who managed to get by with not only free lodging (by staying
with Fred Kuhlken’s mother, Anne Gottschaldt, on Long Island), but free office space to boot (at Tweedy,
Browne).

Photo Insert One

Image 1
Warren, around age two.

Image 2
Warren in 1933 on the running board of the family’s first car, a used Chevrolet.

Image 3

Warren dressed in one of his earliest costumes, which his father brought back from a business trip to New
York City.

Image 4
Ernest Buffett surrounded by his grandchildren: Warren and Doris at left, Bertie in Ernest’s lap.

Image 5
Sidney Buffett, who founded the family grocery store in 1869, in a 1930 photograph with Alice Buffett, his
granddaughter.

Image 6
The Stahl sisters in West Point, Nebraska, around 1913. Warren's mother Leila is top right. Seated beside

her is Edith and, in front, Bernice.

Image 7
Warren’s father Howard (right rear) plays with his siblings George, Clarence, and Alice in the family’s
fringed surrey. His mother Henrietta (holding younger brother Fred in her lap) sits in the back seat.

Image 8
Howard and Leila Buffett, shortly after their marriage in 1925.

Image 9
Warren and Bertie in front of the family’s Buick, around 1938.

Image 10
A revealing family portrait, around 1937.

Image 11
Warren, age six, holds his favorite toy, a nickel-plated money-changer, in a photograph with his sisters
from the winter of 1936-1937. He and Doris later recalled the unhappiness their faces expressed.

Image 12
The eighth-grade class at Rosehill School, May 1938, showing the girls and boys of the disastrous “triple
date” and Warren’s other crush, Clo-Ann Kaul.

Image 13
Fred and Ernest Buffett in front of the Buffett & Son grocery store.

Image 14
Bertie, Leila, and Warren sing to Doris’s accompaniment in Washington around 1945.

Image 15
A 1948 campaign flyer for the only election Howard ever lost.

Image 16
Howard Buffett, Congressman.

Image 17
Warren (second left) and his father (fourth left) on a fishing trip with the Nebraska congressional
delegation around 1945. The Buffetts look as though they’d rather be elsewhere.

Image 18
As a preteen, Warren’s first love was Daisy Mae Scragg. She always loved Li’l Abner, no matter how he
treated her.
