RUNAWAY GAP
PULLBACK

Figure 7-4:
A breakaway
gap and
a runaway
gap.

BREAKAWAY GAP

To qualify as a breakaway gap, the gap has to
✓ Be proportionately big to the usual trading range: If the security normally trades in a $3 range between the daily high and low, and the gap
is $15 between the preceding day’s high and the gap-day open, you can
instantly recognize that “something big happened.”
✓ Occur when a price is either slightly trending or moving sideways:
Nothing much is going on in the chart, and then bam! Fresh news creates
new supply-and-demand conditions and ignites a trend.
You interpret a breakaway gap depending on whether it’s upward or downward, according to supply and demand, in the following way:
✓ Upside breakaway gap: Good news creates demand. New buyers want
to own the security and are willing to pay ever-higher prices to get it.
Volume is noticeably higher than usual.
✓ Downside breakaway gap: Traders can’t wait to get rid of their holdings
and accept ever-lower prices to achieve that goal. Volume may or may
not be abnormally high.

Continuing the push: Runaway gaps
A runaway gap occurs after a security is already moving in a trended way and
fresh news comes out that promotes the existing trend. See the second gap
in Figure 7-4. What’s the difference between a breakaway gap and a runaway
gap? A breakaway gap starts a trend. A runaway gap continues a trend. In

www.pdfdummies.com

125

126 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
both cases, buyers become exuberant and offer higher and higher prices.
Sometimes fresh good news bursts forth, sometimes traders make up fresh
good news, and sometimes the buying frenzy is just feeding on itself in the
absence of any news at all.
Notice on Figure 7-4 that after making new highs following the runaway gap,
the price fell a little. A falling price after a dramatic move up is called a pullback. The security stops making new higher highs and may make some lower
lows, but doesn’t go as far as the low on the breakaway day. A pullback after
a dramatic price move represents profit-taking by the early birds and is very
common. In fact, professionals count on the pullback to “buy on the dip.” If
they get really enthusiastic, reentering professional traders often supply the
energy for a runaway gap that follows a breakaway gap.

Calling it quits: Exhaustion gaps
Exhaustion gaps occur at the end of a trend, signaling that the party’s over.
Volume is usually low. What’s exhausted is the news that propelled the security up in the first place and the energy of the early buyers. An exhaustion
gap is usually followed by a reversal.
Here’s how it works. This example is an exhaustion gap at the end of an
uptrend, but the mechanics are similar for a downtrend exhaustion gap as
well. When you see a gap up in an existing uptrend and volume is low on that
day, you have to wonder why the gap appeared. Volume tells you that buyers
aren’t pounding on the sellers’ doors to get the security.
Presumably some greedy seller is out there, along with one last fool who’s
willing to pay a gap-worth more than the last trade. The buying frenzy is
over, but the buyer doesn’t realize it. He fails to see that there are a lot of
offers and few bids. In short, everybody who wanted to buy has already done
so. But somebody has to be the last buyer, and this particular one got taken
to the cleaners — in the form of the gap. When he turns around and tries to
unload his recent purchase, he finds no buyers, at least no buyers at a profit
to him, and has to dump the security at a loss.
You can distinguish an exhaustion gap from a runaway gap by looking at
volume, which is usually low at an exhaustion gap. Anytime you see wild new
highs (or lows) that aren’t accompanied by wild new high volume, be suspicious of the staying power of the move. You can exit altogether or move up
your stop-loss order.

Scoring big: Island reversals
Sometimes an exhaustion gap is followed immediately by a breakaway gap
going in the other direction (see previous sections for details on exhaustion
and breakaway gaps). This occurrence is how an island reversal forms. An

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
island reversal is a single, isolated price bar with a gap up on one side and
a gap down on the other. It looks like an island in a sea of price bars and is
almost always an unusually long bar — a wide high-low range.
Take a look at Figure 7-5. You see a series of higher highs, including a minor
gap up, but then the last buyers realize that they are all alone on top of the
mountain. They start to sell in a panic and are willing to accept a much lower
price. Now the price takes off in the opposite direction on a breakaway gap.
Remember, a breakaway gap tends to have high volume.
Watching volume can get a little tricky. The island reversal bar has a higher
high but is accompanied by low volume. This combination is the warning. The
next day, as the breakaway gap develops, it has unusually high volume. High
volume in combination with the downward gap is an indication that early selling is strong and prices later in the day aren’t going to go back and fill that gap.
Now consider this case in reverse order. Everyone and his brother has been
dumping the security, and it’s been gapping downward as it trends downward. This time the frenzy is a selling frenzy. At some point, Trader Bruce
realizes that the selling has gone on long enough and maybe the price is now
too low — a bargain. Trader Jane agrees and buys it from him, and offers it
on in the market at a gapping price — and wins. Turn Figure 7-5 upside down
and you can see how an island reversal at the bottom looks.

ISLAND

GAP UP

GAP DOWN

Figure 7-5:
Island
reversal.

Examine price bars, and you can see a lot of gaps. Seldom, though, do you see
an island reversal. But when you do see it, here’s how you can act:

www.pdfdummies.com

127

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

128 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
✓ An island reversal at the bottom: Buy.
✓ An island reversal at the top: Sell.
Despite its rarity, chances are good that a large number of other people will
identify the makings of an island, too, and cause the expected reaction — the
self-fulfilling prophecy aspect of technical analysis.
Although you can’t know for a day or two after the second gap that you have
an island reversal, many commentators speculate that an island is forming
when they see the first gap. Close your ears when you hear market chatter
like this. Form your own judgment. “Is an island reversal forming?” is the
second most-asked question that market technicians hear and one that can’t
be answered on a technical basis until a day or two after the second gap. (“Is
it a head-and-shoulders pattern?” is the most-often asked. See Chapter 9 for a
discussion of head-and-shoulders patterns.)

Filling That Gap
You may hear that a gap must be filled. This emphasis on filling the gap is usually nonsense uttered by people who are trying to sound worldly and wise, but
really don’t know what type of gap they’re dealing with. Filling the gap means
that prices return to the level they occupied before the gap. Figure 7-6 illustrates filling the gap.

FILLING A GAP
Figure 7-6:
Filling a gap.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
If a security takes off on a breakaway gap, sometimes the price doesn’t return
to fill the gap for many months or even years — if ever. Stop and think about
it: When the fundamentals of a security change dramatically, why would
market participants sell it back down to the level it was before the big event?
Conditions have changed permanently and so has the price of the security. If
a company has invented some new must-have product, the new higher stock
prices may not be the right price, but the old prices based on the old conditions aren’t right either.
A runaway gap or common gap is another matter. Demand for the stock is
normal and not under the influence of news or changing conditions, so the
gap may be filled by bargain hunters. Sometimes a gap gets filled because the
chatter about “filling the gap” makes it a self-fulfilling prophecy.
How do you know whether a gap will be filled? If it’s a breakaway gap, it probably won’t be filled, at least not in the near future. If it’s a common or runaway
gap, it might get filled or it might not. You need to look at other indicators
(such as momentum in Chapter 13 to confirm whether a price move is at risk
of going backward to fill a gap).

Using the Trading Range to Deal
with Change Effectively
The length of the price bar, the trading range, plays a role in the special bar
configurations, spikes, and gaps I discuss in this chapter. But the trading
range has meaning in its own right, which you can discover here. As I define
in the “Trading range” section earlier in this chapter, the trading range is the
difference between the high and the low. It measures the maximum distance
that the price traveled that period. If you see a security that has been averaging a $3 high-low range and suddenly it starts trading consistently in a $5
range, something happened — no matter where the opens and closes are.

Paying attention to a changing range
Market prices are seldom boring. Events unfold, information leaks, and stories break. When conditions change, the average trading range is sometimes
the first aspect of price behavior to change.
A change in the high-low range, which you can see in Figure 7-7, usually precedes
or accompanies a change in the direction or slope of a trend. Take note — it’s
often a leading indicator. Take a look at Figure 7-7 and note the following terms:

www.pdfdummies.com

129

130 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
✓ Range expansion is a lengthening of the price bars over time — the highlow range is getting wider (visible in Chart A of Figure 7-7) — and usually
suggests a continuation pattern.
✓ Range contraction is a shortening of the price bars — the high-low range
is getting narrower (check out Chart B in Figure 7-7) — and suggests that
a trend reversal may be coming soon.
A change in the size of the bars — range expansion or contraction — doesn’t
tell you anything about the existing direction of the price move. The range can
expand or contract in both uptrends or downtrends.

Figure 7-7:
Range
expansion
and contraction.

A

B

Determining the meaning
of a range change
As a general rule, an expanding range is a continuation pattern and a contracting range suggests that a trend reversal is impending. Sometimes your only
clue to a shift in market sentiment about your security is a change in the highlow range, but check for these confirming conditions as well:
✓ Volume: Look to see whether the volume is rising or shrinking.
• Rising volume: More people are trading the security, or existing
traders are taking bigger positions. This rising volume usually
accompanies range expansion and is an excellent indication of an
accelerating trend. The acceleration can be in either direction, up
or down. If you see an expansion of the range and it fails to have an
accompanying rise in volume, you have a mystery and need to look
at some other indicators, like momentum (see Chapter 13).
• Shrinking volume: Fewer people are in the market for this security, or existing traders are reducing their allocations to this security. Falling volume often accompanies range contraction.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
✓ Open-close position: Here’s an outline of the four possible open-close
combos and what they likely mean:
• Expanding range, higher closes: Buyers are excited about the
prospect of the price going higher still.
• Expanding range, lower closes: Sellers are ever more anxious to
unload the security.
• Contracting range, higher closes: In all range contractions, traders
start to feel uneasy about the direction that the security has been
trending. But a higher close can offset some of the negative sentiment inherent in a contracting range.
• Contracting range, lower closes: This combination is doubly negative. Traders may not be causing lower lows, but they are unloading at or near the close, forcing it lower. Range contraction usually
means that activity is drying up and volume is low — so if you see
high volume and a lower close in a contracting range, you probably want to get out of Dodge (exit the security).

Looking at the average trading range
The trading range is a valuable analytical tool. But you want to capture a
change in the range in some more-efficient way than eyeballing a bunch of
bars and trying to figure out whether they’re getting bigger or smaller. You
can calculate the average high-low range on a piece of paper, a spreadsheet,
or by using charting software.
The average trading range is the average distance between the high and the
low over a specified period of time. You know what an average is — you measure ten of something, add up the measurements, and divide by ten. If you
have ten days’ worth of high-low ranges that add up to 32, you know that the
average daily trading range for the ten-day period was $3.20.
The average trading range is one of the best tools you have for keeping your
sanity and perspective. If you know that the average daily trading range is
$3.20, the most you can expect to make on this security in a single day is
$3.20, and that’s assuming that you could buy at the exact low and sell at the
exact high — and assuming that it’s an average day.
When your broker, your brother-in-law, or an e-mail solicitation says you can
make $500 in the next month in a specific security, you know that it’s hardly
likely. If the security moved up by its average range every day with no pullbacks for the entire 22 days in a trading month, your most likely gain would
be $70.40. Unless your informant has certain knowledge of some news or

www.pdfdummies.com

131

132 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
event that is going to change things, his forecast is silly. Under normal, average conditions, you can expect the average trading range to persist.
In practice, forecasts of abnormally big gains are usually based on forecasts
of a breakout and the expectations that the breakout will incorporate a gap
on the expected fabulous news. So, how do you incorporate gaps into average range analysis? Keep reading the following sections.

Checking out the gaps
Whether you’re evaluating a potential gap-making event or just looking at
ranges for clues to market sentiment, you need guidance on how to take
gaps into account. In the earlier forecasting a $500 gain in a month example,
it would take more than one gap to deliver this outcome. Gaps almost never
come in multiples. In other words, the trader promising this type of gain is in
the grip of a delusion — don’t join him there!
In regular bar work, say that you are merrily averaging your daily high-low
ranges and suddenly you have a gap. You need to account for that gap or you
will be literally missing something. Figure 7-8 displays the problem. On Day 1,
the high-low range is $2. The next day, the price opens gap up, but the daily
range is the same $2. Therefore, the average range for the two days is also $2.
Looking at the average range alone, without inspecting every bar and every
space on the chart, you wouldn’t know that the gap occurred. Well, so what?
Maybe the gap is just a common old gap that doesn’t mean anything (see the
“Lacking opportunity: Common gaps” section in this chapter). If it were an
important gap, like a breakaway gap (see the “Kicking things off: Breakaway
gaps” section in this chapter), you’d see the range expanding (plus a rise in
volume), and the whole issue would be moot, right?
The reason you need to account for the gap is that it often precedes a longerterm change in the range, which is what you’re looking for. If you measure
each day separately and average those numbers, the range looks the same
from day to day. For the first two days in Figure 7-8, though, the range is actually from the low on Day 1 at $1 to the high on Day 2 at $7 — or a $6 range.
In short, the range doubled but the averaging process doesn’t capture this
change. In fact, if the range on Day 2 had been smaller, say $1.50, the average
would be less than $2. Just looking at the average range on a numerical basis,
you would think that the range had contracted — exactly the opposite of
what really happened.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns

7
6
5
4
3

DAY 1 RANGE
DAY 2 RANGE

$2.00
$2.00

AVERAGE RANGE

$2.00

2

Figure 7-8:
The averaging gaps
problem.

1

DAY 1

DAY 2

Discovering the average “true” range
If you want to make a trading decision based on a change in the average
trading range, you need to adjust the averaging process to account for possible gaps. You do this by starting at the most important component of the
price bar: The close. As a rule, to calculate the true range today after a gap,
you start from the close on the day before and end at today’s high. You are
substituting the first day’s close for the second day’s open in order to incorporate the gap.
In Figure 7-8, Day 1’s range was ordinary. The gap happened afterward. Why
not use Day 1’s high rather than the close? Aren’t you double-counting by
including the space between the high and the close from Day 1? No, because
in range work you don’t really care about the gap itself — you care about the
total range of prices today. The close was the end of trading yesterday, and
you’re now considering it the start of trading today. Because the close is the
most important part of the bar, traders are hypersensitive to an opening gap
away from yesterday’s close.

www.pdfdummies.com

133

134 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Figure 7-9 shows this new measurement. Pretend that the close on Day 1 was
$3, or $2 over the open at $1. Subtracting that close from the high on Day 2
at $7, you get a true range of $4. Averaging that with the original Day 1 range of
$2, you get $3, the average true range. If Day 2’s price bar gaps downward, you
incorporate the gap by measuring from the close on Day 1 to the low on Day 2.
Why the word true? Because the inventor of the idea, J. Welles Wilder, Jr.,
selected this word. The average true range is sometimes called Wilder’s average true range, or simply ATR.

$7.00
$6.00
$5.00
DAY 1 RANGE

$1.00 to $3.00 =
$2.00

DAY 2 RANGE

$5.00 to $7.00 =
$2.00

$2.00

DAY 2 TRUE
Range

$3.00 to $7.00 =
$4.00

$1.00

AVERAGE TRUE
RANGE

$2.00 + $4.00/2 =
$3.00

$4.00
$3.00

Figure 7-9:
The average
true range.

DAY 1

DAY 2

The bigger the shift in the size of the range, the bigger the trading opportunity
(or warning to exit). You judge a shift in average true range the same way as in
a regular high-low range (see the section “Determining the meaning of a range
change” in this chapter), but with greater confidence that you’re measuring and
not just eyeballing. If your security normally trades in a daily range of $10 and
then it starts trading at $6, $4 and $2, something is happening. Go find out what.
In Figure 7-10, for example, you see a price in the bottom window on an
uptrend, but the average true range in the top window is falling. It reaches
a low level just as the trend is ending (note the circle). Notice that after the
trend reversal, you get a big-bar down day and corresponding rise in ATR.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 7: Reading Special Bar Combinations: Small Patterns
The ATR can be hard to use, in part because the ATR line can be choppy, it
doesn’t track the trend slope, and it in fact can diverge from it, as it does in
Figure 7-10. Plus, the ATR requires bar reading to get it right. By the time you
get the big-bar down day, you already know this trend is ending. But do not
neglect ATR as a warning indicator — sometimes it’s the only warning you get.

JUMP IN ATR ON
BIG-BAR DOWN DAY

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

Figure 7-10:
Change
ATR as a
Warning
Indicator.

1.340
1.335
1.330
1.325
1.320
1.315
1.310
1.305
1.300
1.295
1.290
1.285
1.280
1.275
1.270
1.265
1.260
1.255
1.250
1.245
1.240
1.235
1.230
1.225
1.220
1.215
1.210
1.205
1.200
1.195
1.190
1.185

BIG-BAR DOWN DAY

7

14

21

28

6
July

12

19

26

2
August

www.pdfdummies.com

9

16

135

136 Part III: Observing Market Behavior

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 8

Redrawing the Price Bar:
Japanese Candlesticks
In This Chapter
▶ Introducing candlesticks
▶ Going over a few specific patterns
▶ Using candlesticks with other market tools

C

andlestick charting displays the price bar in a graphically different
way from the standard bars described in Chapters 6 and 7. Candlestick
charting was developed in Japan at least 150 years ago, where traders
applied it to prices in the rice market.
A trader named Steve Nison brought candlesticks to the attention of western
traders in 1990. Candlestick patterns became instantly popular because they
embody the principle of imputing trader sentiment to the bars, as in “shaven
top,” where the close is at the high. As I say in Chapter 6, close at the high
means strong bullish sentiment. Today you can buy software that identify
candlesticks by name and give guidance on interpreting them.
In this chapter, I break down the components of a candlestick and explain
why candlesticks are so useful. Note that in some instances, a stand-alone
candlestick is a “pattern” in its own right, and such candlesticks always have
a name. (For more on patterns, check out Chapter 9.) Named candlesticks
and small series of candlestick patterns number in the dozens, and I can’t
cover all of them in this chapter. I select a few candlesticks and combinations
that stand out. If candlestick charting appeals to you, check out Candlestick
Charting For Dummies by Russell Rhoads (Wiley).

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

138 Part III: Observing Market Behavior
Appreciating the Candlestick Advantage
Candlesticks are visually compelling. You can quickly and easily figure out
how to identify a handful of the top candlestick patterns. Here are some of
the advantages you can expect:
✓ Many candlesticks are simple to use and interpret, making it a splendid
place for a beginner to start figuring out bar analysis — as well as for old
hands to achieve new insights. Your eye adapts almost immediately to
the information in the bar notation.
✓ Candlesticks and candlestick patterns have delightfully descriptive and
memorable names — charming and sometimes alarming — that contain
the seeds of interpretation. The names help you remember what the
pattern means. Among the colorful names are “abandoned baby,” “dark
cloud cover,” and “spinning top.”
✓ Candlestick bar patterns and their interpretation are widely known, so
you can expect other participants in the market to respond in a specific
way to specific patterns.
✓ You can use candlesticks on any chart, with any other indicators, just
like standard bars.
✓ Candlestick shapes can be dramatic, so they can often bring your attention to a trend change earlier than standard bars do. As I describe in
Chapter 7, some exceptional bar patterns embody a forecast that’s
usually correct, such as the breakaway gap and the island reversal.
Standard bar analysis offers very few such patterns, but candlestick
analysis offers dozens.
✓ Candlestick patterns excel in identifying strategic market turning points —
reversals from an uptrend to a downtrend or a downtrend to an uptrend.
