MEDIA ATTENTION
What we see on television or in the newspaper is a good indicator for me,
especially if the media is publicizing the market price level or reporting on
the fundamental developments with lots of attention. If the local nightly
news is reporting about a specific market situation when it would not normally discuss such topics, it gets my attention. This reporting usually tells
me that the facts are out and the market price has already factored in this
situation, which probably accounts for the old saying in this business, “Buy
the rumor and sell the fact.”
More than ever, the media is now involved in hype and showmanship.
It has a captive audience: you. The more viewers/readers that mass media
has, the more it can charge for advertising rates, its reward. It pays for the
media to embellish on the past and promote what I call “the gossip for the
game.” You need to learn how to filter out the gossip-for-the-game syndrome
versus acquiring a true market consensus.
It is a different situation when you listen to one person’s opinion and
follow that advice. It helps to know that person’s record of accomplishment.
If he or she is reasonably good, you may have more confidence as a trader
to put on a trade. But remember, verify, verify, verify. Listen, form an opinion, check the fundamentals, verify that by looking at the charts, and then
verify that by looking at some technical indicators. This is a technique that
will help in your trading discipline and help filter out these opinions, which
can distract you from making good trading decisions.
If you look for one opinion after another as if you are searching for the
holy grail, then certain failure is probable. Another situation setting up for
failure is when you act or invest after hearing hype or a tip from a media
source. A great example of this is reading a financial paper that has a big
write-up on a market that had a spectacular market move. The story seems
to embellish how bullish or bearish the market conditions were. Then, when
you listen to the television commentators, they also mention this same

166

MARKET SENTIMENT: What Traders Are Thinking

market move. All of a sudden, market experts are coming out of the woodwork talking about this particular market move. It seems everyone is an expert, and some inexperienced investors can’t help but fall for the trap.
There is truth in another old saying, “By the time it gets on the news,
the move is probably over” because it is most likely factored into the market. In a bullish market, the buyers have already bought, and there are no
more new buyers coming in to play except those latecomers who buy the
top—generally the inexperienced trader or investor or broker who doesn’t
want to miss the opportunity. The simple laws of supply and demand dictate that prices cannot sustain extreme levels for long.
During the 2000 Bush/Gore election campaign, I recall many television
financial stations interviewing so-called experts on how the markets would
react if Bush were elected. The debates went on and on. The general consensus was that, if a Republican president were elected, it would be bullish
for stocks and bearish for bonds. We all know the outcome of the election,
but the outcome of the predictions certainly did not materialize. The point
is: Be careful what you believe when it comes to another person’s opinion
about price direction in the markets.

MARGIN RATE CHANGES
Some analysts believe another good sentiment indicator is watching changes
in the margin requirements that are set by the exchanges. I discussed the
importance of margin requirements and their function as a good-faith deposit or performance bond in the futures market in Chapter 1 and noted that
exchanges can change those requirements quickly. If you examine the reasons behind the increase or decrease in margin requirements, you will learn
that it is a direct relationship to the expected amount of risk you may assume in that market.
Some analysts believe that when the price behavior is bullish in a
steadily rising market and the exchange raises the margin, it may indicate
that the market is near a top and that a price correction is close. The reason
for this belief is that the higher prices move, the more vulnerable a price
correction would be for smaller investors who would need more trading
capital to afford such losses. So the idea is that if you want to enter a position, then you would need more trading capital.
On the other side of the coin, if the market price of a futures contract is
at an extreme low, the exchange may lower the margin as it concludes the
risk factor is lower. The theory is that when the exchanges lower the margin requirements, it may signal that a market may be near a bottom as it encourages more traders to take more positions. Once again, this is strictly a
theory. However, I personally have seen several monumental market rever-

VIX

167

sals within days or a week after a margin rate increase and decrease, and I
do watch for margin changes.

PUT-TO-CALL RATIO
The put-to-call ratio theory is another method of measuring the market’s
sentiment. When trading options, it is important to form an opinion about
the underlying futures market price direction. Traders who are bullish may
choose to buy calls; traders who are bearish may choose to buy puts. In the
futures industry we can track the level of open interest and volume on the
strike prices for both puts and calls. If the majority of traders who buy options are bearish, then the put volume should increase and the level of calls
should stagnate or decrease. Analysts can, therefore, monitor the volume
of puts and calls to determine a level of bullishness or bearishness in the
marketplace.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) has been trading stock
options since the 1970s. It has a put-to-call ratio index based on volume figures from S&P 100 options, better known as the OEX. These figures are
published on the CBOE web site (www.cboe.com) and in Barron’s weekly
financial paper. The statistics use the volume of put options for x amount
of strike prices below the underlying market and then divide that number
by x amount of strike prices above the underlying market.
The figure or ratio calculation is then used to gauge the market’s sentiment. A figure that is increasing is considered to be indicating a bearish market tone or a downtrending market, as evident from a higher volume of puts
than calls. A figure that is decreasing is considered to be indicating a bullish market tone or an uptrending market, as evident from a higher volume
of calls than puts. An extremely high reading of the put-to-call indicator can
usually signal a market bottom or a price correction. An extremely low reading of the put-to-call indicator can usually signal a market top or a price
correction.
This ratio is a popular indicator for those who track and trade the stock
indexes as well as for advisory services and those who publish financial
newsletters.

VIX
The volatility index, otherwise known as the VIX, is a relatively new indicator that the CBOE introduced on January 19, 1993. It gained tremendous
popularity at the height of the stock market price boom in 1999–2000. The

168

MARKET SENTIMENT: What Traders Are Thinking

CBOE lists and tracks this indicator as a measure of the level of implied
volatility for stock index options. It is simply used as another measure of
the overall volatility of the U.S. equity markets or the amount of market turmoil that breeds fear. As a result, the VIX is sometimes known as the fear
indicator or the fear factor gauge.
The VIX was originally calculated by taking a weighted average of the
implied volatilities of eight S&P 100 index (OEX) calls and puts based on
the Black-Scholes option pricing model. These options normally have an
average time until expiration of 30 days, and the VIX is calculated and reported on a minute-by-minute basis in real time.
The most widely used application of the VIX involves a reading between,
say, 24 to 20, a signal that volatility is low and suggesting there is complacency in the market. This low reading generally occurs when the market is
at a high and is accepted as a sell signal. Moreover, if the stock market is
rising, the more confident investors are convinced that the trend will never
end. This condition is when the market is most vulnerable to a downturn or
correction.
Historically, readings below 20 are considered a red flag or a warning
signal to bulls, especially when the markets are in a rallying mode. Simply
put, a low VIX reading means that sellers of options prevail and are aggressive and confident that the market will most likely not move. Buyers are not
interested in acquiring puts for protection against their core cash positions,
causing a decline in demand for options. In essence, the VIX acts like a contrarian indicator. When there is a consensus that the market won’t move or
that volatility will remain low, a believer in contrarian theory would conclude that the opposite would be true.
This observation brings up an important point: A rise in volatility could
be from price increases as well as decreases. This point is important because a low VIX reading does not always signal that prices will drop; prices
could rally and increase the volatility level. When prices of the stock market
were at extreme lows, the VIX was as high as 45 and even reached an intraday high of 56 in July 2002. Based on VIX theory, as the markets declined,
the volatility increased as did the fear in the market. This high reading was
construed as a buy signal, indicating that the downturn was nearly complete. At the very least, it was another warning not to get bearish in the hole.
The CBOE overhauled this index and began using a new formula on
September 22, 2003. This new formula provides the market’s expectations of
volatility directly from index option prices rather than from the algorithm
that involved calculations of implied volatilities from the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The new VIX is calculated using options on the S&P 500
index and now uses a wide range of strike prices. The original VIX is now
called the VXO and uses implied volatility from an option pricing model. The

Summary

169

VXO will still be calculated and the information provided in real time on the
CBOE web site.
There is a slight difference in the way the two stack up. Using an annual
comparison basis, the old VIX (now the VXO) had a daily closing high in
2002 of 50.48 and a low that year of 19.25 while the new VIX put the high at
45.08 and the low at 17.40, according to CBOE officials.
The CBOE was scheduled to launch its first futures contract on this
newest derivative product in March 2004. As of December 4, 2003, the VIX
had hit a low of 15.77. According to theory this low reading may indicate
that volatility will rise, and traders can use the new VIX futures to start placing bets on the actual price of the index itself.
How useful will this instrument be for speculators or even for those
looking to manage risk? Time will tell, but I believe a good bet is that volatility will remain a constant in the stock markets. Maybe adding a volatility
component to a portfolio will work out to be a so-called sure thing. Of
course, remember the advice about something that sounds too good to be
true. It will be interesting to see how this market performs after the first
year in business.

SUMMARY
The COT report, Market Vane, the put-to-call ratio, or the VIX are all based
on the concept of finding a market consensus or measuring the market’s
sentiment to determine if prices have reached an extreme and are at or near
turning points. In other words, a trader uses these as a means to determine
a contrary opinion.
Market consensus is not something they usually teach you in an economics class. The bottom line: When everyone is bullish, don’t join them.
Remember these sayings, too: “Buy low, sell high” and “Buy it when nobody
wants it, and sell it when everybody has got to have it.” These are sheer psychological trading techniques that you can use to your advantage.

CHAPTER 10

Order
Placement
Executing the Plan

The price of success is hard work, dedication to
the job at hand and the determination that,
whether we win or lose, we have applied the best
of ourselves to the task at hand.
—Vincent Lombardi

ombardi’s comment sounds like a tall order to accept—that we have
applied the best of ourselves, especially when it comes time to learning
new methods and means for doing something. Executing orders and
online trading platforms can require a little hard work and discipline. Being
dependent on connectivity and a reliable Internet connection can be scary.
It is the outside unforeseen influences that we have no control over that can
disrupt any individual’s mental state and focus.
But framing the order you want to accomplish what you want is something over which you do have control, and it must be done carefully. Placing
orders is and will be an integral part of trading. Which orders are accepted,
when to use a stop to enter or exit a position, when and where to use order
cancels order orders—these are all questions for which you need answers
so you can put all the hard work from your analysis into action. The order
process is so important that I’m devoting a separate chapter to it.

L

ORDER ENTRY SELECTIONS
Understanding the mechanics of the market is an essential element of trading. Knowing which order to place is like having a specialty tool to get the
171

172

ORDER PLACEMENT: Executing the Plan

right job done. If you have ever played golf, you know there are different
clubs for different shots. I don’t think you would use a pitching wedge for
putting. Understanding market terminology is critical when entering orders
as well.
Let me put it this way. Some traders like using market orders to enter
a position and to liquidate the position. This order lets them know they are
either in or out of the market at all times. If that is all you need to know and
you are comfortable with it, then that is great. However, you must understand that this approach requires nerves of steel, constant monitoring of the
market, or a bundle of cash to help fund those really bad days when the
market moves against you.
First things first. Every trader should be familiar with the more frequently used terms and what you need to say in what sequence to place orders correctly over the phone. There are about 14 different types of orders
you should know about, including what they do and in what market conditions you should use them. This knowledge will help you in your judgment
of trading decisions and give you more wisdom about how to implement
them. One note: Different exchanges accept only certain types of orders and
under certain market conditions. Different rules apply with different exchanges and, like many things, these rules can change without notice. Contact your broker for the current information on what orders you can use in
various markets.
Because the majority of the futures industry is now using the Internet
and Web-based technology to transmit orders, most traders are now moving
to online trading platforms for order entry. The main concern here is that
you make sure you read the computer screen carefully before clicking the
final “OK” on the enter order button. It can be as simple as checking whether
your screen says “Buy” or “Sell” or remembering not to double-click on the
“enter order now” icon so you enter the same order twice. Most platforms
do have safety features such as, “Is this the correct order? If so, click YES.”
If there is any single problem that makes many online traders nervous,
it is the connectivity issue. Will you have a connection to enter orders when
you need it most? Connectivity could involve links to your Internet service
providers or problems that may arise at the brokerage or exchange end.
Even the Globex terminals do go down at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME) once in a while. Some trading firms have an overload capacity on
their servers, and that can cause you to lose connections. In that case you
need to log off and then log back on—pretty straightforward but when you
clicked “enter,” was your order accepted? Are you in the market or not? If
you need to exit a position and the connection goes down, frustration and
panic can set in quickly. The solution is to work with a brokerage firm that
offers support and allows you to call in orders without a tremendous increase in commission rates.

Order Entry Selections

173

The e-mini S&P contract is attracting traders from all backgrounds and
has become one of the favorite online trading contracts. The policies for the
CME’s Globex system as well as the latest information regarding system updates and news events can be found at www.cme.com/globex. There have
been situations where erroneous orders have affected trading and elected
stops in the market due to “fat finger” issues (typing errors). For example,
rumors have it that a trader intended to sell 100 contracts and entered 10,000.
This mistake caused the order system to sell until all 10,000 contracts were
filled, and any stops that were under the market would subsequently be
filled. Some firms may not accept actual stop loss orders but hold orders on
their order desk if they are off the market by a large amount.
The point I am making is that the markets are reliable but not infallible.
To ensure the integrity of the marketplace, the CME has a “bust trade policy”
so that when and if these problems arise, it can reconcile differences.
Trades that would normally not have been filled may be taken off the
books. Ask a representative at your trading firm if it has this policy on hand.
Generally speaking, the markets change, thus driving the demand for policy
changes, so it is best to keep the link to your broker bookmarked on your
favorites list for easy access on the web.
Exchanges can and do have system outages. When a breakdown occurs,
you are exposed to market risk, which may leave you wondering what to do.
You could spread the risk off in a large open-outcry product or get to know
what market you can easily hedge it against. For example, the mini-sized
Dow trades about the same dollar amount as the e-mini S&P does. If the
Chicago Board of Trade system is operating and you are in a couple of e-mini
S&P contracts when Globex goes down, you could balance the risk by entering the opposite side of the trade in a like product that has a fairly close
monetary value on a tick per tick basis. This situation, though rare, has happened, leaving traders at the CME with no access until the next day’s trading session while the problem was being repaired. If you trade actively, you
always need to have an emergency backup plan for every step of the trading
process. Smaller, less frequent traders may want to consult with a firm that
offers different trading platforms to determine whether the costs warrant
the access of such online order entry systems.
Some traders make it a point to deal directly with larger futures commission merchant (FCM) clearing member firms instead of trading at the
smaller companies registered as introducing brokers (IBs) that clear
through an FCM. In some cases, traders at an IB can have advantages over
those at the FCMs. For example, independent IBs can utilize the best of one,
two, or more FCMs. The IB’s clients may get not only more personalized
services, but also better execution services from a selected FCM. Not so
long ago an FCM was purchased by another firm, and some clients could not
trade or close accounts until the books were transferred. If you happened to

174

ORDER PLACEMENT: Executing the Plan

be a client limited to that firm for handling your trades, you were not a
happy camper! An account with an independent IB may give you the flexibility to continue to trade without being affected by regulatory red tape.
There will be certain times when order entry needs to be done over the
phone. For instance, if your power goes out or you wish to place a trade at
night or you want to trade markets other than electronic products or you
want to trade contracts for which you might need special permission, you
may have to call your broker.
No matter whether you trade online or on the phone, you need to know
market terminology and procedures you should follow. Before you place an
order to initiate a position in the market, you should have made a decision
about which direction you believe the market may move. If you are bullish,
you will want to go long the market, meaning you are speculating that the
price will go up. If you are bearish, you are speculating that the price direction will be down and would want to sell short. When offsetting a long position, you need to sell that exact same contract to liquidate your position—a
September bond contract is not the same as a December bond contract or the
same as a September T-note contract. Offsetting makes you flat the market
or out of a position. If you were short the market, you need to buy the same
contract to cover your short position to make you flat the market.
Most brokerage firms have a certain format they want their customers
to use when they enter an order over the phone. The broker or order-taker
is filling in a ticket by hand or typing the order on the computer, so following this standardized format is more likely to get your order executed correctly. Here is a common format:
1. Name.
2. Account number.
3. Clearly state, BUY or SELL.
4. Number of contracts.
5. Contract month (and perhaps year for distant contracts).
6. What contract (perhaps indicating exchange as well).
7. Type of order.
8. Price at which the order is to be activated (not necessary for market

orders).
9. Time duration of the order.
For example, when placing an order over the phone you would say: “Hi,
this is John Person, account number 12345. Buy four June T-bond futures at
the market.” If this were another type of order, you might have said, “Buy
four June T-bond futures at 112 stop, good until canceled.” Your broker will

Order Entry Selections

175

repeat the order, so listen carefully. Make sure what the broker repeats is
exactly what you said and intended. The broker or order clerk should conclude with something like, “Is this order correct?” If it is, you need to respond, “Yes, it is,” or if you were not paying attention, ask to have the order
repeated again. When you are sure it is correct, the broker or order clerk
will give you a confirmation ticket number that refers to that order in case
any follow-up action is required.
Once the order is placed and executed, you are at risk for whatever happens. Errors that were made by placing orders over the phone usually occur
because one individual or the other was not paying attention.
One specific error that stands out for me involved a colleague of mine
who had a client who called to buy two U.S. bonds at the market. At the
time the broker had two phones. His client was on one ear, and he was placing the order to the floor with the phone in his other ear. Another broker sitting near him made a derogatory remark because his voice was loud. Just
before the floor clerk repeated back the order as he heard it, my colleague
turned to the nearby broker to tell him not to interrupt, in so many words.
Just that split second of distraction cost my friend about $4,000. You see,
the floor clerk heard, “Buy ten at the market,” not “Buy two at the market.” It
was at that moment that Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan was
being quoted by the financial media, and the market nose-dived a half point.
Right as the fill was reported, my friend remembered hearing, “You paid even
for ten” (floor talk for you bought ten contracts at 106-00). He told the floor
clerk, “I think you got the wrong guy.” The floor clerk said, “No way! I heard
ten, I repeated buy ten, and you bought ten at 106 even.” With the market at
105-16, the loss was $500 per contract. My friend’s client wanted only two so
he had to eat the balance of eight contracts with a loss of $500 apiece.
Murphy’s Law is always at work, right when you least expect it. The rule
for errors is simple: Just cover them immediately. Don’t stay with errors.
They usually only get worse, and the cost increases against you. Figure out
who’s in the wrong later. By getting out of a mistake immediately, you reduce
the chance for the market to continue to move against you. My friend argued for another 20 or 30 seconds instead of taking care of the mistake immediately, and it cost him, all because he did not pay attention and listen
when he should have.
In addition to verifying the accuracy of the order when you enter it, also
remember to listen carefully when the fill on the executed order is reported.
Did you get exactly what you wanted (allowing for slippage, of course)?
Errors cost money and, more often than not, you are the one who has to
pay. Getting into good habits from the beginning can help you in your trading career.
Entering orders online follows essentially the same steps, but no one is
there to catch errors you may make except you and your computer. The
