
2O

Hardware

THE FORCES THAT make it difficult for companies to create economic
moats are magnified many times over in the hardware sector. Although other
areas of the economy are also subject to product cycles, price competition,
and technological advances, these factors are particularly intense in industries
such as semiconductors, PCs, and telecom equipment. In fact, the environ-
ment in the hardware sector makes it fiendishly difficult to build a sustainable
competitive advantage because technological advances and price competition
mean that the lion’s share of hardware’s benefits are passed to consumers, not
the company creating the products.

Investors often spend a great amount of time delving into the vast trove
of technical minutiae for hardware companies. But we don’t believe the hard-
ware sector behaves by its own special rules. Rather, the sector's dynamics
simply elevate the importance of the factors we look for in every area: solid

management, a focused economic model, and an economic moat.

Jeremy Lopez, Fritz Kaegi, and Joseph Beaulieu with Pat Dorsey.


276

HARDWARE

What Drives the Hardware Industry

Even the casual computer user has experienced the factors that drive the tech-
nology hardware sector. If you've ever bought a PC, you already know that it
won't take long before one twice as fast is on sale for less money. While the
average PC cost more than $1,500 in 1998 (perhaps with a Pentium II chip),
you could buy a much more powerful PC for less than $1,000 in 2002.

But it’s worth remembering that even goods that deliver a big benefit to
society—either through increased productivity or leisure—won't necessarily
make their producers a cent, much less make money for investors. In the next
section, we'll examine how the most successful companies in the industry
manage to keep their heads above water and how you can identify them.

The hardware sector's central driver is its ability to innovate so that com-
puting power increases while costs of that computing power rapidly decrease.
The basis for this driver is Moore’s Law, which was initially observed by Intel
founder Gordon Moore in 1965. (Moore’s Law basically states that the num-
ber of transistors that can be crammed on to a given piece of semiconductor
real estate doubles every couple of years.) Conversely, chip industry econom-
ics means that the price per transistor also tends to plummet at an inverse
rate. In other words, although technology innovation happens at a rapid
pace, most of the benefits of that innovation are passed on to the end user.

Moore’s Law helps spread the productivity and leisure benefits of informa-
tion technology (IT) to an ever-wider range of activities. Decades ago, IT pro-
cessing power (software plus hardware) was economically feasible for only a
few large military, communications, and financial applications. Today, how-
ever, the average person can afford a very powerful computer, and IT has
countless applications in everyday life—whether in snapping photos with dig-
ital cameras or scribbling notes in a Palm Pilot.

A second driver is that advanced economies are progressively shifting
their focus away from manufacturing and toward services. Most manufac-
turing can be performed in countries with lower costs, but services are
much more difficult to import. By the very nature of their activity, services
require a much larger investment in IT (directly or indirectly) than manu-
facturing. Both Moore's Law and the changing structure of advanced
economies suggest that demand for hardware should grow faster than the

economy as a whole.


HARDWARE INDUSTRY DYNAMICS

A third driver is the symbiotic relationship between technology hardware
and software. After all, ifa person didn’t have software applications to run on
his or her PC, what good would it be? Advances in hardware allow software
to do more in less time, whereas new software applications help create de-

mand for more capable hardware.

Hardware Industry Dynamics

Cyclicality is the crucial dynamic in this industry, given that corporate spend-
ing on technology makes up the bulk of total hardware sales. In times of fi-
nancial prosperity, firms often have the flexibility and financial health to
allocate capital to IT spending. But when times are tough and business dries
up, companies tend to conserve cash and try to squeeze more out of what
they already have (see Figure 20.1).

Consumer spending on technology is even more prone to dramatic
swings. The average person doesn't buy gadgets out of necessity, but rather for
entertainment or convenience. A person who earns minimum wage or loses a
job usually doesn’t eed to buy a new digital camera or Palm Pilot. During

Hardware Sector Spending (% change} @ Investment in Computers and Peripherals
All Private Non-residential Investing

1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003

Figure 20.1 Spending on technology is even more cyclical than the overall business spending.
Source: Morningstar, Inc.

277


278 HARDWARE

Common Investing Pitfall: Betting on New Technology

In hindsight, it's also easy to recognize the success stories—the Ciscos and Intels of
the world. But for every Intel, there is an AMD, which has had very limited success
competing against Intel. Or warse yet, there are companies such as Transmeta and
Cyrix, which barely had a chance to get bath feet on the ground. The story is the
same in the PC industry. It’s easy to see the success stories of Dell and Hewlett-
Packard. But recalling the litany of companies that fell victim to competition over the
years is like watching a VH1 “Behind the Music” special on one-hit wonders.
Remember Commodore, AST, or Packard Bell? No? Exactly. Competition even derailed
the efforts of stalwart companies that pioneered the PC, such as IBM, which stopped
selling desktop PCs in retail stores in 1999, and Texas Instruments, which exited the
PC industry altagether.

recessions, therefore, factors such as high unemployment and low consumer
confidence often deter consumers from spending their money on high-tech
goods and services.

A key implication of this cyclicality is that demand is volatile even over
short periods of time—and this volatility worsens the farther away each firm
is from the final consumer.

For example, most economic upturns catch hardware vendors and their
component suppliers off guard. Because equipment makers want to get as
much product out the door as quickly as possible, they often place orders for
more orders than they really need. Prices and unit demand rise: boom. Chip-
makers, thinking that their demand will be sustainable over a long period,
spend billions on additional capacity. All is well until the demand bubble
bursts and customers stop ordering. Chipmakers are usually caught with excess

capacity and chip prices drop rapidly.

Economic Moats in Hardware

Given the hype that often surrounds them, evaluating the economic moats of
technology companies can be especially tricky. During the tech-spending
boom of the late 1990s, the rising tide was lifting all boats, and it was easy to
mistakenly assume that some companies had a sustainable economic moat

when in fact they were merely at the right place at the right time.


ECONOMIC MOATS IN HARDWARE 279

Common Investing Pitfall: Inventory Bubbles

Technology hardware companies often face periods of inventory imbalances. Either
they accumulate too much inventory, or customers suddenly demand more than they
can readily supply. The risk is that products or components that sit on the shelf fara
long time may have to be heavily discounted, or worse, not sold at all. We saw the fall-
out of this soon after the Internet bubble burst in 2000, with Cisco and a host of others
writing down billions in excess inventories.

A waming sign for investors is when a company’s inventories grow faster than sales
over several quarters. But even this trend is obscured by the complexity of the supply
chain. Component suppliers, distributors, and contract manufacturers all hald invento-
ties above and beyond the levels of the end product producer, even though the end pro-
ducer often bears the economic risk for these inventories. Look in the “risk factors”
section of the 10-K for these kinds of situations. If they exist, the inventory number
shown on the balance sheet may not reflect true inventory.

Although most hardware companies differentiate themselves based on
technological advantages, technology itself does not constitute an economic
moat. Companies with superior technology can easily fail, just as com-
panies selling commonplace technology can dominate an industry. Com-
panies such as Intel and IBM have built moats not with superior
technology, but by focusing on distribution channels, dominant scale, and
broad product lines. What’s more, technological leads in the hardware
industry rarely last long. For example, Palm pioneered the personal digital
assistant (PDA), but it wasn't long before Sony, Microsoft, Handspring, and
others all eroded the firm’s early lead.

Economic moats in hardware are rare, but let’s look at some real-world

examples of the four key economic moats we covered in Chapter 3.

High Customer Switching Costs

Telecom equipment manufacturers such as Nortel, Alcatel, and Lucent each
benefit from high switching costs. Their bread-and-butter customers, former
telephone monopolies such as AT&T and the Baby Bells, are extremely con-
servative in their buying habits. They run extremely large, complicated net-

works, and they have to be 100 percent sure that any new equipment they


280 HARDWARE

purchase will work seamlessly within their existing networks and that their
suppliers are actually going to be around 10 years from now. When buying
habits are that entrenched, it is unlikely that buyers will risk their jobs by

changing vendors.

Low-Cost Producer

Dell Computer is a textbook example of a company that benefits from being
the low-cost producer. Part of the reason Dell has been able to achieve this sta-
tus is the scale it enjoys as one of the world’s largest PC vendors. Because the
company purchases chips and disk drives in large volumes, it has leverage with
its suppliers and can, therefore, negotiate lower component costs than its ri-
vals. Dell is also the low-cost producer because its direct sales method is far
more efficient than those used by rivals such as Hewlett-Packard. Dell not
only avoids paying commissions to a third-party reseller when it sells products
via the Web, but also can keep close reins on its inventories and receivables.
This means Dell can pass on lower component costs to its customers more
quickly than its competitors can.

A more obscure advantage that Dell gets from being the largest PC ven-
dor is that its suppliers are more willing to wait longer for payment and are
more flexible about getting Dell the components it needs exactly when it
wants them. This allows Dell to keep its inventories low. Combined with
Dell’s direct sales business model, this creates a big competitive advantage
because Dell receives payment for its products before it has to pay suppliers.
With little money being tied up in inventories, Dell has low working capi-
tal requirements, thus allowing it to generate enormous returns on invested

capital.

Intangible Assets

Companies often use intangible assets, such as patents and brand names, to
help sustain excess returns on investment over an extended period of time.
Chip companies Linear Technology and Maxim Integrated Products don’t
often get recognition for their performance, but both of these chipmakers
have outstanding fundamental track records because of their intangible as-
sets. Over the 10 years ending in 2002, for example, Linear posted an average

sales growth of 16 percent, average gross margins of more than FO percent,


ECONOMIC MOATS IN HARDWARE

and average returns on invested capital of 90 percent—all far better than the
industry average. Maxim posted similar results.

What is it that has allowed both firms to sustain such great results over an
extended period of time? A key part of these companies’ success is due to their
niche as suppliers of high-performance analog semiconductors. Analog chips
are highly proprietary, so they lack direct substitutes, and the engineers who
design these products face a set of unique design challenges. Digital circuits
process information in binary fashion—that is, 1’s and o’s—whereas analog
chips primarily process real-world signals—that is, temperature, pressure,
weight, and sound. Firms like Linear, which have years of R&D and manu-
facturing experience, have a strong competitive edge over newer rivals. A
scarcity of analog engineers also widens these companies’ economic moats be-
cause it would take a long time for a potential rival to hire an experienced staff
to compete with Linear and Maxim. The knowledge and experience of these
firms’ engineers is an intangible asset that allows both of them to earn signifi-

cant excess profits.

The Network Effect

In the hardware industry, network effects can arise because hardware often
needs (1) to operate with other hardware and (2) to be maintained by people.
The more a certain product becomes prevalent, the more other hardware
needs to take heed of the product’s characteristics and the more people (and
time) are invested in learning to operate the product.

Cisco Systems’ routers are a great example. Routers are basically advanced
computers that decide the best route for a piece of data to follow in a net-
work. No matter who manufactures them, routers have to know how to
“talk” to each other. A router that cannot communicate with the rest of a net-
work is useless. This means that router manufacturers have to use a common
set of standards when developing new products. Therefore, the vendor with
the largest market share is in the driver’s seat when it comes to development
and evolution of standards.

Cisco was the first company to make a wide market in routers in the
1980s and gradually built code and protocols to function with more and
more generations of its equipment. When others tried to enter the market,

they began to realize how difficult it was to get routers to consistently operate

281


282

HARDWARE

with one another. Cisco’s only other major rival in the market for high-end
routers, Juniper Networks, was eventually successful, but it took over a year’s
time and an expensive effort to hire Cisco programmers who knew where the
proverbial bodies were buried.

By becoming the de facto standard for routers, Cisco also created a second-
ary network effect. It takes time and extensive training to become familiar with
the language and instructions for maintaining Cisco routers. The engineers
who maintain networks take courses and often earn certifications to aid in
their work. By being first, Cisco was able to become the first certification that
most network engineers obtain—and often that’s good enough, because these
are the folks who also decide which equipment to buy. Cisco certification and

training essentially helped to sustain the pervasiveness of Cisco’s hardware.

Hallmarks of Success for Hardware Companies

Here’s what to look for when you're analyzing hardware companies.

Durable Market Share and Consistent Profitability

Strong profitability and a stable market share are evidence that a wide eco-
nomic moat is allowing the firm to fend off competition. Linear and Maxim,
two of the chip companies discussed earlier in this chapter, are great examples
of this. Although neither one dominates the high-performance analog chip
market, they've both maintained steady shares of this fast-growing market,
and they've both generated solid returns on capital during even the worst

chip industry downturns.

Keen Operational and Marketing Focus

These companies don’t spend much time in businesses where they don’t have
a particular advantage or those that don’t fit their strategic focus. Cisco is a
classic example on the operations end. Cisco has made the strategic decision
not to manufacture things itself; instead, it permits contract manufacturers
to make its routers. This focus helps guide decisions about what new kinds
of products it wants to make, how it wants to budget its money, or whether
it wants to buy a business. Likewise, Dell benefits from this discipline in
terms of marketing. It knows that its business is built on directly marketed,

built-to-order hardware with an upfront payment model. Ideas or projects


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

that deviate from this model simply don’t get funded. Watch out when you
see hardware companies dabbling in areas that seem to be outside their

strengths.

Flexible Economics
The best hardware businesses have revenues and costs with well-matched tim-
ing and levels that can be changed fairly easily. Because demand is so unpre-
dictable and volatile in the hardware industry, the more flexibility companies
have over costs and capacity, the less risk they face. Good signs of flexible eco-
nomics include outsourced manufacturing, low capital expenditure require-
ments, and workforces that are on variable schedules or in low-cost markets.
But even in situations where the company does its own manufacturing,
you can look for signs of flexibility or less risk. One of the reasons we think
Jabil Circuit is the best contract manufacturing company is that it’s the most
disciplined in specifying that customers commit to a certain level of volume.
Locking in volumes means that Jabil can make more informed decisions
about what costs it takes on. Other contract manufacturers are more likely to
accept any deal that comes their way, even though it makes revenues more
unpredictable and creates the risk of building expensive capacity and over-
head that revenues won't be able to cover.

Investor's Checklist: Hardware

» Information technology is an increasingly important source of productiv-
ity in advanced economies. In 2002, IT accounted for nearly 50 percent
of total U.S. investment in capital equipment, up from 20 percent three
decades ago.

> Technology innovation means that hardware firms can offer more com-
puting power at an increasingly cheap price; thus, IT can be applied to
more and more tasks.

> Because of rapid innovation, technology hardware companies tend to
generate rapid revenue and earnings growth.

> At the same time, competitive rivalry is often strong in tech hardware.
Moreover, demand for technology hardware is very cyclical.

> Technology, by itself, does not constitute a sustainable competitive ad-

vantage. Hardware companies that develop economic Moats are more

283


284 HARDWARE

likely to succeed over the long term than companies that rely on a lead in
technology.

> Examples of moats among technology hardware firms include low-cost
producer (Dell), intangible assets (Linear and Maxim), switching costs
(Nortel and Lucent), and network effect (Cisco).

>» A company with a sustainable competitive advantage should be able to
effectively fend off its rivals and maintain significant market share and/or

sustain above-average margins over an extended period of time.


21

Media

CoMPANIES IN THE media sector offer ample opportunity for great long-
term investment gains, but successful investing in media stocks takes more
than picking the next hit TV show, predicting the next blockbuster movie, or
finding a new best-selling book. Of the two dozen media companies that we
follow, all but one have some economic moat associated with their business,
and five have wide economic moats. The key is identifying those companies
that will continue to grow consistently and churn out lots of cash for years to
come. Many companies in this sector benefit from competitive advantages,
such as economies of scale and monopolies, which make it easier to sustain
excess profits for long periods of time.

Overall, the media sector has been rewarding over the past decade. Ac-
cording to Morningstar's historical performance data, the annualized total re-
turn of the media sector was just above 16 percent between 1993 and 2002,
whereas the S&P 500 returned a little more than 9 percent per year during
the same period. The strong showing in the media sector can be traced to a

number of factors, but we'd argue that the two most important factors are

Jonathan Schrader and T. K. MacKay with Pat Dorsey.


286

MEDIA

appealing economics and significant competitive advantages. Differentiated
and focused products give media firms competitive advantages within unique
geographic areas (newspapers and radio stations) or niche categories (techni-
cal books). Dominating one of these areas normally translates into strong and
sustainable free cash flow for these firms.

Media is a broad term, so it helps to divide the sector into three different
groups: publishing, broadcast and cable television, and entertainment pro-
duction. After we review the general economics of the media sector, we'll dig

into the specific characteristics of each of these three areas.

How Media Companies Make Money

Media companies generate cash by producing or delivering a message to the
public. The message, or content, can take several shapes, including video,
audio, or print. The method of delivery is even more varied. Television,
movies, radio, the Internet, books, magazines, and newspapers are the most
popular means of distributing content, but there is no real limit on how a
message can be delivered.

User Fees

Business models in the media sector can vary significantly depending on a
firm's primary source of revenue. We're all familiar with one-time fees that we
must dole out to see the current hit movie, read the best-selling novel, or buy
the hot new CD, Film studios such as Disney and Paramount, publishers
such as Simon & Schuster, and music labels such as Warner Bros. are highly
dependent on these one-time fees.

Companies that rely on one-time user fees sometimes suffer volatile cash
flows because they're heavily affected by the success of numerous individual
products, such as newly released films or novels. While having a string of hits
can result in a bonanza for the firm, the converse is also true: Several flops in
a row can lead to disaster. This uncertainty can make it difficult to forecast
future cash flows.

Because the success of this type of business model relies so much on big
hits, the big-name stars tend to reap most of the profits, which makes for nar-
row profit margins for the company. For example, a top box office draw such
