
76

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

Not many people use the change in the slope to actually enter or exit
the market. The main use is as another indicator to help predict the market’s near-term direction.
Obviously, there are two main problems. First, there is the usual problem of selling into a major bull market. Second, occasionally the %K will
reverse quickly and move again in the original direction. This is called a
failure and I’ll discuss this next.

THE BEST WAY TO MAKE MONEY
USING STOCHASTICS
Now we get to the fun stuff. This is the real way to make money using
stochastics. Let me first describe what divergences are.
One of the most popular modes of using stochastics is divergences. A
divergence occurs when the price and stochastics diverge from following
roughly the same path. In other words, if the price makes a new high but
the stochastics don’t, you have a divergence. If the stochastics make a new
high but the price doesn’t, you have a divergence. Divergences are mainly
used to predict and trade a change in trend.
The typical divergence is when the price makes a new low but the
stochastics don’t or the price makes a new high and the stochastics don’t.
In other words, the momentum of the price is less strong than the price
itself.
There are no specific entry and exit rules but I’ll show you how to use
stochastic divergences to create massive profits. We’ll have to use other
techniques to actually create the timing. We’ll use stochastics to create the
environment for making extra money.
I have studied this type of divergence and have found that divergences on the daily chart mean something different than divergences on
the weekly chart. Divergences on the daily chart typically mean only that
the market will likely have a short-term countertrend move. In general, I
look for the market to change direction in one to five days (but most likely
in two to three days) and have a one-to-five-day countertrend move (but
most likely a two-to-three-day countertrend move).
A weekly divergence usually means that an intermediate-term trend
change is about to happen. At the least, a weekly divergence means that
there will be a significant countertrend move. I think that the size of the
countertrend moves on the daily chart is not powerful enough to overcome
the countertrend nature of the trade as well as the problem of deciding
when the countertrend will begin.

Stochastics

77

On the other hand, the size of the projected weekly countertrend or
new trend move was substantial and very tradable. There still remained
the problem of being able to predict when the divergence would actually
create the resulting change in trend. Nonetheless, a weekly divergence is
far more tradable than a daily divergence.
It is a common belief that divergences do predict changes in trend,
even if only a short countertrend move. But it is important to realize that
you can’t simply buy or sell when the divergence occurs. In virtually all
cases, the market continues its trend for several more bars before succumbing to the power of the divergence. Many traders point out how great
divergences called highs and lows but few, if any, argue that the divergence
actually lasted for some period of time before the price turned direction.
Let’s look at a couple of examples.
In Figure 5.3, we see the price make a significant low about nine bars
from the left (mid-December). The stochastics also make a low. However,
six bars later, the market makes a new low close while the stochastics
have not.
Note that I said a new low close, not a new low. That is because the
relationship of the closes to the closes is the important factor, not the relationship of the lows to the lows. This is because stochastics are based on
the closing price.
In this case, there was stochastic divergence but the price did not make
a new significant low for three more bars. In our study, the divergence
came three days in advance of the actual bottom. We then measure the
distance from the actual bottom to the subsequent high to get an idea of
the magnitude of the countertrend move. We measure this as a percent of
the price of the underlying instrument to normalize the study over many
futures contracts. For example, a move from 100-00 to 101-00 on the bonds
would equal 1 percent. Obviously, this is not perfect, but it is still indicative
of the magnitude when tested over 30 futures contracts.
Look at Figure 5.3 again and you will see several other divergences.
The most significant one is the one about three-quarters through the chart.
The market leaps to a new high with a very wide range bar but the stochastics do not make new highs. Eventually, a high is made and the market sells
off but not before mounting a very strong rally.
In our study, we went back over one year of data on about 30 different
commodities. These commodities were in various types of markets: bull,
bear, and chop city. As a result, we get a good indication of the validity of
using stochastic divergences.
First, we tested divergences on daily charts. We found 58 different
divergences. They led a turn in the market by an average of 4.5 days with
a standard deviation of 5.7. However, the mode was only 1 and the median

78

FIGURE 5.3 Euro with Divergences

Stochastics

79

was 2. The longest lead time was 22 days. As you can see, the lead time
of daily divergences was random. This tends to reduce the value of daily
divergences.
There were obviously 58 retracements from these 58 divergences. The
average percentage retracement was 5.9 percent in a range of essentially
0 to a 21 percent retracement. The mode was 4 percent, and the median
was 5 percent; the reliability of the retracement figures seems reasonable
even though the standard deviation was 4.4 percent.
There were a lot more weekly divergences than daily divergences. We
counted 124 during our sample period. They led turning points by an average of 2.8 weeks with a standard deviation of 3.4 weeks. The range was
from calling the turning point exactly to 16 weeks in advance. Actually, the
mode was calling the exact turning point. In other words, the most common
occurrence of a weekly divergence was that week was the actual turning
point, which is very interesting to me.
The average retracement of the 124 retracements was 15.3 percent with
a standard deviation of 13.6 percent. Obviously, this is a far more powerful
indicator of subsequent price movements than the daily divergences. The
mode was, however, only 4 percent with a median of 11 percent though the
maximum was 80 percent. Talk about a big move!
I’m about to say something that is astounding and perhaps heretical:
It could be that divergences are simply illusions. Perhaps we are creating
a pattern where none exists. For example, I could create a system that
predicted a countertrend move soon after every day named Tuesday. Well,
sure enough, this system will call 98 percent of every countertrend move
within two weeks. In other words, only rarely will a market go two full
weeks without retracing at least one day. Be aware of this potential problem. Having said that, I continue to use stochastic divergences on the daily
and particularly on the weekly charts because I am making money using
them.
A failure occurs when the %K changes direction, doesn’t cross the %D,
and reverses back to the original direction. Figure 5.4 shows two different
failures. Arrows in the stochastic part of the chart show the failures. The
first one occurs in early March when the %K actually drops but does not
actually cross the %D. The second one occurs in late April. This is not a
classic failure because it doesn’t actually drop but it doesn’t sharply slow
and almost cross the %D. They often occur when there is a sharp retracement against the main trend but then an equally sharp resumption of the
main trend.
The classic interpretation is that failure shows that the original trend
will continue and that you should trade in that direction. In this case, that
means jumping in the direction of the trend as soon as the %K resumes its
original trend.

80

FIGURE 5.4 Euro with Failures

Stochastics

81

GO WITH THE TREND
I sometimes use stochastics as a mechanical trading system or as a trend
indicator. The basic rule is to buy when the %K stochastic crosses above
the 50 line and sell when it crosses below the 50 line. You are always in the
market. I use this rule on both the weekly and daily bars, but mainly on the
daily ones.
My experience is that the performance is similar to using any
intermediate-term trend-following system. You will get chopped up during
sideways price action but will make major profits when the market gets
into a major trend.
Colby and Meyers tested this concept on NYSE Composite weekly
data. (See the Appendix for more information.) They add one additional
filter: The %K and the weekly closing price are above their previous week’s
level. Their results were that this was a profitable system using just about
any length of parameter. This shows that the method is robust. However,
profits were best near the 45-week level.
Colby and Meyers point out that only about 39 percent of trades were
profitable. That is about what you would expect from any intermediateterm trading system.
The conclusion: This is a solid trend-following system that can be used
on both weekly and daily data. The percentage of trades that are winners
will be near 40 percent but the winners will be greater in size than the
losers. One great advantage of this method is that it is free with every charting service.

HOW I USE STOCHASTICS
I pay attention to stochastics every day. I look for both daily and weekly divergences, in particular the weekly divergences. I look at the daily stochastics most often because that is the chart I mainly am living with day in and
day out.
On the daily chart, I am mainly looking for divergences. Let’s say that I
see a divergence and I already have a position on and this position comes
from a long-term technique like channel breakout. In this case, I would take
off part of the position, perhaps one-quarter to one-half of the position. This
should be a profit-taking exercise. My idea is that the market will setback
for a few days. I will take some profits now and re-enter those liquidated
positions should the market break to new highs.
Let’s assume that I am right and the daily stochastic divergence actually causes the market to dip. Hopefully, that will cause the stochastics to

82

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

cross down. I can then use an upside crossover to trigger a re-entry buy order. If the stochastics do not cross down, then I will rebuy the sold position
when the market makes a new high.
Now, if I have no position but I am about to have a trade based on one
of the core position methods, I want to follow the method and get long
when the market breaks out. But I see that there is divergence developing,
which suggests that the breakout will fail at least for several days.
I will go ahead and enter the buy order, but I will cut the position size
in half or thereabouts. If I get into a position and there is the setback that
I expect, then I can buy the rest of the position if the market makes a new
high. On the other hand, I will only have a half-size position if the market
continues higher. That situation is rare because daily stochastic divergence
will usually cause a setback. So, basically, I use the daily stochastics to
modify my already existing trading methods.
Weekly stochastics are far more powerful than daily ones since they
lead to either a significant retracement or a major trend change. My trading strategy here is to use them the same way I described using the daily
stochastics, but I will also become aggressive at finding an entry point in
the direction that the divergence is predicting. For example, let’s assume
that the market is moving higher but develops a bearish stochastic divergence. That would predict at least a strong retracement that is big enough
to make a nice profit.
If I am long, I will look for any excuse to exit the long position. If I have
no position, I will look for any excuse to get short. This is more aggressive
than the techniques outlined in earlier chapters.
By “any excuse” I mean that I will take any technique outlined in this
book and jump on the short side with little or no confirmation. For example, the market is heading higher but a divergence appears. I’ll get short
if I see something like a reversal bar down on the daily chart. It doesn’t
have to be much of a signal to get me short. I’ll also use that signal to
exit my position trades from techniques such as the Conqueror or trend
analysis.

INTERVIEW WITH GEORGE LANE
I was fortunate to get a phone interview with the inventor of stochastics,
George Lane. He was quite old at the time and has since died. He was a
great character. He was mainly a trader of Standard & Poor’s (S&P) futures,
but his comments apply to forex trading.
The interview is word for word, so some of the grammar is fractured
and there is some stumbling that is natural in spoken English.

Stochastics

83

Author: Are stochastics your primary form of analysis of the
market?
George Lane: Oh, yes. It beats everything else I’ve discovered or tried. It’s
damn near infallible, once you get to know how to use it.
A: Do you use it mainly as a trend indicator or overbought/oversold or crossovers or what?
GL: I’m a short-term trader. We trade about three or four times a
day. I use it to signal buys at the bottom. I day trade S&P’s.
A: Do you use crossovers to signal the buys?
GL: Why don’t we take out the word “crossover” out of it? The
crossover happens but that isn’t the signal. The signal is
divergence.
A: Does the divergence have to be in overbought or oversold
territory or can it be anywhere on the chart?
GL: Most of the time it will be in the overbought/oversold territory. Those are the safest. We take some in the midrange.
A: When you see a divergence, will you then use a crossover
to signal an entry?
GL: No, just the divergence.
A: So, you will buy or sell just as soon as you see the divergence?
GL: You have to combine old-fashioned charting with stochastics and it’s damn near infallible.
A: So let me get this straight. I’m seeing a divergence on the
downside. Will you then be looking for a reversal bar or
breakout above a previous high after you get the divergence?
GL: Yes, or at the same time. Stochastics is a hair early. It’s a
leading indicator. A lot of times you will get your stochastic
divergence and then one or two bars later, you will get your
chart signal.
A: Do you find that is the case on dailies and weeklies as well
as on shorter-term bars?
GL: Absolutely. I use exactly the same technique on long term as
I do on short term.
A: Do you feel that the crossover of the 50 percent level is of
any significance?
GL: No. Once it breaks the 50 percent, I know I’m right. I don’t
put much weight on it.
A: Do you ever look at right-handed or left-handed crossovers?
GL: Yes. Say the market comes down and makes a great big double bottom. At the first bottom, you’re going to have a lefthanded crossover. That tells you “wait.” You’re going to get

84

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

a right-handed crossover and that’s going to be a better signal. So you wait for the second bottom of the double bottom,
get the right-handed crossover, and then you go.
A: So the right-handed crossover is more significant.
GL: It is the important one, yes, sir.
A: Some people say that when the stochastics first cross
80 percent that is a good time to buy and that is a good
trend signal.
GL: That’s Jake Bernstein’s interpretation. He discovered, and
we have been teaching for 47-some years, that sometimes
stochastics goes on up to the top and the market keeps on
going. In other words, there’s just so damn much momentum
to it that it just keeps on going. Stochastics, when it gets up
around 100, can’t do anything so it just bobbles along the
ceiling. That kind of thing happens and they are marvelous.
So when it gets up around 75, he’s a buyer. If I bought
one down near the bottom, I can buy another one up there
but I have a little trouble buying the first one up there.
A: What about the formation you call a knee or a shoulder
or failure? Do you see that very often and do you find it
worthwhile?
GL: Yes, sir, it happens. It doesn’t happen very often but it does
happen.
You see, if the market comes down and gives me a lefthanded crossover . . . I’m going to wait for the right-handed
crossover. But then K rallies and then comes back and
kisses D and then starts to go back up again. Now I have
a convergence in K only. So I jump on it and go. It means
that we might not get that right-handed crossover because I
got a legitimate right-handed crossover in K.
You take a divergence in K or D or both. So if you don’t
get your divergence in D but do get it in K, go!
A: Let’s say you have entered a position on a divergence. How
do you set your protective stop loss?
GL: Two clicks below the lowest of the two previous lows.
A: Where did the name “stochastics” come from?
GL: Stochastics is an advanced form of statistics. In statistics,
every so often they run across a situation that has so much
data that they have to use other ways of studying. I sat next
to a stochastics engineer flying out to San Francisco one
time. He explained it to me as an advanced level of statistics. He was going out to redesign the lenses of the Hubble
telescope because the data of all the stars in the sky was so

Stochastics

85

enormous that they had to change things a little bit. That’s a
good illustration of where they use it.
A: Who came up with the name “stochastics”?
GL: Stochastics is that discipline in statistics or engineering that
they use. Percent deviation, or %D, is the name of the indicator. Percent deviation from normal.
A: That’s %D. Where does %K come from?
GL: Somebody in the pit one day said that they wish they had
a leading indicator for this darn thing. I looked and it was
right there in our calculation so I named it after my middle
name, Kelly!
After we used it for a few years, Computrac gleamed onto
it in their committee of 30 and suggested they use it. When
they got it all programmed and ready to use, Tim Slater
asked them what are they going to call it, and the guy said
that he thought it was a stochastic-type thing. So they called
it stochastics.
It’s not a stochastic-type indicator at all but it got that
name and it hung on. I didn’t have any control.
A: What is the relationship of stochastics with Larry
Williams’s %R?
GL: The first thing we discovered was %R. We discovered that in
1948.
%R is stochastics upside down. We used it for a while.
When you make a signal at the top, you buy and when you
make a signal on the bottom, you sell it. So we turned it
right-side up to make it more practical. We had written some
stuff on it. I think that one of Larry’s friends came to one of
our seminars and took it home and Larry thought it was a
good thing and published it and put his name on it.
A: Is stochastics a better oscillator than a rate of change or
RSI?
GL: Welles Wilder’s RSI is a damned good indicator. It’s nothing but a closing price chart. If you take off the open, high,
and low and make a chart with just the close, you’re going to get the same type of pattern that you get with RSI. It
will show the divergences and things like that. So a closing
price chart was used early in my experience. It was a good
indicator.
Welles Wilder’s RSI is a complicated way of figuring that.
It’s a damned good indicator but it’s a one-line indicator and
it fails maybe once every 20 times to give you a good clean
signal. Whereas stochastics just damn near never fails.

86

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

We used RSI along with stochastics for several years
but we finally came to the conclusion that we don’t need
two oscillators so we just quit using RSI because we don’t
need it.
I used volume instead of RSI.
A: How do you use volume?
GL: Volume is a very standard thing. We’ve been teaching that
for 45 to 50 years.
A: What term stochastics do you use? Most chart services use
either 9 or 14 days.
GL: Well, a charting service has to have them all the same because they use a computer to generate the charts.
What you do is look at the chart. Let’s say you are looking
at dailies. You look over a few days and locate the cycle. The
cycle that you see, not necessarily the cycle that the guy in
the next desk sees. The rule is, in analysis, when you are
working on an indicator and there is a moving average in the
indicator (to smooth or optimize it), the input data for that
indicator will be 50 percent of the cycle that you are trading.
So you just look at the charts and find the cycle. There is
usually a cycle that is fairly common. It may vary a little bit
but it is fairly repetitive. You take half the number of bars
of the cycle and that is the input data for the stochastics.
Now you are designing the stochastics to fit the cycle that
you see. Therefore, that will be the most successful for you.
A: What does the cycle length have to do with anything?
GL: The rule is in the analysis of oscillators, whenever you are
developing an oscillator of any kind, the input data to calculate that oscillator is going to be 50 percent of the cycle you
are trading. Then you will have the most optimum oscillator.
A: Is there any particular reason why that should be? Why
not the full cycle?
GL: You’ve got moving averages in your oscillator to smooth it.
Any time you use a moving average, like the 10-day moving
average, you are going to be five days behind the last trade.
So you take the input data that shows your last trade, which,
on a 30-day oscillator will be 15 days back. So that seems to
be the most successful.
I’ve researched that for years and I haven’t changed it.
A: So each commodity will have a different length for calculating the stochastic?
GL: This makes stochastics a little more successful and a little
more reliable than just arbitrarily picking a number.

Stochastics

87

A: In general, would you say that the chart services have selected a good average at about 14 days input?
GL: I think that looking at the daily charts 14 or 15 is a pretty
good average. It’s usually a 30-day cycle.
I used to trade the S&P’s a few years ago and they had a
28-day cycle. It lasted for four or five years. Now, of course,
with the volatility that the S&P’s are in now, the cycle has
shrunk to less than 28 days.
We are getting very volatile markets. We are at the end
of a 60- or 70-year cycle and this is the blow-off period and
things are getting wild, as you know.
A: Who invented stochastics?
GL: I did.
A: When was that?
GL: We started on this in about 1948.
A: How did you come up with the concept?
GL: Well, there [were] six of us and we traded on the MidAmerica Commodity Exchange. Every night we would go over to
Investment Educators’ office. We were trying every damn
fool thing we could think of. We were using the alphabet.
We had reduced everything to percentage because then the
range would be from 0 to 100 and it would make the oscillator more practical.
We went through the alphabet I think twice.
We had an old Czechoslovakian immigrant there who
was a friend of one of the Polish boys that was kind of helping me. He told us, in his broken English, about a formula
that they used in Czechoslovakia to figure out how much
limestone to put in the steel mix when they were melting
iron and stuff to make steel. We took that stupid formula
of his and readjusted it and played with it and that was the
tip-off for what is now stochastics!
We were desperate. We were grasping at straws because
we knew that there was something out there but we just
couldn’t find it.
A: Who else was involved?
GL: There were about four or five people helping me or doing
the same thing. They were all Polish people. Gosh, I don’t
even remember their names anymore. I know one of them
went over to the Chicago Board of Trade and got to be a
big player. I remember one day he had a big position and
he wanted to go and visit his girlfriend up in Michigan and
told a buddy of his to get him out of his position. His buddy
