
A standard format is followed for each pattern whenever possible in order to
maintain consistency and ensure that each pattern is thoroughly explained.
That format includes the following:
• The price action that precedes the pattern: either a price advance or a
price decline.
• A description of the pattern and its criteria.
• An illustration of the pattern. Rising or falling lines will be displayed in
the illustrations prior to the pattern example to indicate whether it
forms after an advance (bearish pattern) or a decline (bullish pattern).
• The psychology behind the pattern’s formation.
• A chart that contains a real-world example of the pattern shown in the
context of the surrounding chart landscape.
• Variations of the pattern where applicable.
• A helpful hint for remembering the pattern’s name where applicable.
The order in which the patterns are presented does not dictate their significance as reversal patterns.
For your convenience, a brief summary and illustration of each pattern is
included in Appendix A for quick reference.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

30

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 30 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Nonideal Patterns and Variations

The illustrations that accompany the reversal pattern descriptions were drawn in
order to show ideal examples. The purpose of providing textbook examples is so
that you have a good benchmark from which to work. Although you will see
some ideal patterns when you begin analyzing charts, you should also expect to
see plenty of less-than-perfect formations. That does not mean they are not powerful. Even nonideal versions can provide important clues about shifts in investor
psychology.
In the chart examples presented throughout the book, you’ll view the candlestick patterns in the context of the broader chart rather than in isolation.
That will give you a feel for their real-world applications.
For some patterns, an acceptable variation that differs slightly from the
standard criteria will be shown. For instance, the ideal dark cloud cover, which
is a bearish reversal pattern, will gap up open above the prior candle’s high.
However, if it only gaps open above the prior candle’s close, it is an acceptable
variation, although not quite as strong in some cases.
Just like most anything in technical analysis, there is also some subjectivity involved. One trader may look at a shooting star pattern and dismiss it because the upper shadow is only about one and a half times the length of the real
body rather than two or more times the length as dictated by the criteria. Another trader may say that is trivial and it is long enough to generate a signal.
Some of the nonideal patterns and variations are just as strong as ideal
patterns when viewed in the context of the bigger picture. For instance, if a
mediocre pattern forms at a strong support or resistance area, it is still likely to
follow through. That’s where blending candlesticks with Western technical
analysis can be especially helpful.
In summary, try not to be too rigid in your expectations or exclude valid
signals that are not perfect setups, or you may miss many good trading opportunities and important warning signs.

Umbrella Lines: Hanging Man
and Hammer
The Japanese refer to this formation as an umbrella line because it resembles an
umbrella (see Figures 3.1 and 3.2). However, you’ll rarely hear the term umbrella
line passed around in conversations among traders in the United States. These
patterns are simply referred to as the hanging man and the hammer.
These two reversal patterns have the same shape. The factor that differentiates one pattern from the other is whether it forms after a price advance
(a bearish hanging man) or a price decline (a bullish hammer).

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 31 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

31

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.1 Umbrella lines: No
upper shadow

FIGURE 3.2 Umbrella lines: Small
upper shadow

Pattern Description and Criteria

The hanging man and hammer are single-line candlestick patterns. They both
include the following criteria:
• A small real body forms at, or very near, the upper end (the high) of the
candlestick’s range.
• The color of the small real body is not significant; it can be either black
or white.
• The long lower shadow is typically two or more times the length of the
real body.
• There should be no upper shadow (Figure 3.1) or a very small one
(Figure 3.2). Price must close near the high of the range.
The long lower shadow indicates that the stock declined sharply during
the trading session. In fact, at the time price was at the low, the candle had a
long bearish real body with a shaven bottom. (Recall the discussion at the end
of Chapter 2 about how the candlestick line changes
shape throughout the session.) The bulls were able to
grab control from the bears and push price back up to
rally
close near the high by the end of the session.
A fairly sharp
The smaller the real body, the shorter the upper
rise after a
shadow, and the longer the lower shadow, the more condecline or a
sequential the pattern.
Hanging Man

If an umbrella line forms after a price advance, it is called
a hanging man and it is a bearish signal. A hanging man
may appear after a short-term upward move, but it is
more significant if it appears after a long or sharp rally or
at an all-time high for the stock or index.

period of
consolidation.
Demand
overwhelms
supply
resulting in a
rise in value.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

32

8:57 AM

Page 32 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.3 Hanging man
(black body)

sell-off
Rapid selling
of a stock or
other trading
instrument.
Supply
overwhelms
demand
resulting in a
decline in
value.

long (long
position)
The purchase
of a stock or
other trading
instrument
with the
expectation
that the price
will rise.

FIGURE 3.4 Hanging man
(white body)

Although it does not matter if the small body is
black (Figure 3.3) or white (Figure 3.4), a black body indicates that, even though the bulls did take control back
from the bears intraday, they were not able to close the
session positive. However, that does not necessarily
mean that a bearish close will result in a higher likelihood of a top reversal than a bullish close.
Pattern Psychology The bulls have been benefiting
from a price advance. Then a sharp sell-off occurs during
the hanging man session, which gives them cause for
concern. Some traders who already held long positions
prior to the hanging man may use the intraday recovery
to take profits near the high. Others will tighten their
stop loss orders in order to protect the gains achieved
during the prior run-up. Traders who entered new long
positions during the hanging man session may be
nervous. Some will have negative positions already,
depending on where they entered the trade. If price
declines after the hanging man pattern, many traders will
be forced out of their long positions. Those holding short
positions will be on the right side of the market, at least
temporarily.
A long lower shadow after an upward move may be
seen as a positive development because it shows that the
bulls regained control during the session. Therefore, it is
usually best to wait for more bearish confirmation before

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 33 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

33

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

entering a short position based solely on a hanging man
signal. To confirm the signal, the stock should trade below the hanging man’s real body the following session,
and ideally it should close below it.

short
(short
position)
The sale of a

Chart Example Figure 3.5 shows a daily chart of
stock or other
Autozone Inc. (AZO). Three bearish hanging man
trading
patterns with short upper shadows formed within a fiveinstrument
week period. The first pattern (1) formed on June 5,
with the
2007, after a several-day price advance off the May low.
expectation
It was confirmed the following day with a lower close.
that the price
The uptrend stalled for two more days before moving
will decline.
higher. The second hanging man (2) formed on June 19
after a few weeks of uptrend. The ascent of the uptrend
was fairly steep and vulnerable to profit-taking. The hanging man’s signal was
confirmed the following session with a lower close. Price declined for several
days. The third pattern (3) formed on July 6 and was confirmed the following
session with a lower close. It became part of a larger bearish Western double top
pattern that was created by the parallel highs in June and July. Price subsequently
retraced a significant percentage of the prior trend.

FIGURE 3.5 Bearish hanging man patterns formed after upward moves
Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

34

double top
A common
bearish reversal
pattern that
occurs when
two prominent,
parallel (or
nearly parallel)
peaks form in
an uptrend.
The pattern
resembles the
letter “M.” It is a
valid reversal
pattern when it
is conﬁrmed by
a close below
the middle of
the “M.”

8:57 AM

Page 34 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

The real bodies of the hanging man patterns labeled
2 and 3 were so small that they could also be interpreted
as doji. Regardless, the signal is a bearish one. Doji are
discussed later in this chapter. (Note: The plural of doji is
also doji.)
Helpful Hint This pattern resembles a hanging man
with his head at the top and his body hanging below.
You may remember playing the drawing game called
“hangman” as a child.
Hammer

If an umbrella line forms after a price decline, it is called
a hammer. The hammer is the bullish counterpart of the
hanging man. The hammer is a strong reversal signal. It
is meaningful whether it forms after a short-term downside move or after a more significant decline.
Although it does not matter if the small real body
is black (Figure 3.6) or white (Figure 3.7), a white body
indicates that not only did the bulls wrestle control away
from the bears, but they were able to close the session
slightly positive. However, that does not necessarily
mean that a bullish close will result in a higher likelihood of a bottom reversal
than a bearish close.
Pattern Psychology The trend has been down when a sharp sell-off
occurs, which, at first, further emboldens the bears. However, when the

FIGURE 3.6 Hammer (black body)

FIGURE 3.7 Hammer (white body)

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 35 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

35

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

stop-loss
order
An order
placed with a
broker to exit
an open
position if a
stock reaches
a certain price.
The order is
intended to
limit the loss
an investor
takes if the
stock moves
against him.
Stop-loss
orders become
market orders
when
triggered.

strong intraday reversal transpires, and price closes
near its high, the remaining bears may be worrying
over their positions. The long lower shadow indicates
that bulls are stepping into long positions. Some
traders who have short positions will either cover
them or tighten their stop-loss orders in order to
protect the gains achieved during the prior downswing. If price continues to rise following the hammer
pattern, more traders will be forced to cover their
short positions. Since short covering equals buying,
and bulls will also be buying, it provides fuel for a
rally.
It is not necessary to wait for further confirmation before entering a long position based on the hammer’s signal. For traders who feel more comfortable
doing so, though, confirmation occurs when price
trades above the hammer’s real
body, and ideally it should close
double
above it.

Chart Example Figure 3.8
shows a daily chart of Pediatrix
Medical Group Inc. (PDX). A
hammer with no upper shadow
formed on June 8, 2007, following
a sharp decline during the prior
three sessions. The long lower
shadow of the hammer was about
cover
three times the length of its small
(buy-to-cover)
real body, indicating a strong
An order
bounce intraday. Price turned up
placed with a
over the next several days, but then
broker to exit
rolled over and tested the hammer’s
a short
low as support on June 25. The
position.
successful test of support at the
hammer’s low (dotted line) set up
a larger Western double bottom reversal pattern.

bottom

A common
bullish reversal
pattern that
occurs when
two prominent,
parallel (or
nearly parallel)
bottoms form
in a downtrend.
The pattern
resembles the
letter “W.” It is a
valid reversal
pattern when it
is conﬁrmed by
a close above
the middle of
the “W.”

Helpful Hint This pattern resembles a hammer with
its long handle and its head set crosswise at the top. Think of it as the stock
“hammering out a bottom.”

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

36

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 36 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

FIGURE 3.8 Bullish hammer formed after a price decline
Source: TeleChart 2007®

Shooting Star and Inverted Hammer
The long shadow of the shooting star and inverted hammer patterns points in
the opposite direction to that of the hanging man and hammer. Thus, they are
inverted umbrella lines. The factor that differentiates one pattern from the
other is whether it forms after a price advance (a bearish shooting star) or a
price decline (a bullish inverted hammer).
Pattern Description and Criteria

The shooting star and the inverted hammer are single-line candlestick patterns.
They both include the following criteria:
• A small real body forms at, or very near, the bottom (the low) of the
candlestick’s range.
• The color of the small body is not significant; it can be either black or
white.
• The long upper shadow is typically two or more times the length of the
real body.
• There should be no lower shadow (Figure 3.9) or a very small one
(Figure 3.10). Price must close near the low of the range.

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 37 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 3.9 Inverted umbrella
lines: no lower shadow

37

FIGURE 3.10 Inverted umbrella
lines: small lower shadow

The long upper shadow indicates that the stock rallied strongly during the
trading session. In fact, at the time price was at the high of the session, the
candle had a long bullish real body with a shaven top. The bears were then
able to force price back down to close near the low by the end of the session.
The smaller the real body, the shorter the lower shadow, and the longer
the upper shadow, the more consequential the pattern.
Shooting Star

If the inverted umbrella type of pattern forms after a price advance, it is called a
shooting star, and it has bearish implications.
Although it does not matter if the small body is black (Figure 3.11) or
white (Figure 3.12), a black body indicates that not only did the rally fail but
the bears were able to close the session slightly negative. However, that does not
necessarily mean that a bearish close will result in a higher likelihood of a top
reversal than a bullish close.

FIGURE 3.11
(black body)

Shooting star

FIGURE 3.12
(white body)

Shooting star

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

38

Page 38 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

An ideal shooting star will have a real body that gaps up open away from
the prior real body like the other star patterns discussed later in this chapter. It
is acceptable, though, for the real body of the shooting star to overlap the prior
candle’s real body.
Pattern Psychology Price has been rising and another strong rally occurs after
the open, encouraging the bulls. That bullish sentiment is challenged later
during the session as price reverses direction intraday. Traders who had just
entered new long positions during the shooting star session will feel even more
anxious as many of them watch their trades turn negative. By the close of
market, the day’s rally has been erased as price closes at, or near, the low of the
session. If price continues to decline following the shooting star’s signal, many
bulls will exit their long positions and more bears will establish short positions.
It is best to wait for confirmation before entering a short position based
solely on a shooting star signal. To confirm the signal, price should trade below
the shooting star’s real body, and ideally it should close below it.
Chart Example Figure 3.13 shows a daily chart of MGP Ingredients Inc.
(MGPI). On March 30, 2007, price gapped up open from the prior day’s
close, leaving a gap between the two real bodies and forming a shooting star

FIGURE 3.13

Shooting star patterns formed after upward moves

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 39 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

39

with no lower shadow. (The prior session was a hanging man, although its
lower shadow was not quite twice the length of its real body.) Price declined
for several days following the shooting star’s bearish reversal signal. Price
moved up again, ending with another shooting star with a shaven bottom on
April 17. Its real body formed within the prior bar’s real body, so there was no
gap up at the open like the first shooting star. However, it did meet the
primary criteria for the pattern so its reversal signal should not be ignored,
especially because it formed at resistance. The high of the first shooting star’s
upper shadow provided resistance for the second shooting star. Although
price broke through that resistance intraday on April 17, it did not close
above it. Price reversed direction again after the emergence of the second
shooting star.
Helpful Hint The shooting star pattern looks like a star falling down from
the sky with its long tail trailing behind it.
Inverted Hammer

If an inverted umbrella type of pattern forms after a price decline, it is called an
inverted hammer. The inverted hammer is the bullish counterpart of the shooting star.
Although it does not matter if the small body is black (Figure 3.14) or
white (Figure 3.15), a white body indicates that the bulls were able to rally the
stock intraday and close the session slightly positive. However, that does not
necessarily mean that a bullish close will result in a higher likelihood of a bottom reversal than a bearish close.

FIGURE 3.14
(black body)

Inverted hammer

FIGURE 3.15
(white body)

Inverted hammer

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

40

Page 40 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Pattern Psychology Price has been declining so the strong rally that occurs
intraday will make some bears nervous. Even though the stock fell back and
closed near the low, it is now evident that the bulls are showing interest. Astute
traders may use the information the inverted hammer provides as motivation to
cover their short positions. If price moves higher following the inverted
hammer, a short-covering rally may develop.
A long upper shadow after a decline may be viewed as a negative development because the bulls were not able to sustain the strong rally that occurred intraday. Therefore, it may be best to wait for more bullish confirmation before
entering a long position based solely on a signal from an inverted hammer. To
confirm the signal, price should trade above the inverted hammer’s real body
the following session, and ideally it should close above it.
Chart Example Figure 3.16 shows a daily chart of Limited Brands Inc.
(LTD). The long lower shadow that formed on May 15, 2007, was the first sign
that the decline may be losing its force. The next morning price gapped down
open and then rallied, but closed the session back near the low, leaving a bullish
inverted hammer. The hammer that formed during the following session held
support at the inverted hammer’s low and closed above the inverted hammer’s
real body (confirmation). It was followed the next session by a strong white
candle, which showed that the bulls had arrived in force.

FIGURE 3.16

Bullish inverted hammer formed after a price decline

Source: TeleChart 2007®

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

Page 41 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

Candlestick Reversal Patterns

41

Doji
Even though it is comprised of only a single candlestick line, the doji can be a
very significant signal, especially if it forms at a top. The doji is probably the
most commonly referenced candlestick pattern. It gets so much attention that
some traders give it too much credit. Although its signal should not be ignored,
its importance should not be overstated either. A doji should be considered a
strong warning, but not a guarantee, that price may change direction.
Pattern Description and Criteria

The doji includes the following criteria:
• The pattern has no real body. The opening and closing prices are exactly the same, or nearly the same, and are plotted as a horizontal line
that intersects the vertical range, as shown in Figure 3.17.
• The length of the upper and lower shadows can vary.
Although an ideal doji is formed during a trading session in which the
opening and closing prices are exactly the same, that scenario is not very common. If the open and close are nearly the same, it is still considered a doji. If the
real body is very small, it is sometimes referred to as a near-doji (Figure 3.18). It
is important to note that “nearly the same” in reference to the open and closing
prices is a relative concept.
Example

If the opening and closing prices are 5 cents apart, that would not be
much difference for a stock trading at $50. However, it would result in a
larger real body on a stock trading at $5. A higher-priced stock, say one
trading at $150, may have a difference of 20 cents or more between the
open and close and still look like a doji, or a near-doji.

FIGURE 3.17

Doji (no body)

FIGURE 3.18

Near-doji (very small body)

JWBK100-ch03.qxd

2/21/08

8:57 AM

42

FIGURE 3.19
(bearish)

Page 42 epg WILEY:JOBS:Wiley_PT:Logan:JWBK100_QXD%:Printer File:JW

CANDLESTICK CHARTING

Northern doji

FIGURE 3.20
(bullish)

Southern doji

A doji that appears after an upward move should be viewed as a bearish
signal. Its signal is stronger if it follows one or more long bullish candles. A doji
that forms after a price advance is more potent and reliable than one that forms
in a declining market. Steve Nison refers to a doji that forms after a price advance as a northern doji (Figure 3.19).
A doji that appears after a downward move may also result in a change in
price direction; however, doji tend to lose some of their potency in a declining
market. It is usually best to wait for more confirmation when a doji forms in a
downtrend before entering a long position based solely on its signal. Nison refers
to a doji that forms at the end of a price decline as a southern doji (Figure 3.20).
Pattern Psychology
