
The setup of the waves in the pattern is symmetrical, and wave 5 sometimes makes a false
breakout move outside the protracted line of waves 1 to 3. In other respects, the pattern is
similar to diagonal triangles, though perfect Wolfe waves are rarely found in charts of all time
frames and if there is one, it would take an inordinate amount of time to find it unless the
trader is prepared to buy a special pattern-recognition program to trace it. See
Figures 3.14
to
3.17
. The pattern consists of five waves, labeled 1 to 5, and can occur at the end of any
movement that has five waves, usually in wave C or in a fifth wave of an Elliott wave pattern
structure.
FIGURE 3.14
Bearish diagonal patterns. The waves of the first bearish diagonal pattern are marked 1 to 5;
and in the second bearish diagonal pattern they are numbered 1 to 5 and the numbers are
circled. Notice in both patterns the projection of price target by connecting wave 1 and wave 4
is mind-boggling. Furthermore, in the second diagonal pattern, there is another wavelet
diagonal pattern, creating a pattern within a pattern.

FIGURE 3.15
Bullish diagonal patterns. In this chart, there are two bullish diagonal patterns. The important
point to note is the dependable projection of price target by the connection of wave 1 and
wave 4.

FIGURE 3.16
A bullish reversal after price breaks out from the bullish diagonal pattern.

FIGURE 3.17
Monthly Hang Seng Index. This chart shows the projection line that becomes the major
obstacle of the bullish market in 2007. The line is drawn by connecting point 1 and point 4 of a
Wolfe wave pattern.

Figure 3.17
shows another Wolfe wave pattern, which took approximately eight years to form.

PATTERNS CONTINUED
Patterns indicate the psychology of a market. Martin Pring, in his book, Martin Pring on Price
Patterns, writes, “The more I work with markets, the more it becomes apparent that prices are
determined by one thing and one thing only, and that is people’s changing attitudes toward the
emerging fundamentals.” Another great technician, Garfield Drew, says, “Stocks don’t sell for
what they are worth, but for what people think they are worth. If it were not for the fact that
these changing attitudes move in trends and that trends tend to perpetuate, market prices
would be nothing more than a random event, which would mean that technicians would be out
of business.”
There are two general categories of patterns, reversal and continuation. Reading of patterns
is based on the three basic assumptions in technical analysis: prices discount everything, trend
will continue in the direction of the previous direction, and history tends to repeat.
When prices continue to trend up, they become more vulnerable to profit taking and the
market becomes congested as sellers and buyers pit their strength against one another. On the
other hand, when prices continue to trend down, buying support will reenter as prices seem
more appealing to the buyers. If prices fail to continue in the direction of the previous trend,
they change direction and reversal patterns are formed. The ability to detect reversal patterns
often offers the best reward.
Continuation patterns allow the market to pause for a time before the previous trend
resumes, allowing traders to get out of the market or even to add new commitments to a
previously established position.
Patterns tell the behavior of a market and they can be predictive. Recognizing chart patterns
is a method by which we can gauge market trends and turns. Recognizing even the most
predictable patterns is not easy. However, if we are paying attention, we should be able to see
that there are certain patterns that occur far more frequently than others, and there are certain
stocks which keep repeating the same patterns.
Prices do not move in straight lines. They fluctuate to make peaks and troughs. A simple
method to determine the primary trend and trend reversals is to observe the sequential
patterns of peaks and troughs. When prices are in an uptrend, each successive peak and trough
will be at a higher level than the preceding level; prices will be making higher highs and higher
lows. In a downtrend, each peak and trough will be making lower highs and lower lows, and
they will be lower than previous levels. Generally, reversal patterns evolve when such
succession of peaks and troughs is broken, signaling that a change of trend is taking place.
When prices get bogged down in congested price areas, patterns begin to form. Popular
groups of patterns include the “M” and “W” patterns, the head and shoulders patterns, and the
rectangle patterns.

“M” AND “W” PATTERNS
“M” and “W” patterns (see
Figure 3.18
) are also known as double tops and double bottoms, respectively. A double top is a pattern for
two successive peaks, which may or may not be of the same price levels. The pattern looks like
an M. A double top pattern occurs when the stock fails to continue the uptrend in its second
attempt as it meets resistance pressure from sellers at its highs. In a market rally, sellers
suddenly take control and push the price downward. Price begins to retreat to a level that is
considered attractive for buyers. The buyers enter the market and push the price up to make a
second top where it finds new selling pressure, which pushes the price down past its last
trough. When the price declines below the low point established between the two tops, a
double top pattern has been activated.
FIGURE 3.18
The chart shows a typical double top pattern. At T1, selling pressure pushes prices down to a
trough, where prices regain buying support and rally to a new top. At T2, prices encounter
further selling pressure and retrace below the horizontal trend line to confirm a double top
reversal pattern.

A double bottom is the inverse pattern of a double top and has two successive troughs,
which may or may not be at the same price levels. It looks like a W. In a double bottom, prices
must close above the high point between the two bottoms before a trading decision can be
made. Once this occurs, the implication is that prices will rally as far above the high point as the
distance between the high point and the two lows.

HEAD AND SHOULDERS PATTERNS
Head and shoulders is another popular pattern and it is quite a reliable reversal pattern. It often
has a symmetrical pattern in respect of the price magnitude and the time spent during the
formation of the pattern.
Basically, a head and shoulders top pattern is a bearish signal. It consists of a peak followed
by a higher peak and then another lower peak that fails to hold the continuing uptrend with a
break below the neckline. The neckline is the trend line drawn across the lows of the two
intervening troughs.
The highest peak is the head of the pattern and the peaks to the left and right of the head
are the shoulders. The shoulders are priced lower than the head and are about the same
distance from the head. After a strong rise, the left shoulder is formed when prices face
resistance from selling pressure and make a correction to a level, which attracts further buying
support. When prices begin to rise above the last peak, or the left shoulder, sellers suddenly
take control of the market and push prices downward below the low of the left shoulder,
creating the formation of the head. When prices correct to about the level of the last trough of
the left shoulder, buyers begin to reenter the market to drive prices upward. This time, prices
fail to exceed the highs of the head. Normally, prices will face resistance at about the high of
the left shoulder and make a retreat downward, forming the right shoulder. A head and
shoulders pattern is completed when prices break below the neckline.
Generally, volume will be high on the left shoulder and low on the right shoulder, and will
increase sharply on the break below the neckline (see
Figures 3.19
and
3.20
). The extent of the breakout move can be estimated by measuring the distance from the
head down to the neckline, and then projected downward from the point of the breakout.
FIGURE 3.19
A typical top reversal pattern of a head and shoulder formation.

FIGURE 3.20
A bearish reversal pattern of a head and shoulder top with two left shoulders and two right

shoulders. Note that the neckline becomes the resistance line to the subsequent rally after
completion of the pattern.

A head and shoulders bottom is a bullish reversal pattern in a downward trend. A typical
head and shoulders bottom has three troughs and two peaks. The first trough is the left
shoulder. The left shoulder is followed by a lower trough, the head, and then another trough
forms the right shoulder, which is higher than the head. A head and shoulders bottom is the
inverse pattern of the head and shoulders top and is considered a positive pattern. It indicates
a probable change in trend direction from a downward trend to an upward trend when prices
break above the neckline. The neckline is the line that is drawn across the two peaks of the
pattern. Volume will generally be highest on the left shoulder and lowest on the right shoulder.
It is important that the volume at the point of breakout of the neckline is higher than the
average volume during the formation of the pattern. The increased volume at the breakout of
the line will register the enthusiasm of buyers (see
Figure 3.21
) and marks the end of the downward trend.
FIGURE 3.21
Two bullish reversal patterns: a head and shoulders bottom and a double bottom. Notice the
increased volume at price breakout of the neckline in both cases. Note also the neckline in the
double bottom pattern becomes the supporting line of the retracement of the price after
completion of the pattern.

In peaks and troughs, there are two categories of patterns: (1) bullish reversal patterns, such
as double bottoms and head and shoulders bottoms; and (2) bearish reversal patterns, such as
double tops and head and shoulders tops. In these patterns, the relative neckline is a very
important key. In a bullish reversal pattern, the neckline is the price’s resistance line during the
formation. After a price breakout, the neckline serves as the support line in a retracement. On
the contrary, in a bearish reversal pattern, the neckline becomes the support line during the
period of formation, and after the completion of the pattern, it is the resistance line.

RECTANGLE PATTERNS
Theory is one thing, but getting down to doing it right is quite another. A rectangle is one
pattern that is difficult to trade, particularly when the trading range is narrow.
A rectangle pattern is a consolidation phase in which the bulls and the bears are in a tug of
war, with neither side in decisive control. (See
Figure 3.22
.) It is normally expected for prices to continue in the same direction the market was trading
in before the consolidation began. An important point to take note of is that the pattern is not
complete until a breakout has successfully occurred.
FIGURE 3.22
Two examples of rectangles. The first rectangle shows the force of the bears pushing prices
below the support level. The second rectangle shows the bulls, after a long consolidation,
taking control and pushing prices to a new high.

Rectangle patterns are sometimes called box patterns. You do not often hear market
commentators mention them in the news. They usually refer to the pattern as a trading range
or a consolidation. (See
Figure 3.23
.) Rectangle patterns represent a period of range trading during which prices move between
two parallel trend lines: the upper resistance line, which connects the highs; and the lower
support line, which connects the lows. Prices will test the levels of support and resistance
several times before a breakout from the upper and lower boundaries. Once prices break out of
the range in either direction, they are deemed to be trending in the direction of the breakout.
An upside breakout from the box is a technical buy signal, while a downside breakout is a
technical sell signal.
FIGURE 3.23
Prices fail to break above the resistance line in the first rectangle pattern, and finally break
below the support line with increased volume. The second rectangle shows the stubbornness of
the bulls, who hold prices at the support level to eventually overcome the bears’ resistance.

In Elliott Wave Theory, rectangle patterns are corrective waves and normally appear as Wave
2, Wave 4, and/or Wave B.
In general, a rectangle does not show any particular volume pattern. Volume will mostly be
light as the pattern develops, but when extraordinarily heavy volume takes place during the
consolidation, it provides an indication of the direction of the future breakout. Typically,
volume will also rise in the direction of the ultimate breakout. (See
Figure 3.24
.)
FIGURE 3.24
One long rectangle over a period of about 12 months. A long wait, but worthwhile as prices
catapult to new highs.

Rectangle patterns can extend for a few weeks or many months. We just have to wait until
prices break out of the support or resistance lines and go with the direction of the breakout.
The maxim that we have learned in trading the box pattern is “Think outside the box.”

SAUCER PATTERNS
Saucer bottom formations belong to the group of patterns that seemingly have curve-line or
rounding turns. Prices during the period of formation, especially at the rounding turns, have
low volatility and move narrowly, forming a gradual bowl shape. Saucer bottoms are found at
the end of a downward trend and are considered to be bullish reversal patterns. The initial
downward slope indicates an excess of supply. The excess supply forces prices downward until
buyers enter the market at the low price at the bottom, which increases the demand for the
stock. Once the rounding is complete, the prices break out and continue in an upward trend.
Saucer patterns can also be referred to as cup-and-handle patterns when, upon a breakout of
the pattern, prices retrace to form a right handle that drifts slightly downward. This pattern’s
time frame varies from several weeks to several months. The longer it lasts, the more
significant it becomes. (See
Figures 3.25
and
3.26
.)
FIGURE 3.25
In this chart, the completion of the saucer pattern coincides with the crossover of the 50-day
moving average (50-DMA) over the 200-day moving average (200-DMA).

FIGURE 3.26
A typical cup-and-handle formation showing extreme volume upon breakout of the right
handle of the pattern.

As prices move down toward the bottom, volume decreases, and prices enter a period of
consolidation at the bottom as trading bounces within a certain range. A rounded bottom is
formed as market sentiment shifts gradually from bearishness to bullishness. As market
sentiment becomes more bullish, prices make a gradual upturn, and volume increases as
investors become more decisive about the bullishness. In a saucer pattern, volume tends to
follow the shape of the pattern, and accelerates upon the breakout of the pattern. (See
Figure 3.27
.)
FIGURE 3.27
Prices rally on a breakaway gap (marked with a red circle) with good volume and enter into a
consolidation of a saucer pattern before taking off to new highs.

In
Figure 3.28
, prices break above the neckline of a bullish reversal—an inverted head and shoulders
pattern—and consolidate in a saucer bottom. The upward trend ends when the supporting line
of the bearish diagonal pattern fails to hold off the selling pressure. Note also when prices
break off from each of the respective trend lines of the patterns, volume increases.

FIGURE 3.28
This chart shows a saucer bottom as a continuation pattern.

AB=CD PATTERNS
The AB=CD pattern is a classic pattern found in all time frames. The pattern was highlighted as
the Gartley Pattern in H. M. Gartley’s 1935 book, Profits in the Stock Market. The key to the
pattern is the distinct parallelogram of ABCD, where AB=CD and AC is parallel to BD. (See
Figure 3.29
.) Gartley did not specify any application of Fibonacci ratios, but in later years, technicians
added the applicable ratios to it. The important ratios were that B should be at 0.618 of XA and
D should be at 0.786 of XA.
FIGURE 3.29
Gartley bullish and bearish patterns.

The concept of AB=CD is also mentioned in Elliott Wave Theory. In the formation of five
impulse waves (see Chapter 4, Elliott Waves), when Wave 1 is extended, Wave 3 may be equal
to Wave 5. And when Wave 5 is extended, Wave 1 and Wave 3 may be equal. Each point, X, A,
B, C, and D, is a significant high or low. The points A, B, C, and D represent three consecutive
price swings. AB may represent Wave 1 or Wave 3 in an impulse waves pattern, or Wave A in a
corrective wave pattern; BC represents Wave 2, Wave 4, or Wave B; and CD represents Wave 3,
Wave 5, or Wave C. (See
Figure 3.30
.)
FIGURE 3.30
Formations of AB=CD patterns. In a valid AB=CD pattern, D is the area for considering trade
entries in a bullish AB=CD, and for making trade exits in a bearish AB=CD.

AB=CD is a very common pattern found in the measurement of movements between price
swings of Hong Kong stocks.
Figure 3.31
shows two variations of AB=CD patterns: line (1–2) = line (3–4), and line (2–3) = line (4–5).
Minor “ab=cd” patterns often develop within a larger “AB=CD” swing.
FIGURE 3.31
Two major AB=CD patterns used to project support and resistance levels.

In using AB=CD (
Figures 3.31
and
3.32
), it is not necessary to be very particular to get the exact point; the purpose of using the
pattern is to estimate the probable support or resistance level.
FIGURE 3.32
An example of a bearish AB=CD pattern. After reaching the point at D, price makes a corrective
move.

GAPS
A gap is an opening outside the previous day’s range, creating an area where there are no
trades. In an uptrend, a gap occurs when the price opens above the previous day’s high and the
space (the area between today’s low and yesterday’s high) is not filled during the day. In a
downtrend, the day high gaps down below the previous day’s low.
Generally, most gaps are eventually filled, some on the next trading bar, while others may
take a much longer time and some may never get filled. It depends on the types of
gaps—breakaway, common, runaway, or exhaustion. Breakaway gaps are not filled quickly and
occur when the market is in the early stage as prices break out of a trading range or
consolidation area. Breakaway gaps move prices into new territory and do not often retreat to
fill the gap in subsequent trading.
Breakaway gaps are found mostly in impulse waves (Wave 1) or corrective waves (Wave A or
Wave C). Breakaway gaps can be reliable trading signals, particularly when they occur during
high volume.
Common gaps (see
Figure 3.33
) develop within a trend and reaffirm the conviction and strength of the trend’s direction.
They are probably caused by going ex-dividend and the gaps get filled quickly. They appear
most often in Wave 2 and Wave 4, or Wave B.
FIGURE 3.33
Chart showing various types of gaps in a short rally and a corrective A-B-C wave.

Runaway gaps are series of gaps over several days with price moving in the same direction of
the trend. They commonly appear in impulse Wave 3 or Wave C.
Exhaustion gaps sometimes signal the end of a trend. In an uptrend, they develop in the last
phase of the buying trend, when practically everyone is convinced of the bullishness of the
market and buyers cause the market to gap higher. Finally, when there is no one left to buy, the
uptrend is effectively over. In a downtrend, practically everyone becomes bearish on the
market, selling increases, and the market gaps down. Exhaustion gaps are likely to appear at
impulse Wave 5 and Wave C.

Gaps do not hold every time. They become reference points as long as they hold. The longer
the gaps hold, the greater the probability of the trend’s continuation. The farther away from
the previous day’s range a market opens, the greater the likelihood that the market has
temporarily overextended itself. When this occurs, responsive sellers will often try to narrow
the gap by selling to push prices toward the previous day’s close.
The gap is important because it implies significant changes in trading range and in the
sentiment of professional players. Gaps happen when there is an unexpected announcement of
information about a company made while the market is closed. This information may include
earnings reports, earnings pre-announcements, or analysts’ ratings. If the information is
positive, it will drive a stock price higher on the open relative to previous day’s close, and if the
information is negative, it will cause the price to gap down on the open.
Gaps are perhaps indirect killers of a trend trading system. Prior to point Y2 in
Figure 3.34
, everything looks positive, until the disclosure of a negative announcement at the close of
market. Prices gap down by 9.6 percent when the market opens on the morning of the next
trading day. Gaps may be caused by aggressive market players or professional traders who may
have better information. As an example, a listed company is required under good corporate
governance practice to disclose immediately any price-sensitive information that is not of
public knowledge and which may affect its stock prices. However, such information is
sometimes not released in a timely manner. This may cause a difference between the time the
company becomes aware of the information and the time the information is disclosed to the
public. Therefore, timely release of the information may be delayed. During this delay period,
some tactical trading could have been implemented by smart professional traders. When the
information is finally released, it may come as a shock to the general traders, and in turn cause
a gap.
FIGURE 3.34
A chart showing the habitual occurrence of gaps, which appear to be cyclical. The gap at point
Y2 would have caught most bullish buyers of the stock by surprise.

Gaps occur on all time frames, but the longer time frames will have fewer gaps. In addition, it
is observed that stocks paying quarterly dividends and having listings on various exchanges
tend to be more prone to gaps, as shown in
Figure 3.35
.

FIGURE 3.35
The upper window is the daily chart and the lower window is the weekly chart of a stock that
is listed on three exchanges and pays quarterly dividends. The gaps are marked in the daily
chart by red diamonds.

CONCLUSION
In this chapter, two groups of patterns have been described—the short-term patterns and the
long-term patterns. Short-term patterns are often reversal patterns that show combinations of
price bars ranging from two to five trading days, and are much easier to identify when
displayed in candlesticks. Such candlestick patterns include the morning star, evening star, dark
cloud cover, piercing line, and so on. They give traders the underlying signs of investors’
confidence and alerts to the probable change in trend in the near term. Though a single
candlestick may indicate the bullishness or bearishness of a specific period, it is strongly
recommended, as described in the chapter, that trading decisions should not be based on one
candlestick. Long-term patterns take a longer period in their formations, which may sometimes
be prolonged to several weeks. They are the classical patterns having names that are derived
from their shapes, such as double tops (“M” patterns), double bottoms (“W” patterns), head
and shoulders, saucers, rectangles, and so forth. Compared with short-term patterns, long-term
patterns indicate a longer-term projection of the underlying trend. Though short-term patterns
may appear more frequently than long-term patterns, traders should not make decisions solely
on the basis of short-term patterns without taking into consideration other supporting
indicators. A short-term pattern may be formed within the overall picture of the long-term
pattern, and when prices show a breakout from both patterns, the validity of such signals is
stronger.
Included in the chapter are two specific patterns that belong to the group of long-term
patterns. Traders should take note of these patterns as they are very useful in the
measurements of price projections. Also highlighted are divergence patterns and gaps. The
divergence pattern is not a price pattern per se; it is included in the chapter to stress its
importance as an early warning signal of an imminent change in trend. As to the gap patterns,
these are the fearful patterns that appear more frequently in penny stocks. There may not be
any early warning from price patterns or indicators, as gaps generally occur unexpectedly as a
result of a sudden development or announcement of information. This is the risk in trading.
Traders should, therefore, always have a trade plan to minimize their risks.
