fluctuation that repeats over time with reasonable regularity. It is not
until the rhythm persists over a long span of time that we recognize
this regularity cannot be the result of chance." A lot of people have
been waiting for me to write a Gann book. I promise it will be written
and will fully disclose a careers lifetime of research and application,
but a solid introduction can be offered in a chapter that can begin
your journey and offer enough information for you to stay clear of

the many guesses that are in print at the moment. This chapter follows 15 years of study and I likely have at least five more years ahead
just to complete all the original work of Gann's that I was given by
Elinor Smith Sullivan, a former pilot who did contractual flights for
•

211

212

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T P R I C E OBJECTIVES

Gann and many other business men of that era. (see Breakthroughs
in Technical Analysis, edited by David Keller (Bloomberg Press)).
Therefore, if you have the first edition of this book, rip the Gann
chapter out; the place where I find myself now is light years away

Gann Analysis: Calculating

Price and Time Objectives

•

213

is the natural law of celestial motion, first recognized by Copernicus,
where the Earth's revolution around the sun has a significant effect
on the timing of when life springs back to life, blooms, matures, withers, and decays in a rest phase. These two cycles of celestial motion
equinox as a timing mechanism within the markets.

The books in general about Gann are often misleading. What is a

we accept easily, but the third is more difficult, the precision of the

Many use the methods of Gann's son and they have been led astray.

beginner to do? Working directly from Gann's courses is the best
way. The aim of this chapter is to offer an introduction to a few
methods that will get you started and give you enough information
to know when you are being duped.
Gann was a master of cycle analysis. He used several different
approaches with the aim of finding confluence between price, time,
and diagonal analysis. One of Gann's approaches to identifying
when a trader has permission to exit or enter a market is to use what
are known as the "laws of vibration" or "natural laws." These are

Expansion and Contraction Properties
between Cycles
Before we go any further, consider the following Wheat charts i n
Figures 9.1 through 9.5. The agricultural markets will be extremely
important i n the years ahead and even though you may only trade
an equity index, treasury, or Forex markets, it is important to know
that coming years will place greater emphasis on grains. History has

two very antiquated terms which refer to celestial motion. Gann's
prestige grew in 1909 when Richard D . Wyckoff interviewed him
for The Ticker and Investment Digest. Wyckoff further witnessed a

Annual Average Wheat in England (1259-1938). Compiled by
Bureau of Crop Estimates

trading period with an impressive win:loss ratio. Keep in mind that
the year of the interview was 1909. If you want to know what makes
a trader, study the materials you think brought them into their era of
success. I made the mistake of beginning with modern resources,
when books written in that era would have been easier to use as the
language was the same as that used by Gann.
As an example, books of the late 1800s use the term natural law
freely to describe the "stellar vibrations" of our solar system. It is a
natural law, which we now call "diurnal motion," where the Earth's
rotation on its axis has an influence on us to move from a cycle of
conscious alertness to a state of sleep and back again every 24 hours. It

Figure 9.1

214

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE

OBJECTIVES

Dally WHEAT 1900 to 2011

Gann Analysis: Calculating

Price and Time Objectives

•215

taught us that the cost and availabiUty of food is a more poHtically
destabiUzing force t h a n a f i n a n c i a l crash.
Figure 2.10 i n Chapter 2 showed the European W h e a t prices i n

1000-

the fixed cycle work o f E d w a r d Dewey. As part o f that discussion
I mentioned the data was collected by L o r d Beveridge o f L o n d o n .
For years the only chart I had seen was the Dewey chart that spans
data f r o m 1500 to about 1850, yet L o r d Beveridge reportedly spent
a l i f e t i m e collecting European market prices. H o w far back was he
able to go i n Wheat? H e went back to 1259. T h e interval Edward
Dewey charted for us makes it hard to see a truly remarkable c o m parison to more current W h e a t markets.

Figure 9.2 Daily Wheat 1900-2011
Source: Market Trader Gold, Alphee Lavoie and Sergey Tarasov

Figure 9.1 includes all the data L o r d Beveridge collected, w i t h a
continuation into 1938 by the Bureau o f C r o p Estimates i n L o n d o n .
I f you are a W h e a t trader and have never seen this historical data
before, you m i g h t t h i n k it looks oddly familiar.
Figure 9.2 is the daily W h e a t prices f r o m 1900 to 2011. I f you do
not see the relationships and similarities easily between Figures 9.1
and 9.2, t u r n to Figure 9.3 where the historical data o f 1259 to 1938
i n E n g l a n d is an overlay on the historical market data o f W h e a t i n
N o r t h A m e r i c a f r o m 1900 to 2011.
I f I placed the data f r o m 1259 to 1938 any closer over the data
f r o m 1900 to 2011 by adjusting the scale o f the y axis, you w o u l d
not be able to see the upward price spikes i n the underlying set o f
data at all. Cycles do indeed repeat, but they do not all mirror a fixed
interval of time. Most charts that examine the m i r r o r i n g properties
of cycles suggest t h e x axis should r e m a i n a constant to support
fixed cycle theory. However, Figure 9.3 is a comparison that shows
that cycles do repeat but the cycle may experience an expansion or
contraction attribute. T h e relative ratios that define the significant

2 1 6 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Gann Analysis: Calculating Price and Time Objectives • 2 1 7

versus the other suggests cycles have fractal properties. As you

relationships to one another.

charts have similar proportional spacing. The length of one cycle

logarithmic and have harmonic ratios that explain their internal

overlay of 1920 to current. The principle market spikes in the two

sion and contraction changes have a mathematical basis. They are

prices from 1259 to 1938 have cycle beats that align to the data

beats within the larger cycle remain similarly placed. These expan-

ics and harmonic theory is a precise science. There is a great Web

ars as Pythagoras and Plato.

monic proportion is about. Harmonics fit within the field of phys-

defined the curriculum of the Quadrivium, studied by such schol-

buzzword; their contents show the authors have no idea what har-

be unrelated. These four areas of study are four of the seven that

books have hit the market lately using the word "harmonics" as a

of one another though they seem from the outside looking in to

spiral pattern from rectangles are harmonic, but not all. Several

These four fields of study will mathematically flow into and out

may have a Fibonacci ratio. Some ratios that create the Fibonacci

etry, harmonics (the theory of music), numerology, and astronomy.

properties. As an example, Elliott is not harmonic just because it

sis you must have a comprehensive working knowledge of geom-

to take away the understanding that some ratios have very special

the education path he followed. To fully comprehend Gann analy-

In the next discussion regarding harmonic ratios I only want you

alone. Gann was a thirty-second degree Freemason and that was

selves have a mathematical basis of unique harmonic cohesiveness.

cess. The answers are not easily extracted from his original charts

study hundreds of charts it becomes clear the proportions them-

To understand Gann, you need to study what brought Gann suc-

site you can explore at Georgia State University—they have an app

Harmonic Ratios

as well for iPods and iPads: hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/HBASE/
hframe.html. (If the link changes, try a search using "HyperPhysics

Gann student from the main menu.

see that cycles have expansion and contraction phases themselves

However, this site offers several useful categories of interest for a

this knowledge can be applied within our industry. The start is to

discussion on Pythagorean Temperament in the "Sound" category.

branch, and branch yet again. But my task is to stay focused on how

of Physics and Astronomy. Be sure to work your way toward the

wisdom. There are endless rabbit holes to explore that branch and

to the top of a Google list.) This site is hosted by their Department

by Gann can spend decades in pursuit of his understanding and

C.R. Nave Georgia State University"; my test moves the site right

Readers new to Gann will discover that those of us sincerely intrigued

per second that is mathematically related to the other one.

ratios. Consider Figure 9.3 where the compressed years of Wheat

each string length when plucked produces a vibrating frequency

cycles expand and contract is contained within their proportional

lengths. Together they produce a pleasing sound to the ear because

contraction attributes. The mathematical glue that explains how

monic ratios originate from the vibrations of two proportional string

is to gain a mathematical understanding of these expansion and

While we do not concern ourselves directly with pitch, har-

that proportionally change cycles relative to one another. Our job

218

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

• Lengths of 180 to 360, a ratio of 2:1, is called an octave. The
tone from the shorter string, exactly half the length of the
longer, will vibrate exactly two times faster than the longer
string.
• Lengths of 216 to 360, a ratio of 5:3, is called a major sixth.
• Lengths of 240 to 360, a ratio of 3:2, is called a perfect fifth.
The perfect fifth had great significance to the Pythagoreans.
It has great significance for us as well. As an example, a
Gann Wheel can calculate a perfect fifth price projection
from a pivot point. Our Solar System contains perfect fifths.
Have you ever heard of the phrase "harmony of the spheres"?
Past scholars in history meant it literally.
• Lengths of 270 to 360, a ratio of 4:3, is called a perfect fourth.
• Lengths of 288 to 360, a ratio of 5:4, is called a major third.
• And a ratio of 1:1 is called the first or keynote. I prefer to think
of it as the price pivot note from which all others are derived.

Gann Analysis: Calculating

Price and Time Objectives

• 219

corrections, but it cannot define when it starts and ends as Gann's
work can offer.
When Gann analysis creates a congested mess of cycle targets
in a wide interval of time on a chart, this is not confluence. It can
be thought of as disharmonic noise in time. The result is a market
that is unable to decide the direction it w i l l move. Noise can be
thought of as two sine waves fighting one another. The congestion
of cycle beats must be worked through over time. When the market
breaks past from the congested time period the trends that follow
are often very free flowing and strong. Even i f for no other reason,
this is why you should give Gann analysis a chance. The concept
of vertical confluence targets i n time is very similar to when a market is trapped within a cluster of Fibonacci ratios on the horizontal axis. Then, when prices break through the congestion levels
of resistance or support, the market trends freely toward the next
confluence zone on the horizontal axis. The same concept applies
to Gann time analysis on the vertical axis.

Vibrating strings can be drawn as oscillating sine waves along a
zero axis. Harmonic waves share some common intersecting points
on the zero line. W h y we end up learning about harmonic ratios is
that they explain why certain price objectives are respected by the
market more often than targets derived by other methods. Targets
derived from harmonic ratios also reveal which target is of greater
importance i n a series of objectives.
One of the primary reasons I entered this field of study was
to see if Gann analysis could identify when not to trade a market. Technical analysis has no other method that can more
clearly show when to stay out of a market and identify for how
long. Elliott wave has its guideline of alternation between

Time Cycles: Examples of Gann's Analysis on
the Vertical Axis
Time objectives are significant when time cycles congest in very
narrow bands that confirm one another. I f confluence is important on the vertical axis, there must be a way to test what cycle
should be used. Figure 9.4 is a subset of daily Wheat data from the
1900 to 2011 series. The software is called Market Trader Gold by
Alphee Lavoie and Sergey Tarassov. The program will swear at you
in Russian English and is far from intuitive to use, but it is brilliant because a Russian space program wizard and a professional

220

•

CALCULATING M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Gann Analysis: Calculating

Price and lime Objectives

• 221

astrologer have developed the perfect search engine to identify
cycles that apply to Gann market analysis. I use a program called
Market Analyst with flashier graphics to chart and present some of
the astronomical research results, but some of the cycle conditions
derived from Alphee's program cannot be duplicated in the Market
Analyst. It is very difficult to find software that is easy to use, stable,
consistent, and all inclusive i n one package. Some readers will
know that Peter Pich developed the first Gann charting program,
called Gann Trader 3. It was accurate, but incomplete and very
thin to nonexistent on the astronomy side needed for time analysis.
W i t h his passing, the product remains in Microsoft DOS format
and is slowly becoming extinct. There is no easy solution right
now . Market Analyst is rewriting their entire software product in
need of a new platform to resolve several issues. I have not seen
the new platform at this time. I have invested years of detailing
feature specifications for this product. But the previous versions
have been unstable for advanced Gann users. It is hard to stay
true to Gann methods in a very exclusive and small market. Soon
as numerous additions are added to any product it becomes more
challenging to learn. However, this one has the greatest potential
of getting it right.
Figure 9.4 has an imbedded cycle that slowly expands the timing
between cycle beats and then contracts. This is common for cycles
based on orbital motion because planets follow elliptic patterns that
give the appearance a planet can change speed along the path. To
see the expansion and contraction character of a cycle, use Figure
9.4 to look at the x axis near 1994. The cycle beat is nearly aligned
to the axis hash mark denoting the start of the year. As you scan
left the hash mark for a year on the x axis no longer aligns with

222

• CALCULATING M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Gann Analysis: Calculating

Price and Time Objectives

• 223

in ancient Egypt. Gann travelled to Egypt to further his studies.

of the data, but the alignment with the start of a year returns. As

more interesting when you know that Mercury had great significance

the cycle beat. The contraction phase is not visible in this segment

System is called geocentric. The Earth s tilt on its axis creates several

physics departments. Focus on discussions of motion.

June and July. The perceptions form Earth as the center of our Solar

mation posted by universities for astronomy courses offered by their

the Sun moves faster in December and January, and more slowly in

astronomy from the hiternet. Begin by exploring the online infor-

not uniform? The seasons are of different lengths of time because

from earth it is called geocentric. Beginners can learn the basics of

Speed? D i d you know the mohon of the Sun along the ecliptic is

tions relative to one another. I f we consider their positions as seen

direction, or mathematical orbit measurement has been evaluated.

planets. As planets move around the sun they change their posi-

multiple combination, individual speed, acceleration, position,

looking at a planetary cycle based on the aspect angle between two

ets in combination? Well in fact every planet, every angle, every

of expansion and contraction rhythms within the history. You are

Why look at the Sun and Neptune rather than some other plan-

the chart scrolls toward 1900 the cycle beats clearly display phases

to the barycenter of the Earth-Moon system.

and Neptune appear to be very close to one another as seen from

perturbations of our orbit by other planets and our motion relative

L I is a formula that will map every occurrence when the Sun

small differences in the length of seasons from year to year due to

cycle beats are again caused by the elliptic orbit of the planets.

mathematical issues that must be considered. In fact there are also

In Figure 9.4 the expansion and contraction character of the

record.

produced a different cycle beat. The angles between Gann's Fan

from the cycle beat over the entire 700 years of Wheat data on

be in opposition to one another. The opposition aspect would have

tested further to see what kind of market action might be expected

been 180 degrees from Neptune (plus or minus four) they would

mine the significance of this event. Only then are the signals

example that the Sun is conjunct with Neptune. Had the Sun

markets. The cycle must then be statistically evaluated to deter-

plus or minus four degrees i n orb is close enough to say i n this

with water define one of the cycles of great influence on the grain

ets are in orb. A zero degree alignment is rare. Therefore we accept

Interestingly the Sun that gives light and Neptune associated

Earth. We refer to the four degrees criteria as the period the plan-

lines have been found to be of significance in aspect planetary cycle
studies.

Astronomy is a science and the universal language of science is
mathematics. The new cycle in Figure 9.5, L2, is called an Ingress

only one degree of angle along the celestial horizon has been

Mercury as the center. This mathematical relationship becomes

study there would be 360 degrees between each cycle beat because

a mean distance of 1.618 when measured in astronomical units from

sun passes that precise angle it forms a cycle beat. In this particular

Analysis that Ceres is needed to show how the planets all add up to

the Sun enters a specific degree on the celestial equator. As the

idly. The asteroid Ceres is important. But you will read in Fibonacci

study. L2 is directly under the price data and marks every occasion

Alignments with more than two planets will magnify the task rap-

224

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Gann Analysis: Calculating

Price and Time Objectives

• 225

r<lo Name 1
600500-

300200TRANS lO)-*!*?)

Efficiency l e i t for Asi^qilog^fli E v e n

Figure 9.5 Aerodynamic Investments Inc., www.aeroinvest.com
Source: Market Trader Gold, Alphee Lavoie and Sergey Tarasov

requested (Sun entering Aries). Figure 9.5 includes an efficiency
test for this astrological event. The cycle beat is on the zero axis and
the -20 to +20 scale shows 20 days before and 20 days afterward.
Gann gives time cycles in his books, but he does not give you
charts to make it easy to see his references visually. It is not until
you create the chart that it is clear Gann did not reference the start
or end of significant price swings. This is very confusing at first,
but Gann was teaching us what cycles he used for specific markets.
Patrick Mikula makes a valuable study in his books, but they are
incomplete and Patrick did not filter out John Gann's work that
must be ignored. Gann's work is amazing considering it all had to be
done by hand. Be aware he made errors and omissions because he
lacked the ability to use a computer. He also never traded a market
overseas. Do not assume what works in North America translates
exactly in China, as an example.

'Zl'Jioin^Z"!^^^^^^ investments Inc., Daily Market
Source: Charts by Market Analyst 6, Copyright 1996-2011
We are still discussing vertical cycle analysis used by Gann to
define time objectives. Figure 9.6 is a two-week chart of Corn
prices. This is a different Ingress study where the planet Venus
is tracked when it enters the ninetieth degree or cusp of Cancer.
With the cycle beats marked on the chart you can easily see the

226

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Gann Analysis: Calculating

Price and Time Objectives

*227

ets move in a direct (eastward) motion around the Sun, but the planet

vertical lines on the bottom of the price window. The expansion

caused by its being lapped by another planet, or vice versa. Both plan-

expansion and contraction character of the downbeats on the
and contraction phases are also rhythmical.
We have only touched on two different kinds of astrological cycles
Gann used. Other cycles you will want to learn about, other than
ingress movement and aspect relationships, arc solar and lunar
eclipses, moon phases, and retrograde motion to name a few more.
In the book Breakthroughs in Technical Analysis (Bloomberg Press),
I had a copy editor who corrected my correchons describing retrograde motion several times. I finally submitted a title to the graphics
department so the image would be correct, although the copy editor
explains the retrograde movement backwards. We are all so visual no
one has brought this inconsistancy to the publisher of my attention.
However, it is wrong in that book. So let me use a NASA image to do
a better job on this particular time cycle explanation, (see Figure 9.7).
Most people use the term "retrograde" to mean retrograde motion.
Retrograde motion is the apparent backward motion of a planet

with the inside (smaller) orbit moves faster than the planet on the outside (larger) orbit, and when it passes the slower moving planet, each
sees the other one as apparently moving backward relative to its usual
motion around the sky. In this "retrograde" motion, neither planet is
actually moving backward; it only appears that way, during the time
that one laps the other. There are several periods we Gann analysts
study to find the best correlation with a market: the period when the
planet enters its retrograde motion, the interval of time just before
retrograde when the planet appears to decelerate its orbital speed, the
time when the planet seems to stall and have no motion, the period
it returns to direct motion, and the period when it accelerates away
and returns to the original speed along its normal orbital path. There
are two other types of retiograde movement in astionomy, but we do
not concern ourselves with the backward path of some moons as they
orbit around their planets or if a body spins in reverse on its axis to
most other bodies in the solar system. (On Earth everyone is shifting
to the east. "Clean cups please." A.K.A. Alice in Wonderland.)
Easi
