The New
Trading for a Living

The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived the market’s ever-changing environment and have prospered—some by reinventing
systems, others by getting back to basics. Whether a novice trader, professional
or somewhere in-between, these books will provide the advice and strategies
needed to prosper today and well into the future. For more on this series, visit our
website at www.WileyTrading.com.
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Australia
and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing print and
electronic products and services for our customers’ professional and personal
knowledge and understanding.

The New
Trading for a
Living
Psychology • Discipline
Trading Tools and Systems
Risk Control • Trade Management

Dr. Alexander Elder
www.elder.com
www.spiketrade.com

Cover design: Paul DiNovo
Copyright © 2014 by by Dr. Alexander Elder. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600,
or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011,
fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness
of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.You should consult with
a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material included
with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book
refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this
material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
ISBN 978-1-118-44392-7 (Hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-118-96367-8 (ebk)
ISBN 978-1-118-96368-5 (ebk)
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To the memory of Lou Taylor—
a wise man, a savvy trader, and a true friend.

CONTENTS

Prefacexiii

Introduction1

ONE

TWO

THREE

â•‡ 1. Trading—The Last Frontier
â•‡ 2. Psychology Is the Key
â•‡ 3. The Odds against You

1
3
5

Individual Psychology

9

â•‡ 4. Why Trade?
â•‡ 5. Reality versus Fantasy
â•‡ 6. Self-Destructiveness
â•‡ 7. Trading Psychology
â•‡ 8. Trading Lessons from AA
â•‡ 9. Losers Anonymous
10. Winners and Losers

9
10
16
19
21
23
27

Mass Psychology

31

11. What Is Price?
12. What Is the Market?
13. The Trading Scene
14. The Market Crowd and You
15. Psychology of Trends
16. Managing versus Forecasting

32
33
36
39
43
46

Classical Chart Analysis

49

17. Charting
18. Support and Resistance

50
55

vii

viii

FOUR

FIVE

SIX

SEVEN

EIGHT

CONTENTS

19. Trends and Trading Ranges
20. Kangaroo Tails

60
65

Computerized Technical Analysis

69

21. Computers in Trading
22. Moving Averages
23. Moving Average Convergence-Divergence:
MACD Lines and MACD-Histogram
24. The Directional System
25. Oscillators
26. Stochastic
27. Relative Strength Index

69
74

Volume and Time

103

28. Volume
29. Volume-Based Indicators
30. Force Index
31. Open Interest
32. Time
33. Trading Timeframes

103
107
112
117
121
126

General Market Indicators

133

34. The New High–New Low Index
35. Stocks above 50-Day MA
36. Other Stock Market Indicators
37. Consensus and Commitment Indicators

133
139
140
142

Trading Systems

149

38. System Testing, Paper Trading, and the
Three Key Demands for Every Trade
39. Triple Screen Trading System
40. The Impulse System
41. Channel Trading Systems

151
154
162
166

Trading Vehicles

173

42. Stocks
43. ETFs
44. Options
45. CFDs
46. Futures
47. Forex

175
176
178
186
187
194

80
89
95
95
99

ix

CONTENTS

NINE

TEN

ELEVEN

Risk Management

197

48. Emotions and Probabilities
49. The Two Main Rules of Risk Control
50. The Two Percent Rule
51. The Six Percent Rule
52. A Comeback from a Drawdown

197
202
203
208
210

Practical Details

215

53. How to Set Profit Targets: “Enough” Is the Power Word
54. How to Set Stops: Say No to Wishful Thinking
55. Is This an A-trade?
56. Scanning for Possible Trades

215
219
225
230

Good Record-Keeping

233

57.Your Daily Homework
58. Creating and Scoring Trade Plans
59. Trade Journal

234
238
243

A Journey without an End:
How to Continue Learning

249

Sources253
Acknowledgments257
About the Author
259
Index261

P R E FA C E

T

â•ƒrading for a Living was published in 1993 and became an international best seller.
It remains at the top of many reading lists, as friends recommend it to friends and
trading firms give it to their new hires. All these years, I resisted revising my book
because I trusted and liked its internal logic. I traded, traveled, wrote other books,
and taught a few classes. Now, 21 years later, I agreed to update my most popular
book so that you can benefit from the new technologies as well as the lessons I’ve
learned.
My late great friend Lou Taylor, to whom this book is dedicated, used to joke: “If
I get half a percent smarter each year, I’ll be a genius by the time I die.” Revising my
very first book felt like reliving my youth with the benefit of experience.
In planning this update, I thought of a building complex in Vienna, Austria
called the Gasometer. At its core are multistory storage tanks, erected by Austrian
bricklayers in 1927. When modern technology made huge gas cylinders obsolete,
architects converted them into modern apartments. They punched wide openings
in brick walls, creating panoramic views, installed floors and elevators, and added
glass-enclosed penthouses. I used to stay in one of them and wanted my new book to
follow that model of blending old craftsmanship with new technology.
Before you begin reading this book, ask yourself: what’s the single most important
step you can take to become a successful trader?
Psychology is important. Since I was actively practicing psychiatry while writing the original Trading for a Living, its psychology part stood the test of time and I
changed it very little in this new edition.
Market analysis is very important—but remember that when we look at a chart,
we deal with only five pieces of data—the open, the high, the low, the close and
volume. Piling up masses of indicators and patterns on top of those five values only
increases confusion. Less is often more. If you’ve read Trading for a Living, you’ll see
that I’ve reduced the number of technical chapters and moved some of them into
a downloadable addendum. On the other hand, I added several new chapters that
xi

xii

PREFACE

focus on new tools, notably the Impulse system. I also added a section on stops,
profit targets and other practical details.
Money management is extremely important because financial markets are hotbeds of risk. That was the weakest part of the original book, and I completely
rewrote it. One of many tools you’ll discover will be the Iron Triangle of risk
control.
Psychology, trading tactics, and money management are the three pillars of
success, but there is the fourth factor that ties them together. That factor—which
integrates all others—is record-keeping.
Keeping good records will enable you to learn from your experiences. It’ll help
you break out of the vicious circle of small gains and big losses, running like a squirrel in a barrel, sweating and stressed but never getting anywhere. Keeping good
records will make you your own teacher and a better trader. I’ll show you several
types of records you need to keep and will share several of my trade diaries.
If you’re a new reader, welcome to the journey. If you’ve already read Trading for a
Living, I hope you’ll find this new book two decades smarter than the first.
Dr. â†œAlexander Elder
NewYork–Vermont, 2014

The New
Trading for a Living

Introduction

■■1. Trading—The Last Frontier
You can be free. You can live and work anywhere in the world. You can be independent from routine and not answer to anybody.
This is the life of a successful trader.
Many aspire to it but few succeed. An amateur looks at a quote screen and sees
millions of dollars sparkle in front of his face. He reaches for the money—and loses.
He reaches again—and loses more. Traders lose because the game is hard, or out of
ignorance, or from lack of discipline. If any of these ail you, I wrote this book for you.

How I Began to Trade
In the summer of 1976, I drove from NewYork to California. I took along a few books
on psychiatry (I was a first-year psychiatric resident), several histories, and put a paperback copy of Engel’s How to Buy Stocks into the trunk of my old Dodge. Little did I
know that a dog-eared paperback, borrowed from a lawyer friend, would in due time
change the course of my life. That friend, incidentally, had a perfect reverse golden
touch—any investment he touched went under water. But that’s another story.
I gulped down the Engel book in campgrounds across America, finishing it on a
Pacific beach in La Jolla. I had known nothing about the stock market, and the idea
of making money by thinking gripped me.
I grew up in the Soviet Union in the days when it was, in the words of a former
U.S. president, “an evil empire.” I hated the Soviet system and wanted to get out, but
1

2

INTRODUCTION

emigration was forbidden. I entered college at 16, graduated medical school at 22,
completed my residency, and then took a job as a ship’s doctor. Now I could break
free! I jumped the Soviet ship in Abidjan, Ivory Coast.
I ran to the U.S. Embassy through the clogged dusty streets of an African port
city, chased by my ex-crewmates. The embassy put me in a “safe house” and then on
a plane to New York. I landed at Kennedy Airport in February 1974, arriving from
Africa with $25 in my pocket. I spoke some English, but did not know a soul in this
country.
I had no idea what stocks, bonds, futures, or options were and sometimes got a
queasy feeling just from looking at the American dollar bills in my wallet. In the old
country, a handful of them could buy you three years in Siberia.
Reading How to Buy Stocks opened a whole new world for me. When I returned
to New York, I bought my first stock—it was KinderCare. A very bad thing happened—I made money on my first trade and then the second one, leaving me with
a delusion that making money in the markets was easy. It took me a couple of years
to get rid of that notion.
My professional career proceeded on a separate track. I completed a residency in
psychiatry at a major university hospital, studied at the New York Psychoanalytic Institute, and served as book editor for the largest psychiatric newspaper in the United
States. I still have my license, but my professional practice these days is at most an hour
or two per month. I am busy trading, love traveling, and do some teaching.
Learning to trade has been a long journey—with soaring highs and aching lows.
In moving forward—or in circles—I repeatedly knocked my head against the wall
and ran my trading account into the ground. Each time I returned to a hospital job,
put a stake together, read, thought, did more testing, and then started trading again.
My trading slowly improved, but the breakthrough came when I realized that the
key to winning was inside my head and not inside a computer. Psychiatry gave me
the insight into trading that I will share with you.

Do You Really Want to Succeed?
For many years I had a friend whose wife was fat. She was an elegant dresser, and
she had been on a diet for as long as I had known her. She said she wanted to lose
weight and she didn’t eat cake or potatoes in front of people—but when I came into
her kitchen, I’d see her go at it with a big fork. She said she wanted to be slim, but
remained fat.
The short-term pleasure of eating was stronger for her than the delayed pleasure
and health benefits of weight loss. My friend’s wife reminded me of a great many
traders who say they want to be successful but keep making impulsive trades—going
for the short-term thrills of gambling in the markets.
People deceive and play games with themselves. Lying to others is bad, but lying
to yourself is hopeless. Bookstores are full of good books on dieting, but the world
is still full of overweight people.

2. PSYCHOLOGY IS THE KEY

3

This book will teach you how to analyze and trade the markets, control risks, and
deal with your own mind. I can give you the knowledge. Only you can supply the
motivation.
And remember this: an athlete who wants to enjoy risky sports must follow safety
rules. When you reduce risks, you gain an added sense of accomplishment and control. The same goes for trading.
You can succeed in trading only if you handle it as a serious intellectual pursuit. Emotional
trading is lethal. To help ensure success, practice defensive money management. A good trader
watches his capital as carefully as a professional scuba diver watches his air supply.

■■2. Psychology Is the Key
Remember how you felt the last time you placed an order? Were you anxious to
jump in or afraid of losing? Did you procrastinate before entering your order? When
you closed out a trade, did you feel elated or humiliated? The feelings of thousands
of traders merge into huge psychological tides that move the markets.

Getting Off the Roller Coaster
The majority of traders spend most of their time looking for good trades. Once
they enter a trade, they don’t manage it but either squirm from pain or grin from
pleasure. They ride an emotional roller coaster and miss the essential element of
winning—the management of their emotions. Their inability to manage themselves
leads to poor risk management and losses.
If your mind is not in gear with the markets, or if you ignore changes in mass
psychology of crowds, you have no chance of making money trading. All winning
professionals know the enormous importance of psychology. Most losing amateurs
ignore it.
Friends and students who know that I am a psychiatrist often ask whether this
helps me as a trader. Good psychiatry and good trading have one important principle
in common. Both focus on reality, on seeing the world the way it is. To live a healthy
life, you have to live with your eyes open. To be a good trader, you need to trade with
your eyes open, recognize real trends and turns, and not waste time or energy on
fantasies, regrets, and wishful thinking.

A Man’s Game?
Brokerage house records indicate that most traders are male. The files of my firm,
Elder.com, confirm that approximately 85 to 90 percent of traders are male. The
percentage of women traders among my clients, however, has more than doubled
since the original edition of Trading for a Living was written twenty years ago.

4

INTRODUCTION

The English language being what it is, “he” flows better than “he or she” or jumping between the two pronouns. To make reading easier, I’ll use the masculine pronoun throughout this book. Of course, no disrespect is intended to the many women traders.
As a matter of fact, I find that the percentage of successful traders is higher among
women. As a group, they tend to be more disciplined and less arrogant than men.

How This Book Is Organized
The three pillars of successful trading are psychology, market analysis, and risk management. Good record-keeping ties them together. This book will help you learn the
essentials of all these areas.
Part One of this book will show you how to manage emotions in trading. I discovered this method while practicing psychiatry. It greatly improved my trading, and it
can help you too.
Part Two will focus on crowd psychology of the markets. Mass behavior is more
primitive than that of individuals. If you understand how crowds behave, you’ll be
able to profit from their mood swings instead of being swept up in their emotional
tides.
Part Three will show how chart patterns reflect crowd behavior. Classical technical analysis is applied social psychology, like poll-taking. Support, resistance, breakouts, and other patterns reflect crowd behavior.
Part Four will teach you modern methods of computerized technical analysis.
Indicators provide a better insight into mass psychology than classical chart patterns.
Trend-following indicators help identify market trends, while oscillators show when
those trends are ready to reverse.
Volume and open interest also reflect crowd behavior. Part Five will focus on
them as well as on the passage of time in the markets. Crowds have short attention
spans, and a trader who relates price changes to time gains a competitive advantage.
Part Six will focus on the best tools for analyzing the stock market as a whole.
They can be especially helpful for stock index futures and options traders.
Part Seven will present several trading systems.We’ll begin with the Triple Screen,
which has become widely accepted, and then review the Impulse and Channel trading systems.
Part Eight will discuss several classes of trading vehicles. It will outline pluses and
minuses of equities, futures, options, and forex, while blowing away the promotional
fog that clouds some of these markets.
Part Nine will lead you into the all-important topic of money management. This
essential aspect of successful trading is neglected by most amateurs. You can have a
brilliant trading system, but if your risk management is poor, then a short string of
losses will destroy your account. Armed with the Iron Triangle of risk control and
other tools, you’ll become a safer and more effective trader.
Part Ten will delve into the nitty-gritty of trading—setting stops, profit targets,
and scanning. These practical details will help you implement any system you like.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

3. THE ODDS AGAINST YOU

5

Part Eleven will guide you through the principles and templates of good recordkeeping. The quality of your records is the single best predictor of your success. I’ll
offer you free downloads of the templates I like to use.
Last but not least, this book has a separate Study Guide. It asks over 100 questions,
each linked to a specific section of the book. All questions are designed to test your
level of understanding and discover any blind spots. After you finish reading each section of this book, it’ll make sense to turn to the Study Guide and answer questions
relevant to that section. If test results turn out to be less than excellent, don’t hurry,
reread that section of the book, and retake the test.
You are about to spend many hours with this book. When you find ideas that
look important to you, test them in the only way that matters—on your own market data and in your own trading. You will make this knowledge your own only by
questioning and testing it.

■■3. The Odds against You
Why do most traders lose and wash out of the markets? Emotional and mindless
trading are big reasons, but there is another. Markets are actually set up so that most
traders must lose money. The trading industry slowly kills traders with commissions
and slippage.
You pay commissions for entering and exiting trades. Slippage is the difference
between the price at which you place your order and the price at which it gets filled.
When you place a limit order, it is filled at your price or better, or not at all. When
you feel eager to enter or exit and place a market order, it’s often filled at a worse
price than prevailed when you placed it.
Most amateurs are unaware of the harm done by commissions and slippage, just
as medieval peasants could not imagine that tiny invisible germs could kill them. If
you ignore slippage and deal with a broker who charges high commissions, you’re
acting like a peasant who drinks from a communal pool during a cholera epidemic.
The trading industry keeps draining huge amounts of money from the markets.
Exchanges, regulators, brokers, and advisors live off the markets, while generations
of traders keep washing out. Markets need a fresh supply of losers just as builders
of the ancient pyramids needed a fresh supply of slaves. Losers bring money into the
markets, which is necessary for the prosperity of the trading industry.

A Minus-Sum Game
Winners in a zero-sum game make as much as losers lose. If you and I bet $20 on
the direction of the next 100-point move in the Dow, one of us will collect $20 and
the other will lose $20. A single bet has a component of luck, but the more knowledgeable person will keep winning more often than losing over a period of time.
People buy the industry’s propaganda about trading being a zero-sum game, take
the bait, and open accounts. They don’t realize that trading is a minus-sum game.

6

INTRODUCTION
