
Burniske 03.indd 264

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

265

Hence, the incumbent that avoids developing products that utilize the new
technology may be maximizing short-term revenue, but is shooting itself in the
foot over the long term. As Christensen notes, in the early stages of a disruptive technology, it is most important that the company learn and experiment.
If the company doesn’t experiment early on, then by the time the technology
is inflecting in its growth—with a market that is sizeable enough to move the
needle for the incumbent—it is too late. By that point, the smaller companies that took the time to master the new technology are much more nimble
and experienced and will outcompete incumbents in what have become big
growth markets.
If an incumbent misses enough of these growth opportunities, its offerings
will become obsolete, its revenue will dwindle, its market capitalization will
shrink, and it will become a dead-end investment. Often these are referred to
as value-traps. As the innovative investor might expect, the fall of incumbents
is happening at an accelerating rate, as is the rise of new winners. The disruption of incumbents can be quantified by how long the biggest companies stay
in the S&P 500, or their average life span. The average life span for companies
in the S&P 500 has fallen from 60 years in the 1960s to below 20 years of
late.2 This is clearly a sign that investors must not be complacent. One cannot
assume that the companies succeeding today will continue to be the leading
(and profitable) companies for decades to come.
Disruptive technologies are also being invented at an accelerating rate. The
trend is one we have been witnessing for millennia. For example, between AD
900 and 1900, a new general purpose technology was invented roughly every
100 years, with notable examples including the steam engine, automobile,
and electricity. In the twentieth century, a new general purpose technology
came into existence every 15 years, with familiar examples like computers, the
Internet, and biotechnology. In the twenty-first century, general purpose technologies have come into existence every 4 years, with autonomous robotics
and blockchain technology as two of the more recent examples.3
While disruptive technologies tend to unseat incumbents, there are examples of companies that have managed to reinvent themselves continually for
decades. Just as there is danger, there is also opportunity for incumbents to
capitalize on exciting new growth markets, which can boost their revenue and
market capitalizations. Discerning the difference between a value-trap and a
reborn incumbent can make all the difference for the innovative investor.

Burniske 03.indd 265

9/9/17 2:41 PM

266 CRYPTOASSETS

BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR
In 2016, the father-son team of Don and Alex Tapscott published the book
Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology Behind Bitcoin Is Changing Money,
Business, and the World, and William Mougayar published the book, The
Business Blockchain: Promise, Practice, and Application of the Next Internet
Technology. As the titles imply, these books discuss the many ways in which
blockchain technology is currently and will continue to disrupt how business
is done worldwide. In this chapter, we investigate a few ways the financial sector may be upended by cryptoassets and how incumbents are responding.
Using the financial sector as a leaping off point, investors can then apply their
learnings to other industries.
The financial industry must slog through a swamp of regulation, sometimes
making it slow to adapt to new technologies. Recently the industry has been
showing its age with numerous data breaches, near-monopolistic structures,
and continued use of tools and models developed decades ago that still run the
inefficient money systems in place today. However, the Tapscotts believe the
days of “Franken-finance”—that convoluted, contradictory, and often irrational system of finance we’ve lived under for so many years—are “numbered as
blockchain technology promises to make the next decade one of great upheaval
and dislocation but also immense opportunity for those who seize it.”4
Recall from Chapter 2 that not all instances in which blockchain technology
is used necessarily involve a cryptoasset (such as bitcoin or ether). In fact, thus
far the majority of companies in the financial services space have opted for
blockchain implementations void of cryptoassets. It is increasingly common
for these implementations to be referred to as distributed ledger technology
(DLT), which differentiates them from the blockchains of Bitcoin, Ethereum,
and beyond. For companies pursuing a DLT strategy, they still utilize many
of the innovations put forth by the developers of public blockchains, but they
don’t have to associate themselves with those groups or share their networks.
They pick and choose the parts of the software they want to use and run it
on their own hardware in their own networks, similar to intranets (earlier
referred to as private, permissioned blockchains).
We see many DLT solutions as band-aids to the coming disruption. While
DLT will help streamline existing processes—which will help profit margins
in the short term—for the most part these solutions operate within what will
become increasingly outdated business models. As we will cover with insurance, incumbents could use public blockchain architectures to provision simi-

Burniske 03.indd 266

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

267

lar services to what they do already, but it would cannibalize some of their
revenue. Such cannibalization is admittedly painful, but as Christensen lays
out, it is often necessary for long-term survival. Additionally, regulation can
handcuff the incumbents, and in the financial services industry incumbents
are particularly sensitive to regulatory rebukes after the financial crisis of 2008.
The incumbents protect themselves by dismissing cryptoassets, a popular
example being JPMorgan’s Jamie Dimon, who famously claimed bitcoin was
“going to be stopped.”5 Mr. Dimon and other financial incumbents who dismiss cryptoassets are playing exactly to the precarious mold that Christensen
outlines:
Disruptive technologies bring to a market a very different value
proposition than had been available previously. Generally, disruptive technologies underperform established products in mainstream markets. But they have other features that a few fringe
(and generally new) customers value. Products based on disruptive technologies are typically cheaper, simpler, smaller, and, frequently, more convenient to use.

Disruptive technologies like cryptoassets initially gain traction because they’re
“cheaper, simpler, smaller.” This early traction occurs on the fringe, not in the
mainstream, which allows incumbents like Mr. Dimon to dismiss them. But
cheaper, simpler, smaller things rarely stay on the fringe, and the shift to mainstream can be swift, catching the incumbents off guard.

Remittances and Blockchain Technology
One area long discussed as ripe for disruption is the personal remittances market, where individuals who work outside of their home countries send money
back home to provide for their families. The market is massive, with the World
Bank reporting worldwide remittance flows north of $600 billion, though it
admits that the estimate is conservative: “The true size of remittances, including unrecorded flows through formal and informal channels, is believed to be
significantly larger.” 6
Most remittances originate in high-income countries and are sent to individuals in developing countries, where the banking systems may not be easily
accessible. As families in the receiving countries are typically unbanked—without access to a bank account or direct wire transfer capabilities—companies

Burniske 03.indd 267

9/9/17 2:41 PM

268 CRYPTOASSETS

that provide a solution serve as a lifeline between the remitter and his or her
family.7 For many years companies such as Western Union and MoneyGram
have used their lifeline position to levy high fees on these remitters, as they are
among few options available and provide a mission critical service.
For example, toward the end of 2016 the global average fee for a remittance
was just shy of 7.5 percent, with the weighted average coming in just under 6
percent.8 These fees are decreasing, and rightfully so; in 2008, the average fee
was nearly 10 percent, which meant that someone with $100 to send home
only ending up giving $90 to his or her family, while the remitting company
took the other $10.9 It hardly seems fair; some call it exploitation.
As more competitors enter the market in the Internet era, people realize
there is little reason for such high fees to be charged. While the term “wire
money” may make it sound like the company providing the service is doing
something sophisticated, in reality there’s no wire. This is an outdated term
from the days when Western Union was a telegraph company, literally using
wires to send messages. Those wires are long gone. For the most part, all that
happens in a remittance is a few centralized entities rebalance their books,
debiting one account and crediting the other, after taking out a large chunk of
the original amount, of course.
It’s no stretch then to recognize that bitcoin, with its low cost, high speed,
and a network that operates 24/7, could be the preferred currency for these
types of international transactions. Of course, there are requirements to make
this happen. The recipient needs to have a bitcoin wallet, or a business needs
to serve as an intermediary, to ultimately get the funds to the recipient. While
the latter option creates a new-age middleman—which potentially has its own
set of problems—thus far these middlemen have proved to be much less costly
than Western Union. The middleman can be a pawnshop owner with a cell
phone, who receives the bitcoin and pays out local currency to the intended
recipient.
In India, the largest receiver of remittances in the world with 12 percent of
the global remittance total, a recent partnership between bitcoin exchanges is
projected to bring the fee down to 0.5 percent for remittances into the country.10 In Mexico, there’s been a huge surge in volume at the country’s bitcoin
exchange, Bitso, where funds can be transferred for a similarly low fee.11 All of
these companies are eyeing the tens of billions of dollars the incumbents make
from levying fat fees on vulnerable customers.
The impact of this major disruption in the remittance market should be
recognized by the innovative investor not only because of the threat it creates

Burniske 03.indd 268

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

269

to a publicly traded company like Western Union (WU) but for the opportunities it provides as well. For example, Bitso secured startup funding through
the online investment service bnktothefuture.com, which, as we discussed in
Chapter 16, connects investors with cryptoasset startups.12

Business-to-Business Payments and Blockchain Technology
Sending money internationally goes beyond citizens, as businesses also transmit large volumes to global business partners. While this industry is too large
to dive into every detail, the same story laid out in remittances applies: fees
are generally higher than they should be, and payments are slower than they
should be. Visa, for example, has sensed the opportunity and is working with
a startup called Chain to build a business-to-business payment solution using
blockchain technology.13 BitPesa is another company that leverages Bitcoin to
help companies in Africa (currently Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Uganda)
send and receive global payments.14
Ripple has been a popular startup for incumbents to work with, and some
of them are creating projects that utilize its native asset, XRP. Incumbents such
as Bank of America, RBC, Santander, BMO, CIBC, ATB Financial, and more
use Ripple’s blockchain-based technology to achieve faster and more secure
financial transactions.15 If realized, these efforts could not only reward the
companies that utilize Ripple but also potentially benefit Ripple’s own crypto­
asset, XRP, which can be used as a bridge currency to help settlements on the
Ripple network.16
The innovative investor will want to monitor how cheaper money flows
may create opportunities for new and existing businesses in emerging markets. Capital fuels the growth of industries, and if money moves more freely
between citizens and businesses, that may induce a significant economic boom
in developing markets. This, too, may warrant an investigation of which geographies stand to benefit the most, as many ETFs and mutual funds can be purchased for exposure to targeted geographies. Geographic diversification can
benefit a portfolio when isolated macroeconomic dislocations strike.

Insurance and Blockchain Technology
Thus far, most insurance companies have opted to investigate DLT implementations and have not ventured far into the world of cryptoassets. Large consulting firms are competing to be viewed as thought leaders on how distributed

Burniske 03.indd 269

9/9/17 2:41 PM

270 CRYPTOASSETS

ledger technology will change the insurance industry, as these firms hope to
win valuable contracts with deep-pocketed insurance companies that need
help navigating the potential disruption. Deloitte believes that “a blockchain
could allow the industry as a whole to streamline its processing and offer a better user experience for customers who have to make a claim. Simultaneously,
storing claims and customer information on a blockchain would cut down
fraudulent activity.”17
Innovative investors can get a leg up on which insurance companies may
be good short-term investment candidates and which to avoid, based on the
action they take given the predictions of well-respected consulting firms. That
said, as we have already mentioned, we view many of these DLT implementations as band-aids to prolong the life of systems that will fade into obsolescence over the coming decades. For the long term investor, careful analysis
should be undertaken to understand if insurance companies are pursuing DLT
use cases that will provide a lasting and meaningful solution. Lastly, some of
the major consulting firms may be so entrenched in incumbent ideology that
they too may be blind to the coming disruption.
Recall from Chapter 5 that there are already companies like Etherisc providing decentralized insurance policies. The disruption can go beyond the
capital raising and claims management processes of insurance companies, and
into the risk models themselves. For example, Augur’s prediction platform
built on Ethereum allows for markets to be created around the outcome of
real-world events.18 The predictive applications for this platform in the insurance area are varied and could have a direct impact on the actuarial industry,
which is an integral part of the insurance industry and currently defines its
pricing models.
Options exist for insurance companies to find a happy medium using the
solutions provided by cryptoassets. For example, Factom has implemented a
smart contract platform that allows for the creation of insurance policies with
improved security and identification capabilities. Peter Kirby, the cofounder of
Factom, points out that his platform can protect policyholders from fraud and
identity theft, or at least provide them with the ability to track down the perpetrators of fraud and identity theft through the immutability provided by the
blockchain technology that his platform is built on.19 Cutting down on fraud
and identity theft would help the bottom line of many insurance companies
tremendously. Furthermore, operating in the transparency of public networks
would do much to bolster trust in their operations, which could draw more
customers.

Burniske 03.indd 270

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

271

DON’T REARRANGE THE DECK CHAIRS ON THE TITANIC
In the days immediately after the 2016 election of Donald Trump as U.S.
president, the stocks of companies in the financial sector rallied in expectation of the new president’s potential policy shifts from that of the prior
administration.20 During that time, investors benefited from having financial
stocks in their portfolio, and perhaps, many more put these stocks into their
portfolio after the election, either on the advice of advisors or as a reaction to
the financial media claiming financial stocks were bound to benefit in the “age
of Trump.” However, focusing on these short-term trends is like rearranging
the deck chairs on a sinking Titanic.
The innovative investor should ask if these gains were due to actual policies or the expectation of these policies, which hadn’t yet been implemented.
Policies can be temporarily effective at reinforcing the financial status quo
but are only stopgaps in the face of long-term secular trends. It’s important to
recognize the disruption that bitcoin and cryptoassets can bring to the entire
global financial system. Armed with this recognition, the innovative investor
should consider the long-term investment prospects of financial companies
clinging to their current operating models without consideration or recognition of the impending disruptions that these technologies will bring to the
sector. The bottom line is that rather than fretting over where to position
their deck chair, investors should consider if they should be long-term buyers of these existing banks and financial firms, given what they know about
blockchain technology and the potential it brings to significantly change the
banking industry.

THREE POTENTIAL STRATEGIES FOR SURVIVAL
We list three general strategies incumbents will likely use in their attempt to
capitalize on the potential of blockchain technology.

If You Can’t Beat ’Em, Buy ’Em
Toward the end of 2015 and through much of 2016, it seemed as if every single
financial services firm was waking up to the potential of blockchain technology to disrupt its industry. When incumbents feel like they are late and being

Burniske 03.indd 271

9/9/17 2:41 PM

272 CRYPTOASSETS

outmaneuvered by startups, they simply buy or invest in the startups. That
is precisely what happened. The list of incumbents investing in bitcoin and
blockchain startups accelerated to a frenzied pace starting in late 2015, and
continued through the first half of 2016, including Citi, Visa, MasterCard,
New York Life, Wells Fargo, Nasdaq, Transamerica, ABN AMRO, and Western
Union.21
While the investing or takeover strategy has been a go-to for incumbents
trying to avoid disruption, it is rarely as effective as hoped. Once the big company swallows the startup, or begins meddling, it is often hard for the startup
to retain its fast-moving and flexible culture. Nimble cultures are key to succeeding in the early stages of a disruptive technology, and if the startup is
tainted by corporate bureaucracy, then it will quickly lose its edge.

Circle the Wagons
Industry consortiums have been extremely popular among incumbents investigating how to apply distributed ledger technology to their industry. On one
hand, a consortium makes perfect sense, as a distributed ledger needs to be
shared among many parties for it to have any use. A collaborative consortium
helps financial services companies—many of which have historically been
competitors that keep their business processes close to their chest—learn how
to share. On the other hand, these consortiums can hit snags if too many big
names and big egos become involved.
One of the most famous consortiums is R3, which launched on September
15, 2015, with big names such as JPMorgan, Barclays, BBVA, Commonwealth
Bank of Australia, Credit Suisse, Goldman Sachs, Royal Bank of Scotland,
State Street, and UBS. By the end of September, 13 more financial companies
had joined, including Bank of America, BNY Mellon, Citi, Deutsche Bank,
Morgan Stanley, and Toronto-Dominion Bank. Before 2015 was over, 20 other
financial companies joined R3. R3 consists of the leading financial companies
in the world, many of which are held either in individual equity or bond positions in portfolios or are in managed money investments like mutual funds
and ETFs.
Another consortium, The Hyperledger Project,22 offers more open membership than R3. Remember, one of the strengths and defining aspects of an
effective blockchain project is its open source ethos. The Hyperledger project
was launched in December 2015 under the umbrella of the Linux Foundation
to create a collaborative and open-source platform that could work with many

Burniske 03.indd 272

9/9/17 2:41 PM

Preparing Current Portfolios for Blockchain Disruption

273

industries, not just financial companies.23 Companies currently supporting the
project include Airbus, American Express, Daimler, IBM, and SAP.
The project states, “Hyperledger members and staff are committed to sharing best-practices and providing assistance with the use-case development,
Proof-of-Concept (POC) testing, and adoption of Hyperledger.”24 Initial efforts
undertaken by the group are in the finance and healthcare industries, with
plans to build supply chain solutions as well. It will be interesting to see how
this cross-industry collaborative and open source effort proceeds and what
results come of it. An innovative investor will do well to follow the group’s
efforts to help identify specific companies that may benefit from the results.
One of the more interesting recent consortiums was the Enterprise
Ethereum Alliance. It went public in late February 2017, and its founding
members include Accenture, BNY Mellon, CME Group, JPMorgan, Microsoft,
Thomson Reuters, and UBS.25 What is most interesting about this alliance is
that it aims to marry private industry and Ethereum’s public blockchain. While
the consortium will work on software outside of Ethereum’s public blockchain,
the intent is for all software to remain interoperable in case companies want to
utilize Ethereum’s open network in the future.

Create an Innovation Lab and Leave It Alone
The third strategy that an incumbent can follow is known as an innovation lab.
Several universities, including Harvard, have set up innovation labs as a way
to foster innovation through a collaborative effort between students and businesses. The corporate world has also jumped on this unique way of providing
a forum for nurturing creative ideas with solid business skills. Often, these
innovation labs are left alone, or largely untouched, by the incumbent parent,
perhaps following Christensen’s advice,
With few exceptions, the only instances in which mainstream
firms have successfully established a timely position in a disruptive technology were those in which the firms’ managers set up
an autonomous organization charged with building a new and
independent business around the disruptive technology.
