
Absolutely. Working with Eli was a fabulous experience. He would trade position sizes of 3,000
contracts when the entire market open interest was only 30,000. He would trade more volume than
any cotton trader off the floor. He was a true sight to behold.
Was he trading futures against cash or just speculating?
He was a pure speculator. The amazing thing was that since he used his own broker on the floor,
everyone always knew exactly what his position was. He was very easy to tag. Eli's attitude was,
"The hell with it, I'm going to take them head on."
So everyone knew his hand?
Definitely.
But, apparently, it didn't hurt him?
No.
Is that an exception? Do you try to hide your positions?
I try. But, realistically, the guys in the pit who have been there for five or ten years know it is me.
Everyone knows when I trade. The one thing I learned from Eli is that, ultimately, the market is
going to go where it is going to go.
So you don't think it is important to hide your positions?
I think it is important to make an effort. For instance, my orders used to be particularly easy to read
because I traded in multiples of 300 contracts. Now I break my orders up; I might give one broker
an order for 116 and another broker an order for 184.1 have at least four brokers in every pit.
What else did you learn from Tullis?
He was the toughest son of a bitch I ever knew. He taught me that trading is very competitive and
you have to be able to handle getting your butt kicked. No matter how you cut it, there are
enormous emotional ups and downs involved.
That sounds like a general character-building lesson. What about specifics regarding
trading?
Tullis taught me about moving volume. When you are trading size, you have to get out when the
market lets you out, not when you want to get out. He taught me that if you want to move a large
position, you don't wait until the market is in new high or low ground because very little volume
may trade there if it is a turning point.
One thing I learned as a floor trader was that if, for example, the old high was at 56.80, there are
probably going to be a lot of buy stops at 56.85. If the market is trading 70 aid, 75 offered, the
whole trading ring has a vested interest in buying the market, touching off those stops, and
liquidating into the stops—that is a very common ring practice. As an upstairs trader, I put that
together with what Eli taught me. If I want to cover a position in that type of situation, I will
liquidate half at 75, so that I won't have to worry about getting out of the entire position at the point
where the stops are being hit. I will always liquidate half my position below new highs or lows and
the remaining half beyond that point.
Any other lessons you can attribute to Tullis?
By watching Eli, I learned that even though markets look their very best when they are setting new
highs, that is often the best time to sell. He instilled in me the idea that, to some extent, to be a good
trader, you have to be a contrarian.
You have done tens of thousands of trades. Is there any single trade that stands out?
Yes, the 1979 cotton market. One leams the most from mistakes, not successes. I was a broker back
then. We had lots of speculative accounts and I was long about 400 contracts of July cotton. The
market had been trading in a range between 82 and 86 cents, and I was buying it every time it came
down to the low end of that range.
One day, the market broke to new lows, took out the stops, and immediately rebounded about 30 or
40 points. I thought the reason the market had been acting so poorly was because of the price
vulnerability implied by the proximity of those well-known stops. Now that the stops had been
touched off, I thought the market was ready to rally.
62

I was standing outside the ring at the time. In an act of bravado, I told my floor broker to bid 82.90
for 100 July, which at the time was a very big order. He bid 90 for 100, and I remember the Refco
broker came running across the pit screaming, "Sold!" Refco owned most of the certificated stock
at that time [the type of cotton available for delivery against the contract]. In an instant I realized
that they intended to deliver against the July contract, which then was trading at about a 4-cent
premium to the October contract. It also dawned on me that the whole congestion pattern that had
formed between 82 and 86 cents was going to be a market measurement for the next move down
[the break from 82 cents was going to equal the width of the prior 4-cent trading range].
So you knew you were wrong immediately?
I saw immediately that the market was going straight down to 78 cents, and that it was my blood
that was going to carry it there. I had come in long 400 contracts, entered another 100 as a day
trade, and a final 100 on that macho-type bid that I should never have made.
So you realized instantly that you wanted to be out.
No, I realized instantly that I wanted to be short.
How fast did you react?
Almost immediately. When the Refco broker shouted, "Sold," everyone in the ring turned around
and looked at me, because they knew what I was trying to do. The guy standing next to me said, "If
you want to go to the bathroom, do it right here." He said I looked three shades of white. I
remember turning around, walking out, getting a drink of water, and then telling my broker to sell
as much as he could. The market was limit-down in sixty seconds, and I was only able to sell 220
contracts.
When did you get out of the rest of your position?
The next morning the market opened 100 points lower and I started selling from the opening bell. I
sold only about 150 contracts before the market locked limit-down again. By the time it was all
over, I ended up selling some contracts as much as 4 cents below the point I first knew the position
was no good.
Even though you reacted fairly quickly, you still took a big hit. In retrospect, what should you
have done?
First of all, never play macho man with the market. Second, never overtrade. My major problem
was not the number of points I lost on the trade, but that I was trading far too many contracts
relative to the equity in the accounts that I handled. My accounts lost something like 60 to 70
percent of their equity in that single trade.
Did that particular trade change your whole trading style in terms of risk?
Absolutely. I was totally demoralized. I said, "I am not cut out for this business; I don't think I can
hack it much longer." I was so depressed that I nearly quit.
How many years had you been in the business at that time?
Only about three and a half years.
Had you been successful up to that point?
Relatively. Most of my clients had made money, and I was an important producer for my company.
How about someone who had given you $10,000 at the beginning of the three-year period?
They were probably up about threefold.
So everyone who was with you for a long time was still ahead of the game?
Yes, but I had to suffer some intense drawdowns during the interim. That cotton trade was almost
the deal-breaker for me. It was at that point that I said, "Mr. Stupid, why risk everything on one
trade? Why not make your life a pursuit of happiness rather than pain?"
That was when I first decided I had to learn discipline and money management. It was a cathartic
experience for me, in the sense that I went to the edge, questioned my very ability as a trader, and
decided that I was not going to quit. I was determined to come back and fight. I decided that I was
going to become very disciplined and businesslike about my trading.
63

Did your trading style change radically from that point on?
Yes. Now I spend my day trying to make myself as happy and relaxed as I can be. If I have
positions going against me, I get right out; if they are going forme, I keep them.
I guess you not only started trading smaller, but also quicker?
Quicker and more defensive. I am always thinking about losing money as opposed to making
money. Back then, in that cotton trade, I had a vision of July going to 89 cents and I thought about
all the money I was going to make on 400 contracts. I didn't think about what I could lose.
Do you always know where you are getting out before you put a trade on?
I have a mental stop. If it hits that number, I am out no matter what. How much do you risk on any
single trade?
I don't break it down trade by trade. All the trades I have on are interrelated. I look at it in terms of
what my equity is each morning. My goal is to finish each day with more than I started. Tomorrow
morning I will not walk in and say, "I am short the S&P from 264 and it closed at 257 yesterday;
therefore, I can stand a rally." I always think of it in terms of being short from the previous night's
close.
Risk control is the most important thing in trading. For example, right now I am down about 6'/2
percent for the топшТТНауе а З'б percent stop on my equity for the rest of the month. I want to
make sure that I never have a double-digit loss in any month.
One aspect of your trading style is a contrarian attempt to buy and sell turning points. Let's
say you are looking for a top and go short with a close stop when the market reaches a new
high. You then get stopped out. On a single trade idea, how many times will you try to pick a
turning point before you give up?
Until I change my mind, fundamentally. Otherwise, I will keep cutting my position size down as I
have losing trades. When I am trading poorly, I keep reducing my position size. That way, I will be
trading my smallest position size when my trading is worst.
What are the trading rules you live by?
Don't ever average losers. Decrease your trading volume when you are trading poorly; increase
your volume when you are trading well. Never trade in situations where you don't have control. For
example, I don't risk significant amounts of money in front of key reports, since that is gambling,
not trading.
If you have a losing position that is making you uncomfortable, the solution is very simple: Get out,
because you can always get back in. There is nothing better than a fresh start.
Don't be too concerned about where you got into a position. The only relevant question is whether
you are bullish or bearish on the position that day. Always think of your entry point as last night's
close. I can always tell a rookie trader because he will ask me, "Are you short or long?" Whether I
am long or short should have no bearing on his market opinion. Next he will ask (assuming I have
told him I am long), "Where are you long from?" Who cares where I am long from. That has no
relevance to whether the market environment is bullish or bearish right now, or to the risk/reward
balance of a long position at that moment.
The most important rale of trading is to play great defense, not great offense. Every day I assume
every position I have is wrong. I know where my stop risk points are going to be. I do that so I can
define my maximum possible drawdown. Hopefully, I spend the rest of the day enjoying positions
that are going in my direction. If they are going against me, then I have a game plan for getting out.
Don't be a hero. Don't have an ego. Always question yourself and your ability. Don't ever feel that
you are very good. The second you do, you are dead.
Jesse Livermore, one of the greatest speculators of all time, reportedly said that, in the long ran,
you can't ever win trading markets. That was a devastating quote for someone like me, just getting
into the business. The idea that you can't beat the markets is a frightening prospect. That is why my
guiding philosophy is playing great defense. If you make a good trade, don't think it is because you
have some uncanny foresight. Always maintain your sense of confidence, but keep it in check.
But you have been very successful for years. Aren't you more confident now than you were
before?
I am more scared now than I was at any point since I began trading, because I recognize how
64

ephemeral success can be in this business. I know that to be successful, I have to be frightened. My
biggest hits have always come after I have had a great period and I started to think that I knew
something.
My impression is that you often implement positions near market turns. Sometimes your
precision has been uncanny. What is it about your decision-making process that allows you to
get in so close to the turns?
I have very strong views of the long-ran direction of all markets. I also have a very short-term
horizon for pain. As a result, frequently, I may try repeated trades from the long side over a period
of weeks in a market which continues to move lower.
Is it a matter of doing a series of probes until you finally hit it?
Exactly. I consider myself a premier market opportunist. That means I develop an idea on the
market and pursue it from a very-low-risk standpoint until I have repeatedly been proven wrong, or
until I change my viewpoint.
In other words, it makes a better story to say, "Paul Jones buys the T-bond market 2 ticks
from the low," rather than, "On his fifth try, Paul Jones buys the T-bond market 2 ticks from
its low."
I think that is certainly part of it. The other part is that I have always been a swing trader, meaning
that I believe the very best money is to be made at the market turns. Everyone says you get killed
trying to pick tops and bottoms and you make all the money by catching the trends in the middle.
Well, for twelve years, I have often been missing the meat in the middle, but I have caught a lot of
bottoms and tops.
If you are a trend follower trying to catch the profits in the middle of a move, you have to use very
wide stops. I'm not comfortable doing that. Also, markets trend only about 15 percent of the time;
the rest of the time they move sideways.
What is the most prominent fallacy in the public's perception about markets?
That markets can be manipulated. That there is some group on Wall Street that controls price action
in the markets. I can go into any market and create a stir for a day or two, maybe even a week. If I
go into a market at just the right moment, by giving it a little gas on the upside, I can create the
illusion of a bull market. But, unless the market is really sound, the second I stop buying, the price
is going to come right down. You can open the most beautiful Saks Fifth Avenue in Anchorage,
Alaska, with a wonderful summer menswear department, but unless somebody wants to buy the
clothes, you will go broke.
What other misconceptions do people have about the markets?
The idea that people affiliated with Wall Street know something. My mother is a classic example.
She watches "Wall Street Week" and she takes everything they say with almost a religious fervor. I
would bet that you could probably fade "Wall Street Week."
I know you talk to traders in virtually every major market on an almost daily basis. Are you
uncomfortable about being on the opposite side of the fence from these people?
Yes. Who wants to fade a winner? I want to be with them because I make a point of talking to the
people who have the best track records.
How do you keep all these other opinions from confusing your own vision? Let's say you are
bearish on a market and 75 percent of the people you talk to about that market are bullish. What
do you do?
I wait. I will give you a perfect example. Until last Wednesday, I had been bearish on crude oil,
while it was in the midst of a $2 advance. The best crude oil trader I know was bullish during that
period. Because he was bullish, I never went short. Then the market started to stall and one day he
said, "I think I am going to go flat here." I knew that instant— particularly, given the fact that
bullish news was coming out of OPEC right at that time—that crude oil was a low-risk short. I sold
the hell out of it, and it turned out to be a great trade.
Are there any market advisors that you pay attention to?
65

Marty Zweig and Ned Davis are great; Bob Prechter is the champion. Prechter is the best because
he is the ultimate market opportunist.
What do you mean by opportunist?
The reason he has been so successful is that the Elliott Wave theory allows one to create incredibly
favorable risk/reward opportunities. That is the same reason I attribute a lot of my own success to
the Elliott Wave approach.
Any advisor you consider underrated?
I think Ned Davis does the best research on the stock market that I have seen. Although he is well
known, I don't think he has received the recognition he deserves.
Any analysts you consider overrated?
Judge not, least you be judged.
Very few traders have reached your level of achievement. What makes you different?
I think one of my strengths is that I view anything that has happened up to the present point in time
as history. I really don't care about the mistake I made three seconds ago in the market. What I care
about is what I am going to do from the next moment on. I try to avoid any emotional attachment to
a market. I avoid letting my trading opinions be influenced by comments I may have made on the
record about a market.
No loyalty to positions is obviously an important element in your trading.
It is important because it gives you a wide open intellectual horizon to figure out what is really
happening. It allows you to come in with a completely clean slate in choosing the correct forecast
for that particular market.
Has the tremendous growth of the money you are managing made it more difficult to trade at
the same level of profitability?
It has made it tremendously more difficult.
Do you think you could make a substantially higher percentage return if you were trading
smaller amounts of money?
Without question.
Do you ever question whether the detrimental impact of size on your performance outweighs
profit incentive fees you earn from managing money?
I think about that question every day. It is going to be interesting to see what happens by the time
your book is published.
Have you stopped accepting new investment funds?
Yes, a long time ago.
You have been both a broker and a money manager. How do you compare the relative
advantages and disadvantages of these two jobs?
I got out of the brokerage business because I felt there was a gross conflict of interest: If you are
charging a client commissions and he loses money, you aren't penalized. I went into the money
management business because if I lost money, I wanted to be able to say that I had not gotten
compensated for it. In fact, it would probably cost me a bundle because I have an overhead that
would knock out the Bronx Zoo. I never apologize to anybody, because I don't get paid unless I
win.
Do you keep your money in your own funds?
I would say that 85 percent of my net worth is invested in my own funds, primarily because I
believe that is the safest place in the world for it. I really believe that I am going to be so defensive
and conservative that I will get my money back.
You did extraordinarily well during October 1987, a month which was a disaster for many
other traders. Could you fill in some of the details?
The week of the crash was one of the most exciting periods of my life.
We had been expecting a major stock market collapse since mid-1986 and had contingency plans
66

drawn up because of the possibility we foresaw for a financial meltdown. When we came in on
Monday, October 19, we knew that the market was going to crash that day.
What made you so sure?
Because the previous Friday was a record volume day on the downside. The exact same thing
happened in 1929, two days before the crash. Our analog model to 1929 had the collapse perfectly
nailed. [Paul Jones' analog model, developed by his research director, Peter Borish, superimposed
the 1980s market over the 1920s market. The two markets demonstrated a remarkable degree of
correlation. This model was a key tool in Jones' stock index trading during 1987.] Treasury
Secretary Baker's weekend statement that the U.S. would no longer support the dollar because of its
disagreements with West Germany was the kiss of death for the market.
When did you cover your short position?
We actually covered our shorts and went somewhat long on the close of the day of the crash itself
[October 19].
Were most of your profits in October due to your short stock index position?
No, we also had an extremely profitable bond position. The day of the crash we put on the biggest
bond position we ever had. The bond market had been acting terrible all day long on October 19.
During the day, I was very concerned about the financial safety of our clients' and our own assets.
We had our assets with various commission houses on the street, and I thought those funds could be
in jeopardy. It was an intolerable situation for me.
I kept on thinking: What is the Fed reaction going to be? I thought that thev would have to add
massive amounts of liquidity to create a very rosy environment, instantaneously. However, since
bonds had been acting poorly all day, I couldn't bring myself to pull the trigger on a long bond
position. During the last half hour of trading, bonds suddenly started to turn up, and it clicked in my
mind that the Fed was going to take actions that would create a tremendous upsurge in bond prices.
As soon as I saw the bond market act right for a moment, I went wild.
Do you believe that October 1987 was an early warning signal of more negative times ahead?
I think the financial community, particularly Wall Street, was dealt a life-threatening blow on
October 19, but they are in shock and don't realize it. I remember the time I got run over by a boat,
and my backside was chewed up by the propeller. My first thought was, "Dammit, I just ruined my
Sunday afternoon because I have to get stitched up." Because I was in shock, I didn't even realize
how badly cut up I was until I saw the faces of my friends.
Everything gets destroyed a hundred times faster than it is built up. It takes one day to tear down
something that might have taken ten years to build. If the economy starts to go with the kind of
leverage that is in it, it will deteriorate so fast that people's heads will spin. I hate to believe it, but
in my gut that is what I think is going to happen.
I know from studying history that credit eventually kills all great societies. We have essentially
taken out our American Express card and said we are going to have a great time. Reagan made sure
that the economy would be great during his term in office by borrowing our way into prosperity.
We borrowed against the future, and soon we will have to pay.
Are you blaming the current situation on Reaganomics?
I think Reagan made us feel good as a country—and that is wonderful— but, in terms of
economics, he was the biggest disaster that ever struck. I think he basically hoodwinked us by
promising to cut the deficit, and then went on the biggest spending binge in the history of this
country. I don't think a Democrat could have gotten away with it, because everyone would have
been very vigilant about a $150-180 billion deficit.
Do you see any way in which we can solve our current problems before we go into a deep
recession, or even depression?
That is what scares me so much. I don't see any blueprint out of our current dilemma. Maybe there
are macroeconomic forces at work that are part of a larger super cycle that we don't have any
control over. Perhaps we are simply responding to the same type of cycles that most advanced
civilizations fell prey to, whether it was the Romans, sixteenth-century Spain, eighteenth-century
67
