
231


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

moved it into my longer-term account and just kept going for that
goal of getting it back to 100,000 and I did several times. So my
goal is to always keep each account around that the level and to
pull the excesses and put it somewhere else.

Q.: Do you trade a lot from different places around the world?

A : I do. I love to trade on the road. The time difference makes it
a little difficult when I was in Asia, trading NFP on a Friday night.
That felt very strange. But I do best trading on the road when I’ve
had time to kind of breathe and get away from things. I remember
before I made that trade in the NFP, I was sitting in the Starbucks
café just thinking about the trade and what I planned to do. I wasn’t
looking at any charts, I had just planned in my head, and when it
happened the way I thought it would, I just executed. It was like
mechanical.

Q: de you think finding the perfect entry is more important than
managing your exit?

A : [ think you need to have a good entry. I always know where
my stop is, my risk level. That’s planned before I even enter into
the trade. But as far as profitable exits, take profits, I tend to leave
those open. When it’s going my way, and I’m satisfied, I'll take
most of it off the board and let the rest of it set up with profitable
stops from there on.

: How did you learn about technical analysis and different
indicators?

A : Well, as you know, some of the indicators are actually the
same as in the stock market. They're just used a little differently.
I do have a technical analysis book that I tried to read through.

232


THE NEWS JUNKIE

It’s so difficult. You know the basics are all I use—MACD, RSI,
stuff like that, moving averages. But once again, the key to me is
psychological. You have to know what other people are doing and
just get a feel, a taste for the market because those technical levels
won't mean anything if the market doesn’t want to go there.

Q - what's your favorite indicator?

A. I would have to say Fibonacci. I prefer using those for defining
and testing resistance levels and supports.

Q: Are you more of a systematic or discretionary trader?

A : Definitely discretion. I couldn’t do system trading. It’s too
monotonous. I have to choose how I want to enter, where I want
to enter, the environment I want to enter in, so definitely discre-
tionary.

Q.- Given you background as a system engineer, have you ever
considered trading systematically?

A: I guess the reason I don’t is I get too bored at work [laughter].
So I don’t want to do the same thing at home.

Q. When you are doing your currency trading, do you typically
have one currency that you're trading at a time or will you have
positions in a few different currencies at the same time?

A : | would say two is the max. Any more than that and it gets to
be too much to follow.

233


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Do you care about correlation between the two pairs? For
example, the British pound/Japanese yen and euro/Japanese yen
pairs which may be very strongly correlated.

A : In general I'll trade pairs that aren’t very correlated. Like I
said, I do trade the British pound/U.S. dollar or euro/U.S. dollar
quite often. That’s the normal one. Then if there’s not a lot of
action there and there’s more news coming out in the commodity
currencies, I'll go over there and trade it because often times they'll
move when the majors don’t.

Q.: What do you find is the most interesting thing about trading?

A : Just that basically you can dictate when you decide to trade
and work. Some people don’t want to wake up at 2 o’clock in the
morning and trade, some people love to. I mean, I can’t think of
anything I'd rather be doing from 2 to 5 o’clock in the morning.
Everybody else is asleep. I’m up making these great trades. It’s
a fantastic market. It can be very exciting. I try not to get too
emotional one way or the other. But you do get excited, especially
when you trade well. It’s very rewarding at the end of the day.
There’s a statement telling you whether you did or did not do
good. Whereas at a normal job, you're told if you did a good job or
not and it’s not based on the numbers you produced.

Q. Yes, it’s very tangible. So what was your best trade ever? Most
memorable?

A : The most memorable was definitely the one we discussed
because I was in an Internet café and I was kind of nervous, hoping
that the connection doesn’t drop in this place. I'd actually gone
all around Bangkok testing connections to see which ones were
strongest and which cafés were quiet. So finally I found one I
liked, found an end computer, and when the NFP number came
out, I just jumped all over it. It was exactly what I was expecting
and key levels were broken. It’s been a while, so I don’t remember

234


THE NEWS JUNKIE

what they were, but it was about 120 pip of profit on a good amount
of money. So it was at least a $50,000 profit and that sticks out.

: Now, did you make so much money because you went all in
or did you keep on scaling?

A : L kept scaling in.

:Wasita one-way move at the time or was ita lot ofretracement
and then continuations?

A : Well it jumped initially and it pulled back, I want to say like
20 or 30 pips, and every time it pulled back I just kept loading up.
I knew from the get-go what my limit was. I was willing to risk
10 to $20,000 on this trade if it didn’t work out.

Q.:s0 you had a hard monetary stop then?

A: Right. This was one time I did put in a stop because normally
I just watch the market. I was afraid that the Internet connection
would drop [laughter].

Q.- what's your worst trade ever?

A: Wow, that would have to be another NFP. That Friday I got in
on the wrong side of a British pound trade and it went against me.
I was basically frozen like a deer in the headlights. I just didn’t exit
when I could have gotten out for maybe a 30 to 40 pip loss. I ended
up getting out for 100. So, of course, I was in a bad mood and I
didn’t handle things properly. At the time, I went out and bought
the pound, leveraged myself really high, and then turned off my
computer. I came back it had reversed another 100 pips, and I
ending up losing like 200 pips that day senselessly, just because I
didn’t control my emotions properly.

235


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: was there a lesson there?

A : Yes. I told myself that I wouldn’t let the emotions get the best
of me, I wouldn’t just sit there idly, and I will never turn off my
computer again and hope that the trade will turn back my way. The
problem was I didn’t have a plan. At the time, I bought in before
the news and that’s one of the things I don’t do now. But it was
kind of like a guessing game back then because I felt I was so lucky
but now I don’t do that, I don’t need that little part of the move.

Q.: Do you always have a plan before going into a number?

A: Thave a plan. Obviously I don’t know what the number will be.
But I'll say okay if the number is this amount, then I'll go short—if
it’s this amount, I'll go long. I will also keep in mind the price
action and how the market responds to it and what is the market
doing prior to the number coming out because, if there’s dollar
weakness, it doesn’t matter what that number is. Sometimes it can
be fantastic for the dollar. It will continue to sell off even after
great news. So I’m always watching the price action.

Q.:s0 when you are trading what is the most you've lost pipwise?

A : Pve been down more than 100. But I don’t like being down
more than 100 pips at any point. I would say normally 75 to 80 is
about where I call it quits.

Qin terms of your trading style, do you feel like it’s changed at
all?

A : Definitely less aggressive because I can trade a larger number
of lots. In the beginning, I would trade two or three. Maybe now
I'll do 20 or 30. It just depends, so I need a smaller amount of
move to actually pull that profit in. I try to only take the trades that
I think are going to be successful.

236


THE NEWS JUNKIE

QO: do you find that you spend a lot time trying to keep yourself

out of trades?

A: Oh that’s a problem [laughter]. I have to pull myself away
from the computer on Fridays, especially NFP. I'll have locked in
$5,000 to $10,000 for that day, and I literally have to turn off the
PC, Otherwise I'll try to jump on another move. One thing that I
love is to go into the weekend on a winning streak. Today was one.
It gets you really energized for Monday’s trading. If you go out
with a poor trade, you spend the whole weekend thinking about
things and you come back Monday in general as a negative trader.

Q: Do you hold positions over the weekends?

A : I try not to, actually. I don’t mind holding it over night. But
over the weekends I prefer not to.

Q.: what's the most humbling trading experience for you?

A. Wow. I would say probably either that pound trade or another
trade where I got a bad entry, and didn’t pay attention to what
the market was trying to tell me. I was trying to fight the market.
I thought I was right, and I would just say, “Well I can buy 10
more lots or I'll buy 20 more lots.” I'll force the market in my
direction—and once you realize that you're not moving the market
one bit, then it’s very humbling.

Q.:s0 what’s your number one rule of trading?

A : My number one rule is don’t overleverage yourself. Don’t get
into a position to the point where you're margin is called. You need
to always have some ammunition on the side because you never
know when that trade is going to start turning in your favor and a
lot of times that’s a great time to add to your trade. You’ve been
down 50 to 60 pips, now all of the sudden you've broken through

237


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

some key support, you know you need some ammo, and you don’t
want to be sitting there thinking, “Wow, wish I could buy.” So it’s
money management. You have to have that money available at all
times.

Q:s0 you encourage people to average into winning trades then?

A : Absolutely. If it’s going in your direction and your plan is
working, there’s no reason not to cut those pips down and make it
that much easier to make profit.

Q: Doe you feel like you ever compete against yourself or against
others when it comes to trading?

A : T always feel like ’'m in competition against the big players
for some reason, that it’s me against the big guy. I’m very cautious,
not to disclose what I’m doing, and it may sound paranoid, but
I just always feel that especially when I have a lot of lots in the
market that someone’s out to get you—gunning for you. I feel
like I'm always competing against someone. Rarely do I put the
pressure on myself and say, well, I have to get this number of

pips.

Q.- what kind of pips do you look for on an average trade?

A : Pl tell you I only need maybe 30 or 40 pips to have a successful
trade because I like to trade larger amounts. I prefer to do that
than to hold something for 100 pips.

: You mentioned earlier that you might trade multiple lots, so
do you do any stop management with the different lots?

A : I definitely move the stops up. If a trade is working, I will
take some money off of the table by moving my stops up. As it
moves more into my favor, I’m going to take more off, even if the

238


THE NEWS JUNKIE

adjustments are made in a few small pip increments. Sure there’s
a higher likelihood of the stops getting picked off, but that’s part
of the game. It could also drop another 50 so I'll just keep moving
those stops until they get hit because that’s what they're for, which
is to get hit.

: Is there anything we didn’t talk about that you feel other
traders might be interested in hearing?

A : I don’t know if they'd be interested, but one quirk I have is
that I really feel like Feng Shui plays a part in my trading. The
way I have my trading room set up makes a huge difference in my
opinion. I went from losing quite a bit to making successful trades,
partially based on my environment.

Q.- That's interesting, how did you change it?

A : For one thing I was facing a different direction. My room was
set up to where people would enter from behind me and watch over
my trading and sometimes I wouldn’t know they were there. Now
it’s facing the other way, and I can see everything that’s coming
towards me. I’m just a lot more comfortable. I have greenery
in the room. Everything feels much cleaner and crisper and I can
trade. So, as I was saying, when I was searching out Internet cafés
to trade in, whether it was Japan, Thailand, or wherever, comfort
was an important factor. I want to sit to the side of the room. I
need to ensure that all these things function the way I like them
to.

Q:p id you learn that from someone?

A : Picking up Feng Shui was just a part of being in San Francisco.
I was around a lot of people who taught me about healthy living,

239


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

so I applied the same things when I started trading stock. I looked
at my setup and thought, that’s true, my trading room is not the
way I want it. So I started changing things around and you'd be
surprised at the differences. I like peace and quiet. When I enter
a trade or exiting a trade, the TV’s muted out and I’m fully focused
especially right before news. Once I’m in the trade, I know there’s
nothing I can do to change it. Then I'll put on other distractions
because I don’t want to think about the market 24/7. I can glance
at it and see what’s going on and continue with the rest of my life.

: Now, in terms of taxes, do you do that yourself or do you have
someone do it for you?

A : I did it myself last year, but this year someone else is going to
do it [laughter].

Q.: any plans of ever trading full-time?

A : Yes. It seems like every time I go to work, I ask myself why am
here? And my coworkers—they're aware of my successes in the
currency market—they ask me the same thing. You should trade
full-time, but things like health benefits are stuff that is really worth
thinking about. Right now I have the flexibility to work only three
days a weeks, I get a full-time income. It’s hard to walk away from
that.

LESSONS FROM ROLAND CAMPBELL
Fading Market Sentiment

Some of the smartest traders that we know are fade traders. Typ-
ically called contrarians, these traders will step into the mar-
ket when moves have become very extended and sentiment has
become extremely one-sided to take a position in contrast to
the prevailing market opinion. For example, if the market has

240


THE NEWS JUNKIE

become so dollar bullish that mainstream media starts printing
cover stories about the strength of the currency, instead of buying
the greenback on the surrounding euphoria, contrarians will sell it
in anticipation of a market slump since they realize that sentiment
has likely reached its peak. This is exactly the way Roland Camp-
bell trades because, when everyone is bullish, he is looking for
opportunities in the other direction. One of the most dangerous
yet most tempting ways to trade is to jump into a market move
when everyone is talking about it. Oftentimes this is right before
the exhaustion occurs and the market begins to reverse because
everyone who wants to be in the position already is. Therefore, at
those points, fading the prevailing market movement may be far
smarter than joining it.

Go for the Meat of the Move

The most important technique when looking for a reversal is to look
for the price action to confirm your opinion before getting into the
trade. Market extensions can often reach further than most people
can imagine, especially faders. Therefore, arbitrarily picking a top
or bottom can be very frustrating as well was very unprofitable.
Roland’s focus on catching the meat of the move rather than trying
to pinpoint the exact beginning or the end of the move is the key
to his strategy. Having experienced the damage of top or bottom
picking with no clear price support, Roland now waits for news to
come out, let the market move in its direction, make sure it is not
a false move and only at that time, enter into the trade.

Average Your Entry and Trail Your Exit

With every trade, Roland averages in and averages out. Although
averaging down can be a mug’s game, the difference for Roland is
intent. He knows the average price that he wants before he even
places the trade. He also knows when to get out. If the price moves
against him and goes much further than four average downs, he
will usually abandon the trade. Not every one can get the trade
right 100 percent of the time. On the flipside, he tries to get as
much out of his winning trades as possible by averaging out. In

241


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

order to do so, he will first lock in profits on half of the position,
trail his stop on a quarter of his position and leave his stop on other
quarter at breakeven. When market reversals occur, the moves can
be just as powerful as the trends that preceded them. The use of
trailing stops allows medium-term traders like Roland to ride as
much of the meat of the move as possible.

242


CHAPTER 9

THE GREAT
ADAPTER

TYRONE BALL

One of the most remarkable aspects of Tyrone Ball’s story is his
uncanny ability to adapt and succeed in some of the most treacher-
ous market environments in recent history. Trading Nasdaq stocks
almost exclusively, Tyrone has been able to navigate and prosper
through a variety of changes in the market, including the vicious
bear market decline in the early 2000s and the introduction of
decimalization, which compressed bid/ask spreads and destroyed
many profitable trading strategies. While the vast majority of his
colleagues have fallen by the wayside, Tyrone has found new ways
to extract profits from the market. Although his trading methods
remain relatively simple, his flexibility and refusal to be satisfied
with the status quo make Tyrone one of the most consistent and
successful retail traders we've interviewed. He talked to us from
his home office in Illinois.

243


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- what is the market that you trade?
A : Primarily Nasdaq.

Q.- are you strictly a day trader, or are you a position trader?

A : I would say 98 percent day trading. Occasionally I'll take
something overnight.

Q. Most people we talk to usually don’t like to take anything home
overnight either. Let us start by getting the basic background story
from you. How did you get started in trading? What triggered your
interest? Was it your family, or was this something you came across
yourself?

A : You want the shorter version or the longer version?

QO): The longer version.

A : Okay. Well, I’ve always had an interest in the market. Growing
up, my father was always dabbling with his stock portfolio, and I
would poke around at the time with a very small Schwab account.

Q.- That's very common. So you traded a little bit in high school,
then you went to college. Did you focus on finance or a completely
different subject matter?

A : [knew I was going into business and I did my undergraduate
in finance and went on to get an MBA as well. But I always thought
I'd be more on the brokerage side of things. I interned for a major
financial services company and it worked out very well. I actually
built a nice book of business while I was in school.

244


THE GREAT ADAPTER

Q- You had a Series 7 while you were in grad school?

A : They let me get my Series 6 and 63. I was doing life insurance
planning, variable life, and variable annuities. Any mutual fund
business I'd refer to the rep above me. It was a great experience.
I learned how to run your business while going to school. Most
importantly, it provided a solid foundation and work ethic which I
applied to my trading career.

Q.: pia you cold call a lot?

A: The first year I did a heck ofa lot of cold calling and figured out
that is the lowest percentage game out there. I worked hard and
learned to work a little smarter as time went on. Going to school
full time and working 30-plus hours demanded I learn to manage
my time efficiently.

Q.: What did you do differently in the second year to help you
build your book?

A : I really started hammering referrals. I'd get in there and
try to do the best job I could, give the best advice, do the most
for the client, and then ask them for referrals. Instead of beating
up the phones, I’d ask them who their five best friends are and
call on them. So that’s where I thought I was headed out of grad
school.

Q.- and then what happened?

A : Well, I took my wife, who at the time was my girlfriend in
the spring of 99, down to see my best friend, my childhood friend
who I grew up with. He was living in Houston at the time. When
I got there, he had all this day-trading material on his coffee table
because that’s what he was going to do. He was going to quit his
job, cash in, and go trade full-time. So I started reading and then
I felt guilty that he was taking time off from his job to cater to us.

245


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

So I suggested we check out a couple of nearby offices and that’s
how it all started.

OQ: 80 you went along with him on a trip? When you walked into
one of those trading operations that were so common in the late
90s, what was your initial reaction?

A : My jaw hit the floor. I remember the first office, I think
Momentum.

Q.: How big was the room that you walked into?

A : It wasn’t real huge in terms of bodies, but it was a full shop. I
don’t know the head count—under 50 I’m guessing. I just remem-
ber the branch manager showing me the trader P&Ls by noon. I
thought, “Are these monthly or yearly P&Ls?” [laughter.] I said,
“Wait a minute, all you got to do is play this game?”

Q.: Like playing a video game, right?

A: Right. I mean that was essentially how it was advertised. So I
just went and started checking out more shops after I got back to
Illinois.

Q.: Were you living in the suburbs of Chicago or the city proper?

A : At that point, I was six hours south of Chicago, in southern
Illinois. I went to school at SIU.

Q.-we can’t imagine many day trading shops around there.

A : Right, nothing. So I just called around and asked, “Where’s
the closest place I can go try it?” and it seemed like it was Chicago.

246


THE GREAT ADAPTER

So I called a couple of buddies and they said come on up. I figured
I'd give it a try, and they offered to let me live free for six months
on the couch.
