
Buffett: “$12.50 bid.”
Clayton: “You know, Warren, the board might entertain something in the high teens, more like $17 or $18 a
share.”
Buffett: “$12.50 bid.”
Kevin Clayton got off the phone and went and talked to the board. Even though the stock had recently traded
around nine bucks, it was a hard nut to swallow, that the company was worth only $12.50.
Clayton: “The board would consider $15.”
Buffett: “$12.50 bid.” Although not part of the official record, by this point he had almost certainly applied
his other classic maneuver, the Circular Saw, slicing the floor out from under the Claytons by stressing—in a
sympathetic way—how weak and vulnerable they were going to be with their funding sources drying up.
The Claytons and their board went through some further processes.
Clayton: “We’d like $13.50.”
Buffett: “$12.50 bid.”
More discussion.
Clayton: “Okay, we’ll take $12.50, on the condition that we get Berkshire stock.”
Buffett: “I’m sorry, that’s not possible. By the way, I don’t participate in auctions. If you want to sell to me,
you can’t shop this bid against me to any other buyer. You have to sign an exclusive that you won’t entertain
any other offers.”
The Claytons, who perhaps understood the direction that their industry was headed better than most experts
did at the time, capitulated.16
After Buffetting the Claytons, Warren flew out to Tennessee to meet them, tour the plants, and visit with
local Knoxville dignitaries. He had asked Jim Clayton to “pick and sing” with him, and they had rehearsed a
couple of songs over the phone, but when the time came, “He forgot all about my guitar on the stand beside
him,” wrote Clayton later. “Give our new friend Warren a microphone and he forgets all about time.”17 Not
used to being upstaged, Clayton at least had the consolation of being the guy who brought the famous Warren
Buffett to Knoxville.
Yet while the local folks were mostly pleased with the deal, investors in Clayton were not. Buffett’s aura
worked against him for the first time. Many of the investors knew about Buffetting, even if the Claytons
didn’t, and they were in no mood to be Buffetted themselves.
After the deal was announced, shareholders began to besiege the Claytons, pleading, “You’re a great
company, the best in the industry; if I’m going to own somebody in the industry, I want to own you; please
don’t go away, you’ll get through this and the industry will come bouncing back again,” or threatening, “How
dare you sell this company at $12.50 when it’s been as high as $16 and we’ve weathered the storm; the
industry is getting ready to come back. How could you even think of selling it that cheap?” Clayton’s large
investors thought Buffett was buying at the “bottom of the cycle” for mobile homes and had opportunely
timed the deal to catch a bounce. At its peak in 1998, the manufactured-housing industry, using aggressive
lending tactics, had shipped 373,000 homes a year. By the end of 2001, that number was down to 193,000 as
the economy suffered in the wake of 9/11, and the outlook for 2003 was a measly 130,000. But surely it
would turn. Buffett’s history as a savvy trader convinced them that he must have bottom-ticked the price and
that they would be suckers if they sold the company now.

That was not what Buffett saw, however. He saw that the mobile-home market had backed itself into a
corner by using easy financing terms to make a large percentage of its sales to people who could not afford to
buy a home. Therefore the number of homes sold by the industry was not going to bounce.
But the dissidents knew how successful Clayton had been, and, given the numbers, were sure the situation
would reverse. They were stewing, talking on the phone far away from Omaha.
Unperturbed by shareholder outrage, Buffett reveled in the thought of his future role as a mobile-home
impresario. He kind of liked the trailer-park aspect of the thing. And buying a company from a
sharecropper’s son appealed to the man who ate Dilly Bars at Dairy Queen, still lusted over model-train
catalogs, owned a company that made prison uniforms, and got a huge kick out of having his picture taken
with the Fruit of the Loom guys. The P. T. Barnum in him was already beginning to stir. He could picture it
so vividly—a giant mobile home installed in the exhibition space down in the basement of Omaha’s new
Qwest Convention Center at the 2004 shareholder meeting, next to the See’s Candies shop maybe, or over by
the area where the Justin people were selling boots. The exhibition space kept getting bigger and more
dramatic, with more vendors and more merchandise for sale every year. The thought of a whole house, right
there in the middle of his shareholder meeting, with a lawn even, and shareholders lined up to get into the
house, gaping in awe, delighted him. How many mobile homes could you sell at a shareholder meeting? he
wondered. None of the guys at Sun Valley ever sold a mobile home at their shareholder meetings.
Not only that, but Clayton was another company that married his business instincts with his urge to preach.
He was going to give the bad actors of the mobile-home business hellfire and damnation. He was going to
lead the mobile-home business to financial salvation.
***
Buffett called in Ian Jacobs, his new project guy. They had a brief conversation: “Ian, here’s a file on
Clayton. It gives you all kinds of dope on foreclosures and advances. Now, I’d like you to go out and see
some retail dealers, and I’d like you to do a scuttlebutt approach to learning how this damned business
works. The more you can learn about the sales practices, Ian, if there’s any real change going on from how
it was done in the past, and who does it right, and who does it wrong, I would just soak up everything you
can about what is going on and what is the logical way of conducting a business like this.”
Like Marc Hamburg, Berkshire’s chief financial officer, and others before him, Ian’s ability to interpret and
work off directions like this with virtually no further instructions or supervision would be crucial to his career
at Berkshire Hathaway. For the right kind of person it was the learning opportunity of a lifetime. Ian flew off
to scuttlebutt.
By the end of the month shareholders jammed every flight into Omaha’s airport and filled every hotel room
in town for the 2003 shareholders’ meeting, to see the man whom popular magazines had been proclaiming
the “Comeback Crusader” and “The Oracle of Everything.” And there was some surprising news too. The
Hong Kong Stock Exchange had disclosed that Berkshire had bought a stake in PetroChina, the giant, mostly
state-owned Chinese oil company. It was Buffett’s first publicly acknowledged foreign investment in many
years.18 He was notoriously cautious about investing outside the U.S. and had not owned a significant
position in a foreign stock since Guinness PLC in 1993.19
Reached by reporters hungry for an explanation of this radical departure from the past, Buffett said he knew
nothing much about China and had bought it for the oil that was denominated in yuan, the Chinese currency.
He was pessimistic about the dollar and optimistic about oil. Buffett had written an article for Fortune, “Why
I’m Down On the Dollar,”20 in which he explained that he had made significant investments in foreign
currencies out of a belief that the dollar would decline in value. The reason was something called the trade
deficit: Americans were buying more from other countries than they were selling, and at a fast-accelerating
rate. They were paying for the difference through borrowing; foreigners were buying Treasury bonds, an

I.O.U. from the U.S. government. In short order, the country’s “net worth,” he said, “is being transferred
abroad at an alarming rate.” He posited a hypothetical example of two countries called Thriftville and the
deficit-spending Squanderville: Sooner or later, the Thriftville citizens who were buying Squanderville
Treasury bonds started wondering if Squanderville was good for the money. When that happened, they still
traded with Squanderville—but instead of bonds, they took less risky hard assets: land, businesses, office
buildings. “And eventually,” wrote Buffett, “the Thrifts own all of Squanderville.”
To ward off the United States becoming a version of Squanderville that was selling off pieces of itself to other
countries, Buffett proposed a system in which United States companies that exported would be issued
“Import Certificates”—in total about $80 billion a month. They could trade these (like the old warehouse
certificates issued by Rockwood Chocolates could be traded). Anybody wanting to import into the United
States would need an Import Certificate, and would have to buy from an exporter. Presto, companies would
get paid a higher price to export than to sell domestically, automatically increasing exports. That, of course,
would increase the importers’ (foreign companies’) costs. While this system could be viewed as
unfriendly—a tariff, or tax on imports, which in the past had led to trade wars that depressed economies
—Buffett felt that importers were going to suffer anyway as their goods became more expensive with the
falling dollar. The Import Certificate idea at least used the market to allocate who was willing to suffer. Over
time, demand for Import Certificates would gradually increase exports to rebalance trade and restore parity
between Thriftville and Squanderville.
The plan had many nuances, but its bottom line was hallmark Buffett in many ways. The article showcased
Buffett’s thinking; it was a lesson on economics; it was a warning of potential catastrophe; it had a margin of
safety (while it might not improve the trade balance as much as he hoped, the market mechanism meant it
was unlikely to make things worse); it was a blend of a market and government solution; it was a complex,
ingenious, comprehensive system—and, of course, a no-risk deal in which most parties would be at least
somewhat better off than the alternative of doing nothing.
Executing it would also require a wholesale change in thinking; a coalition of politicians would have to grasp
the economics and care deeply enough about them to take the considerable political risk of pushing through
Buffett’s idea. Moreover, the plan would attack a problem before it had turned into a crisis—always unlikely
in Washington. The odds of anything remotely resembling a tariff being enacted into law with President Bush
and free-marketeers controlling the White House were zero. Thus the Import Certificates were an elegant
solution that was going absolutely nowhere. Buffett’s father, however, would have been extremely proud of
him.
And at least Buffett would have the honor of being the first prominent figure to go on record warning
—loudly—about the risk of a falling dollar. To hedge that risk for Berkshire, he had been looking at Chinese
stocks because of China’s burgeoning economic power. He had found PetroChina, studied it, and gotten
comfortable enough to buy it. Although he was able to purchase only $488 million, he said he wished he
could have bought more. His endorsement of PetroChina sent investors over the moon. Warren Buffett had
bought a foreign stock! PetroChina soared. And so did attendance at the BRK shareholders’ meeting.
That year, 15,000 people came to Omaha’s Woodstock for Capitalists. Buffett’s $36 billion fortune was once
again exceeded only by Bill Gates’s. He had bounced back, almost to the top of the heap.
“What is the ideal business?” a shareholder asked when the questions began. “The ideal business is one that
earns very high returns on capital and that keeps using lots of capital at those high returns. That becomes a
compounding machine,” Buffett said. “So if you had your choice, if you could put a hundred million dollars
into a business that earns twenty percent on that capital—twenty million—ideally, it would be able to earn
twenty percent on a hundred twenty million the following year and on a hundred forty-four million the
following year and so on. You could keep redeploying capital at [those] same returns over time. But there
are very, very, very few businesses like that…we can move that money around from those businesses to buy
more businesses.”21 This was about as clear a lesson on business and investing as he would ever give. It
explained why Berkshire was structured as it was, although what it said about the stock market’s long history
of disappointed investors was sobering. It explained why he was always looking for new businesses to buy,
and what he was planning to do with Clayton Homes. He expected to invest part of Berkshire’s extra capital

in Clayton so that it could survive to take market share away from its bankrupt competitors and to buy and
service their portfolios of loans.22
The fifty-some journalists from around the globe who had flown in to cover BRKfest were more interested in
PetroChina and whether that investment signaled a new interest in foreign stocks. They got their chance to
ask him and Munger about it at the press conference on Sunday. Many of them wanted to ask a version of a
question that they knew would resonate with their home audiences: What stocks would you buy in Australia?
Taiwan? Germany? Brazil? Russia? Buffett stressed that he was still buying mainly in the United States. Most
foreign stocks, he said, were not in his circle of competence. The PetroChina stock didn’t change that.
On Monday morning at the Berkshire board meeting, Buffett held a little seminar, explaining to the board the
things he most wanted to teach them about this year, which consisted of the risk that the dollar would decline
against foreign currencies and the problems involved in the financing of mobile homes.
Tom Murphy and Don Keough had just been voted in as directors, joining Charlie Munger, Ron Olson,
Walter Scott Jr., Howie, Big Susie, and Kim Chace, the lone representative of the old Hathaway textile
family. There had been some grumbling about these appointments, with shareholders making noises about
cronyism, and lack of balance and diversity. But the idea of a board of directors overseeing Warren Buffett
was ludicrous. A board made up of Barbie dolls would do just as well. When the Berkshire board met, it was
to listen to Buffett teach, just as every occasion—from a party to a luncheon to a sing-along with Jim Clayton
—turned into an opportunity for Buffett to figuratively stand at the blackboard, fingers dusty with chalk.
The reason shareholders cared about Berkshire corporate governance was not oversight, however, but the
question of who would succeed Buffett, who was now almost seventy-three. He had always said there was a
“name in an envelope” crowning his successor. But he would not acquiesce to the pressure to reveal the
name, because that would tie his hands to one person, and events could change. It would also effectively
begin the transition, and he certainly wasn’t ready for that.
There was, of course, a guessing game about who this person could possibly be. Most of the managers of the
various companies Buffett bought seemed unlikely candidates. Buffett liked managers like Mrs. B—people
who shunned the spotlight, who worked as tirelessly as a human anthill—but these people did not manage
capital. Where was the capital allocator who could run this thing? The right person had to be willing to sit
behind a desk reading financial reports all day long, yet excel at dealing with people in order to retain a
bunch of managers who wished they were still working for Warren Buffett.
“I have this complicated procedure I go through every morning,” Buffett said, “which is to look in the
mirror and decide what I’m going to do. And I feel at that point, everybody’s had their say.”23 The next
CEO would have to be a superb leader—and yet oversized egos need not apply for the job.
As the board meeting ended on Monday, the town emptied of shareholders, and the Buffett family headed to
New York for their annual trip. Every year they traditionally attended a dinner with the East Coast members
of the Buffett Group, held at Sandy and Ruth Gottesman’s house, where Susie would pile into Warren’s lap
and run her fingers through his hair, and Warren would gaze enraptured at his wife. But this year it seemed
obvious that Susie wasn’t feeling well. At lunch one day, dressed beautifully in a light wool skirt suit with a
wraparound shawl, she ate only a tiny piece of chicken and some carrots with a glass of milk. She said she
was fine but wasn’t that convincing.
Within two weeks, shortly before they were to have left for the trip to Africa that she was so excited about,
she was admitted to the hospital with another bowel obstruction. There, the doctors found that she was
anemic and had an esophageal ulcer. In a huge disappointment for the family—at least some in the
family—the Africa trip had to be postponed by a year, to the following spring. Even Warren was dismayed,
because he knew how much the trip meant to Susie. But, asked if he was worried, he said, “Oh, no, it would
bother Susie if she thought I was worrying about her. She wants to worry about me, not the other way
around. She’s a lot like Astrid in that sense. I’m not a worrier in general, y’know.”
Although the reason for the cancelation was regrettable, it turned out to be a good thing that Buffett was

around that June. As the meeting at which the Clayton shareholders would vote on the merger approached,
opposition to the deal swelled like a blister chafed by shareholders’ resistance to the price—even to the very
idea of selling to Berkshire. Rumors started that another bidder would come in.24 Investors assumed that
Buffett was going to make a lot of money, because with Berkshire’s hoard of capital and good credit rating,
he could fund the Claytons, more or less forever, on terms more attractive than anyone except a sovereign
government. It seemed almost unfair. Some of the shareholders were convinced that the Claytons had sold
out to Buffett too cheap in order to keep their jobs and benefit themselves or to get access to that war chest.
The potential conflict of interest when the management of a public company wanted to sell the company to
Berkshire was about to set off a war.
William Gray of Orbis Investment Management, for one, thought the Claytons were heisting the company on
behalf of Buffett. He filed a petition with the SEC and a lawsuit with the Chancery Court in Delaware, where
Clayton was incorporated; his argument was that the Claytons were not trying to get the best deal for
shareholders, because they had signed the exclusive clause preventing them from entertaining competing
offers. He sought a ruling that they not be allowed to vote their shares on the deal and wanted a special
shareholder meeting called to replace the Clayton board.25 After all, said one investor, “if Buffett bids for
something, it must by definition be undervalued.”26
Buffett’s reputation, which had been an asset for so many years, had begun to work against him in certain
other ways as well. He was such a magnet for publicity that anyone who wanted publicity for themselves or
their cause could hijack his shareholder meeting or misappropriate his fame to get it. And so it happened that
just before the shareholder meeting and around the time that Berkshire had announced the Clayton deal,
Doris Christopher, CEO of The Pampered Chef, called him with just such a problem.
The Pampered Chef sold kitchenware at home parties through independent salespeople, mostly women. After
Berkshire’s purchase of the company, members of pro-life organizations had begun boycotting their parties.
Berkshire’s position was that it made no donations to pro-choice or reproductive rights groups, but only acted
as a conduit for its shareholders, who through the charitable-contributions program had the right to allocate
$18 per share to the charity of their choice. Of the $197 million that had been donated to nonprofit groups of
all types, the largest number of recipients were schools and churches, many of them Catholic, and most of the
money went to causes not related to abortion. But a significant amount of money had gone to reproductiverights organizations.27 As it happened, Warren and Susie’s personal share of the contributions—about $9
million in 2002—went to the Buffett Foundation, where it mostly funded reproductive rights. That
Berkshire’s money should be funneled this way was what was bothering the pro-life groups. The argument
that the contributions were not Berkshire’s fell on deaf ears.28 In 2002, Buffett had tried to square things
with one of these groups by showing them how much money went to causes other than family planning. He
got a reply from the president of Life Decisions International, saying, “Even if only $1.00 went to Planned
Parenthood and $1 billion was donated to pro-life organizations, the former gift would still land Berkshire
Hathaway on The Boycott List.”29 If the price of filling a parking meter was enough to attract a boycott, that
was a pretty clear sign that Berkshire would find little room for compromise.
Doris Christopher had tried to mediate, telling her people that while she personally did not agree with Buffett,
“it is not my place to ask or to judge” how he donated money. Fewer than a thousand of the 70,000
Pampered Chef consultants were petitioning Christopher over this issue.30 Still, the boycott was affecting
business and hurting the people involved. They were being intimidated by pro-life picketers who were now
making appearances at the hosts’ houses during sales parties. Christopher called Buffett to tell him the
disruption to her business was getting worse.
“She didn’t ask me, but I could tell she was hoping I would cancel the program. And you know, I’ll do it. I
thought we could tough it through, but we can’t. It’s hurting too many people that I don’t want to hurt. It
hurts Doris, and these are her flock. They’re getting injured, and they’re innocent. They’re in her office,
crying.”
In late June, Buffett called Allen Greenberg, his former son-in-law and executive director of the Buffett

Foundation, into his office and explained that he had talked to Charlie Munger. Rather than sell The
Pampered Chef—one of the options—they had decided to shut down the charitable-contributions program.
Greenberg was astounded. The year before, ninety-seven percent of shareholders had defeated a resolution
by a pro-life shareholder to cancel the program. Combing his hands through his dark wavy hair, he paced
back and forth, pointing out that the contributions came from individuals, not the corporation. People could
still donate on their own. Shutting down the program would accomplish nothing. But Buffett had made up his
mind.
Greenberg returned to his office to draft a press release that went out to the news wires right before Sun
Valley, over the Fourth of July weekend. The phone rang and rang for several days; the secretaries grew
weary from ferrying messages up and down the hall. Life Decisions almost instantly put out its own release
dropping Berkshire from its boycott list.
But Buffett’s friends, no matter what their views on abortion, mostly reacted the same way: They were
stunned. Some were angry. “I was surprised that he gave in on that,” one said. “It didn’t sound like him to
back down so easily. Warren is such a principled person. Was it such a big deal that it had to be done?” asked
another.31
Though other people in his position might have chosen to stand up to the right-to-lifers, Buffett said he was
worried that such a stance might put The Pampered Chef consultants at risk. He didn’t say it, but implicitly,
not just their livelihoods but their physical welfare was at stake. Buffett himself was a very big target, not just
Sid the Dry Cleaner down on the corner whom nobody had ever heard of; taking a stand might make
Berkshire Hathaway, as well as him, a symbol of pro-choice defiance, which was dangerous.32 He shrank
from confrontation anyway; this was something he simply could not do.
Afterward, he never showed any sign of rancor over the criticism or the pro-life victory laps. You can always
tell them to go to hell tomorrow, as Murph said. There was never any need to do it today. Over the years he
had saved himself a lot of trouble by following this advice. Almost as soon as he got past The Pampered Chef
sidebar, he simply stopped thinking about it.
Alas, this did not solve the other problem caused by being Warren Buffett instead of Sid the Dry Cleaner.
Shareholders at Clayton Homes had begun weighing in for and against the Berkshire bid as the July 16
meeting to vote on the deal approached. Prices of peer companies had started to float upward. Lenders
suddenly became more lenient. The argument about the “bottom of the cycle” gained currency. About
thirteen percent of the investors, including respected money managers like Brandywine Asset Management,
Schneider Capital, and CalPERS, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, said publicly that
they would oppose the deal. Kevin Clayton trotted around the country, meeting with investors and pitching
the merger, while Orbis and other naysayers worked the phones and the press. By then Berkshire had lent
$360 million to Clayton to finance its stopgap needs. Buffett put out a news release in which he said that he
would not raise his price “now or in the future.” If the deal fell through, he would walk away. He also used
the release to give an economic forecast for the industry, saying no turnaround was coming.33
Before Buffett bid, nobody had wanted Clayton. Despite a faithful following of hard-core shareholders, it
was like a good-looking girl who couldn’t get a partner at the dance. Now she was on Warren Buffett’s arm,
headed to the middle of the floor as the fiddlers and pickers began the schottische. The former wallflower
suddenly looked prettier to others. At midnight two days before the shareholder meeting, Cerberus Capital,
which had outbid Buffett on Conseco’s lending business, faxed a letter to Clayton suggesting that it was
likely to make a higher bid. When it came to money, Buffett’s attitude was defiant. “Okay, let them,” he said.
He was certain that Clayton without Berkshire wasn’t worth more than $12.50 a share.
And, indeed, by the day of the meeting, exactly zero other bidders had emerged for Clayton Homes. It was
still a toss-up whether the Claytons had enough votes to win approval of the sale, however. Jim Clayton
faced an hour-long barrage of questions from agitated shareholders who had packed the auditorium where the
meeting was held. Manufactured-housing stocks had been on a tear since the deal was announced, making
the $12.50 price look even worse by comparison. Some shareholders wanted Cerberus to have a chance to
