
Catch a falling knife: Estimating where
and when a retracement will stop
To try to estimate where a retracement will stop is called “to catch a falling
knife.” In other words, no reliable rules exist to tell you where a trend correction will end or when the primary trend will resume. One of the chief uses of
indicators and combined indicators, described in Chapter 16, is to get guidance on where and when a retracement will stop.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement

Figure 2-1:
Trend
with four
retracements.

Your tolerance for retracements is the key to deciding in what time frame you
want to trade. If the security you want to trade regularly retraces 50 percent
and the prospect of losing 51 percent turns you into a nervous wreck, you
need to trade it in a different time frame — or find another security.
Acknowledging that no one can forecast a retracement hasn’t stopped technical traders from trying to establish forecast rules. The following rules are
generally helpful, but no one can offer reliable statistics to back them up, so
take them with a grain of salt.
✓ A retracement won’t exceed a significant prior high or low. In Figure 2-1,
for example, the second retracement doesn’t challenge the lowest low
of the first dip, and the third retracement doesn’t challenge the second.
This is cold comfort, because knowing where it won’t go doesn’t help you
figure out where it will go.
✓ Look for round numbers. Research shows that support and resistance
levels (see Chapter 10) actually do occur more often at round numbers
than chance would allow.
✓ The 30 percent rule. Measure the percentage change and assume that a
majority of traders will place stops to avoid losing more than x percent,
such as 30 percent. The problem with this idea, and it’s a chilling one,
is that you’re measuring from a peak and you don’t know the price level
where the majority of traders entered. Logically, you should assume
that they’re protecting 70 percent of their personal cash gain from their
entry, not from the peak. To measure from the peak would be to say that
traders make decisions based on opportunity loss rather than cash loss,
and while this contains a germ of truth, it’s not a reliable assumption
about crowd behavior. (The germ of truth lies in people feeling worse
if they expected to get $10 and got only $1, compared to how they feel
if they expected to get $5 and got only $1, as shown by behavioral economics — see the sidebar “Empiricists, 1: Academics, 0.”)

www.pdfdummies.com

33

34

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis

Empiricists, 1: Academics, 0
Finance academics assert that the price of a security depends on forecasts of the security’s underlying value in the future, such as a company’s
future earnings. The price today already contains
market expectations about the price tomorrow.
This idea is called rational expectations.
Rational expectations sound okay until you lift up
your head and look around. You find many more
price changes than you can find information
about future earnings! In the 1990s, some dotcom
stock prices represented 1,000 times future
earnings — for companies that had no earnings.
Finance academics said people knew the earnings expectations were absurd fictions, but they
didn’t care because they expected to unload the
stock at a higher price to a greater fool.
Finance academics stopped at the greater-fool
theory. If you buy a security whose price is
wildly divergent from some estimate of “value,”
you’re the fool. This is profoundly disappointing,
because nobody has a certain way to attribute
intrinsic value to any security. So how do you
know when you’re the last fool, the one who will
get stuck with the security at its highest price?
Even historical comparisons are iffy. To use the
price-earnings ratio over the past 50 years, for
example, is to assume that those traders knew
the right way to merge price and value, so following this logic, you can’t find any fools in 1950 or
1960. And which earnings are you talking about,
anyway? Earnings has more than one definition.

Finance academics treat manias and panics as
though they’re inconvenient and rare exceptions to the rational expectations rule. In 2000–
2003, most technical analysts escaped the
appalling losses that accompanied the pricking
of the dotcom bubble because to them, manias
and panics are normal and familiar market
behavior — writ large.
Behavioral economics is just starting to define
in exactly what ways people fail to be rational.
One key is that most people have a lousy understanding of probability. The gambler’s fallacy is
the most famous example — in a coin toss, after
heads comes up 50 times in a row, just about
everybody will bet on tails, ignoring that the coin
doesn’t remember which way it fell last time and
the probability of heads is still 50 percent. In fact,
the probability of heads may be higher than 50
percent, because the coin may not be a fair one.
But it’s more complicated than misunderstanding probability. For example, people will give up
a small certain gain for the chance to deprive
their opponent of a larger gain. People go out of
their way to avoid small risks but then take wild
gambles on the word of a stranger. Most people
feel twice as much pain at a loss than they feel
pleasure at a gain. Behavioral economists,
now winning a few Nobel Prizes, are starting
to grasp and quantify these “irrational” behaviors. Eventually this work will lead to a coherent
theory of crowd behavior.

Big-Picture Crowd Theories
Some important ideas about the extent of retracements come from theories
about the cyclical nature of history. This section deals with these ideas as a
stand-alone section because they’re pervasive — and controversial.
When you start gathering technical analysis material, you inevitably run into
big-picture crowd theories, a school of thought that is very popular today.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement
Some people swear that the ideas are obvious. But just as beauty is in the eye
of the beholder, theories about the ebb and flow of history are just that —
theories. No big-picture theory has been proved by statistical measures. To
be fair, no theory has been disproved, either.
Technical analysis is a sufficiently crowded field already and offers a bewildering variety of tools and techniques. Why make things more complicated than
they have to be? If you use the empirical evidence in front of you — clean and
easy techniques like drawing support and resistance lines, for example — you
can use technical analysis to make profits and avoid losses. Do you really need
to know the secrets of the universe, too? My heartfelt advice to the beginner
is, “Don’t go there.”
But you need to know that these ideas are scattered throughout the field of
technical analysis and some smart and successful people in the field believe
them. Those who don’t are mostly too polite to ridicule the ideas. You’ll also
run into critics who mistakenly think that all technical analysis involves bigpicture crowd ideas. So buckle your seat belt.
Some analysts subscribe to the idea that in the ebb and flow of human affairs,
they can perceive cycles, including market cycles. Some of these ideas contain mystical overtones and unproven claims about how the world works,
such as “the trading crowd is only the instrument of bigger forces at work.”
Because these ideas can never be verified, some critics unfairly color the
whole field of technical analysis with the charge of supernatural voodoo.
Empiricists and skeptics cast doubt on these theories because they’re not
proven and by their nature, can’t be proven. In particular, economics offers
no theoretical basis for cycles that are fixed in size or duration. Economists
do observe business cycles — several of them — but they overlap and don’t
appear regularly. It is undeniable, however, that retracements do occur sometimes near the levels forecasted by market cycle theorists such as J.M. Hurst,
who has a large following. As a result, technical traders are reluctant to level
the charge of crackpot against cycle theories.

The Gann 50 percent retracement
In the early 1900s, a trader named W.D. Gann discovered that retracements
in the securities he was trading at the time tended to occur at one-half of the
original move from the low to the high. To illustrate, say the price moved
from $10 to $30. At $30, the crowd decided that the security was overbought
and started to sell. The ensuing price decline, the retracement, stops near 50
percent of the original $10 to $30 move, namely $20. See Figure 2-2. This chart
shows the 50 percent retracement case.
In fact, Gann said that the most profitable retracement is a 50 percent
retracement. The area around 50 percent is a danger zone, because the price

www.pdfdummies.com

35

36

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
can keep going and become a full-fledged reversal around there (in which
case you lose all the gains). But it’s the best place to reenter an existing trend
(with an exit planned just below using a stop-loss order in case it doesn’t
work). If the trend resumes, Gann wrote that it will then exceed the previous
high, which gives you an automatic minimum profit target. This observation
may be the origin of the phrase, “Buy on the dip.”
Gann also saw retracements occurring at the halfway point of a move, such
as 25 percent (half of 50 percent), 12.5 percent (half of 25 percent), and so on.
Statisticians can’t offer proof that retracements occur at 12.5 percent,
25 percent, or 50 percent with more frequency than chance would allow. The
absence of statistical proof in a field populated by mathematical sophisticates is puzzling at first.
But when you ask a statistician why he doesn’t just run the numbers and test
the hypothesis, he points out that defining the low-to-high original move and
then defining the stopping point of a retracement is a computational nightmare. No matter what definitions he gives his software, another analyst is
sure to want to refine them in some other way. You’ll see studies, for example, showing that the actual percentage change of many retracements isn’t
precisely 50 percent, but rather in a range of 45 to 55 percent. Should you
accept a minor retracement of 45 percent but not a major one that correctly
predicts a trend resumption at 44 percent?
A critical point about the 50 percent retracement rule is that you may think
you want to exit to protect your profit at the 50 percent level. If you bought
the security at $10 and it rose to $30, but has now fallen to $20, shown in
Figure 2-3, you want to sell at $20 to hang on to the gain you have left. But if
the 50 percent retracement rule works this time, you would be getting out
exactly when you should by buying more (adding to your position), because a
resumption of the trend at the $20 level almost certainly means that the price
will now go higher than the highest high so far, $30.
A 100 percent retracement, a price that goes from $10 to $30 and back to $10,
will often form a double bottom, a bullish formation. When the price peaks
twice at the same level, you have a double top, a bearish formation. (See
Chapter 9 for more details on these formations.)

$30

Figure 2-2:
Gann 50
percent
retracement
rule.

$20

50% RETRACEMENT
BUY HERE
$10

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement

Magic numbers: “The secret of the universe”
Another theory about how retracements should form is based on the
Fibonacci sequence of numbers. This theory says that a retracement is most
likely to stop at one of a series of numbers, with an emphasis on 38 percent
or 62 percent of the original move. Where does this come from?
A 13th-century Italian mathematician named Fibonacci discovered a selfreplicating sequence of numbers with curious properties. It starts with 1, 1,
2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, and so on to infinity. The sum of two adjacent
numbers in the sequence forms the next higher number in the sequence.
Most important, the ratio of any two consecutive numbers approximates
1.618 or its inverse, 0.618 (after the first few numbers).
Nature offers many examples of these ratios: daisy petals, ferns, sunflowers,
seashells, hurricanes, whirlpools, and atomic particles in a bubble chamber.
And many of man’s works purportedly embody the Fibonacci ratios as well:
the pyramids in Egypt, the Parthenon in Greece, and Cézanne’s choice of
canvas shape, although some mathematicians dispute some or all of these.
Of course, critics point out that many other events in nature, architecture, and
human behavior follow a sequence of 2, 4, 6, 8, and so on. The number 11 can be
considered magic, not to mention pi (3.14159), used to calculate the circumference
of a circle. Prime numbers, which are numbers divisible only by themselves and
one (3, 5, 7, 11, 17, and so on), are important numbers. In fact, many other selfreplicating number sequences exist. In short, scientists say that to attribute human
behavior to any single number sequence is ludicrous, or at least not plausible.
A trader named Ralph Nelson Elliott believed that man’s behavior, including
his behavior when trading in the stock market, revealed similar characteristics as the Fibonacci sequence and could therefore be charted to predict
future behavior. Elliott observed that securities prices appear in a wavelike form on charts, hence the name of his forecasting method, Elliott Wave.
Elliott wrote that the Fibonacci sequence provides the mathematical underpinnings of the wave principle. Elliott Wave adherents expanded Elliott’s use
of the Fibonacci sequence and often use Fibonacci levels, with special attention to 38 percent and 62 percent (but also including 23.6 percent, 50 percent,
and 100 percent of the high-low span), to predict the extent of retracements.
Note that technically, 50 percent isn’t a Fibonacci number. It’s customary to
include it, though, possibly because of Gann’s influence.
To make life difficult, some traders who like the Fibonacci sequence aren’t
strict adherents of the Elliot Wave principle and some Elliot Wave traders
don’t necessarily believe that price moves will stick to Fibonacci numbers.
See the sidebar “The Elliot Wave principle” in this chapter for more about the
Elliott Wave, which goes far beyond the subject of retracements.

www.pdfdummies.com

37

38

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis

The Elliott Wave principle
The wave idea became popular in part because
one of its proponents, Robert Prechter, called
for a massive bull market in 1982 that did materialize — and then he called the top, just ahead of
the 1987 Crash. That certainly got the market’s
attention! And prices do seem to move in waves
on many charts.
The basic idea is that all price movements have
two segments: impulse waves and corrective
waves. The impulse wave is the way the crowd
wants to take the price in a trend. Considering
that the right way to look at price developments is through the lens of crowd psychology,
impulse is an excellent choice of words. Each
impulse wave has five parts: three waves that
go in the trend direction, alternating with two
that go in the opposite direction.
In a correction, each corrective wave has three
parts: two that go against the main trend and
one that goes with it. If a bull market reaches
a new high in five waves instead of three
and also goes down in five waves instead of
three, you’re witnessing the beginning of a
major bear market.

You will often see three clear waves up,
although sometimes a move has more upwaves
than three, as in Figure 2-3. The three-waves
rule is only the model of how markets move, not
a rigid orthodoxy.
Elliot Wave practitioners are the first to admit
that calling corrective waves is tricky, much
harder than seeing impulse waves. Experienced
practitioners advise against straining to make a
correction “fit” the Elliott Wave model. A correction often just keeps on going, too, whereupon it isn’t a correction but a true reversal and
thus a new trend in the opposite direction.
Counting waves can be an elaborate and timeconsuming process, and miscounting as prices
evolve can result in losses and having to start
all over again. If the wave idea appeals to you,
be prepared to devote a lot of time to it. If you
choose not to count waves, you can still benefit
from the observation that trends start with an
impulse wave that then retraces in the opposite direction before the trend resumes. “Buy
on the dip” isn’t bad advice when you are sure
that you have a trend.

Seeing too many retracements
Fans of the Fibonacci sequence assert that the 38 percent and 62 percent
retracement levels occur more often than chance would allow, although I
have never seen statistical proof. (Perhaps because any statistical studies
would degenerate into squabbling over measurement criteria.)
Some traders embrace Gann’s ideas, some embrace the Elliott Wave, some
embrace Fibonacci numbers, and some embrace them all. If you were to put
the main Gann retracement numbers (12.5, 25, 50, and 75 percent) and the
main Fibonacci retracement numbers (23.5 percent, 38 percent, and 62 percent) on the same chart of a trend, you’d have so many lines that the next
retracement would be bound to hit one of them or a level near one of them.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement
Some advisors who like all the ideas choose to display the retracements that
did work while conveniently not mentioning all the others that could have
been shown on the same chart. In other words, they’re going to be right no
matter how the retracement turns out. You may see advertisements and solicitations claiming that the seller has “objective” methods of forecasting securities prices, and these methods are often based on Gann or Fibonacci
“scientific principles.” Beware. By definition, all math is science. If you’re
going to follow an advisor, put your faith in a consistently winning track
record rather than in claims of an inside track to universal truth.
Like all technical methods, applying Gann and Elliott Wave ideas is an art,
and constant revision is necessary as prices evolve. Statisticians scoff at
magic numbers, but in any particular market or security, if a majority of traders believe that a retracement will stop at 38 percent, 50 percent, or 62 percent after a peak, they can and do make it come about.
The sensible approach to Gann and Fibonacci retracement ideas is to be aware
of their influence over some traders. You don’t have to believe in cycles, the
universal truth embedded in Fibonacci numbers, or that market prices follow a
hidden system in order to take advantage of what the crowd is thinking.
Figure 2-3 shows a security with four waves and three corrections (69.2
percent, 35.7 percent, and 78 percent). Notice that none of the percentage
retracements qualifies precisely as a Gann or Fibonacci number, although
you might stretch the point and say that 68 percent isn’t all that far from 62
percent (Fibonacci) and 78 percent is fairly close to 75 percent (Gann). Most
traders acknowledge the wavelike movement of prices even if they don’t try
to count them according to the Elliott Wave principle.

Retracements
1: 69.2%
2: 35.7%
3: 78%

RETRACEMENT 3
1.65

RETRACEMENT 2

1.60

1.55

RETRACEMENT 1
1.50

1.45

Figure 2-3:
Wavelike
appearance
of a trend.

1.40

A M J

J A

S O N D 2002 M A M J J A

S O N

D 2003

M A M J J

www.pdfdummies.com

A S

1.35

39

40

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 3

Going with the Flow:
Market Sentiment
In This Chapter
▶ Looking into market sentiment
▶ Turning up the volume
▶ Paging through calendar effects

Y

our goal as a technical trader is to identify what the crowd is doing and
take advantage of it — without falling prey to the extremes of sentiment
that can cause big losses when the market wakes up and realizes it has gone
too far. When just about every trader is either bullish or bearish, you need to
stop following the crowd. Acknowledging that the balance of buyers and sellers can tip violently, analysts have devised sentiment indicators and volume
indicators to help identify crowd extremes. Sentiment indicators identify
extreme situations so you can catch the next wave or get out of the way.
Sentiment and volume indicators operate on the principle that, “The trend
is your friend — until the end,” meaning that the crowd is wrong at price
extremes. Some sentiment indicators apply to “the market” in its entirety, and
others apply to individual securities. Volume directly represents the extent
of trader participation and is a powerful indicator in its raw state, before you
even manipulate the data to derive an indicator.
The word indicator refers to a statistic comprised of data about the price or
volume of a security that has been reorganized or rearranged to provide analytical insight. You can use just about any market data that takes your fancy to
create an indicator. Some indicators pertain to the entire market, like the dayto-day change in the volume on the New York Stock Exchange, and some indicators relate to specific securities, like IBM stock. The purpose of an indicator
is exactly what its name suggests — to indicate the upcoming behavior of the
price or volume. But remember, indicators only indicate; they do not dictate.
In this chapter, I discuss a few of the 100 or so sentiment and volume indicators commonly used. I can’t possibly cover all of them, and besides, new
sentiment indicators are invented every day. I also throw in a little guidance

www.pdfdummies.com

42

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
on the concept of probability, which is not as scary as it sounds. You need
to have a basic understanding of probability to accept some of the inherent
limitations of technical analysis and also to avoid getting cheated by sellers
of technical programs.

Defining Market Sentiment
In technical analysis, sentiment comes in only two flavors — bullish (the
price is going up) or bearish (the price is going down). At any moment in
time, a bullish crowd can take a price upward, or a bearish crowd can take
it downward. When the balance of sentiment shifts from bullish to bearish
(or vice versa), a pivot point emerges. A pivot point is the point (or a region)
where an up move ends and a down move begins (or the other way around).
At the pivot point, the crowd itself realizes that it has gone to an extreme,
and it reacts by heading in the opposite direction.
As far back as the early 1900s, traders observed that if they were patient and
waited for a pivot point to develop, they could trade at the right psychological time — just as the crowd is beginning a new move. When the crowd is
reaching an emotional extreme, the crowd is usually moving in the wrong
direction. A reversal point is impending. You should do the opposite of what
the crowd is doing, or at least get ready to.
