
P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

83

The Mission Statement

TABLE 3.4 c Starting Equity of $10,000, Win/Loss Percentage of 33 Percent,
Risk/Reward Ratio of 6:2 with Four 10 Percent Winning Trend Trades

After # Trades

1–10
11–20
21–30
31–40
41–50

Maximum Account
Value

Minimum Account
Value

Max%/Min%
Return

$11,605
$12,244
$13,406
$14,942
$16,359

$10,180
$11,032
$11,759
$12,875
$14,350

16.1/1.8
22.4/10.3
34.1/17.6
49.4/28.8
63.6/43.5

trades). He succeeds in catching four trends on the 10th, 22nd, 34th, and
46th weeks. His impressive results are shown in Table 3.4c.
What the exercise in the numbers demonstrates is that the mission
statement of making the most money is found by looking for, and staying
on, trends. Trader 3 who risked only 2 percent of his account per trade (20
pips) was able to stretch out his wins just a touch to have a 3:1 risk/reward
ratio. Even though he had to do this, he only had to make 60 pips, which
was 10 pips less than the other traders. The other traders were not as good
with their borderline levels, so they had to risk more on their entry trades.
Trader 3 was able to make 6 percent thirteen times a year and 10 percent
four other times. He had 33 losing trades, but each only lost 2 percent per
trade (20 pips). He used key borderlines that made him either wrong or
right, and he lived with the results.
Trader 1 did fine for himself, too. He made a nice return. He did not
stretch his wins any further than he had to, and he had to risk 3 percent (30
pips) on his entry trades, as he was not as good with his borderlines. He
felt he could do better with his win/loss percentage and entry levels, but he
was happy.
Finally, Trader 2 lost money. She had some good winners, but she blew
up four times during the year, and like Trader 1 was not all that happy with
her entry trades.
Knowing the numbers behind what trends and entry levels can do for
you can be eye opening. They highlight how trading near borderlines and
staying on the trends are the key to success.
The next chapter will take our next step forward by looking at the game
plan for successfully trading and attacking the currency market.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c03

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

84

18:51

Printer: Yet to come

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 4

What’s Your
Game Plan?

y now, you have probably deduced that I find parallels between
sports and trading. For me, success on the athletic field is a nice
comparison to success in trading. In football, if you complete 60 percent of your passes, you are a starting NFL quarterback. In trading, if you
are successful 60 percent of the time, you should be a success. In golf,
controlling risk, or employing proper “course management,” will keep high
scores off the scorecard. In trading, controlling and knowing your risk will
keep the big losses out of your account. Tennis is a game of risk and reward, baseball has a large degree of failure that has to be managed and
controlled, and soccer is also a game that requires working through little
failures but takes a big trend-type move to lead to a goal.
I would be willing to wager that if athletes and traders got together in
a room and talked generally about the mind-set and hurdles each has to
go through to be successful and how they solve the mental challenges, the
similarities would be startling.
The last chapter introduced a mission statement for all currency
traders: “To make the most money with the least amount of risk.” Using
another sports metaphor, now the ball has to be moved farther down the
field to refine how the mission will be accomplished. It’s time to develop a
game plan to go with our mission statement.

B

85

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

86

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

EVERY MISSION STATEMENT NEEDS A
GAME PLAN
A football coach might have as a mission statement, “To win the most
games possible, with the fewest injuries.” The first part is similar to making the most money as a trader. If a football team does not want to win as
many games as possible (i.e., make the most money), it should not play the
games. Does it mean the team will win all its games? No. But given what
they have, all members should strive to win the highest number.
The second part, “with the fewest injuries,” addresses the importance
of keeping the best players playing. With fewer injuries, the team stands to
win more games.
Contrast this to the “least amount of risk” part of a trader’s mission
statement. If you take too much risk, you will likely fail. Fear will be increased. So use the least amount of risk.
Our fictitious football team now needs a game plan. That game plan
would likely focus on the strengths of the team and getting the most out of
the weaker parts. So if the team is strong on defense, the game plan might
be to limit yards gained rushing and force a certain number of turnovers.
On offense the game plan might be to keep penalties to a minimum, keep
turnovers down, establish a running game to keep the clock moving and the
team’s defense off the field (so it remains strong and rested). Another part
of the game plan would address the injury side of the mission statement.
So the game plan for that may be to commit the team members to strength
and conditioning, limit contact at practice, and look to perfect technique in
an attempt to steer clear of avoidable injuries.
The game plan must be focused on the team’s mission statement, but
it must also speak more specifically to how the mission can be accomplished. Now, what should be our game plan for trading? Specifically, how
do traders make the most money, and how do they do it with the least
amount of risk? The game plan comes in two parts: Trade the trends and
keep fear to a minimum.

TRADE THE TRENDS
Focusing on the first part of our mission statement, it is common knowledge that traders should trade with the trends, and that if they do, they will
stand to make the most money. As a result, this is the first part of our game
plan: Trade the trends.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:17

What’s Your Game Plan?

Printer: Yet to come

87

There are a few reasons why trading the trends offers the best opportunity to make the most money:

r Trends move in one direction with higher highs and higher lows when
in an uptrend, and lower lows and lower highs when in a downtrend. If
trading with the trend, the account equity should not go negative and
should continue to go higher with each successive directional trend leg
up or down.
r Trends tend to move faster with corrective waves that are shallow and
sometimes quick. This should keep profits accruing at an accelerated
rate. The faster a trend moves, the better chance a successful trader
has to manage the trend without getting scared and covering. Plus, the
trader has more money to play with in the account, which also works
to his or her mental advantage.
r Often a trend trading range can be multiple of the range of a nontrend.
A larger range increases the potential for a larger profit.
Trends are a powerful profit dynamic for traders and one that should
therefore be a focus if the trader is geared toward making the most money.
What retail traders do not realize is that for the same reasons that trading
with the trend is so profitable, trading against the trend can be devastating
to the account equity.
When a trader trades against the trend:

r Instead of account equity not having a chance to go negative, the account equity has no or little chance of going positive.

r Instead of profits accruing quickly, losses accrue quickly.
r Instead of leading to profit, the larger trading range leads to larger
losses.
If you want to see equity disappear from your account quickly, then
simply trade against the trend.

Why Don’t Retail Traders Trade the Trend?
Do retail traders trade trends well? The answer is no. Over the last 10 years
in the currency business, I have found that most retail traders do poorly
trading the trends. What I see is also supported by generally accepted estimates for active traders. Although there is no proven statistic as to the
percentage of active traders who will ultimately lose money trading, the
estimates do range in the vicinity of greater than 70 percent.
The reasons are varied, but one can safely assume that it is trading
against the trend that tips the scales against most retail traders. Losses

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

88

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

simply accrue too quickly when traders go against the trend. They tend to
wipe out any chance for success while they wipe out account balances and
confidence in the process. Moreover, if retail traders were good at trading
with the trend, profits from that should lead to oversized account balances.
That is, there would be more profitable traders. The fact is, there are not.
So who makes all the money trading with the trends? It seems the institutional traders make the most money, or that is what their earnings
show. Why do they make the most money? Because they tend to trade
and stay on the trends. They may have an informational advantage at
some point—there is no denying that—but the information is reflected in
the price in the chart, and institutional traders see the same charts retail
traders see. If the information says be long, the price is going to go higher.
Everyone sees the price. So how can a retail trader do as well as an institutional trader? Trade like an institutional trader. In other words, trade the
trend and stay on it as long as possible.
To solve a problem, it is often beneficial to understand why the problem exists. Although there are a number of reasons why retail traders don’t
trade trends well, the following are some of the main reasons.
They Don’t Think It’s Worth It One reason retail traders can’t seem
to trade the trends is that they simply don’t pay enough attention to trends
or the potential for a trend. If you were to look at a daily chart of a currency
pair, most of the activity is either nontrending or correcting a trend move.
Therefore, traders tend to think the trends are not so important.
Although trends occur less than nontrends and corrections on a
daily basis, with the currency markets trading 24 hours a day, there
usually are periods where the market trends intraday. When looking at
5-minute, 15-minute, or even hourly charts, there are many more trend trading opportunities. These are trends that traders can either profit from or
get hurt trading. Traders have to be aware of intraday trends. They can be
a great benefit to your trading account’s profitability.
What is also important to realize as a trader is that longer-term
trends—the kind that happen less often—start from shorter-term trends.
You can bet that if there is a longer-term trend, there are a bunch of shorterterm trends in the same direction that, combined, made up that sustained
directional move. So, although we don’t know what the future may bring,
the trends from the shorter periods start the progression that leads to a
longer-term trend. As the book progresses, we will look at the progression
of a longer-term trend that has its roots firmly established in the shorterterm market.
Traders Don’t Anticipate Trends Another reason for the failure to
trade the trends successfully is that most traders do not consciously think
about anticipating a trend.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

What’s Your Game Plan?

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

89

Think about your favorite major league baseball player. He hits a home
run to win the game. He is being interviewed by the television announcer,
and more times than not, the player will say something like “The pitcher
fell behind two balls and no strikes. So I was looking for a fastball for a
strike and I got it.” The batter anticipated the pitch and he hit it out. Home
run. Game over.
Think about Apple and the iPad (or any of Apple’s other products). One
of the selling points in its television ad says simply, “You already know how
to use it.” That is what Apple does well. It minimizes the learning curve. It
anticipates what the consumer will do with the iPad from a usability standpoint and as a daily informational tool, and this is one of its main attractions. I am willing to bet that on one of Apple’s designer’s white boards for
the iPad, someone wrote the word “ANTICIPATE.”
Traders need to anticipate the trends, too. If you can anticipate a trend,
you are more ready to trade a trend. Not only that—if you anticipate a
trend and it starts to trend, you are now more willing and able to stay on
the trend. If I told you the market had a good chance of trending and you
believed me, would you be more willing to ignore the little corrections? I
would. The good news is, you don’t have to believe me. What you have to
believe is what the market is telling you through the price and tools applied
to the price. If you believe those tools, and you are anticipating a trend, you
will be more likely to stay firmly on the trend until the market tells you to
get out. This is what the institutional guys are doing.
How can you anticipate when a trend is going to happen? Much the
same way that a baseball player anticipates a fastball or Apple anticipates
how a user would use an iPad. The baseball player knew the pitcher needed
to throw a strike and that came via a fastball. For Apple, applying human
logic to technology and understanding what the consumer wants and needs
via the apps allowed designers to anticipate what users would do with the
product in their hands.
In trading, the clues the market gives from technical trading tools allow successful traders to anticipate a trend-type move. Does anticipating a
trend always lead to a trend move? Not always. Just like a pitcher may not
always groove a fastball down the middle of the plate, the currency markets
may not always be ready to trend when you think they might. Nevertheless,
the best traders always look to anticipate the trend moves.
Later in the book I will outline the ways that traders can better anticipate trends by using key technical tools. This will allow the traders to take
advantage of the predictability of the market. Pretty soon you will be taking
the grooved fastball out of the park, too.
Traders Are Too Complicated Pete Tomasino, a colleague of mine
at FXDD, is a character. He has much more personality than most. He also

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

90

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

is not shy when it comes to expressing an opinion. It certainly helps add to
his personality. I always surmised that although Pete may not have been on
his high school debate team, he most likely would have beaten the pants
off of them if he wasn’t too busy excelling on the athletic fields. The reason
is that Pete has a bunch of plain old common sense.
One of the more logical proclamations that Pete abides by is “Life is
simple. People choose to make it complicated.” Retail traders may or may
not make their lives complicated, but they most certainly make trading,
and trading the trends, complicated. This helps explain why they are not
successful trading trends.
Most retail traders’ charts will have a Relative Strength Index
(RSI), Stochastic, Commodity Channel Index (CCI), or Moving Average
Convergence-Divergence (MACD) on them. They will have three to four
different moving averages and a Bollinger Band. They might analyze candlestick patterns and include an Ichimoku cloud. They will have trend lines
coming up and down from all sorts of obscure angles. They will follow
oil, the S&P, and gold for the intermarket relationships. They might have
Bloomberg and CNBC on two separate television monitors. They might
subscribe to some premium news services and have 10 different books
on trading on their desks. I realize my book is adding to that pile, but I
hope it simplifies your trading thoughts and becomes the bible for your
trading.
These traders will often be one of two types. The first type will rarely
have a position because they have successfully confused themselves with
all the input running through their brains. When they do get the courage to
trade, something on their charts that will tell them to go the other way and
the position will be squared up.
The second type will go to the other extreme. They will have positions
in the EURUSD, GBPUSD, USDCHF, AUDUSD, GBPJPY, and AUDCAD or
some similar combination at the same time. They too will go back and forth
as the different tools kick in from bullish to bearish and bearish to bullish
and back again.
Most likely both stay up well past their bedtime. The trader from the
first group will stay up without executing a trade, lamenting how his eightpoint signal was not triggered. The trader from the second group will eventually tire as the lethal cocktail of caffeine, adrenaline, and trading losses
leads to a trading coma. Neither will be focused on trading trends.
Baseball players have a choice between a fastball, curve, or changeup.
Golfers agonize over a 9-iron or pitching wedge to the green. Ice skaters
choose to do either the triple toe loop or the quad toe loop during their
long routines.
Traders feel a need to clog their heads with all sorts of technical indicators, with the thought that more equals better. What they fail to realize is
that the more tools they use, the greater the chance a trend will never be

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

What’s Your Game Plan?

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

91

found or traded. In the revised words of Pete Tomasino, “Trading is simple.
People choose to make it complicated.”

KEEP FEAR TO A MINIMUM
The second part of our traders’ game plan is to “keep fear to a minimum.”
Fear is an emotion that I never, ever liked. In fact, I don’t know anyone who
thrives on fear. Fear causes you to do things you normally would not do.
Yet controlling fear is also very difficult thing to do. It almost is impossible
to control some forms of fear.
When I was a young boy, I will always remember how two friends set
me up by having me go get a board game in my friend’s dark basement.
Little did I know that one of my friends, who I thought was going to get
a drink, actually snuck down to the basement and hid in the dark. When I
went down and tried to turn on the light, the light failed to go on. I entered
the room anyway, and from a dark corner in the room a flashlight went on,
focused on a masked monster face. Immediately, my heart raced, I bolted
out of the room, and I screamed my way up the stairs. Needless to say,
my friends thought it was hilarious. For me, however, the fear was real. It
was lingering. I could not get the sight of that mask out of my mind’s eye. I
had trouble sleeping. I kept lights on. I opened closet doors when I entered
rooms. I certainly did not like going in any basement. Fear overcame me.
It became my enemy. I could not do anything about my fear for a good
long while.

A Different Type of Fear
Traders have a different type of fear. It is not the horror fear that I experienced as a child, but it is fear nevertheless. Most people know about
the fear of failure. That rears its head when a trader fears losing money. If
you put a position on and immediately feel that you would rather have the
complete opposite position, that is an example of the fear of failure.
Traders also have what I call the fear of success. This is a fear most
traders don’t know about, but which I think contributes to retail traders’
inability to trade trends. I introduced this fear in Chapter 2.
Before discussing and explaining in greater detail the two types of fear,
it is important to realize that for a trader, fear is directly proportional to
risk—the second part of our mission statement. That is, if a trader’s fear
is increased, trader’s risk is likely to be increased as well, and vice versa.
So to control risk—that is, to keep the least amount of risk—traders should
search for ways to control their fear. If they can control fear, it is likely that
they will be using the least amount of risk—the second part of our mission
statement.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c04

92

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 20, 2011

21:17

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

What is also important to realize is the seesaw balance of our game
plan, which is “Trading the trends and keeping fear to a minimum.” Most
traders know that the “trend is your friend.” What most traders don’t realize
is that fear is a trader’s worst enemy. Fear makes you do the wrong things.
It will make you scream and yell (inside, of course); it will increase your
heart rate; it will make you avoid trading; it will muddy your mind. If a
trader can stay with the angelic trend and steer clear of devilish fear, there
will be a greater chance for success.
As already mentioned, there are two types of fear that retail traders
face. One is obvious. The other is not so obvious. The next sections will
go through each in more detail. It is important to know your fears and find
ways to overcome them.
Fear of Failure The most common fear that traders have is the fear
of failure. As mentioned, this fear is specifically tied to the notion that the
trade initiated will lose money. I think some fear is better than no fear.
The trader with no fear is one who takes the stance that he is right, the
market is wrong, and no matter what, the position will remain—even when
it is clearly wrong. That is one extreme that I do not recommend, as there
usually is no limit to the loss side of the trading equation.
The other extreme is the trader who does a trade and almost immediately wishes to have the opposite position. Invariably, this trader will
switch the position, close the position quickly, tell himself the position is
right as a way to quell the fear (even though the fear is still there and high),
and keep a losing trade longer than he should. What he will not likely do
is keep the position on for an extended trend-type move. He is too scared.
Missing trends is not what traders should aspire to do.
Traders who fear failure have fear similar to the fear of monsters I experienced as a child when my friends scared me in the basement. To overcome my fear, I had to condition myself to listen to what my parents were
telling me: “There are no monsters in the basement.” I had to change my
negative thought (monsters were everywhere) to a positive thought (they
are not everywhere). I took it slowly from there until I could say there were
no monsters anywhere.
If you have the fear of failure in your trading, you need to do the same
thing. You need to understand that you have this fear (i.e., listen to your
emotions. Perhaps listen to me.). You need to condition your mind that
you have this fear and a solution is needed. You need to solve the problem
by conditioning your mind to think more positively about your trading and
find ways to control your fear, and in the process, rid your mind of the
negative thoughts/fear.
When this is all done, the fear will be dispersed. It may not be all gone,
but it will be lessened, and as a result, you will be back in control of your
trading position—instead of leaving fear in control. Needless to say, I will
