
stress can be dangerous because:
Few have the sufficiently strong concentrations skills.
There is risk of bad decisions from decision fatigue (the tendency to make poorer decisions
after a long day of making decisions or other mentally taxing work as the mind tires).
Professional traders know not to trade when they're tired, stressed, or otherwise suffering
from impaired mental focus.
It's not uncommon for day traders to make 10–20 or more trades per day when markets are
volatile. That can and does lead to decision fatigue. It causes those who make many mentally
demanding decisions to make bad decisions toward the end of a workday.
For example, a study of Israeli judges showed that the deciding factor in which prisoners got
parole was not whether the prisoner was Jewish or Arab. Instead, the deciding factor was
how long the judge had been on duty that day.4 Prisoners on trial early in the morning received
parole about 70 percent of the time, but those who appeared late in the day were paroled less
than 10 percent of the time. Decision fatigue is a known problem for day traders.5
Traders using longer time frame charts are less likely to encounter this problem. The more
reliable trends, chart patterns, and support and resistance (s/r) levels on longer-term charts
take more time to develop, so decisions about whether to take a trade are much less frequent.
Usually, those trading off of daily or longer time frame charts can reach a tentative conclusion,
and then sleep on it before reaching a final decision and executing the trade.
There is less time to evaluate the available evidence or check with more experienced trades or
analysts. This is a particularly serious problem for:
Newer traders.
Traders who have yet to find a trading style with which they are both comfortable and
successful.
Those prone to making slower decisions and/or to examining lots of evidence before making
financial decisions.

A More Level Playing Field
Remember what we said in Chapter 1 about not trying to compete with the big boys who have every
advantage? Day trading currencies is the worst form of that. The traders running the forex departments
of large financial institutions have decisive advantages that are most prominent with short-term
intraday trading than with longer duration trades. They usually have:
More experience because it's their full-time job (and the newer hires have access to their veteran
supervisors).
Better training and access to analysis, at times from top in-house gurus or private advisory
services charging prices only institutions or the wealthy can afford.
More natural ability. Competition for these lucrative institutional trading jobs is naturally fierce.
Those who survive it tend to be the fittest.
Access to the best information resources and equipment available. Assume they will know
everything before you do. That puts you at a huge disadvantage when you're holding positions
over a matter of hours or a few days. However, over weeks or months more of the important
information becomes widely known. For example, a big institutional trader might have ways of

knowing about a major central bank announcement a few hours in advance. However, over the
coming weeks that bank's policy bias will be clearer to all.
Access to enough capital to move prices over a given number of minutes or hours to their
advantage and start false breakouts or other fake price moves that can fool the herd into buying or
selling at the wrong time. (More on that later and what to do about it over longer durations.)
Even if you could afford to buy most of that, here's what no amount of money can buy (short of
buying a majority share in one of these firms):
Direct or indirect access to their firms' order books, allowing them to know what price levels
their own customers chose for their buy and sell orders.
Various inside contacts at other institutions with whom this information can be shared and
traded for future tips. It's like playing cards with someone who can see your hand when you
can't see theirs.
Pure insider information. This information is the only rational explanation for why markets
seem so consistently good at anticipating certain major news events. For example, in the days
before Greece agreed to terms allowing its second bailout in the spring of 2011, the Euro and
other risk assets strengthened. Weeks later, just before Standard & Poor's (S&P) downgraded
America's credit rating from AAA to AA+, markets were selling off. A coincidence? The SEC
suspected otherwise. Days after the announcement, the SEC began investigating the firm on
suspicion that news of the downgrade was leaked ahead of time. Insider trading scandals have
become a regular occurrence. Given their record in recent years, it's safe to assume that
regulators catch only a portion of the most egregious offenders.
However, over a period of days or weeks, insider information tends to leak out, or if it
doesn't, it still may show up on the charts as unexplained steady buying or selling pressure.
That too can alert you to an opportunity. The longer your time frame the better your chances of
seeing this, because those accumulating large positions try to be discreet and build them
gradually. So the longer your time frame—multiple days, weeks, or longer—the more you can
neutralize the natural advantages of the big players, especially if you're selective about the
trades you take.

More and Better Information Means Better Trade Decisions
Intraday price movements are harder to predict. You don't have much information on which to base a
good decision. Some of the following is repeated from above to make sure you get it clear.
First, random price movements or “market noise” is more influential over the course of a given
number of hours, during which time trades can be made or broken based on the movements of 10 to 20
pips.
In addition to the attempted manipulations noted earlier, there are the more innocent short-term
money flows from large players conducting their normal business. For example if a Chinese company
buys an Australian firm, that payment or installment on that purchase could influence short-term AUD
prices. These price movements are difficult to predict even for experienced institutional traders with
every advantage available.
Those lower on the food chain, particularly the least experienced and skilled at the bottom of it,
lack the training, experience, and information resources needed to identify and interpret the resulting

short-term price movements, which can include a lot of sheer random movements.
The widely available technical indicators are less useful, and the publicly available longer-term
fundamentals and trends of the underlying economies of a currency pair are irrelevant over the course
of a given number of hours.

Trends Are More Reliable in Longer Time Frames
Currencies often perform as if we're really trading shares in entire national (or regional in the case of
the EUR) economies. The economic fundamentals of a country (GDP, employment rates, consumer
spending, etc.) change much more slowly for countries than for publicly traded companies. That
stability in economic fundamentals creates equally stable trends (or flat trading ranges) in forex pairs
that can persist over weeks, months, or years. So why not trade with longer holding periods that
exploit these longer, stronger, more reliable trends?
Let's look at some examples.
Note how stable the long-term trends have been for the USDCHF, USDJPY, and AUDUSD from
June 1999 to December 2011 (see Figure 5.1).
FIGURE 5.1 Top to Bottom: USD versus CHF, JPY, AUD from June 1999 to December 2011. Note
the steady, persistent trend in these pairs.
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

From January 2000 to mid-August 2011, the CAD gained over 32 percent against the U.S. dollar
(USD) (see Figure 5.2).
FIGURE 5.2 USDCAD January Monthly Chart, December 1999 to August 18, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Long-term forex trends can persist for even longer than those shown in Figure 5.2.
From 1970 to 2011, the Swiss Franc gained 75% versus the USD. Imagine how well you'd have
done with the right Swiss stocks and/or bonds since you'd have asset and currency appreciation in
your favor.6 We'll go deeper into that topic in Chapter 12.
In both cases, the monthly charts show that, with few exceptions, the trends were smooth and stable
over the periods in question.
This tendency toward stable long-term trends is a huge advantage for forex traders with the
intelligence, patience, and capital needed to play them because so much of successful trading is based
on betting in the direction of the longer-term trend.
So why not take advantage of these safer, more easily predictable multiweekly, monthly, and yearly
trends and trade them instead of their riskier, less predictable short-term counterparts? The pips are
worth as much for easy trades as for hard ones.
One word of caution: Long-term positions mean there's more time for wider price swings, so if
you're using leverage you need to be sure you have enough cash in reserve to afford the wider
distances between your entry point and your stop loss orders. For example, a given pair might
typically move only 50 pips over a given day but move hundreds of pips in the course of a month. You
need enough cash in your account relative to your position size and leverage used to be able to absorb
those temporary drawndowns as the longer-term trend makes its normal countermoves within its
longer-term trend. If you don't want the risks associated with leveraged trading for a given position
size, you can cut your position size, or use instruments like forex, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and
exchange-traded notes (ETNs), which we'll cover in Chapter 10.
These easily seen long-term national economic fundamentals create these persistent, reliable longterm trends. The ability to play such reliable trends is a great advantage of long-term trading over
short-term trading, which lacks trends of comparable trend reliability.

Ideal Trends For Long-Term Investors
Should you continue to play the trends in Figure 5.2? Unless they've reversed by the time you read

this, why not? These are decade-long trends that are assumed valid until proven otherwise. The only
questions are when to enter, what stop loss settings make sense, and whether you are able to afford to
ride out the likely price swings along the way for a given position size and leverage. For long-term
investors, or those with limited analytical and RAMM skills, these are some of the lowest risk trends
you can find. As we'll see in Chapters 10 through 12, you don't even have to play them by directly
buying or selling the currency pairs themselves. There are multiple ways to ride these trends which
long-term investors may find more suitable.

Other Technical Indicators Are Better in Longer Time Frames
As noted at the start of Chapter 4, the easily available TA indicators found on most popular charting
platforms used by retail traders all work better on longer time frame charts because they're older,
more established, and provide more meaningful s/r and better signals when they're breached or when
they diverge from normal price behavior, regardless of whether they are:
Forms of s/r that we've covered previously or those in later chapters: chart patterns, Fibonacci
retracements (Fibs), price levels, and so forth.
Momentum indicators: assorted oscillators, moving average (MA) crosses, Double Bollinger
Bands (DBBs), and so on.
Cycle or timing tools: Fibonacci, Gann, Elliot Wave or other price cycle indicators.

Publicly Available Fundamental Data and Analysis Matters in Longer
Time Frames
Over the course of weeks and months, the fundamentals of the underlying economies of a currency
pair have time to affect its trend and price. For example, trends in interest rates, national debt levels,
employment, consumer spending, and more may not matter over the course of a few hours or days
(except as news items before and after the most recent figures are announced), but they become
increasingly meaningful over weeks and months. Though the big players will still be better at
fundamental analysis (FA), their advantage is less pronounced. With some experience, small traders
and investors get a good grasp of the longer-term fundamentals of the major currencies. There's a lot
of good information online for free or low cost, and there are only eight major currencies. Seriously,
you don't need to pay thousands a year for a subscription to Nuriel Roubini or Charles Nenner to have
had a firm grasp of how the EU or U.S. debt troubles are likely to influence their respective
currencies. An hour a day on some top free websites like those listed in Appendix A will get you free
access to some superb analysts and articles on forex and related macro and fundamental topics. When
you're playing multiweekly or monthly trends, it usually wouldn't matter much if you read them a few
days after their subscribers.

Lower Trading Costs
The potential trading range over a few minutes or hours is usually going to be a mere fraction of that
which is possible over a period of many days or weeks. Let's say each transaction to open and close a
position costs you on average 2 pips, so each trade costs about 4 pips. If you're striving for the 10–30
pips profit per trade of a typical day trader, transaction costs consume up to 40 percent of your

profits. That kind of expense implies a trader needs a high percentage of winning trades to be
profitable.
In contrast, those in positions that take multiple weeks to develop commonly earn 150 pips or more
on winning trades because the trend or trading range has more time to cover a greater range of pips.
That means transaction costs consume a much smaller percentage of profits and allow traders to be
profitable with a much lower percentage of winning trades.

Start Out with Longer Duration Trades
In sum, trading longer-term positions from longer time frame charts increases your odds of success for
six reasons:
1. A more level playing field: Longer duration positions allow you to compete by neutralizing
much of the big institutions' advantages, which are more pronounced in the short term.
2. More and better information: The better the information, the greater the time to digest that
information, with more reliable trends and technical indicators and less decision fatigue risk,
combine to foster better decisions and a higher percentage of winning trades.
3. More time, less stress: You have more time to analyze and reconsider before placing a trade,
with the ability to place trades in advance without greed and fear weighing on you as you decide
in real time what to do, less pressure to decide, and lower chance of decision fatigue.
4. Work smarter, not harder: Longer time frames demand less active trade monitoring and less
work. In addition to being better rested and less stressed, you can choose to put that extra time
into finding the lowest risk trades, furthering your trading education, market research, and related
reading. Or (dare I say it) you could do other things for a more balanced, rewarding life.
5. Lower transaction costs: The larger trading ranges over longer time frames mean that
transaction costs consume a much smaller percentage of your revenues and allow you to be
profitable with a much lower percentage of winning trades.
6. We believe these benefits far outweigh the potential excitement (or stress) and potential faster
profits (which few achieve without considerable experience and skill) of the day traders.
To trade longer time frames, it helps if your broker provides the tools you need, particularly quality
longer-term analysis.

Content Quality: The Sign of a Quality Broker
While we're encouraging trades on longer time frames, which depend on good long-term focused
analysis, here's a related bit of critical advice for selecting a forex broker. Even though you have a
number of criteria to consider, here's one you can use as a first screening to filter out the obviously
lower quality operations.

The Best Forex Brokers Provide Quality Guidance to Trade LongerTerm Positions
The more quality content they provide that makes it easier for you to trade longer time frames (as well
as shorter durations), the more they're oriented toward serious traders rather than casual gamblers and

the better a chance of success they're giving you.
There are four signs to look for.
1. Price data going back at least 10 years, preferably more
An important sign of the quality of your charting tools is how far back you view the price
action on a given asset or currency pair. There will likely be times when you will want a big
picture view of the price action of the past decade or more. If your broker can give you only a
few years or shorter for the assets or currency pairs you trade, that signals a bad trading
platform. It suggests the broker is focused on encouraging the short-term trading to be avoided
by all but the more experienced and successful traders or that the broker is focused on fleecing
casual gamblers who are trading more for fun than profit. This is a warning to trade
elsewhere.
2. Free access to quality longer-term as well as short-term analysis
A broker who's serious about helping you profit will provide quality technical and
fundamental analysis for periods extending beyond hours or days. If a broker provides only
news updates you could find on any financial or forex news site, poor quality analysis, or
analysis covering only the next few days at most, then move on. The broker is either unwilling
or unable to invest in the resources you need for success playing the safer, more reliable
longer-term trends.
The best will provide specific trade advice, including suggested entry and exit points. Some
decent brokers don't do this out of liability concerns though there are ways to avoid that, and
few traders would publicly admit to being stupid enough to believe that a given analyst was
guaranteeing a winning trade (especially when nearly all analysis web pages contain legal
disclaimers).
3. Free quality trader training
Similarly, a broker that's on your side will make a serious effort to educate you with free or
low-cost extensive training materials. We don't mean a superficial 30-page beginner's guide
that barely covers basic s/r, plus a few brief, superficial webinars. We mean a full set of
courseware on all aspects of trading.
4. Quality content means your broker is stable and on your side
Quality shows a genuine effort to help you succeed and says a lot about the broker's financial
stability. Good analysts and full-featured websites represent a serious investment that suggests
both financial stability and the intention to build a lasting business based on a large base of
successful traders. The forex industry is young and has many small brokers started by those
who come from the online gambling industry. Many of them retain that mentality, and continue
to view traders as lambs to be slaughtered rather than long-term clients who will provide a
lasting corps of repeat customers, who therefore should be nurtured. Cheap or nonexistent
content suggests the broker isn't focused on helping you succeed. Instead, it's assuming high
client turnover (read: you lose all your money) and is focused on bringing in the next group of
suckers before the current group is wiped out.
In general, if a broker is not helping you survive and succeed in the long run, not teaching you to
trade or is limiting your ability to take longer-term positions, then move along. Remember this advice
when you explore binary options, an alternative way of trading forex that we'll look at in detail later.

For now, just note that most binary options brokers offer expirations of a day or less. Don't waste
your time with them as these are just glorified gambling sites. View them as you would any other
casino, as adversaries, not trusted brokers. You'll want to stick to the ones that offer weekly and
monthly durations. At the time of this writing, only anyoption.com offered both of these though we
hope more brokers do so by the time you read this.

THE ESSENCE OF GOOD RAMM
To be motivated to practice good RAMM, you first need the right mindset, discussed previously.
RAMM is all about the following, which we cover in detail in this chapter:
Trading with safer styles and methods, as discussed previously.
Making sure your gains from winning trades are larger than your losses from losing trades, as
discussed later in the chapter on risk-to-reward ratios (rrrs).
Increasing the odds of favorable rrrs. We'll consider only the trades that offer entry near strong
support, with a reasonable stop loss that's much closer to our entry point than the next likely
resistance area, which would serve as our likely exit point. Again, see the upcoming section on
rrrs for details.
Preventing a fatal loss from one or a series of losing trades from which you're unlikely to recover
without adding funds. In essence, that means keeping your maximum loss per trade to a maximum
of 1 percent to 3 percent of your trading capital.

THE THREE PILLARS OF RAMM
As in Chapter 2, the size of this maximum allowable loss per trade depends on three conditions:
1. Account size: Determines the cash value of the 1 to 3 percent maximum loss you can afford.
Thus, it determines how far you can set your stop loss orders from your entry point. The larger the
account, the wider the stops you can afford, and the more choices of trades you have available to
take. For a given account size, that maximum loss you can safely afford is a function of the
following two factors.
2. Leverage or margin used: Fixes the percent loss you incur for each 1 percent price move
against you per lot traded. The greater the leverage (or the lower the margin), the greater the
percent loss for each 1 percent price move against you, and the smaller the percent price move
against you that you can afford without exceeding that 1 to 3 percent. The higher the leverage, the
higher the risk and profit potential per trade. Some brokers allow you to adjust the leverage you
use, some don't.
3. Position size: Determines cash value of each pip or 1 percent loss. For a given leverage
setting, the larger the lot size used (more on that later), the more every pip move against you
costs. The larger the lot size, the higher the risk and profit potential.
Let's look at these in greater detail. All focus is on insuring that your stop loss setting doesn't risk
more than 1 to 3 percent of your capital and that gains per winning trade are much larger than losses
per losing trade.
