
The Case Study You Will Never Read About at Harvard Business School, or, Has This Ever Happened to You or Your
Spouse?
I thought about updating this example for the new edition, but this really is a classic case that would apply equally well to trading today’s hot stocks such as PCLN
(Priceline) or GC (gold futures) or anything else that is actively traded today. I did go through and update and expand the text. Let’s take a look.
Figure 1.1 is a chart of an actively traded stock with the name deliberately removed for now. During 2004 it was vigorously bought by one side of the trading
community and energetically shorted by the other side. Both parties had plenty of opportunities to make money. On December 29, 2004, this stock made a new 52week high, hitting $33.45 the next trading day. Over the next five sessions, it pulled back to support at point 3, at $27.62, which represented a solid buying
opportunity, replicating the buying opportunity that had taken place at point 1, with the same oversold stochastic reading as point 2.
This chart represents a classic case of an inflection point at which a group of traders has to make a decision. A trader who bought the stock as it broke out to new
highs will be feeling pain, while a trader who shorted the highs will be feeling euphoria. Traders who are long the stock way back from $10.00 will feel excited and
wonder whether they should add to their positions on this pullback. A trader who is flat the stock is anxious, not wanting to miss the next move, and will be looking to
buy the stock here at this pullback to support. Take a moment to look at this chart. What would you do here? Would you short the stock or buy it? What would you
be willing to risk? These are questions all traders need to know before they actually place the trade.

17

Figure 1.1
Let’s work with someone I will call Joe Trader. Joe has been trading for a while and has learned a lot about risk/reward levels and about being patient and waiting for
high-probability setups. He looks at this chart and sees a decent buying opportunity in this stock. He has a $100,000 account. Near the close, he buys 2,000 shares at
$27.80, using about half his cash buying power and not even getting close to using any margin. He places a stop limit order at $26.20 and also places a GTC (good till
canceled) sell order at $32.60, which is just below the recent highs. He’s risking $1.60 ($3,200) to make $4.80 ($9,600), a very comfortable 3:1 risk/reward ratio. If he’s
stopped out, he will lose 3.2 percent of his account’s value, which he deems an acceptable risk against making a potential 9.6 percent return on the trade.
The next day, January 7, 2005, the stock gaps lower, opening at $23.78, well below Joe’s stop limit order. (See Figure 1.2.) This leaves Joe in the stock, as his stop
limit order won’t fire unless the stock rallies back to $26.20. (A stop market order at $26.20 would have been liquidated at the open at the market price, incurring a
larger loss.)
Joe doesn’t panic. He’s been down this road before. He is negative on his trade, but it’s not the end of the world. He gets that he is going to lose money on this
trade, and he’s not going to do anything stupid like triple down to bring down his average cost. He is going to follow his plan and take his stop loss like a man. He is
trying to exit gracefully. “Do I dump the stock here,” he wonders, “or do I wait for a small retracement?” He understands that when stocks break down, they will
almost always retrace a portion of the move before ultimately moving lower. He might even be able to get out at his original stop loss. He checks the daily chart and
sees that the stochastic is oversold, setting the stock up for a bounce, even if only of the dead cat variety. He decides to leave his limit stop order in for this eventual
retrace, and he plans to see where the stock ends up near the close.

18

Figure 1.2
Fifteen minutes before the closing bell, he checks the stock and notices that it never reached his stop limit order, but it also bounced off its lows on the day. He
thinks there is a good chance that the stock will start to retrace a portion of the move the next trading day. He is calm. He is objective. He decides to hang on. He is
following a logical plan.
Unfortunately, the next trading day isn’t until M onday, and he spends most of the weekend thinking about his stock, not really reacting to the environment around
him. On Sunday, his wife notices that he has been quiet, almost listless, all weekend and keeps staring at charts on his computer screen. She flips through her latest
issue of Cosmopolitan magazine to see if she can get any tips on how to cheer him up, and perhaps invigorate their sex life, but by the time she is done reading the
insightful articles, she wonders why she ever married this submissive little mouse of a man in the first place. The guys in the articles are so much more daring and fun,
and, best of all, it sounds like they don’t spend a lot of time staring at charts. By the time she goes to bed Sunday night, she is angry. She calls out, “Are you coming to
bed, honey?”
Joe, oblivious, is still up looking at a chart. “Still doing research, babe,” he tells her.
M onday morning finally arrives. Joe jumps out of bed early after a restless sleep, just in time to see that the stock is trading lower premarket. It gaps down by
almost $3.00 at the open of the regular session. (See Figure 1.3.) Joe looks at this and shakes his head. Now he knows he’s in trouble. How could this have happened?

19

Figure 1.3
As Joe numbly sips his coffee, he looks at the chart “objectively” and sees all the reasons why the stock should bounce. It’s now down by more than 40 percent
from its all-time highs in only seven days. It’s near major support on the daily charts. The daily stochastic is now deeply oversold. He is realistic. He knows this stock
is done for, and he knows he is going to lose money on this trade, but he also knows that at some point the stock will at least retrace, and he will be able to exit
gracefully and keep his losses to a minimum. He watches the stock all day, chewing his dirty nails, slurping cold coffee and warm Red Bull, and getting nothing done.
The stock closes at more than $6.00 below his stop. Aghast, he locks up. This is not a situation he remotely believed could happen with this trade. He simply can’t
sell this stock now. The loss is just too big. He decides to hang on for another day, as the stock is way, way overdue for a bounce.

20

Figure 1.4
It is not until he hears the garage door opening downstairs that he remembers that he was supposed to drop off his wife’s pile of clothes at the cleaners. He grabs
them, pauses in the entryway, and races out the front door, timing it perfectly so that she doesn’t see him.
On Tuesday, January 11, the stock (okay, it’s TASR) gaps down yet another 3 points, opening at $17.01. (See Figure 1.4.) Joe takes a deep breath and grits his
teeth. A part of him seems to die a small death. He is dead tired from not being able to sleep last night, and to top it off, his wife has suddenly been acting downright
hostile. He wonders if she saw his P&L on the computer screen, but he’s confident that he’s kept that covered up really well, always minimizing his execution
platform when he leaves the room. He knows he should talk to her, and he will, as soon as he exits this position and goes flat. After all, she is the one holding down a
real job so that he can pursue his dream of becoming a trader.
He focuses on the chart. He tells himself not to panic like a stupid newbie and to react like a professional trader. He knows he will never let himself get into a
situation like this again, ever, ever, ever. But in the meantime, he has to keep a cool head and get out of this mess. He asks God for help, though from past experience
he suspects that He doesn’t care much about the financial markets.
Joe reflects that over the past four months, he has been able to generate an income averaging $5,000 per month from his trading account. If he closes out his TASR
position here at $17.00, he will be down $21,600 on just this one trade. It would take him more than four months just to rebuild his capital. He says to himself, “Okay,
forget about your original order. Let’s say you just entered the trade here. What would be a reasonable target?” He quickly sets up a series of Fibonacci retracement
lines on his chart to see where the 50 percent retracement level of the entire move down is. That level is $22.79, well below his original stop, but if the stock rallies to
that level, it means $11,580 in recovered open losses, leaving him with just a $10,020 “hard loss” to make back instead of $21,600. Okay, that makes some sense. He
starts to feel better and places his new sell order, confident that this is going to work. He sits back to watch the action. He contemplates doubling down … and almost
does it. But he’s learned the hard way that it’s not the right thing to do. He holds back. He waits.
Amazingly, the stock continues to drift lower during the day. Joe stares at the chart, getting quite close to his screens. He is blinking about once every 30 minutes.
He now has it on seven different time frames, continually reminding himself to keep a cool head, that the stock is desperately oversold and that it will soon bounce. Be
patient; wait for the retracement; don’t be an idiot and sell at the dead lows.
As the markets near the close, TASR breaks new intraday lows yet again, cracking $14.00 a share. Joe pushes back from his desk and yells in disgust, “This is
freaking impossible!” TASR is down by nearly 60 percent in eight days. About to explode with rage, he realizes he simply cannot deal with this any longer. His
21

nervous system is a wreck, and his neck muscles feel like plywood. He sells near the close for $14.02, a mind-numbing loss of $27,560. He still cannot believe how far
and how fast TASR has fallen. How much lower can it go? Is this company going bankrupt? Is it going to be the next Enron?
On impulse, he looks at the weekly chart and notices that there isn’t any support until $10.00 a share. He immediately reverses and goes short 4,000 shares at
$14.04, just minutes before the closing bell. Although disgusted with himself, he feels better now that he has taken action, and at least he won’t miss out on the
remaining down move for this stock. He is anxious to see where TASR opens the next day. M aybe they’ll announce a financial scandal?

Figure 1.5

He decides not to tell his wife about any of this, but he does leave a Post-it note on his computer screen reminding himself to pick up the clothes from cleaners the
next day. After a moment’s hesitation, he also scribbles the words, “Buy flowers for wife.”
TASR opens flat the next day, and then steadily starts to rally. (See Figure 1.5.) Joe is confident that the rally will be short-lived. However, he does place a stop just
above yesterday’s highs. This time he places a stop market order, as it was the stop limit order that got him in trouble in the first place. He feels very confident that
this trade is going to work out. This is a good horse!
TASR closes near its highs on January 12, but it does not exceed the previous day’s highs, so Joe’s stop is not hit. He can’t believe his bad luck, although he is still
optimistic that this trade will work out. He certainly hopes the stock will gap down the next day. His wife calls to say that she is going out with the girls. He grabs a
bottle of Grey Goose from the freezer and turns on HBO to see how Tony Soprano is dealing with the problems in his life.
Well, the next day comes around, and the stock gaps up by almost $4.00. Joe’s stop order gets him out at the open, as this turns into a market order when the price
is above his stop, which is $20.83. He lost $6.79 on the play. On 4,000 shares, that is $27,160, nearly identical to the loss on his first trade. His $100,000 trading
account is now down to $45,280. He needs to make 121 percent just to get back to breakeven. He is so angry that he doesn’t know what to do, and eventually he picks
up his keyboard and slams it against the wall. About an hour later, his wife calls to say that they should seek counseling. Joe pours himself a large shot of Don Julios
(since he’s now out of Grey Goose) and contemplates the meaning of life. He mutters out loud, “What the hell happened to me?”
Joe did not have a bad plan, and he treated this trade as well as he could have— with one minor, but very important, exception. He got the stock long based on a
credible entry method. He used a low-risk entry point, had a great risk/reward ratio, and was risking only 3 percent of his portfolio. He didn’t even get a margin call like
22

many traders did in this same situation. The bottom line is, it was a great plan, but it turned into a disaster. This is something that could happen to any trader. It’s not
the fault of Joe Trader that the stock gapped through his stop. However, once it happened, he stopped focusing on the risk and instead focused only on the gain—in
this case, how much of his loss he could make back. It was this small detail that derailed an otherwise solid trading plan and blinded him to the possibility of ruin.
“Live to fight another day” is the mantra of all traders who have survived their first 10 years dancing with the markets.

A Note from My Wife: How Have I Dealt with Being Married to John Carter the Trader?

For those of you who are beginning or well on your way in your trading journey with a significant other or loved one in the wings, I suggest you share this chapter
with him.
John and I have been married for 15 years, and we’ve shared a life together for 20 years. I can almost map my dating and married life to John’s level of trading
experience. For many years, I was waiting to be issued a medal for “standing by my man” during the rough patches of his trading. Now I realize that sticking through
those learning experiences has created the life and freedom we have today through his trading career. M ay you learn from our collective experience, and be sensitive to
the journey of a novice trader trying to make a living at trading.

The Couple’s Trading Litmus Test
Every trader will have bad trades, and in most cases, he will have at least one or two really bad losses. If you are involved with a trader who is on a consistent losing
streak, it would be unrealistic and frankly irresponsible for you to just ignore it. These are some areas of discussion you can have together to help you navigate those
rough spots and see if your partner is still going down the trading path for the right reasons. Use these “three Ps” before you get to the big P, Pissed Off, that leads to a
whole lot of pain.
PASSION. To become a professional at anything, you have to love what you do. If you are looking for trading to get you out of debt or give you a quick cash fix, you are
going to get burned. John has been intrigued with the markets since the day I met him, when I was 19 years old and in college. In fact, even back then, he taught me how
I could invest some of my financial aid money in a little stock called Iomega. (He had me hooked at Iomega.)
An aspiring trader should be intrigued by the markets, enjoy the process of learning about them, and recognize whether the lifestyle of a trader and the markets she is
trading fit her nature. I’ve met many potential clients and friends who probably shouldn’t be trading—it does not suit their personality or the type of life they want to
create. If you are dreading your trading day or becoming secretive, or if your gut or your health is nagging at you, these are all probably pretty good indicators that
something is not right, or that you are not pursuing something you may be passionate about for many years to come.
PERSPECTIVE. Emotional management is critical to a trader. Having activities and interests outside of trading allows a trader to gain perspective and de-stress. Does your
trading partner have other outlets outside of trading? How does he decompress or blow off steam? For John, that includes spending time with our kids, working out
and running, traveling to exotic locations, staying involved with business networking groups where not all the members are traders, and, of course, hanging out with his
awesome wife. Allow time for vacation days and days off, just as you would in any other career. Sometimes it will take the nontrader to rip the trader away from the
monitor and push him in this direction. In our house, I like to call this “the Gollum.” If your partner begins to look like Gollum from Lord of the Rings , hunched over
his computer and stroking the keys lovingly like “his precious”—it’s time to help him unplug. All the successful traders I have met who have made the leap to
becoming professional traders have found a way to bring perspective to their trading. Finding a passion outside of trading and having a bigger-picture vision of what is
important to you that keeps your trading in check is the only way to make it work for the long term.
PLAN. I may not know much about the technical aspects of the market, but one thing I’ve learned from hearing all the blowout stories over the years is that a trader is
only as good as her trading plan. Everybody deviates from a plan occasionally, but without one, you are toast. John has boxes and boxes filled with trading journals
logging not only his trading plans, but also his emotional state when those plans did or did not work. By retrospectively looking at his actions and behaviors, he can
reset his course and avoid making the same mistakes over and over. I believe this also helped him find the niche in the markets that best suited his own personality. A
loss on the day doesn’t get me worried now; it’s when I don’t see John writing in his trading journal that does.

Rules of the Road
Living with a trader is much like riding the ups and downs of the markets. In fact, the way the markets behave is often the barometer for the trader’s emotional state at
the dinner table. If you are living with a trader, here are a few rules of the road to make the ride a little more pleasant— for you and for him.
Here’s a Quarter, Call Someone Who Cares
Traders, if there are times when you come home or come downstairs, as the case may be, from your trading cocoon, itching to talk to a human about your trading
adventures, remember this: your deep passion for the markets may not be shared by your significant other, and that can be a very good thing. Balance is a blessing in a
relationship. Don’t always expect your partner to hang on your every word as you talk ad nauseam about the details of your trading day. Just as John doesn’t want to
hear me talk about the 20 fabric samples I want him to look at for our new drapes, my eyes might roll back in my head if I hear about Russells and E-minis and
Fibonacci clusters while I am trying to sip on my Pinot Grigio on date night. In fact, we have a code word we use to cease diarrhea of the mouth related to our
obsessive interests: “Drapes.” Hearing about one another’s day is lovely, but hashing out the nitty-gritty should be reserved for your trading buddies. So, cut your
partner some slack; she may not be the next M aria Bartiromo, but that doesn’t mean she doesn’t care.
The Pain Principle
23

There is a pain scale that is inversely proportional to your trader’s level of experience. It seems that the less experienced the trader, the more intense her feelings of
pain at the full realization of a poor trading day. In those early days of trading in our marriage, I wish I had had a Hallmark card that said, “Sorry for your loss.
Thinking of you.” There is not much you can say in words to make someone feel better after losing $500 or $5,000 in a day. But creating a relationship in which your
partner can come to you even when she is feeling the pain of a huge loss without total fear of hellfire and damnation judgment at each drawdown is critical in building
her character and her confidence as a trader. Being able to keep her trading successes and failures somewhat transparent will force her to go back to the drawing board
because she realizes that she is not going at this alone. If you attack at each loss, that’s when the rash decisions happen that make traders take stupid trades to quickly
recover their losses to appease themselves or those around them. It’s better to digest and go back with a plan.
The Do Not Enter Zone
A trader’s day can be volatile, filled with ups and downs. But certain times of day are critical, and the most critical are probably market open and market close. During
these hours, treat his trading space like Harry Potter’s Chamber of Secrets. Do not enter. I learned this the hard way. John’s business partner actually has installed a
soundproof, bolted locked room in his home specifically for trading. While this is a little extreme, it can give you an inkling of how serious the level of focus of some
traders can be.
If you want to see a pissed-off trader or, worse yet, a passive-aggressive pissed-off trader, call on the phone repeatedly until he picks up or burst into his trading
office at his critical trading hours. Do this day after day, and not only is it a recipe for frustration, but it becomes downright disrespectful. Imagine that your husband is
an open-heart surgeon and you burst into his open-heart surgery procedure midstream—no bueno. During opening bell and closing bell, a trader’s level of concentration
is probably as intense, and like the patient on the table, his heart and soul are splayed out there just waiting to get stomped on by the markets.
Taming Your Trading Beast
“Raising” a trader in your household is a little like birthing a trading beast. In those early days of her trading life, she is raw, rough around the edges, and foaming at the
mouth occasionally at a losing trade. Periods of poor hygiene may even occur on those long trading jags.
Have faith; if your trader is consistently abiding by the three Ps mentioned earlier, she will begin to mature. M y beloved trading beast John evolved something like
this:
Years 1–5: The Novice Trader
DEVELOPMENTAL MILESTONES . The novice may devour and regurgitate every trading strategy he can get his hands on. Sleep patterns are highly irregular at this stage.
Irritability and tantrums mixed with periods of jubilant elation and lots of high-fiving is common. Onset of delusions of grandeur may occur.
SPOUSAL SKILL DEVELOPED. Tolerance.
Years 5–10: The Intermediate Trader
DEVELOPMENTAL MILESTONES. Sleep patterns become more regulated, with short periods of fitfulness. New interests may develop. Trader may experience need for social
interaction with other traders. Emotional bipolarism at wins and losses less pronounced. Writing habits and homework skills improve.
SPOUSAL SKILL DEVELOPED. Acceptance.
Years 10–15: The Successful Professional Trader
DEVELOPMENTAL MILESTONES. Trader regains humanlike countenance once again. Trader can be taken out in public and social situations. Body functioning optimally. Bank
account functioning optimally.
SPOUSAL SKILL DEVELOPED. Elation.
Take S tock
Taking risks and managing risk is a huge percentage of what trading boils down to. In our case, John took the huge risks and the big hits very early in our relationship.
It was definitely a test for our relationship, and a testament to his character. John took risks when the things we had to lose were truly only monetary. In my twenties,
I could live on ramen noodles for a couple of weeks if I had to. I could wait on having our first starter home if I had to. However, if you have three children, have a job
that is barely paying the rent, and are in debt to high heaven, you are playing a game with very high stakes. If you are making trades that eat away at your life and the
lives of those around you without being honest with yourself about following your passion, keeping perspective, and having a plan, it’s not going to be pretty. If you
and your partner have highly different values concerning lifestyle, material goods, and timing of your life plan, that’s something you need to look closely at before you
begin pursuing life as a trader (or begin pursuing a marriage, for that matter). There are many ways to make a go at this life, and trading is a great one. But take stock
and figure out whether trading is the right path and whether it is coming at the right time for you. Determine the level of risk you are willing to take, and manage a plan
accordingly.
______________
