These statistics are not published on a weekly or monthly basis, so longer-
term analysis should be undertaken by recording the value of the line at the
end of each Friday, or taking an average of Friday readings for a monthly
plot. The appropriate MA can then be constructed from these weekly and
monthly observations. It is normal for the upside/downside line to rise dur-
ing market advances and to fall during declines.

Principle When the upside/downside line fails to
or low) in the price index, it warns of a potential

iB

The basic principles of trend determination discussed in Part I may be
applied to the upside/downside line. When a market is advancing in an
irregular fashion, with successively higher rallies interrupted by a series of
tising troughs, the upside/downside line should be doing the same. Such
action indicates that the volume of advancing issues is expanding on rallies
and contracting during declines. When this trend of the normal price/vol-
ume relationship is broken, a warning is given that one of two things is hap-
Pening. Either upside volume is failing to expand sufficiently, or volume

= during the decline has begun to expand excessively on the downside. Both

are bearish factors. The upside/downside line is particularly useful when
Prices are rising to new highs and overall volume is expanding. In such
instances, if the volume of declining stocks is rising in relation to that of
advancing stocks, it will show up either as a slower rate of advance in the
Upside /downside line or as an actual decline.

The upside/downside line from 1985 to 1987 is shown in Chart 23-14,

~ together with its 200-day MA. For most of this period, the line remained
a above its MA despite some fairly large short-term corrections in the S&P



426

Chart 23-14 S&P Composite, 1985-1987, and an upside/downside volume line, (From
www.pring.com.)

Part Il: Market Structure

= Volume Oscillators 427

Chart 23-15 S&P Composite, 1998-2001, and an upside/downside volume line. (From
» wuw.pring.com.)

S&P Composite

Composite, but in early October 1987 it fell below the MA, just before the
crash. An important up trendline was violated simultaneously with the MA,
which had the effect of emphasizing the bearish signal.

Also worth noting were the positive divergences that occurred in October
1986 when the S&P made a new short-term low, which was not confirmed
by the cumulative upside/downside line.

Between 1988 and 1997 there were no major divergences since the line
and the S&P moved more or less in gear. Chart 23-15 shows the same indi-
cator between 1998 and 2001. Note the negative divergence at the 1998 sum-
mer peak, and the trendline break that signaled the subsequent rally.
Between 1999 and the summer of 2000 some major negative divergences
arose between the two series. This period was one of most confusing 0”
record, since there were numerous discrepancies. First, one series would
lead, and then the other.

Upside/Downside Volume Oscillators Another method of measuring
apside/downside volume is to plot an oscillator of up and down volume and
overlay them. Possibilities include the volume oscillator, a smoothed RSI, and
io forth. Chart 23-16 features such an exercise using two know sure things
(KSTs) of volume. The idea is that when the KST constructed from up volume

4304 S&P Composite

getbrdbs

FEET EREER

Chart 23-16 S&P Composite, 2000-2001, and upside/downside volume oscillators. (From

© Www.pring.com.)

135] ‘Sap Composite

2
=,

Spaperavs <ncuaneie ey 5

'
'
'
115 ‘

ve

bess Wu Tug’ [sep " Oct“ Nov’ [Dec [2001 Feb” (Mar [Apr (May Mun



428

crosses the one constructed from down volume, this trigge: i
nal, and vice versa. The various signals are flagged in the char by aw i
down arrows. The dashed arrows indicate whipsaw signals. Unfortunateh ie
is no way of knowing from the indicator itself whether a signal will work
not. For this reason, it is important to monitor the price itself for trending
breaks, and so on. In this respect, a couple have been drawn on Chart 28.16: :
Sometimes it helps to construct a ratio of upside to downside volume and
study the overbought/ oversold levels. In this respect, Chart 23-17 shows a

ratio of a 10-day to a 45-day volume oscillator for the two series. The volume”

oscillator for the up volume data is calculated by dividing a 10-day by a 25-

day simple MA of up volume. This is then divided by a similar measure for.

down volume. There is nothing special about these time span: a
trend reversals would be spotted by using shorter time franem and dee ven
The arrows on the chart indicate when the ratio crosses its overbought
and oversold zones on its way back to zero. By and large, these signals appear -
to work quite well, but they should always be integrated with trend-reversal ,

signals in the price itself to reduce the risk of whipsaw signals. There is no «

reason why trendlines, price patterns, and even MA crossovers could not be
used as a method of analysis using this ratio.

Chart 23- i :
ee re rT pe? Composite, 1999-2001, and an upside/downsice volume ratio. (From

1507 S&P Composite

PMAMUD ABEND bo MAME DAS Np por Ao

 Yolume Oscillators

there ©

429

” The Arms Index
“This indicator was developed by Richard Arms (www.Armsinsight.com)

and is constructed from breadth and upside/ downside volume data. It is

sometimes referred to as the TRIN or MEDS. It is calculated by dividing the

yatio of advancing and declining stocks by the ratio of volume in advancing
jssues over volume in declining issues as follows:

(advances/ declines)
(advancing volume/declining volume).

In almost all cases, daily data are used, but there is no reason why a weekly
or even monthly series could not be constructed. Normally, the Arms Index is
used in conjunction with NYSE data, but its principles can be applied to any
market situation, such as the NASDAQ, where upside/ downside volume and
breadth data are available. There is one important thing to note, and that is
that movements in the Arms Index move contrary to those of the market. This

“means that oversold conditions appear as peaks and overbought as valleys.
- Since this is contrary to virtually all other indicators described in this book, the
‘+: chart examples are presented inversely in order to be consistent with the other indicators.

The concept behind this indicator is to monitor the relative power of the
volume associated with advancing issues to that of declining ones. Ideally,

~~ itis important to see a healthy amount of volume moving into rising issues

relative to that associated with declining stocks. If this is not the case, the

~ indicator will diverge negatively with the market average. On the other hand,

ifa substantial amount of volume is moving into declining issues, this indi-
cates tremendous selling pressure. At some point selling pressure reaches
an extreme and prices are poised for a reversal.

This momentum series can be calculated for any period. For example, the
quote services and the number appearing on the CNBC ticker represent an

” instant in time and are based on the volume and number of issues experi-

encing an up or down tick. Unless you are fortunate enough to be able to
chart this indicator on a continuous basis through a real-time service, iso-
lated quotes of this nature are limited to gauging whether the market is
intraday overbought or oversold. In this respect, 120 or higher is regarded
as oversold and 50 or below overbought (remember these numbers are
Inverse to the other momentum indicators).

’ The Arms Index can also be used with an MA, where the 10-day (open
TRIN) time span is the most widely followed. It is interpreted in much the
Same way as the 10-day A/D ratio discussed earlier in this chapter. Most of
the time these two series move in a consistent manner, but from time to time
the Arms Index gives some subtle indications that the prevailing trend is
about to reverse. Chart 23-18 shows three different versions of the Arms



430 Part Il: Market Structure

Chart 23-18 S&P Composite, 1998-2001, and three Arms Indexes. (From
www.pring.com.)

Index with a 10-, 25-, and 45-day time spans. The rationales for including
three indicators on one chart were explained in Chapter 10. The arrows
indicate those points when at least two of these inversely plotted series are
at an extreme and have begun to reverse since tops tend to be rolling affairs
where volume leads price. The Arms Index often reaches its extreme ahead
of the market average, whereas the selling climax conditions often seen at
bottoms mean that there is usually more of a coincident nature between the
Arms and the market. Generally speaking, when the 10-day Arms rises above
150, this signals a major low. Sometimes this happens right away; at other
times there is a delay of 10-20 days before the final bottom is seen. Between
1968 and 2001 there were no exceptions to this rule.

On-Balance Volume

On-balance volume (OBV) was discovered by Joe Granville and published
in his book Granville’s New Key to Stock Market Profits. The indicator is plot
ted as a continuous, cumulative line. The line is started with an arbitrary
number, which rises and falls depending on what the price does. The vok
ume for the day is added in when the price rises and is subtracted when it
falls. If intraday charts are being used, volume units would be added and
subtracted based on the time frame of the bars; for weekly charts, the bast

Volume Oscillators 431

would be the week, and so forth. OBV therefore offers a rough approxi-
mation for buying and selling pressure and has become a very popular indi-
cator. It is interpreted by comparing the line to the price, using divergences,
trendline breaks, price patterns, and MA crossovers to point up underlying
strength or weakness.

“Chart 23-19 shows how this should happen. The price makes a lower low
in November, but the OBV, indicating a lack of selling pressure, does not.
This is a bullish sign and the price rises. Earlier in September, the OBV
makes a marginal new high, and the price makes a more significant one.
This indicated that volume was notas strong as price and was a bearish sign.

* You can also see that both examples were then confirmed with trend breaks
in the price and OBV lines. Note also in late July that the price broke below
its 200-day MA and OBV did not, another sign that selling pressure was not
as strong as it appeared on the surface. This example represents a pretty
perfect analytical picture. Unfortunately, I do not find OBV to normally be
as accurate as this. Indeed, its warnings are often as misleading as the valid
signals. Chart 23-20 featuring Alergan, for example, shows a situation at the
end of 1999 when OBV was pointing to higher prices and they went down;
fin early 2000, weakness in the OBV pointed to lower prices, but they went
tr up! Note that in both charts the joint trendline technique worked, which is
probably the best way to interpret OBV.

t

Chart 23-19 Amerada Hess, 2000-2001, and OBV. (From www.pring.com.)

80
754 Amerada Hess

70

“001” (February



432 Part Il: Market Stn Volume Oscillators 433

Chart 23-21 MMM, 2000-2001, and equivolume. (From www.pring.com.)

atte 3 se r,

a J = x "= : yea

“J

1

Chart 23-20 Alergan, 1998-2000, and OBV. (From www.pring.com.)

Alergan

Waa
faye

[pool A Das [oN "Peon FI” Ta a

gegsseges i

~~ Chart 23-22 Johnson and Johnson, 2000-2001, and equivolume. (From www.pring.com.)
Equivolume ae

Lae

Equivolume is a plotting concept that was developed by Dick Arms ed B ~—/ c
(www.ArmsInsight.com). It is similar to the candlestick volume discussed in 4 . -_—
Chapter 13. Bars are plotted equally for each period, day, week, and so on. «= 50 f
With equivolume, the bars are plotted in different widths depending onthe J" | 49 i Last ae
level of volume for that particular period. The greater the volume, the wider 43 if i |
the bar. The top and bottom of each bar are the high and low for that par- a} iff il 1 1 |
ticular period. This is a very useful approach because it shows graphically oy
in one series whether prices are rising or falling on light or heavy volume. 454°
Because of this technique, dates on the X axis are not equidistant from each ane |
other as they normally would be, but depend on volume patterns instead. a

Chart 23-21 shows MMM Company. At A, the price breaks out with a cou 42
ple of thick bars, indicating very heavy volume. In effect, this is a classic buy = “1 D—
signal. At B, the rally is associated with very narrow equivolume bars, which 40

tells us that there is a distinct lack of upside volume. Thus, a warning of a0
impending trend reversal is given.

Chart 23-22 shows an equivolume chart for Johnson and Johnson. The
decline at A is associated with very thin bars, which indicates a total disin-
terest in the stock. This is the type of characteristic that is often associated _
with a short-term bottom. Other indicators are, of course, required to COM”
firm. Another rally on shrinking volume is signaled at B. C points up the

| Waug Sep" Joct” "ov" pec’ " lz001 " ‘Feb '" [Mar Tape’ "May

_ fact that volume is expanding on the decline, which is bearish. The trend-
line break in the price then acts as a confirmation. Finally, the extremely
Wide bar at D indicates the possibility of a selling climax.



434

Summary

* The ROC of volume often gives signs of subtle changes in the level of vol- ad

ume that are not apparent from volume histograms.

* The ROC of volume can be expressed as a percentage or in a subtraction
format.

* Volume ROCs and oscillators can be used with overbought/oversold
crossovers, trendline analysis, and price patterns.

* Overbought readings in the volume ROC and the volume oscillator can

be followed by declining or rising prices, depending on the nature of the
previous trend. ‘

*® The Demand Index is constructed from volume and price, moves in the

same direction as a regular price oscillator, and is best used with diver-

gence and overbought/ oversold analysis, trendline, and price pattern con-
struction.

* The CMF is constructed from volume and price data and moves in the oi
same direction as a regular price oscillator. It is best used with divergence...

analysis.

* Upside/downside volume measures the volume in advancing and declin- *. +»:

ing stocks. It can be used as a continuous line or in oscillator format.

» The Arms Index is constructed from advancing and declining stocks and
their respective volume. It is usually used as a 10-day MA. Readings in
excess of 150 signal major bottoms. .

» OBV is constructed as a continuous line and used with divergence analy-
sis. Joint trendline breaks between the OBV line and the price offer a
more accurate method of interpretation. :

Part I: Market Structure

— 24

Breadth

Basic Concepts

Breadth indicators measure the degree to which the vast majority of issues
are participating in a market move. It therefore monitors the extent of a
market trend. Generally speaking, the fewer the number of issues moving
in the direction of the major averages, the greater the probability of an
imminent reversal in trend. Breadth indicators were originally developed
to monitor trends in the stock market. Even though most of the comments
in this chapter refer to US. equities, it should be remembered that breadth
can just as validly be applied to other markets around the world. It can also
be applied to any sector or market that can be broken down into compo-
nents, An example might include a basket of commodities being compared
to a commodity index, a series of currencies to an overall currency index
(such as the Dollar Index), or a selection of stocks in an industry to an indus-
try group index. The main thing to keep in mind is that the principles of
interpretation remain constant.

The concept of breadth can probably be best explained using a military
analogy. In Fig. 24-1, lines AA and BBindicate military lines of defense drawn
during a battle. It might be possible for a few units to cross over from AA
to BB, but the chances are that the BB line will hold unless an all-out effort
is made. In Fig. 24-1(a), the two units represented by the arrows are quickly
tepulsed. In Fig. 24-1(6), on the other hand, the assault is successful since
Many units are taking part, and army Bis forced to retreat to a new line of
defense at B,.

A narrowly advancing stock market can be compared to Fig. 241 (a),
where it looks initially as though the move through the line of defense (in
Stock market terms, a resistance level) is going to be successful, but because

435



436

A ———___——___-a A

®) ©)
Figure 24-1 Trench warfare.

the move is accompanied by such little su 10 i is
soon reversed. In the saillinry analogy, svat the a gE te
assaulted the BB defense, it would not be long before army B would have
sverPowered them, for the farther they advanced without broad support,
“n vulnerable they would have become to a counter offensive by
The same is true of the stock market, for the longer a pri is maii
: : ; Price trend is main-
a without a follow-up by the broad market, the more vulnerable is the
At market bottoms, breadth is not such a useful concept for determining
reversals because the majority of stocks usually coincide with or lag behind
the major indexes. On the few occasions when breadth reverses its down-
trend before the averages, it is actually a more reliable indicator than the
one at the top. I will begin this discussion with a rationale as to why the broad
market normally leads the averages at market tops. The word normally is used
because, in the vast majority of cases, the broad list of stocks does peak out
ahead of a market average such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA)
or the S&P Composite. This rule is not invariable, however, and it should

not be assumed that the technical structure i ssari j
market breadth is strong. ee

Advance/Decline Line
The Concept

The most widely used indicator of market breadth is an advance/decline
(A/D) fine. It is constructed by taking a cumulative total of the difference
(plurality) between the number of New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) issues
that are advancing over those that are declining in a particular period (usu-
ally a day or a week). Similar indexes may be constructed for the American
Exchange (AMEX) or NASDAQ issues. Because the number of issues listed

Breadth 437

on the NYSE has expanded since breadth records were first kept, an A/D
line constructed from a simple plurality of advancing over declining issues
gives a greater weighting to more recent years. For the purpose of long-term
comparisons, it is better to take a ratio of advances versus declines, or a ratio
of advances and declines divided by the number of unchanged issues,
rather than limiting the calculation to a simple plurality.

The late Hamilton Bolton devised one of the most useful measurements
of breadth. It is calculated from a cumulative running total of the follow-
ing formula:

V A/U-D/U

where A = the number of stocks advancing, D = the number declining, and
U= the number unchanged.

Because it is not mathematically possible to calculate the square root of
a negative number (that is, when the number of declining stocks is greater
than the number of those advancing), the D and A are reversed in such
cases, so that the formula becomes the square root of D/U— A/U. The result-
ing term is then subtracted from the cumulative total, as opposed to the
term in the earlier formula, which is added. Table 24-1 illustrates this cal-
culation using weekly data.

Inclusion of the number of unchanged issues is useful because the more
dynamic the move in either direction, the greater the tendency for the num-

~ ber of unchanged stocks to diminish. Consequently, by giving some weight

to the number of unchanged stocks in the formula, it is possible to assess a
slowdown in momentum of the A/D line at an earlier date, since an expand-
ing number of unchanged issues will have the tendency to restrain extreme
movements.

The A/D line normally rises and falls in tandem with the major market
averages, but it usually peaks well ahead of them. There appear to be three
basic reasons why this is so:

1. The market, as a whole, discounts the business cycle and normally
reaches its bull market peak 6 to 9 months before the economy reaches
its peak. Since the peak in business activity is itself preceded by a dete-
Tioration of certain leading sectors such as financial, consumer spend-
ing, and construction, it is logical to expect that the stocks representing
these sectors will also peak ahead of the general market.

» Many of the stocks listed on the NYSE, such as preferred and utility, are
Sensitive to changes in interest rates. Since interest rates usually start to
Tise before the market peaks, it is natural for the interest-sensitive issues
to move in tandem with rising rates.



"Breadth 439

3. Poorer-quality stocks offer the largest upside potential, but they are also

Sy
Eat Ne} :
g = eo a e a 2 S a Ne representative of smaller, underfinanced, and badly managed companies
E Qa “|S89 Se SER that are more vulnerable to reduced earnings (and even bankruptcy) dur-
OT INANNNANAAA ing a recession. Blue-chip stocks normally have good credit ratings, rea-
sonable yields, and sound underlying assets; thus, they are typically the
IN yu ying y are typically
g NAIA ti © last stocks to be sold by investors during a bull market.
SSIMOWMAH A did
lO @ a pCa.

' ! ' The DJIA and other market averages are almost wholly composed of
in o nN larger companies, which are normally in better financial shape. These pop-
2asS|NSRggnwo x ular averages therefore continue to advance well after the broad market has

oo a oO mn

1S) | | iN peaked.

+9

no

Beces SBgesraa Interpretation of A/D Lines

89x To SS toe __ The following are some key points for interpretin, A/D data:

Ag g Y Pi TP’ s

ta 1. Some A/D lines appear to have a permanent downward bias. It is there-

8 ho fore important to observe the relationship between an A/D line and an

SES lanno P P °
_|/§ 878 Taos Ss ZB index over a very long period to see whether this bias exists. Examples
S/39x 9 ON ON include breadth data for the AMEX market, the U.S. OTC market, and
& the Japanese market.
6
i a} 2. Divergences between a market average and an A/D line at market tops
§ 2 romad are almost always cleared up by a decline in the average. However, it is
i Lia 2 ares S mandatory to await some kind of trend-reversal signal in the average as
a 3 NNANNAAAA A ny gn §
= s confirmation before concluding that the average will also decline.
g 3. It is normal for the A/D line to coincide or lag at market bottoms. Such
