
MARKETS MOST FUNDAMENTAL CHARACTERISTIC
(IT CAN EXPRESS ITSELF IN AN ALMOST INFINITE COMBINATION OF WAYS )
The market can do virtually anything at any time. This seems obvious enough, especially for anybody
who has experienced a market that has displayed erratic and volatile price swings. The problem is that
all of us have the tendency to take this characteristic for granted, in ways that cause us to make the
most fundamental trading errors over and over again. The fact is that if traders really believed that
anything could happen at any time, there would be considerably fewer losers and more consistent
winners. How do we know that virtually anything can happen? This fact is easy to establish. All we
have to do is dissect the market into its component parts and look at how the parts operate. The most
fundamental component of any market is its traders. Individual traders act as a force on prices, making
them move by either bidding a price up or offering it lower.
Why do traders bid a price up or offer it lower? To answer this question we have to establish the
reasons why people trade. There are many reasons and purposes behind a person s motivation to trade
in any given market. However, for the purposes of this illustration, we don't have to know all the
underlying reasons that compel any individual trader to act because ultimately they all boil down to one
reason and one purpose: to make money. We know this because there are only two things a trader can
do (buy and sell) and there are only two possible outcomes for every trade (profit or loss). Therefore, I
think we can safely assume that regardless of one's reasons for trading, the bottom line is that everyone
is looking for the same outcome: Profits. And there are only two ways to create those profits: Either
buy low and sell high, or sell high and buy low. If we assume that everyone wants to make money, then
there's only one reason why any trader would bid a price up to the next highest level: because he
believes he can sell whatever he's buying at a higher price at some point in the future.
The same is true for the trader who's willing to sell something at a price that is less than the last posted
price (offer a market lower). He does it because he believes he can buy back whatever he's selling at a
lower price at some point in the future. If we look at the market's behavior as a function of price
movement, and if price movement is a function of traders who are willing to bid prices up or offer them
lower, then we can say that all price movement (market behavior) is a function of what traders believe
about the future. To be more specific, all price movement is a function of what individual traders
believe about what is high and what is low. The underlying dynamics of market behavior are quite
simple. Only three primary forces exist in any market: traders who believe the price is low, traders who
believe the price is high, and traders who are watching and waiting to make up their minds about
whether the price is low or high. Technically, the third group constitutes a potential force. The reasons
that support any given traders belief that something is high or low are usually irrelevant, because most
people who trade act in an undisciplined, unorganized, haphazard, and random manner. So, their
reasons wouldn't necessarily help anyone gain a better understanding of what is going on. But,
understanding what's going on isn't that difficult, if you remember that all price movement or lack of

movement is a function of the relative balance or imbalance between two primary forces: traders who
believe the price is going up, and traders who believe the price is going down.
If there's balance between the two groups, prices will stagnate, because each side will absorb the force
of the other side's actions. If there is an imbalance, prices will move in the direction of the greater
force, or the traders who have the stronger convictions in their beliefs about in what direction the price
is going. Now, I want you to ask yourself, what's going to stop virtually anything from happening at
any time, other than exchange-imposed limits on price movement. There's nothing to stop the price of
an issue from going as high or low as whatever some trader in the world believes is possible—if, of
course, the trader is willing to act on that belief. So the range of the market's behavior in its collective
form is limited only by the most extreme beliefs about what is high and what is low held by any given
individual participating in that market. I think the implications are self-evident:
There can be an extreme diversity of beliefs present in any given market in any given moment, making
virtually anything possible. When we look at the market from this perspective, it's easy to see that
every potential trader who is willing to express his belief about the future becomes a market variable.
On a more personal level, this means that it only takes one other trader, anywhere in the world, to
negate the positive potential of your trade. Put another way, it takes only one other trader to negate
what you believe about what is high or what is low. That's all, only one! Here's an example to illustrate
this point. Several years ago, a trader came to me for help. He was an excellent market analyst; in fact,
he was one of the best I've ever met. But after years of frustration during which he lost all his money
and a lot of other people's money, he was finally ready to admit that, as a trader, he left a lot to be
desired. After talking to him for a while, I determined that a number of serious psychological obstacles
were preventing him from being successful.
One of the most troublesome obstacles was that he was a know-it-all and extremely arrogant, making it
impossible for him to achieve the degree of mental flexibility required to trade effectively. It didn't
matter how good an analyst he was. When he came to me, he was so desperate for money and help that
he was willing to consider anything. The first suggestion I made was that instead of looking for another
investor to back what ultimately would be another failed attempt at trading, he would be better off
taking a job, doing something he was truly good at. He could be paid a steady income while working
through his problems, and at the same time provide someone with a worthwhile service. He took my
advice and quickly found a position as a technical analyst with a fairly substantial brokerage house and
clearing firm in Chicago.
The semiretired chairman of the board of the brokerage firm was a longtime trader with nearly 40 years
of experience in the grain pits at the Chicago Board of Trade. He didn't know much about technical
analysis, because he never needed it to make money on the floor. But he no longer traded on the floor
and found the transition to trading from a screen difficult and somewhat mysterious. So he asked the
firm's newly acquired star technical analyst to sit with him during the trading day and teach him
technical trading. The new hire jumped at the opportunity to show off his abilities to such an

experienced and successful trader. The analyst was using a method called "point and line," developed
by Charlie Drummond. (Among other things, point and line can accurately define support and
resistance.) One day, as the two of them were watching the soybean market together, the analyst had
projected major support and resistance points and the market happened to be trading between these two
points.
As the technical analyst was explaining to the chairman the significance of these two points, he stated
in very emphatic, almost absolute terms that if the market goes up to resistance, it will stop and reverse;
and if the market goes down to support, it will also stop and reverse. Then he explained that if the
market went down to the price level he calculated as support, his calculations indicated that would also
be the low of the day. As they sat there, the bean market was slowly trending down to the price the
analyst said would be the support, or low, of the day. When it finally got there, the chairman looked
over to the analyst and said, "This is where the market is supposed to stop and go higher, right?"
The analyst responded, "Absolutely! This is the low of the day." "That's bullshit!" the chairman
retorted. "Watch this." He picked up the phone, called one of the clerks handling orders for the soybean
pit, and said, "Sell two million beans (bushels) at the market." Within thirty seconds after he placed the
order, the soybean market dropped ten cents a bushel. The chairman turned to look at the horrified
expression on the analysts face. Calmly, he asked, "Now, where did you say the market was going to
stop? If I can do that, anyone can."
The point is that from our own individual perspective as observers of the market, anything can happen,
and it takes only one trader to do it. This is the hard, cold reality of trading that only the very best
traders have embraced and accepted with no internal conflict. How do I know this? Because only the
best traders consistently predefine their risks before entering a trade. Only the best traders cut their
losses without reservation or hesitation when the market tells them the trade isn't working. And only
the best traders have an organized, systematic, money-management regimen for taking profits when the
market goes in the direction of their trade. Not predefining your risk, not cutting your losses, or not
systematically taking profits are three of the most common—and usually the most costly—trading
errors you can make. Only the best traders have eliminated these errors from their trading. At some
point in their careers, they learned to believe without a shred of doubt that anything can happen, and to
always account for what they don't know, for the unexpected. Remember that there are only two forces
that cause prices to move: traders who believe the markets are going up, and traders who believe the
markets are going down. At any given moment, we can see who has the stronger conviction by
observing where the market is now relative to where it was at some previous moment. If a recognizable
pattern is present, that pattern may repeat itself, giving us an indication of where the market is headed.
This is our edge, something we know. But there's also much that we don't know, and will never know
unless we learn how to read minds. For instance, do we know how many traders may be sitting on the
sidelines and about to enter the market? Do we know how many of them want to buy and how many
want to sell, or how many shares they are willing to buy or sell? What about the traders whose

participation is already reflected in the current price? At any given moment, how many of them are
about to change their minds and exit their positions?
If they do, how long will they stay out of the market? And if and when they do come back into the
market, in what direction will they cast their votes? These are the constant, never-ending, unknown,
hidden variables that are always operating in every market—always] The best traders don't try to hide
from these unknown variables by pretending they don't exist, nor do they try to intellectualize or
rationalize them away through market analysis. Quite the contrary, the best traders take these variables
into account, factoring them into every component of their trading regimes. For the typical trader, just
the opposite is true. He trades from the perspective that what he can't see, hear, or feel must not exist.
What other explanation could account for his behavior? If he really believed in the existence of all the
hidden variables that have the potential to act on prices in any given moment, then he would also have
to believe that every trade has an uncertain outcome. And if every trade truly has an uncertain outcome,
then how could he ever justify or talk himself into not predefining his risk, cutting his losses, or having
some systematic way to take profits? Given the circumstances, not adhering to these three fundamental
principles is the equivalent of committing financial and emotional suicide. Since most traders don't
adhere to these principles, are we to assume that their true underlying motivation for trading is to
destroy themselves? It's certainly possible, but I think the percentage of traders who either consciously
or subconsciously want to rid themselves of their money or hurt themselves in some way is extremely
small. So, if financial suicide is not the predominant reason, then what could keep someone from doing
something that would otherwise make absolute, perfect sense? The answer is quite simple: The typical
trader doesn't predefine his risk, cut his losses, or systematically take profits because the typical trader
doesn't believe it's necessary. The only reason why he would believe it isn't necessary is that he
believes he already knows what's going to happen next, based on what he perceives is happening in any
given "now moment."
If he already knows, then there's really no reason to adhere to these principles. Believing, assuming, or
thinking that "he knows" will be the cause of virtually eveiy trading error he has the potential to make
(with the exception of those errors that are the result of not believing that he deserves the money). Our
beliefs about what is true and real are very powerful inner forces.
They control every aspect of how we interact with the markets, from our perceptions, interpretations,
decisions, actions, and expectations, to our feelings about the results. It's extremely difficult to act in a
way that contradicts what we believe to be true. In some cases, depending on the strength of the belief,
it can be next to impossible to do anything that violates the integrity of a belief. What the typical trader
doesn't realize is that he needs an inner mechanism, in the form of some powerful beliefs, that virtually
compels him to perceive the market from a perspective that is always expanding with greater and
greater degrees of clarity, and also compels him always act appropriately, given the psychological
conditions and the nature of price movement. The most effective and functional trading belief that he
can acquire is "anything can happen." Aside from the fact that it is the truth, it will act as a solid

foundation for building every other belief and attitude that he needs to be a successful trader. Without
that belief, his mind will automatically, and usually without his conscious awareness, cause him to
avoid, block, or rationalize away any information that indicates the market may do something he hasn't
accepted as possible.
If he believes that anything is possible, then there's nothing for his mind to avoid. Because anything
includes everything, this belief will act as an expansive force on his perception of the market that will
allow him to perceive information that might otherwise have been invisible to him. In essence, he will
be making himself available (opening his mind) to perceive more of the possibilities that exist from the
markets perspective. Most important, by establishing a belief that anything can happen, he will be
training his mind to think in probabilities. This is by far the most essential as well as the most difficult
principle for people to grasp and to effectively integrate into their mental systems. CHAPTER 7

CHAPTER 7
THE TRADER'S EDGE: THINKING IN PROBABILITIES
Exactly what does it mean to think in probabilities, and why is it so essential to one's consistent success
as a trader? If you take a moment and analyze the last sentence, you will notice that I made consistency
a function of probabilities. It sounds like a contradiction: How can someone produce consistent results
from an event that has an uncertain probabilistic outcome? To answer this question, all we have to do is
look to the gambling industry. Corporations spend vast amounts of money, in the hundreds of millions,
if not billions, of dollars, on elaborate hotels to attract people to their casinos.
If you've been to Las Vegas you know exactly what I am talking about. Gaming corporations are just
like other corporations, in that they have to justify how they allocate their assets to a board of directors
and ultimately to their stockholders. How do you suppose they justify spending vast sums of money on
elaborate hotels and casinos, whose primary function is to generate revenue from an event that has a
purely random outcome?
PROBABILITIES PARADOX: RANDOM OUTCOME, CONSISTENT RESULTS
Here's an interesting paradox. Casinos make consistent profits day after day and year after year,
facilitating an event that has a purely random outcome. At the same time, most traders believe that the
outcome of the market's behavior is not random, yet can't seem to produce consistent profits. Shouldn't
a consistent, nonrandom outcome produce consistent results, and a random outcome produce random,
inconsistent results? What casino owners, experienced gamblers, and the best traders understand that
the typical trader finds difficult to grasp is: even that have probable outcomes can produce consistent

results, if you can get the odds in your favor and there is a large enough sample size. The best traders
treat trading like a numbers game, similar to the way in which casinos and professional gamblers
approach gambling. To illustrate, let's look at the game of blackjack. In blackjack, the casinos have
approximately a 4.5-percent edge over the player, based on the rules they require players to adhere to.
This means that, over a large enough sample size (number of hands played), the casino will generate
net profits of four and a half cents on every dollar wagered on the game. This average of four and a half
cents takes into account all the players who walked away big winners (including all winning streaks),
all the players who walked away big losers, and everybody in between. At the end of the day, week,
month, or year, the casino always ends up with approximately 4.5 percent of the total amount wagered.
That 4.5 percent might not sound like a lot, but let's put it in perspective. Suppose a total of $100
million dollars is wagered collectively at all of a casino's blackjack tables over the course of a year. The
casino will net $4.5 million. What casino owners and professional gamblers understand about the
nature of probabilities is that each individual hand played is statistically independent of every other
hand. This means that each individual hand is a unique event, where the outcome is random relative to
the last hand played or the next hand played. If you focus on each hand individually, there will be a
random, unpredictable distribution between winning and losing hands. But on a collective basis, just
the opposite is true. If a large enough number of hands is played, patterns will emerge that produce a
consistent, predictable, and statistically reliable outcome.
Here's what makes thinking in probabilities so difficult. It requires two layers of beliefs that on the
surface seem to contradict each other. We'll call the first layer the micro level. At this level, you have
to believe in the uncertainty and unpredictability of each individual hand. You know the truth of this
uncertainty, because there are always a number of unknown variables affecting the consistency of the
deck that each new hand is drawn from. For example, you can't know in advance how any of the other
participants will decide to play their hands, since they can either take or decline additional cards. Any
variables acting on the consistency of the deck that can't be controlled or known in advance will make
the outcome of any particular hand both uncertain and random (statistically independent) in
relationship to any other hand. The second layer is the macro level. At this level, you have to believe
that the outcome over a series of hands played is relatively certain and predictable. The degree of
certainty is based on the fixed or constant variables that are known in advance and specifically
designed to give an advantage (edge) to one side or the other.
The constant variables I am referring to are the rules of the game. So, even though you don't or couldn't
know in advance (unless you are psychic) the sequence of wins to losses, you can be relatively certain
that if enough hands are played, whoever has the edge will end up with more wins than losses. The
degree of certainty is a function of how good the edge is. It's the ability to believe in the
unpredictability of the game at the micro level and simultaneously believe in the predictability of the
game at the macro level that makes the casino and the professional gambler effective and successful at
what they do. Their belief in the uniqueness of each hand prevents them from engaging in the pointless

endeavor of trying to predict the outcome of each individual hand. They have learned and completely
accepted the fact that they don't know what's going to happen next. More important, they don't need to
know in order to make money consistently.
Because they don't have to know what's going to happen next, they don't place any special significance,
emotional or otherwise, on each individual hand, spin of the wheel, or roll of the dice. In other words,
they're not encumbered by unrealistic expectations about what is going to happen, nor are their egos
involved in a way that makes them have to be right. As a result, it's easier to stay focused on keeping
the odds in their favor and executing flawlessly, which in turn makes them less susceptible to making
costly mistakes.
They stay relaxed because they are committed and willing to let the probabilities (their edges) play
themselves out, all the while knowing that if their edges are good enough and the sample sizes are big
enough, they will come out net winners. The best traders use the same thinking strategy as the casino
and professional gambler. Not only does it work to their benefit, but the underlying dynamics
supporting the need for such a strategy are exactly the same in trading as they are in gambling.
A simple comparison between the two will demonstrate this quite clearly. First, the trader, the gambler,
and the casino are all dealing with both known and unknown variables that affect the outcome of each
trade or gambling event. In gambling, the known variables are the rules of the game. In trading, the
known variables (from each individual trader's perspective) are the results of their market analysis.
Market analysis finds behavior patterns in the collective actions of everyone participating in a market.
We know that individuals will act the same way under similar situations and circumstances, over and
over again, producing observable patterns of behavior. By the same token, groups of individuals
interacting with one another, day after day, week after week, also produce behavior patterns that repeat
themselves. These collective behavior patterns can be discovered and sub- «pnii<=-nflv identified bv
nsinf analvtical tools such as trend lines, moving averages, oscillators, or retracements, just to name a
few of the thousands that are available to any trader. Each analytical tool uses a set of criteria to define
the boundaries of each behavior pattern identified. The set of criteria and the boundaries identified are
the trader's known market variables.
They are to the individual trader what the rules of the game are to the casino and gambler. By this I
mean, the trader's analytical tools are the known variables that put the odds of success (the edge) for
any given trade in the trader's favor, in the same way that the rules of the game put the odds of success
in favor of the casino. Second, we know that in gambling a number of unknown variables act on the
outcome of each game. In blackjack, the unknowns are the shuffling of the deck and how the players
choose to play their hands. In craps, it's how the dice are thrown. And in roulette, it's the amount of
force applied to spin the wheel. All these unknown variables act as forces on the outcome of each
individual event, in a way that causes each event to be statistically independent of any other individual
event, thereby creating a random distribution between wins and losses. Trading also involves a number
of unknown variables that act on the outcome of any particular behavior pattern a trader may identify
