TH E VOD KA-AN D-B U R R ITO PORTFOLIO
Graham considered foreign bonds no better a bet than junk bonds.3
Today, however, one variety of foreign bond may have some appeal for
investors who can withstand plenty of risk. Roughly a dozen mutual
funds specialize in bonds issued in emerging-market nations (or what
used to be called “Third World countries”) like Brazil, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russia, and Venezuela. No sane investor would put more than 10% of
a total bond portfolio in spicy holdings like these. But emergingmarkets bond funds seldom move in synch with the U.S. stock market,
so they are one of the rare investments that are unlikely to drop merely
because the Dow is down. That can give you a small corner of comfort
in your portfolio just when you may need it most.4
DY I N G A T R A D E R ’ S D E AT H
As we’ve already seen in Chapter 1, day trading—holding stocks for a
few hours at a time—is one of the best weapons ever invented for committing financial suicide. Some of your trades might make money, most
of your trades will lose money, but your broker will always make
money.
And your own eagerness to buy or sell a stock can lower your
return. Someone who is desperate to buy a stock can easily end up
having to bid 10 cents higher than the most recent share price before
any sellers will be willing to part with it. That extra cost, called “market
impact,” never shows up on your brokerage statement, but it’s real. If
you’re overeager to buy 1,000 shares of a stock and you drive its price

3

Graham did not criticize foreign bonds lightly, since he spent several years
early in his career acting as a New York–based bond agent for borrowers in
Japan.
4
Two low-cost, well-run emerging-markets bond funds are Fidelity New
Markets Income Fund and T. Rowe Price Emerging Markets Bond Fund;
for more information, see www.fidelity.com, www.troweprice.com, and www.
morningstar.com. Do not buy any emerging-markets bond fund with annual
operating expenses higher than 1.25%, and be forewarned that some of
these funds charge short-term redemption fees to discourage investors from
holding them for less than three months.

Commentary on Chapter 6

149

up by just five cents, you’ve just cost yourself an invisible but very real
$50. On the flip side, when panicky investors are frantic to sell a stock
and they dump it for less than the most recent price, market impact
hits home again.
The costs of trading wear away your returns like so many swipes of
sandpaper. Buying or selling a hot little stock can cost 2% to 4% (or
4% to 8% for a “round-trip” buy-and-sell transaction).5 If you put
$1,000 into a stock, your trading costs could eat up roughly $40
before you even get started. Sell the stock, and you could fork over
another 4% in trading expenses.
Oh, yes—there’s one other thing. When you trade instead of invest,
you turn long-term gains (taxed at a maximum capital-gains rate of
20%) into ordinary income (taxed at a maximum rate of 38.6%).
Add it all up, and a stock trader needs to gain at least 10% just to
break even on buying and selling a stock.6 Anyone can do that once,
by luck alone. To do it often enough to justify the obsessive attention it
requires—plus the nightmarish stress it generates—is impossible.
Thousands of people have tried, and the evidence is clear: The
more you trade, the less you keep.
Finance professors Brad Barber and Terrance Odean of the University of California examined the trading records of more than 66,000
customers of a major discount brokerage firm. From 1991 through
1996, these clients made more than 1.9 million trades. Before the
costs of trading sandpapered away at their returns, the people in the
study actually outperformed the market by an average of at least half a
percentage point per year. But after trading costs, the most active of
these traders—who shifted more than 20% of their stock holdings per

5

The definitive source on brokerage costs is the Plexus Group of Santa
Monica, California, and its website, www.plexusgroup.com. Plexus argues
persuasively that, just as most of the mass of an iceberg lies below the
ocean surface, the bulk of brokerage costs are invisible—misleading
investors into believing that their trading costs are insignificant if commission costs are low. The costs of trading NASDAQ stocks are considerably
higher for individuals than the costs of trading NYSE-listed stocks (see
p. 128, footnote 5).
6
Real-world conditions are still more harsh, since we are ignoring state
income taxes in this example.

150

Commentary on Chapter 6

month—went from beating the market to underperforming it by an
abysmal 6.4 percentage points per year. The most patient investors,
however—who traded a minuscule 0.2% of their total holdings in
an average month—managed to outperform the market by a whisker,
even after their trading costs. Instead of giving a huge hunk of their
gains away to their brokers and the IRS, they got to keep almost
everything.7 For a look at these results, see Figure 6-1.
The lesson is clear: Don’t just do something, stand there. It’s time
for everyone to acknowledge that the term “long-term investor” is
redundant. A long-term investor is the only kind of investor there is.
Someone who can’t hold on to stocks for more than a few months at a
time is doomed to end up not as a victor but as a victim.
T H E E A R LY B I R D G E T S W O R M E D
Among the get-rich-quick toxins that poisoned the mind of the investing public in the 1990s, one of the most lethal was the idea that you
can build wealth by buying IPOs. An IPO is an “initial public offering,”
or the first sale of a company’s stock to the public. At first blush,
investing in IPOs sounds like a great idea—after all, if you’d bought
100 shares of Microsoft when it went public on March 13, 1986, your
$2,100 investment would have grown to $720,000 by early 2003.8
And finance professors Jay Ritter and William Schwert have shown
that if you had spread a total of only $1,000 across every IPO in January 1960, at its offering price, sold out at the end of that month,
then invested anew in each successive month’s crop of IPOs, your
portfolio would have been worth more than $533 decillion by yearend 2001.
(On the printed page, that looks like this:
$533,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000.)

7

Barber and Odean’s findings are available at http://faculty.haas.berkeley.
edu/odean/Current%20Research.htm and http://faculty.gsm.ucdavis.edu/
~bmbarber/research/default.html. Numerous studies, incidentally, have
found virtually identical results among professional money managers—so this
is not a problem limited to “naïve” individuals.
8
See www.microsoft.com/msft/stock.htm, “IPO investment results.”

Commentary on Chapter 6

151

FIGURE 6-1

The Faster You Run, the Behinder You Get
20

Annual return (%) on portfolios

19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
Extremely
patient

Very patient

Patient

Return before trading costs

Impatient

Hyperactive

Market index
fund

Return after trading costs

Researchers Brad Barber and Terrance Odean divided thousands of traders into
five tiers based on how often they turned over their holdings. Those who traded
the least (at the left) kept most of their gains. But the impatient and hyperactive
traders made their brokers rich, not themselves. (The bars at the far right show a
market index fund for comparison.)
Source: Profs. Brad Barber, University of California at Davis, and Terrance Odean, University of California at Berkeley

Unfortunately, for every IPO like Microsoft that turns out to be a big
winner, there are thousands of losers. The psychologists Daniel Kahnerman and Amos Tversky have shown when humans estimate the likelihood or frequency of an event, we make that judgment based not on
how often the event has actually occurred, but on how vivid the past
examples are. We all want to buy “the next Microsoft”—precisely
because we know we missed buying the first Microsoft. But we conveniently overlook the fact that most other IPOs were terrible investments. You could have earned that $533 decillion gain only if you
never missed a single one of the IPO market’s rare winners—a practi-

152

Commentary on Chapter 6

cal impossibility. Finally, most of the high returns on IPOs are captured
by members of an exclusive private club—the big investment banks
and fund houses that get shares at the initial (or “underwriting”) price,
before the stock begins public trading. The biggest “run-ups” often
occur in stocks so small that even many big investors can’t get any
shares; there just aren’t enough to go around.
If, like nearly every investor, you can get access to IPOs only after
their shares have rocketed above the exclusive initial price, your
results will be terrible. From 1980 through 2001, if you had bought
the average IPO at its first public closing price and held on for three
years, you would have underperformed the market by more than 23
percentage points annually.9
Perhaps no stock personifies the pipe dream of getting rich from
IPOs better than VA Linux. “LNUX THE NEXT MSFT,” exulted an early
owner; “BUY NOW, AND RETIRE IN FIVE YEARS FROM NOW.” 10
On December 9, 1999, the stock was placed at an initial public offering price of $30. But demand for the shares was so ferocious that
when NASDAQ opened that morning, none of the initial owners of VA
Linux would let go of any shares until the price hit $299. The stock
peaked at $320 and closed at $239.25, a gain of 697.5% in a single
day. But that gain was earned by only a handful of institutional traders;
individual investors were almost entirely frozen out.
More important, buying IPOs is a bad idea because it flagrantly violates one of Graham’s most fundamental rules: No matter how many
other people want to buy a stock, you should buy only if the stock is a
cheap way to own a desirable business. At the peak price on day one,
investors were valuing VA Linux’s shares at a total of $12.7 billion.
What was the company’s business worth? Less than five years old,
VA Linux had sold a cumulative total of $44 million worth of its software and services—but had lost $25 million in the process. In its most
recent fiscal quarter, VA Linux had generated $15 million in sales but

9

Jay R. Ritter and Ivo Welch, “A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations,” Journal of Finance, August, 2002, p. 1797. Ritter’s website, at http://
bear.cba.ufl.edu/ritter/, and Welch’s home page, at http://welch.som.yale.
edu/, are gold mines of data for anyone interested in IPOs.
10
Message no. 9, posted by “GoldFingers69,” on the VA Linux (LNUX) message board at messages.yahoo.com, dated December 16, 1999. MSFT is
the ticker symbol for Microsoft Corp.

Commentary on Chapter 6

153

had lost $10 million on them. This business, then, was losing almost
70 cents on every dollar it took in. VA Linux’s accumulated deficit (the
amount by which its total expenses had exceeded its income) was
$30 million.
If VA Linux were a private company owned by the guy who lives
next door, and he leaned over the picket fence and asked you how
much you would pay to take his struggling little business off his hands,
would you answer, “Oh, $12.7 billion sounds about right to me”? Or
would you, instead, smile politely, turn back to your barbecue grill, and
wonder what on earth your neighbor had been smoking? Relying
exclusively on our own judgment, none of us would be caught dead
agreeing to pay nearly $13 billion for a money-loser that was already
$30 million in the hole.
But when we’re in public instead of in private, when valuation suddenly becomes a popularity contest, the price of a stock seems more
important than the value of the business it represents. As long as
someone else will pay even more than you did for a stock, why does it
matter what the business is worth?
This chart shows why it matters.

FIGURE 6-2

The Legend of VA Linux
$250
$239

$150

$100

$50
$30

Sources: VA Linux Systems Inc.; www.morningstar.com

2

2

/0
/9

12

10

/9

/0

02

02

9/
8/

02

9/

9/
4/

6/

1

02
9/

2/

1
12

/9

/0

01

/0
/9

10

01

9/
8/

01

9/

9/
4/

6/

0

01
9/

2/

0
12

/9

/0

00

/0
/9

10

00

9/
8/

00

9/

9/
4/

6/

00
9/

/9

2/

/9

9

$0
12

Share price

$200

154

Commentary on Chapter 6

After going up like a bottle rocket on that first day of trading, VA
Linux came down like a buttered brick. By December 9, 2002, three
years to the day after the stock was at $239.50, VA Linux closed at
$1.19 per share.
Weighing the evidence objectively, the intelligent investor should
conclude that IPO does not stand only for “initial public offering.” More
accurately, it is also shorthand for:
It’s Probably Overpriced,
Imaginary Profits Only,
Insiders’ Private Opportunity, or
Idiotic, Preposterous, and Outrageous.

CHAPTER 7

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising
Investor: The Positive Side

The enterprising investor, by definition, will devote a fair amount

of his attention and efforts toward obtaining a better than run-ofthe-mill investment result. In our discussion of general investment
policy we have made some suggestions regarding bond investments
that are addressed chiefly to the enterprising investor. He might be
interested in special opportunities of the following kinds:
(1) Tax-free New Housing Authority bonds effectively guaranteed
by the United States government.
(2) Taxable but high-yielding New Community bonds, also guaranteed by the United States government.
(3) Tax-free industrial bonds issued by municipalities, but serviced by lease payments made by strong corporations.
References have been made to these unusual types of bond
issues in Chapter 4.*
At the other end of the spectrum there may be lower-quality
bonds obtainable at such low prices as to constitute true bargain
opportunities. But these would belong in the “special situation”
area, where no true distinction exists between bonds and common
stocks.†

* As already noted (see p. 96, footnote †), the New Housing Authority and
New Community bonds are no longer issued.
† Today these “lower-quality bonds” in the “special situation” area are
known as distressed or defaulted bonds. When a company is in (or
155

156

The Intelligent Investor

Operations in Common Stocks
The activities specially characteristic of the enterprising investor
in the common-stock field may be classified under four heads:
1. Buying in low markets and selling in high markets
2. Buying carefully chosen “growth stocks”
3. Buying bargain issues of various types
4. Buying into “special situations”

General Market Policy—Formula Timing
We reserve for the next chapter our discussion of the possibilities and limitations of a policy of entering the market when it is
depressed and selling out in the advanced stages of a boom. For
many years in the past this bright idea appeared both simple and
feasible, at least from first inspection of a market chart covering its
periodic fluctuations. We have already admitted ruefully that the
market’s action in the past 20 years has not lent itself to operations
of this sort on any mathematical basis. The fluctuations that have
taken place, while not inconsiderable in extent, would have
required a special talent or “feel” for trading to take advantage of
them. This is something quite different from the intelligence which
we are assuming in our readers, and we must exclude operations
based on such skill from our terms of reference.
The 50–50 plan, which we proposed to the defensive investor
and described on p. 90, is about the best specific or automatic formula we can recommend to all investors under the conditions of
1972. But we have retained a broad leeway between the 25% miniapproaching) bankruptcy, its common stock becomes essentially worthless,
since U.S. bankruptcy law entitles bondholders to a much stronger legal
claim than shareholders. But if the company reorganizes successfully and
comes out of bankruptcy, the bondholders often receive stock in the new
firm, and the value of the bonds usually recovers once the company is able
to pay interest again. Thus the bonds of a troubled company can perform
almost as well as the common stock of a healthy company. In these special
situations, as Graham puts it, “no true distinction exists between bonds and
common stocks.”

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

157

mum and the 75% maximum in common stocks, which we allow to
those investors who have strong convictions about either the danger or the attractiveness of the general market level. Some 20 years
ago it was possible to discuss in great detail a number of clear-cut
formulas for varying the percentage held in common stocks, with
confidence that these plans had practical utility.1 The times seem to
have passed such approaches by, and there would be little point in
trying to determine new levels for buying and selling out of the
market patterns since 1949. That is too short a period to furnish any
reliable guide to the future.*

Growth-Stock Approach
Every investor would like to select the stocks of companies that
will do better than the average over a period of years. A growth
stock may be defined as one that has done this in the past and
is expected to do so in the future.2 Thus it seems only logical that
the intelligent investor should concentrate upon the selection of
growth stocks. Actually the matter is more complicated, as we shall
try to show.
It is a mere statistical chore to identify companies that have “outperformed the averages” in the past. The investor can obtain a list of
50 or 100 such enterprises from his broker.† Why, then, should he
not merely pick out the 15 or 20 most likely looking issues of this
group and lo! he has a guaranteed-successful stock portfolio?

* Note very carefully what Graham is saying here. Writing in 1972, he contends that the period since 1949—a stretch of more than 22 years—is too
short a period from which to draw reliable conclusions! With his mastery of
mathematics, Graham never forgets that objective conclusions require very
long samples of large amounts of data. The charlatans who peddle “timetested” stock-picking gimmicks almost always base their findings on smaller
samples than Graham would ever accept. (Graham often used 50-year periods to analyze past data.)
† Today, the enterprising investor can assemble such a list over the Internet
by visiting such websites as www.morningstar.com (try the Stock Quickrank
tool), www.quicken.com/investments/stocks/search/full, and http://yahoo.
marketguide.com.

158

The Intelligent Investor

There are two catches to this simple idea. The first is that common stocks with good records and apparently good prospects sell
at correspondingly high prices. The investor may be right in his
judgment of their prospects and still not fare particularly well,
merely because he has paid in full (and perhaps overpaid) for the
expected prosperity. The second is that his judgment as to the
future may prove wrong. Unusually rapid growth cannot keep up
forever; when a company has already registered a brilliant expansion, its very increase in size makes a repetition of its achievement
more difficult. At some point the growth curve flattens out, and in
many cases it turns downward.
It is obvious that if one confines himself to a few chosen
instances, based on hindsight, he could demonstrate that fortunes
can readily be either made or lost in the growth-stock field. How
can one judge fairly of the overall results obtainable here? We think
that reasonably sound conclusions can be drawn from a study of
the results achieved by the investment funds specializing in the
growth-stock approach. The authoritative manual entitled Investment Companies, published annually by Arthur Wiesenberger &
Company, members of the New York Stock Exchange, computes
the annual performance of some 120 such “growth funds” over a
period of years. Of these, 45 have records covering ten years or
more. The average overall gain for these companies—unweighted
for size of fund—works out at 108% for the decade 1961–1970,
compared with 105% for the S & P composite and 83% for the
DJIA.3 In the two years 1969 and 1970 the majority of the 126
“growth funds” did worse than either index. Similar results were
found in our earlier studies. The implication here is that no outstanding rewards came from diversified investment in growth
companies as compared with that in common stocks generally.*

* Over the 10 years ending December 31, 2002, funds investing in large
growth companies—today’s equivalent of what Graham calls “growth
funds”—earned an annual average of 5.6%, underperforming the overall
stock market by an average of 3.7 percentage points per year. However,
“large value” funds investing in more reasonably priced big companies also
underperformed the market over the same period (by a full percentage point
per year). Is the problem merely that growth funds cannot reliably select

Portfolio Policy for the Enterprising Investor: The Positive Side

159

There is no reason at all for thinking that the average intelligent
investor, even with much devoted effort, can derive better results
over the years from the purchase of growth stocks than the investment companies specializing in this area. Surely these organizations have more brains and better research facilities at their
disposal than you do. Consequently we should advise against the
usual type of growth-stock commitment for the enterprising
investor.* This is one in which the excellent prospects are fully recognized in the market and already reflected in a current priceearnings ratio of, say, higher than 20. (For the defensive investor
we suggested an upper limit of purchase price at 25 times average
earnings of the past seven years. The two criteria would be about
equivalent in most cases.)†

stocks that will outperform the market in the future? Or is it that the high
costs of running the average fund (whether it buys growth or “value” companies) exceed any extra return the managers can earn with their stock picks?
To update fund performance by type, see www.morningstar.com, “Category
Returns.” For an enlightening reminder of how perishable the performance of
different investment styles can be, see www.callan.com/resource/periodic_
table/pertable.pdf.
* Graham makes this point to remind you that an “enterprising” investor is
not one who takes more risk than average or who buys “aggressive growth”
stocks; an enterprising investor is simply one who is willing to put in extra
time and effort in researching his or her portfolio.
† Notice that Graham insists on calculating the price/earnings ratio based
on a multiyear average of past earnings. That way, you lower the odds that
you will overestimate a company’s value based on a temporarily high burst
of profitability. Imagine that a company earned $3 per share over the past
12 months, but an average of only 50 cents per share over the previous six
