
¢ RS can be used to compare one asset to another in order to decide which
one to buy or to better understand an intermarket relationship. In this
case we might compare gold to bonds to see whether the gold price is in
a rising trend relative to bonds. If so, this could mean that an inflation-
ary trend is unfolding. Another possibility might arise when a review of
the technical position indicates that both the U.S. and the Japanese stock
markets are in a bullish trend. Analyzing the trend of the RS between the
two would show which market was likely to outperform the other.

¢ In commodity trading, a spread is a form of RS. A spread involves the rela-
tionship between one commodity and another, such as corn to hogs.
Alternatively, a spread captures the relationship between a distant contract
and a nearby one. In this instance traders are attempting to discover rela-
tionships that have diverged from the norm and riding on the spread until
the two contracts come back into line.

304

The Concept of Relative Strength 305

« A currency is really a relative relationship. For example, there is no such
thing as the “U.S. dollar” in an external sense because each currency is
really a relationship between itself and other currencies—the dollar/euro
cross, the euro/yen cross, and so forth.

« The most common and important use of RS is to compare a stock to a
market average. For example, we might compare the performance of
Microsoft to the S&P Composite. When RS is used in this way, it becomes
a powerful concept for individual stock selection. It is this concept of com-
paring an individual security to a market average that we will be concen-
trating on in this chapter. Please note that unless otherwise stated, all RS
comparisons in this chapter are against the S&P Composite.

Construction of an RS Line

An RS line is obtained by dividing the price of one item by another. The
numerator is usually a stock and the denominator is a measurement of the
market—for example, the NASDAQ or the S&P 500. The concept can also
be expanded to the commodity area by comparing the price of an individ-
ual commodity, such as corn, to a commodity index, such as the Commodity
Research Board (CRB) Composite. Figure 16-1 shows the closing price of
the stock in the upper panel and its RS in the lower one. When the line is
rising, it means that the stock is outperforming the market. In this case the
denominator is the S&P Composite, so a rising line means that the stock is
outperforming the S&P. Later, the stock continues to rally, but the RS line
peaks out. This means that it is now underperforming the market. Another
possibility might involve the comparison of an individual country’s stock or
index toa global indicator, such as the Morgan Stanley World Stock Index.
As long as the appropriate currency adjustments are made, the principles
are the same.

The interpretation of relative trends is subject to exactly the same princi-
ples as that of the price itself. It is important to note that an RS indicator is
Just what its name implies—relative. A rising line does not mean that an item,
such as a stock, is advancing in price, but merely that it is outperforming the

Major Technical Principle RS moves in ‘trends, just like the
bsoltite ‘pri¢é: This means that RS lends itself to trenid-reversal tech-
ques such as price patterns, trendlines, and moving average (MA)



306 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Price continues to rise, but... —_——,

Stock Price

..A declining RS means the stock is
underperforming the market and...

Relative Strength

.4 rising RS means the stock is

outperforming the market

Figure 16-1 RS and price.

market or rising relative to the market index. For example, the market, as mea-
sured by the S&P Composite, may have fallen by 20 percent and the stock
may have fallen by 10 percent. Both have lost value, but the RS line would
be rising because the stock retreated less than the market.

RS Interpretation

Relative trends can be interpreted in similar ways to trends in absolute
prices. However, the introduction of relative analysis into the equation offers
an additional dynamic. This arises from a comparison of the two series that
often throws up subtle differences in much the same way as a comparison
between the price and an oscillator.

Since RS trends tend to experience more random noise than absolute
Price trends, we generally find that charts based on weekly and monthly data
tend to be more reliable than those constructed from daily RS data. This
same principle is true for the absolute price, but more so for relative action.

Positive and Negative RS Divergences

When both the price and the RS are rising, they are said to be “in gear”
Important trends usually begin with both series acting in concert, but eve

The Concept of Relative Strength 307

tually the RS line fails to confirm new highs being set by the price itself. This
type of situation indicates that the odds favor the stock beginning a period
of underperformance against the market. However, weakness in RS is not
an absolute sell signal—that is, one indicating that the price will go down;
it is merely a relative signal—that is, one implying a switch from an issue
that has started to become out of favor to one that is coming into favor.

Quite often, though, a divergence or series of divergences between the
price and RS following an advance represents an early warning sign of trou-
ble, which is later confirmed by a trend-reversal signal in the price itself. In
Fig. 16-2 the two are in gear at the start, but later on the RS line diverges
negatively with the price on three occasions. Finally, the price completes a
top and declines.

The opposite set of circumstances holds true in a declining market in
which an improvement in RS ahead of price is regarded as a positive sign.
An example is shown in Fig. 16-3. This time the confirmation comes from
a trendline break in the price.

Trend-Reversal Techniques

MA Crossovers Sometimes it’s a good idea to run an MA through the
price using the crossovers as legitimate signals of a change in trend. It’s also
possible to do the same thing for an RS line, but because the RS line tends
to be much more volatile, this technique often proves unprofitable because

Price is rising

Stock price
Confirmation

RS is deteriorating

Relative strength

Figure 16-2 RS anda negative divergence.



308 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Stock price

Confirmation

Price is declining

Relative strength

RS is improving

Figure 16-3 RS and a positive divergence.

of the numerous whipsaws that are generated. This is especially true for
short-term trends, but even long-term MAs, such as a 40-week simple or 65-
week exponential, often result in more whipsaw signals than we might like.
Figure 16-4 offers an alternative. It involves plotting two MAs, a short-term
and a longer-term average, using the crossovers for signaling trend rever-
sals. This approach definitely eliminates whipsaws, but the trade-off is that
several signals are less timely.

An example is shown in Chart 16-1 for General Motors. Note the numer-
ous whipsaws for the 65-week EMA heing flagged by the ellipse. Chart 16-2
shows an alternative, where the 65-week exponential moving average (EMA)
is used with its 10-week EMA as a method of signaling trend changes. Note
that pretty much all of the 1996-1998 whipsaws have been eliminated. We
are still left with a couple, but the 1996-1998 pounding is totally avoided,
as the 65-week dashed line remains below the solid blue line during the
whole period.

Trendline Violations _ feel that a better alternative to the MA approach
is to construct trendlines against the RS line. The concept is to construct
a trendline for the RS line and when that is violated to look around for 4
legitimate trend-reversal signal in the price itself to act as confirmation.
Figure 16-5 shows an example of a reversal from an uptrend toa downtrend.

The Concept of Relative Strength 309

Stock price

Figure 16-4 RS and MAs.

Chart 16-1 General Motors, 1993-2001, and RS MA crossovers. (From www.pring.com.}

704 General Motors

++ 65-week EMA (both series)

“| S&P Composite RS

010-4

0.05 4

22 P9d [1994 [1995 jis96 i997 [iges [i999 [2000

Figure 16-6 shows that this is also a useful way to identify “buy” candidates.

“The first thing to do is wait for a violation of the RS line. Then, when the

.. Price also confirms with a trend-reversal signal, you can take some action.
These joint violations do not occur that often, but when they do, it’s usually



310 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 16-2 General Motors, 1995-2000, and RS MA crossovers. (From www.pring.com.)

0.103
0.09 4
0.09 >>
0.08 4
0.08 4
097 4
0074
0.08 4
0.084
0.05 4
0.05 4

0,04 4

Stock price

Confirmation

Relative strength

Figure 16-5 RS and uptrendlines.

a signal of an important reversal. In this case the strength of the signal bas.
been enhanced because it was preceded by a positive divergence. The diver
gence did not represent a signal to buy, but it did set the scene for somes

The Concept of Relative Strength 311

Incidentally, the confirmation by the absolute price does not have to be a
trendline break; it could be a price pattern completion, a reliable—and I
emphasize the word reliable—MA crossover, or even a reversal to a series of
rising peaks and troughs. Remember at all times that the size of the
new trend depends principally on the time frame being charted and the
length of the lines. Intraday breaks, for example, reflect small trends and
have nowhere near the significance of trendline violations on the monthly
charts.

Price Patterns Price patterns can also be employed to analyze trends in
RS. In Fig. 16-7 the RS line completed a head-and-shoulders (H&S) top. This
certainly indicates that the RS trend has reversed and provides enough evi-
dence to justify a switch from this stock in favor of one where the RS trend
was emerging in a positive way. However, it does not signal that the price
itself is going to decline, though in many instances that will prove to be the
case. In this particular example the absolute trend reversal is signaled when
the short-term low flagged by the small horizontal trendline is violated
because this confirms that the series of rising bottoms and tops has now been
reversed. Note that even though the price subsequently rallies back through
the line, this does nothing to reverse the peak trough progression to the
upside, so the trend is still regarded as negative.

Confirmation

|

ieee

Figure 16-6 RS and downtrendlines.



312
Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Stock price

Confirmation

s S
Relative strength

Figure 16-7 RS and price patterns.

Figure 16-8 features a reversal from a downtrend to an uptrend. First the

BS fine diverges positively with the price. This is our initial indication that. -
oth trends may be about to reverse. Then the RS line traces out a rectan-

gle and breaks to the upside, later to be foll

‘ lowed b i i
a broadening formation with a flat top. ca by the price completing

Long-Term RS

Chart 16-3 features a quarterly close of the S&P Domestic Oil RS line—
relative, that is, to the S&P Composite. This is a very long term chart that
encompasses much of the twentieth century. It is useful in that it demon-
strates that the RS line lends itself to price pattern and trendline construc
tion. These formations are not completed often, but they are usually
followed by a relative price move that lasts for many years. It’s im ortant to
bear this in mind because most of the patterns look small on the chart but
extend over considerable periods of time. Their completion therefore sig:
nals a change in the environment that typically lasts for many years, even

decades. For example, it traces out a 15-year H&S top in the late 1950s. ACS

break of this magnitude signals a change in sentiment for a long time.

Indeed, it was not until the late 1960s th: i
of the bresiddown bon s that the RS line returned to the level -

The Concept of Relative Strength 313

\
Stock price

Relative strength Confirmation

VV SRZXZ MV

: Figure 16-8 KS and price patterns.

Next we see a breakout from a double bottom formation that forms the
right shoulder of an approximate 25-year reverse H&S pattern. The neck-
line is flagged with the dashed line, but the SHS labeling has been omitted
so that the chart is not too busy. A huge pattern warrants a huge move, and
that was definitely the case in this instance. A consolidation symmetrical tri-
angle forms approximately halfway up the move.

Finally, note the fact that the Oil Index experienced a substantial rally
between 1980 and the end of the century. Does this mean that oils would
have been a good place to invest in this 20-year period? Hardly, because the

. persistent decline in the RS line indicated that the oils were consistent

underperformers.

Obviously, we would not make a practice of studying these long-term
charts every week or so, but say once a quarter it does make sense to review
the long-term picture of the RS technical structure to see whether any major
trends might be emerging. On a more regular basis, we would look at
monthly charts covering a far shorter period of time, later moving down to

the weekly and daily ones.

- Individual Stocks and RS Analysis

: Chart 16-4 compares General Motors to its RS line in the 1984-1987 period.
The two large arrows point up a negative divergence between the two series.
This indicated technical vulnerability but was not an outright sell signal for

2 BB



314 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 16-3 S&P Domestic Oil, 1940-2001, and RS price patterns. (From www.pring.com.}

1000 5

S&P Domestic Oil

Price is up, but there is
considerable underperformance

| S&P Domestic Oil
3-4 Relative strength (RS)

S

Huge base

Shea ese ee ers a a

the stock. Later, the RS line completes a H&S top, which indicated that how
ever much GM might rally, it would be far less than the market. This was a :*
definite sign of forthcoming weakness. As the RS line tries to rally back to,
the extended neckline, we see another small divergence as flagged by the.

two small dashed arrows. Finally, the price was confirmed by violating a sec
ondary 1984-1987 up trendline. :

RS and Momentum

Long-Term Trends Since classic trend-determining techniques can be
applied to RS lines, it is a small step to expand the analysis to embrace
momentum indicators derived from RS lines. While it is certainly practi
to apply oscillators to short-term momentum of RS lines, by far the best usé.
of momentum in relative work, I believe, is to use oscillators based on Jon:
term spans that have been carefully smoothed to iron out unwanted
tuations.
Chart 16-5 features the RS line of ConAgra Inc., together with a longte
know sure thing (KST) of RS. The waves against the RS line reflect the waves
in the KST. Peaks in the KST roughly correspond with peaks in the wat
and vice versa. As we shall learn in Chapter 19, RS lines are far more cyel
cal in their patterns than absolute prices. This makes the use of smo!

The Concept of Relative Strength 315

Chart 16-4 General Motors, 1984-1987, and RS trendline breaks. (From wuw.pring.com.)

134
"4
94 General Motors
a4

74
64
re

84

oad General Motors RS line

0.044

0.03 4

0034
Tl ies fis06 set

long-term oscillators such as the KST (see Chapter 12) far more accurate
"in their reflection of the primary trend. Remember, absolute prices can be
subject to strong linear trends, which means that even the best-designed
smoothed long-term momentum indicator will offer premature buy and sell
signals. We cannot say this will never happen with a KST constructed from
relative action, but it is certainly a lot less likely.

The principal objective is to identify a stock when its long-term KST is
below zero and is starting to poke above its 26-week EMA. Incidentally, the
average plotted against the RS line is a 65-week EMA. Note, even with a sub-
, Stantial time span such as this, there were still numerous whipsaws between
1987 and 1989 and 1994 and 1997. This is one of the reasons why I prefer
to use trendline violations of the RS line in conjunction with long-term RS
KST reversals. They are certainly not perfect, but they tend to be relatively
ore reliable. In this example I used a KST, but it is possible to substitute
any smoothed long-term momentum indicator. The KST just happens to be
my preference. Alternatives could be a stochastic, a moving average con-
gence divergence (MACD), or another trend deviation indicator. The
asic idea is to use an indicator that closely resembles the primary up and

ge VOWN waves yet turns reasonably close to the turning points. When experi-

Menting, always try for consistency over a number of stocks in different time
Periods; never go for perfection because it just isn’t there.

aba



316 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 16-5 ConAgra, 1985-2001, and long- momentum.
www.pring.com.) Teme ES ‘erm erm

The Concept of Relative Strength 317

Chart 16-6 Abbott Labs, RS 1998-2001, and short-term RS momentum. (From
www.pring.com.)

oa ConAgra Foods RS line
0.03 4
0.03 5
0024

oo2 fin

0.01 5

0.01 5
6004 Long-term KST of RS

Once the direction and maturity of the long-term trend of RS has been
established, it is then time to move to the shorter-term charts.

Short-Term Trends Chart 1646 features the relative action of Abbott Labs
in the top panel, followed by a 14-day RSI of the RS line and in the lower
panel an MACD of the RS line. It is fairly evident by looking at the chart
that there are two main environments—a bear market between the end of
1999 and the start of the year 2000, followed by a bull move. Now take a
closer look at the MACD. During the bear market, the MACD fails to reach
an overbought condition yet oversold readings fail to signal rallies. The
opposite is true during the bull phase. This is typical of oscillators since they
change their characteristics in primary bull markets. Just like birds in the
Northern Hemisphere, they migrate to the south during the winter or bear
market and to the north in the summer or bull market. Whenever you can
spot a situation where an oversold oscillator fails to trigger much in the way
of a rally, this represents a tip that the prevailing trend may be bearish. It
does not happen every time, of course, but in most cases this rule will work
out. In this case, the failure of the January 1999 MACD oversold condition
to generate a rally and its failure to register an overbought reading a little
bit later pointed to a bear market environment.

14-day RSI

004--

A sign that a bull market was starting did not come when the MACD
Teached an overbought reading, which, after all, is still possible in a bear
market. Instead, it came when the May decline in the oscillator did not fall
back to an oversold reading but was held just above zero. Such action indi-
cated that the underlying character of the MACD had probably changed for
the better.

Chart 16-7 shows an analysis of the relative action in greater detail start-
ing with the October 1998 top. Signs of weakness started to appear as both
the RSI and the MACD of RS violated up trendlines. This was then con-
firmed by the RS line itself violating an up trendline. This joint action was
Not important enough to signal a bear market, but it definitely indicated
that the uptrend would be stalled for several months. In effect Abbott Labs
Was unlikely to outperform the market during that period. If you look
Carefully, you can see that the RSI trendline was, in fact, the neckline of a
H&S top.

As we move on the price, action becomes progressively disappointing. The
January oversold condition merely triggers a sideways trading range after
Which the relative downtrend is resumed. Also, look at the three dashed
down trendline breaks. They should have been followed by a good rally, but

‘"y were not—the type of action that is often indicative of a bear market.



318 Part !: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 16-7 Abbott Labs, RS 1998-2001, and short-term RS momentum. (From
www.pring.com.)

The Concept of Relative Strength 319

Chart 16-8 Abbott Labs, 1998-1999, and short-term RS momentum. (From
www.pring.com.)

0.034 Abbolt Labs RS Line
0024
4 14-day RSI
70 A iat
604 ne
60+ * Ay
30 +++
204 . y W TT
0.04

004
004
00
0.04
0.04

S26 AMP VASO ND ise AMP L ABEND EO AMDDASPRE

Chart 16-8 shows the same period but also includes the actual price. The
dashed up trendline marks the approximate point where we got our rela-
tive sell signal, but note that the absolute price continued to extend its rally.
It then diverged negatively with the RS line, indicating underlying techni-
cal weakness. However, it remained above its solid up trendline until January
1999. If the sell signals in the RS line that had developed previously were
not sufficient evidence to justify liquidation, the violation of this trendline
in the absolute price certainly was.

Chart 16-9 shows a closeup of the bullish period featured in Chart 16-4.
Remember, coming into this period the RS line had been in a strong bear
market where the momentum indicators had been triggering false signals.
However, in March 2000 some Positive action by both momentum series
starts to develop since they barely fell below the equilibrium level at the time
the RS line was reaching its second low in the top panel. Also, the MACD
moved above its previous high, indicating a probable change in character
more suitable for a bull than a bear market.

Finally, the RS line confirmed by breaking above the horizontal line mark-
ing the top of a double bottom formation. At the same time, it confirmed
that a series of rising peaks and troughs was now under way. Throughout
the bear market each rally high was lower than its predecessor; this was als
the case with the bottoms.

3? 4 Abott Labs absolute price
404 oo

0.044

[May Bun Dut "[Aug [Sep Joct [Nov [ec Jigga] [Mar "apr May

Chart 16-9 Abbott Labs, RS 1999-2000, and short-term RS momentum. (From
www.pring.com.)

oss. Abbott Labs AS line
0.03 4 ON
0024

New high signals rising
peaks and troughs

‘| 14-day RSI

_>
3 (Vous. 2 ee

204 a

0.04

oe New high of - “ay \

Fe" TToul [aug Sep’ [Oct Nov [Dec 2000] [Mar [Apr [May [Jun [ul” [aug “|Sep [oct!



320 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques
