
the guilty, who in those days formed more than nineteen twentieths of the population.
Forsaking their homes, kindred, and occupation, they crowded to Jerusalem to await the
coming of the Lord, lightened, as they imagined, of a load of sin by their weary
pilgrimage. To increase the panic, the stars were observed to fall from heaven,
earthquakes to shake the land, and violent hurricanes to blow down the forests. All these,
and more especially the meteoric phenomena, were looked upon as the forerunners of the
approaching judgments. Not a meteor shot athwart the horizon that did not fill a district
with alarm, and send away to Jerusalem a score of pilgrims, with staff in hand and wallet
on their back, praying as they went for the remission of their sins. Men, women, and even
children, trudged in droves to the holy city, in expectation of the day when the heavens
would open, and the Son of God descend in his glory. This extraordinary delusion, while
it augmented the numbers, increased also the hardships of the pilgrims. Beggars became
so numerous on all the highways between the west of Europe and Constantinople that the
monks, the great alms-givers upon these occasions, would have brought starvation within
sight of their own doors, if they had not economized their resources, and left the devotees
to shift for themselves as they could. Hundreds of them were glad to subsist upon the
berries that ripened by the road, who, before this great flux, might have shared the bread
and flesh of the monasteries.
But this was not the greatest of their difficulties. On their arrival in Jerusalem they found
that a sterner race had obtained possession of the Holy Land. The caliphs of Bagdad had
been succeeded by the harsh Turks of the race of Seljook, who looked upon the pilgrims
with contempt and aversion. The Turks of the eleventh century were more ferocious and
less scrupulous than the Saracens of the tenth. They were annoyed at the immense
number of pilgrims who overran the country, and still more so because they showed no
intention of quitting it. The hourly expectation of the last judgment kept them waiting;
and the Turks, apprehensive of being at last driven from the soil by the swarms that were
still arriving, heaped up difficulties in their way. Persecution of every kind awaited them.
They were plundered, and beaten with stripes, and kept in suspense for months at the
gates of Jerusalem, unable to pay the golden bezant that was to facilitate their entrance.
When the first epidemic terror of the day of judgment began to subside, a few pilgrims
ventured to return to Europe, their hearts big with indignation at the insults they had
suffered. Everywhere as they passed they related to a sympathizing auditory the wrongs
of Christendom. Strange to say, even these recitals increased the mania for pilgrimage.
The greater the dangers of the way, the more chance that sins of deep dye would be
atoned for. Difficulty and suffering only heightened the merit, and fresh hordes issued
from every town and village, to win favour in the sight of Heaven by a visit to the holy
sepulchre. Thus did things continue during the whole of the eleventh century.
The train that was to explode so fearfully was now laid, and there wanted but the hand to
apply the torch. At last the man appeared upon the scene. Like all who have ever
achieved so great an end, Peter the hermit was exactly suited to the age; neither behind it,
nor in advance of it; but acute enough to penetrate its mystery ere it was discovered by
any other. Enthusiastic, chivalrous, bigoted, and, if not insane, not far removed from
insanity, he was the very prototype of the time. True enthusiasm is always persevering

and always eloquent, and these two qualities were united in no common degree in the
person of this extraordinary preacher. He was a monk of Amiens, and ere he assumed the
hood had served as a soldier. He is represented as having been ill favoured and low in
stature, but with an eye of surpassing brightness and intelligence. Having been seized
with the mania of the age, he visited Jerusalem, and remained there till his blood boiled to
see the cruel persecution heaped upon the devotees. On his return home he shook the
world by the eloquent story of their wrongs.
Before entering into any further details of the astounding results of his preaching, it will
be advisable to cast a glance at the state of the mind of Europe, that we may understand
all the better the causes of his success. First of all, there was the priesthood, which,
exercising as it did the most conspicuous influence upon the fortunes of society, claims
the largest share of attention. Religion was the ruling idea of that day, and the only
civiliser capable of taming such wolves as then constituted the flock of the faithful. The
clergy were all in all; and though they kept the popular mind in the most slavish
subjection with regard to religious matters, they furnished it with the means of defence
against all other oppression except their own. In the ecclesiastical ranks were
concentrated all the true piety, all the learning, all the wisdom of the time; and, as a
natural consequence, a great portion of power, which their very wisdom perpetually
incited them to extend. The people knew nothing of kings and nobles, except in the way
of injuries inflicted. The first ruled for, or more properly speaking against, the barons,
and the barons only existed to brave the power of the kings, or to trample with their iron
heels upon the neck of prostrate democracy. The latter had no friend but the clergy, and
these, though they necessarily instilled the superstition from which they themselves were
not exempt, yet taught the cheering doctrine that all men were equal in the sight of
heaven. Thus, while Feudalism told them they had no rights in this world, Religion told
them they had every right in the next. With this consolation they were for the time
content, for political ideas had as yet taken no root. When the clergy, for other reasons,
recommended the Crusade, the people joined in it with enthusiasm. The subject of
Palestine filled all minds; the pilgrims' tales of two centuries warmed every imagination;
and when their friends, their guides, and their instructors preached a war so much in
accordance with their own prejudices and modes of thinking, the enthusiasm rose into a
frenzy.
But while religion inspired the masses, another agent was at work upon the nobility.
These were fierce and lawless; tainted with every vice, endowed with no virtue, and
redeemed by one good quality alone, that of courage. The only religion they felt was the
religion of fear. That and their overboiling turbulence alike combined to guide them to
the Holy Land. Most of them had sins enough to answer for. They lived with their hand
against every man; and with no law but their own passions. They set at defiance the
secular power of the clergy, but their hearts quailed at the awful denunciations of the
pulpit with regard to the life to come. War was the business and the delight of their
existence; and when they were promised remission of all their sins upon the easy
condition of following their favourite bent, is it to be wondered at that they rushed with
enthusiasm to the onslaught, and became as zealous in the service of the Cross as the
great majority of the people, who were swayed by more purely religious motives?

Fanaticism and the love of battle alike impelled them to the war, while the kings and
princes of Europe had still another motive for encouraging their zeal. Policy opened their
eyes to the great advantages which would accrue to themselves, by the absence of so
many restless, intriguing, and blood-thirsty men, whose insolence it required more than
the small power of royalty to restrain within due bounds. Thus every motive was
favourable to the Crusades. Every class of society was alike incited to join or encourage
the war; kings and the clergy by policy, the nobles by turbulence and the love of
dominion, and the people by religious zeal and the concentrated enthusiasm of two
centuries, skilfully directed by their only instructors.
It was in Palestine itself that Peter the Hermit first conceived the grand idea of rousing
the powers of Christendom to rescue the Christians of the East from the thraldom of the
Mussulmans, and the sepulchre of Jesus from the rude hands of the infidel. The subject
engrossed his whole mind. Even in the visions of the night he was full of it. One dream
made such an impression upon him, that he devoutly believed the Saviour of the world
himself appeared before him, and promised him aid and protection in his holy
undertaking. If his zeal had ever wavered before, this was sufficient to fix it for ever.
Peter, after he had performed all the penances and duties of his pilgrimage, demanded an
interview with Simeon, the Patriarch of the Greek Church at Jerusalem. Though the latter
was a heretic in Peter's eyes, yet he was still a Christian, and felt as acutely as himself for
the persecutions heaped by the Turks upon the followers of Jesus. The good prelate
entered fully into his views, and, at his suggestion, wrote letters to the Pope, and to the
most influential monarchs of Christendom, detailing the sorrows of the faithful, and
urging them to take up arms in their defence. Peter was not a laggard in the work. Taking
an affectionate farewell of the Patriarch, he returned in all haste to Italy. Pope Urban II.
occupied the apostolic chair. It was at that time far from being an easy seat. His
predecessor, Gregory, had bequeathed him a host of disputes with the Emperor Henry IV.
of Germany, and he had made Philip I. of France his enemy by his strenuous opposition
to an adulterous connexion formed by that monarch. So many dangers encompassed him
about, that the Vatican was no secure abode, and he had taken refuge in Apulia, under the
protection of the renowned Robert Guiscard. Thither Peter appears to have followed him,
though in what spot their meeting took place is not stated with any precision by ancient
chroniclers or modern historians. Urban received him most kindly; read, with tears in his
eyes, the epistle from the Patriarch Simeon, and listened to the eloquent story of the
Hermit with an attention which showed how deeply he sympathised with the woes of the
Christian church. Enthusiasm is contagious, and the Pope appears to have caught it
instantly from one whose zeal was so unbounded. Giving the Hermit full powers, he sent
him abroad to preach the holy war to all the nations and potentates of Christendom. The
Hermit preached, and countless thousands answered to his call. France, Germany, and
Italy started at his voice, and prepared for the deliverance of Zion. One of the early
historians of the Crusade, who was himself an eye-witness of the rapture of Europe,
[Guibert de Nogent] describes the personal appearance of the Hermit at this time. He
says, that there appeared to be something of divine in every thing which he said or did.
The people so highly reverenced him, that they plucked hairs from the mane of his mule,
that they might keep them as relics. While preaching, he wore in general a woollen tunic,

with a dark-coloured mantle, which fell down to his heels. His arms and feet were bare,
and he ate neither flesh nor bread, supporting himself chiefly upon fish and wine. "He set
out," says the chronicler, "from whence I know not; but we saw him passing through the
towns and villages, preaching every where, and the people surrounding him in crowds,
loading him with offerings, and celebrating his sanctity with such great praises that I
never remember to have seen such honours bestowed upon any one." Thus he went on,
untired, inflexible, and full of devotion, communicating his own madness to his hearers,
until Europe was stirred from its very depths.
While the Hermit was appealing with such signal success to the people, the Pope
appealed with as much success to those who were to become the chiefs and leaders of the
expedition. His first step was to call a council at Placentia, in the autumn of the year
1095. Here, in the assembly of the clergy, the Pope debated the grand scheme, and gave
audience to emissaries who had been sent from Constantinople by the Emperor of the
East to detail the progress made by the Turks in their design of establishing themselves in
Europe. The clergy were of course unanimous in support of the Crusade, and the council
separated, each individual member of it being empowered to preach it to his people.
But Italy could not be expected to furnish all the aid required; and the Pope crossed the
Alps to inspire the fierce and powerful nobility and chivalrous population of Gaul. His
boldness in entering the territory, and placing himself in the power of his foe, King Philip
of France, is not the least surprising feature of his mission. Some have imagined that cool
policy alone actuated him, while others assert, that it was mere zeal, as warm and as blind
as that of Peter the Hermit. The latter opinion seems to be the true one. Society did not
calculate the consequences of what it was doing. Every man seemed to act from impulse
only; and the Pope, in throwing himself into the heart of France, acted as much from
impulse as the thousands who responded to his call. A council was eventually summoned
to meet him at Clermont, in Auvergne, to consider the state of the church, reform abuses,
and, above all, make preparations for the war. It was in the midst of an extremely cold
winter, and the ground was covered with snow. During seven days the council sat with
closed doors, while immense crowds from all parts of France flocked into the town, in
expectation that the Pope himself would address the people. All the towns and villages
for miles around were filled with the multitude; even the fields were encumbered with
people, who, unable to procure lodging, pitched their tents under the trees and by the
way-side. All the neighbourhood presented the appearance of a vast camp.
During the seven days' deliberation, a sentence of excommunication was passed upon
King Philip for adultery with Bertrade de Montfort, Countess of Anjou, and for
disobedience to the supreme authority of the apostolic see. This bold step impressed the
people with reverence for so stern a church, which in the discharge of its duty showed
itself no respecter of persons. Their love and their fear were alike increased, and they
were prepared to listen with more intense devotion to the preaching of so righteous and
inflexible a pastor. The great square before the cathedral church of Clermont became
every instant more densely crowded as the hour drew nigh when the Pope was to address
the populace. Issuing from the church in his frill canonicals, surrounded by his cardinals
and bishops in all the splendour of Romish ecclesiastical costume, the Pope stood before

the populace on a high scaffolding erected for the occasion, and covered with scarlet
cloth. A brilliant array of bishops and cardinals surrounded him; and among them,
humbler in rank, but more important in the world's eye, the Hermit Peter, dressed in his
simple and austere habiliments. Historians differ as to whether or not Peter addressed the
crowd, but as all agree that he was present, it seems reasonable to suppose that he spoke.
But it was the oration of the Pope that was most important. As he lifted up his hands to
ensure attention, every voice immediately became still. He began by detailing the
miseries endured by their brethren in the Holy Land; how the plains of Palestine were
desolated by the outrageous heathen, who with the sword and the firebrand carried
wailing into the dwellings and flames into the possessions of the faithful; how Christian
wives and daughters were defiled by pagan lust; how the altars of the true God were
desecrated, and the relics of the saints trodden under foot. "You," continued the eloquent
pontiff, (and Urban the Second was one of the most eloquent men of the day,) "you, who
hear me, and who have received the true faith, and been endowed by God with power,
and strength, and greatness of soul, -- whose ancestors have been the prop of
Christendom, and whose kings have put a barrier against the progress of the infidel, -- I
call upon you to wipe off these impurities from the face of the earth, and lift your
oppressed fellow-christians from the depths into which they have been trampled. The
sepulchre of Christ is possessed by the heathen, the sacred places dishonoured by their
vileness. Oh, brave knights and faithful people! offspring of invincible fathers! ye will
not degenerate from your ancient renown. Ye will not be restrained from embarking in
this great cause by the tender ties of wife or little ones, but will remember the words of
the Saviour of the world himself, 'Whosoever loves father and mother more than me is
not worthy of me. Whosoever shall abandon for my name's sake his house, or his
brethren, or his sisters, or his father, or his mother, or his wife, or his children, or his
lands, shall receive a hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal life.'"
The warmth of the pontiff communicated itself to the crowd, and the enthusiasm of the
people broke out several times ere he concluded his address. He went on to pourtray, not
only the spiritual but the temporal advantages, that should accrue to those who took up
arms in the service of the Cross. Palestine was, he said, a land flowing with milk and
honey, and precious in the sight of God, as the scene of the grand events which had saved
mankind. That land, he promised, should be divided among them. Moreover, they should
have full pardon for all their offences, either against God or man. "Go, then," he added,
"in expiation of your sins; and go assured, that after this world shall have passed away,
imperishable glory shall be yours in the world which is to come." The enthusiasm was no
longer to be restrained, and loud shouts interrupted the speaker; the people exclaiming as
if with one voice, "Dieu le veult! Dieu le veult!" With great presence of mind Urban took
advantage of the outburst, and as soon as silence was obtained, continued: "Dear
brethren, to-day is shown forth in you that which the Lord has said by his evangelist,
'When two or three are gathered together in my name, there will I be in the midst of them
to bless them.' If the Lord God had not been in your souls, you would not all have
pronounced the same words; or rather God himself pronounced them by your lips, for it
was He that put them in your hearts. Be they, then, your war-cry in the combat, for those
words came forth from God. Let the army of the Lord when it rushes upon His enemies
shout but that one cry, 'Dieu le veult! Dieu le veult!' Let whoever is inclined to devote

himself to this holy cause make it a solemn engagement, and bear the cross of the Lord
either on his breast or his brow till he set out, and let him who is ready to begin his march
place the holy emblem on his shoulders, in memory of that precept of our Saviour, 'He
who does not take up his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.'"
The news of this council spread to the remotest parts of Europe in an incredibly short
space of time. Long before the fleetest horseman could have brought the intelligence it
was known by the people in distant provinces, a fact which was considered as nothing
less than supernatural. But the subject was in everybody's mouth, and the minds of men
were prepared for the result. The enthusiastic only asserted what they wished, and the
event tallied with their prediction. This was, however, quite enough in those days for a
miracle, and as a miracle every one regarded it. For several months after the council of
Clermont, France and Germany presented a singular spectacle. The pious, the fanatic, the
needy, the dissolute, the young and the old, even women and children, and the halt and
lame, enrolled themselves by hundreds. In every village the clergy were busied in
keeping up the excitement, promising eternal rewards to those who assumed the red
cross, and fulminating the most awful denunciations against all the worldly-minded who
refused or even hesitated. Every debtor who joined the crusade was freed by the papal
edict from the claims of his creditors; outlaws of every grade were made equal with the
honest upon the same conditions. The property of those who went was placed under the
protection of the church, and St. Paul and St. Peter themselves were believed to descend
from their high abode, to watch over the chattels of the absent pilgrims. Signs and
portents were seen in the air to increase the fervour of the multitude. An aurora-borealis
of unusual brilliancy appeared, and thousands of the crusaders came out to gaze upon it,
prostrating themselves upon the earth in adoration. It was thought to be a sure prognostic
of the interposition of the Most High; and a representation of his armies fighting with and
overthrowing the infidels. Reports of wonders were everywhere rife. A monk had seen
two gigantic warriors on horseback, the one representing a Christian and the other a Turk,
fighting in the sky with flaming swords, the Christian of course overcoming the Paynim.
Myriads of stars were said to have fallen from heaven, each representing the fall of a
Pagan foe. It was believed at the same time that the Emperor Charlemagne would rise
from the grave, and lead on to victory the embattled armies of the Lord. A singular
feature of the popular madness was the enthusiasm of the women. Everywhere they
encouraged their lovers and husbands to forsake all things for the holy war. Many of
them burned the sign of the cross upon their breasts and arms, and coloured the wound
with a red dye, as a lasting memorial of their zeal. Others, still more zealous, impressed
the mark by the same means upon the tender limbs of young children and infants at the
breast.
Guibert de Nogent tells of a monk who made a large incision upon his forehead in the
form of a cross, which he coloured with some powerful ingredient, telling the people that
an angel had done it when he was asleep. This monk appears to have been more of a
rogue than a fool, for he contrived to fare more sumptuously than any of his brother
pilgrims, upon the strength of his sanctity. The crusaders everywhere gave him presents
of food and money, and he became quite fat ere he arrived at Jerusalem, notwithstanding
the fatigues of the way. If he had acknowledged in the first place that he had made the

wound himself, he would not have been thought more holy than his fellows; but the story
of the angel was a clincher.
All those who had property of any description rushed to the mart to change it into hard
cash. Lands and houses could be had for a quarter of their value, while arms and
accoutrements of war rose in the same proportion. Corn, which had been excessively dear
in anticipation of a year of scarcity, suddenly became plentiful; and such was the
diminution in the value of provisions, that seven sheep were sold for five deniers.[Guibert
de Nogent] The nobles mortgaged their estates for mere trifles to Jews and unbelievers,
or conferred charters of immunity upon the towns and communes within their fiefs, for
sums which, a few years previously, they would have rejected with disdain. The farmer
endeavoured to sell his plough, and the artisan his tools, to purchase a sword for the
deliverance of Jerusalem. Women disposed of their trinkets for the same purpose. During
the spring and summer of this year (1096) the roads teemed with crusaders, all hastening
to the towns and villages appointed as the rendezvous of the district. Some were on
horseback, some in carts, and some came down the rivers in boats and rafts, bringing
their wives and children, all eager to go to Jerusalem. Very few knew where Jerusalem
was. Some thought it fifty thousand miles away, while others imagined that it was but a
month's journey, while at sight of every town or castle, the children exclaimed, "Is that
Jerusalem ? Is that the city ?"[Guibert de Nogent] Parties of knights and nobles might be
seen travelling eastward, and amusing themselves as they went with the knightly
diversion of hawking to lighten the fatigues of the way.
Guibert de Nogent, who did not write from hearsay, but from actual observation, says, the
enthusiasm was so contagious, that when any one heard the orders of the Pontiff, he went
instantly to solicit his neighbours and friends to join with him in "the way of God," for so
they called the proposed expedition. The Counts Palatine were full of the desire to
undertake the journey, and all the inferior knights were animated with the same zeal.
Even the poor caught the flame so ardently, that no one paused to think of the inadequacy
of his means, or to consider whether he ought to yield up his house and his vine and his
fields. Each one set about selling his property, at as low a price as if he had been held in
some horrible captivity, and sought to pay his ransom without loss of time. Those who
had not determined upon the journey, joked and laughed at those who were thus
disposing of their goods at such ruinous prices, prophesying that the expedition would be
miserable and their return worse. But they held this language only for a day. The next,
they were suddenly seized with the same frenzy as the rest. Those who had been loudest
in their jeers gave up all their property for a few crowns, and set out with those they had
so laughed at a few hours before. In most cases the laugh was turned against them, for
when it became known that a man was hesitating, his more zealous neighbouts sent him a
present of a knitting needle or a distaff, to show their contempt of him. There was no
resisting this, so that the fear of ridicule contributed its fair contingent to the armies of the
Lord.
Another effect of the crusade was, the religious obedience with which it inspired the
people and the nobility for that singular institution "The Truce of God." At the
commencement of the eleventh century, the clergy of France, sympathizing for the woes
