
accuracy. He did so by using planetary alignments. Several market
researchers have taken the dates of the worst storms from 1940
through 1964 and run statistics on the percent change in the Dow
Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) from -10 days to + 10 days from
the onset of the storms. They find that the DJIA shows a statistically
significant decline from 2 days before the storm until 3 days after
the storm. And during a new moon or a full moon, the effect is
amplified even more. However, during much of this time the stock
market was in a bear market when there was already a downward
biasi
On March 5, 1989, a massive X-ray flare, lasting 137 minutes,
erupted on the sun’s surface. It overloaded the sensors on the
equipment monitoring it; and in the region from which it occurred,
a cluster of sunspots were clearly visible. On March 8 a solar proton flow began, and a large quantity of these ions began flowing
toward the earth on a solar wind, lasting until March 13. Monitors
of the earths magnetism in the Shetland Islands registered a
change in magnetism of as much as 8 degrees per hour (with the
normal deviation being only 0.2 degree). There were huge surges in
power lines, telephone lines, and cable networks. Radio and satellite communications were badly affected. Transformers overloaded
in Canada, and over a million people were suddenly left without
electricity. Yet this particular flare was by no means a spectacular
event in solar terms.
The solar flare between March 5 and March 13, 1989, was
small in terms of what the sun is capable of, but it was the largest
recorded in this century-bigger than any of the storms reported
by Nelson. So the question obviously is, what effect did it have on
the markets? The answer, as best I can tell, was that it had no effect
at all.
Nevertheless, despite some evidence to the contrary, let us
assume that there is some rhythm to the activity of these physical
entities and that it does have a slight effect on the markets. Perhaps,
for example, it raises the odds of being “right” about a market
change from 48 percent to 52 percent. That’s about the same odds
that a card counter at blackjack gets in Las Vegas, and the casinos
kick out card counters. As a result, the physical system explanation
of order in the markets is also a tradable one.

PART 2

Conceptuaiization of Your System

There’s a Mysterious Mathematical Order to the Universe
The third concept relating to orderliness in the markets searches
through mathematics in order to find the answers. It asserts that certain “magic” numbers, and the relationships among the numbers,
influence the markets. For example, Pythagorus is rumored to have
taught in an ancient “mystery school” that all the principles of the
universe were based upon mathematics and geometry. Furthermore, certain “magical” societies and sects seem to carry this notion
forward. The work of W. D. Gann, as currently promoted by many
of his followers, is based upon mathematical orderliness.
Basically, mathematical orderliness theories are based on the
following two assumptions: (1) that certain numbers are more
important than others in predicting market turning points, and (2)
that these numbers are important both in terms of price levels and
in terms of time (i.e., when to expect a change in the market). For
example, suppose you believed that 45,50,60,66,90,100,120,135,
144,618, etc., were magic numbers. What you’d do is find “significant” tops or bottoms and apply these numbers to them-looking
at both time and price. You might expect, for example, a 0.50, a
0.618, or a 0.667 correction in the market. In addition, you might
expect your target price to be reached in 45 days or 144 days or
some other magic number.
If you have enough magic numbers, you can figure out and
verify a lot of projections after the fact. You can then extend those
projections into the future, and some of them might actually work
out. This usually will happen if you have enough magic numbers
to work with in your arsenal. For example, if you have at least 33
people in a room, your odds are quite good of finding two people
with the same birthday. That doesn’t necessarily mean, however,
that the common date is a magic number, although some people
might jump to that conclusion.
Let’s make the assumption that such numbers do exist. Let’s
also assume that they are not perfect, but they do increase the reliability of your predictions beyond chance. For example, with magic
numbers you might predict that~the Dow Jones Industrial Average
should make a major turn on July 23. You estimate that the reliabil-

CHAPTER 5 Selecting a Concept That Works

125

ity of your prediction is 55 percent. If you have that kind of edge,
then you have a tradable event.
Conclusion
What do these three concepts about orderliness in the markets have
in common? They all predict turning points. Turning points, in
most cases, tend to give traders information about when to enter
the market. In some cases, they also give profit objectives and a clue
about when to get out of the market. You’ll learn in Chapter 8 that
it’s possible to make money with a trading system in which the
entry is totally random. As a result, if any prediction method gives
you a better than chance expectation of predicting the market, you
could have some advantage in trading it.
How should one trade such predictions? First, you could use
the expected target date (with whatever time variance you are willing to give it) as a filter for entry. Thus, if your method predicts a
market turn on July 23 with a possible variance of 1 day, then you
should look for an entry signal between July 22 and July 24.
Second, you must look for the market to tell you that it is making the move before you enter. The move itself should be your trading signal. The simplest way of trading it would be to look for a
volatility breakout signal during the window in which you expect
a move. For example, suppose the average daily price range (e.g.,
the average true range) for the last 10 days has been 4 points. Your
signal might be 1.5 times this range, or 6 points. As a result, you
would enter on a 6-point move from yesterday’s close. You would
then use appropriate stops, exits, and sizing-to control the trade.
These are discussed in subsequent chapters.

The keys to trading such concepts of orderliness profiitably me the
same as the keys to trading any concept properly. First, you need good

exits to preserve your capital when your concept does not work
and to create a high payoff when it does. Second, you need to size
your positions appropriately to be able to meet your trading objectives. Thus, even if such concepts increase your accuracy by 1 percent, you can still trade them profitably. However, if you deemphasize the prediction part of such systems (thus giving up your

need to be in control and to be right), and concentrate on exits and
position sizing, you should do quite well.

SUMMARY
The purpose of this chapter was to introduce you to a few of the
many different concepts that you can use to trade or invest in the
market, depending on your beliefs. I’m not saying that any of these
concepts is more valid (or valuable) than any other. In addition, I’m
not expressing any personal preferences for any of these concepts.
My point in including this chapter is simply to show you how
many different ideas there are.14
. Tom Basso started out with the discussions by talking
about trend following, and he simply expressed the
viewpoint that the markets occasionally move one
direction for a long time or trend. These trends can be
captured and form the basis for a type of trading. The basic
philosophy is to find a criterion to determine when the
market is trending, enter the market in the direction of the
trend, and then exit when the trend is over or the signal
proves to be false. It’s an easy technique to follow, and it
makes good money if you understand the concepts behind
it and follow it consistently.
. Chuck LeBeau discussed the next concept, fundamental
analysis. This is the actual analysis of supply and demand
in the market, and many academics think it is the only way
one can trade. The concept typically does give you a price
objective, but your analysis (or some expert’s analysis) may
have no relationship to what prices actually do.
Nevertheless, some people trade fundamental data quite
well, and this is another option for you to consider. Chuck
gives seven suggestions for you to follow if you wish to
follow this concept. However, he only discusses
fundamental analysis as it applies to the futures markets,
not as it applies to equities. That is covered in future
chapters.
. Next, Jerry Toepke discussed the concept of seasonal
tendencies. Seasonal analysis is based upon the

fundamental qualities of certain products to be higher
priced at some times during the year and lower priced at
other times. The result is a concept that combines both the
supply and demand analysis of fundamental analysis and
the timing value of trend following. It’s another way to
play the markets if you make sure that there is a valid
reason for any seasonal tendencies that you find.
. Kevin Thomas, a floor trader on the LIFFE exchange,
talked about spreading. The advantage of spreading is that
you are trading relationships between products instead of
the products themselves. As a result, new opportunities are
available which could not come to you any other way.
Kevin gives some wonderful examples of spreads in his
discussion.
. Arbitrage, presented by Ray Kelly in a very humorous and
artful way, is looking for opportunities that have a very
narrow window of opportunity While the window is open,
the opportunity is like “free money.” However, sooner or
later the window shuts and then the arb player must find
new opportunities. Ray gives many examples of such
windows and gives some humorous stories of his
frustrations in trying to capture some of them.
* Neural networks represent somewhat of a technology,
rather than a concept. Computers can be trained to make
predictions, as expert Louis Mendelsohn showed us. If that
prediction is then combined with some other trading
technique, as Mendelsohn suggests, you could have some
interesting trading. However, the emphasis of the neural
network, in my opinion, must be on the areas that make
people money-such as exits and position sizing-not on
the areas that excite people’s biases.
. The final concept presented was a synopsis of many-there
is an order to the markets. There are many theories that
claim to understand some magic order to the markets.
There are three types of order concepts: (1) based upon
waves of human emotion, (2) based upon large physical
events influencing human behavior, and (3) based upon
mathematical order. Many of them may have little or no

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

validity, and yet all of them can be traded profitably-just
as random entry can be traded profitably. In this last
discussion, you learned how to take one of the order
concepts (if one of them appeals to you) and use it to your
advantage. Such concepts are probably excellent for people
who feel that they must know how markets work before
they can commit themselves to trade.

NOTES
1. Expectancy will be discussed extensively in the next chapter. It is one
of the most important topics that you need to understand as a trader
or investor.
2. The CFTC requires that commodity trading advisors include a
statement in their advertisements and disclosure documents that
says that past results do not reflect upon future results.
3. Tom Basso can be reached by e-mail at tom@trendstat.com.
4. You can reach Chuck LeBeau at 310-791-2182.
5. I don’t want to get off on a tangent discussing how to make life’s
decisions; that’s a subject more suitable to one of Dr. Tharp’s
enjoyable seminars. The point is that you can easily and successfully
combine fundamental and technical analysis in your trading.
6. See the Recommended Readings in Appendix I.
7. Moore Research Center, Inc., can be reached at l-800-927-7257.
8. An old correlation that is right better than 80 percent of the time says
that if an old AFL team (Denver being one) wins the Super Bowl,
then the market will go down. If an old NFL team wins, then the
market will go up. Obviously, an old AFL team won the 1998 Super
Bowl and you also know how much the market has gone up as of
May 1,1998.
9. John Murphy, Intcr~wket Technical Analysis (New York: Wiley, 1986).
10. You can reach Ray Kelly at l-909-698-4088 or at his web page at
htto://www.traderoasis.com.
11. See the Recommended Readings &Appendix I.
12. Mr. Mendelsohn is president and chief executive officer of Market
Technologies Corporation (formerly Mendelsohn Enterprises, Inc.)
in Wesley Chapel, Florida. He can be reached by e-mail at
Predict@ProfitTaker.com
or by phone at 800-732-5407.

C H A P T E R 5 Selecting a Concept That Works

129

1 3 . This information came from an lntemet posting by Greg Meadors and
by Eric Gatey. The dates of the worst storms were March 23, 1940,
August 4,1941, September 18,1941, October 2,1942, February 7,1944,
March 27, 1945, September 23,1957, April 24,1960, July 15, 1960,
August 30,1960, November 12,1960, April 14,1961, and September
22,1963. See httD://ww~.minds~rine.com/edee/home.htm.
14. I haven’t included a number of concepts, such as scalping, statistical
trading, counter trend following, hedging, etc., simply because
doing so would turn this chapter into a lot more than it was
intended to be.

CHAPTER 6

Understanding Expectancy and
Other Keys to Trading Success

He who thinks he knows, doesn’t know. He who knows that he
doesn’t know, knows.
La” i-se
When I told one of my clients that I was going to write a chapter in
this book about expectancy, his response was, “Oh, no, knowing
about that is one of our edges.” However, I don’t think expectancy
is a trade secret. In fact, in my opinion, there are six key variables
that must be included in a successful trading system. None of these
variables are what most people would call “trade secrets.” Before
we go into the details of expectancy, let us explore these six variables that have such large effects on the profits and losses of a
trader or investor.
THE SIX KEYS TO INVESTMENT SUCCESS
This chapter is probably the most difficult to understand in the
book. The material is complex, but it is critically important if you
want real success as a trader or investor! In order to simplify the
material as much as possible, I have elected~to repeat it through different metaphors many different times. You only have to “get it”
once, however, to really understand the incredible benefits these
variables can unleash for you.

Let’s think about trading or investing in terms of the following variables:
1. Reliability, or what percentage of time you make money.
For example, if you made 10 stock trades and made money on 6 of
them, then your reliability is 60 percent. It’s the number of winning
trades you make divided by the total number of trades. Sometimes,
reliability is called the “hit rate.” Basically, it is the percentage of
time you get to be “right” in your system.
2. The relative size of your profits compared with your
losses when traded at the smallest possible level (i.e., one share of
stock or one futures contract). For example, the relative size of your
profits and your losses would be the same if you lost $1 per share
on losing trades and made $1 per share on winning trades.
However, the relative size would be quite different if you made $10
per share on winning trades and only lost $1 per share on losing
trades. It would now be 10 to 1.
You can get a good idea of the relative size of your profits to
your losses by taking the average size of your winning trades and
comparing that with the average size of your losing trades. This
will give you a rough idea of relative size. However, you might
have one giant profit and many small losses, so this is not an exact
measure.
A more exact measure would be to think of your gains as multiples of the initial risk (R) that you took in the trade. Thus, your
gains might be a whole series of R multiples. For example, let’s say
you are willing to risk $500 on a trade (i.e., you’ll get out immediately if you have a $500 loss so that it doesn’t get any bigger). Your
basic risk is $500. Thus, a $1,000 gain is a 2-R multiple and a $5,000
gain is a 10-R multiple. And if by some misfortune, you have a
$1,000 loss, then you’ll have a 2-R loss. You’ll learn more about R
multiples later in this chapter.
3. Your cost of making an investment or trade. This is the
destructive force on your account size whenever you trade due to
execution costs and brokerage commissions. Quite often, people
simply include these costs when figuring the average gain or the
average loss. However, it is also wise to be aware of just how big
these costs are for you.
4. How often you get the opportunity to trade. Now imagine

1.32

PART 2

Conceptualization of Your System

holding the first three variables constant. Their combined effect
depends upon how often you trade. Let’s say’the combined effect
of the first three variables is that you make 20 cents per dollar
risked. That means that if you make 100 trades, each risking $100,
you will end up with a total profit of $2,000.’ However, now imagine that it takes one day to make 100 trades. You’d make $2,000 per
day. Now compare that with a system that makes 100 trades each
year-you’d only make $2,000 per year trading. The opportunity
factor makes a big difference.
5. The size of your trading or investing capital. The effect of
the first four variables upon your account depends significantly
upon the size of your account. For example, even the cost of trading will have a significant effect on a $1,000 account. If it costs $100
to trade, then you would take a 10 percent hit on each trade before
you’d make a profit. You’d have to average more than 10 percent
profit per trade just to cover the cost of trading. However, the
impact of the same $100 in costs becomes insignificant if you have
a million dollar account.
6. Your position-sizing model or how many units you trade
at one time (i.e., 1 share of stock versus 10,000 shares of stock).
Obviously, the amount you win or lose per share is multiplied by
the number of shares traded.
Different trades probably will have different risk levels, or different Rs. Thus, a 1-R loss probably will not be the same for trade X
as for trade Y. Your reaction might be to say, “What good is the concept of R if it varies all over the place?” The value comes in through
position sizing. For example, if you risk a constant percentage of
your equity, like 1 percent, then you will be equating each 1-R risk.
If you have $100,000, then you would only take a $1,000 risk (i.e., 1
percent) on each position. Thus, if 1 R is a single dollar on one trade,
you would purchase 1,000 shares. If 1 R was $10 on another trade,
then you would purchase 100 shares. In each case, your 1-R risk
would be a constant, representing 1 percent of your equity. We’ll be
discussing position sizing in much more detail later in this book.
Would you want to focus on just one of those six variables? Or
do you think that all six of them are equally important? When I ask
the question in that manner, you probably agree that all six variables are important.

However, if you were to devote all your energy to focusing on
just one of those variables, which one would it be? Perhaps you
think this question is a little naive since all of them are important.
Nevertheless, there is a reason behind this question, so write your
answer in the space provided.
ANSWER:
The reason I asked you to focus on one item is because most
traders and investors often only focus on one of the six items in
their day-to-day activity. Their focus tends to be on the need to be
right. People are obsessed with it to the exclusion of all else. Yet if
all six components are important to success, you can begin to
understand how nayve it can be to just focus on being right.
The first four variables are part of the topic I call expectancy.
They are the primary focus of this chapter. The last two variables
are part of what I call money management or position sizing. We’ll
touch upon position sizing in this chapter, and we’ll focus on it in
detail in Chapter 12.

THESNOWFIGHTMETAPHORZ
To illustrate the importance of all six variables, let me guide you
through a metaphor that might give you a different perspective
from one of just thinking about money and systems. Imagine that
you are hiding behind a large wall of snow. Someone is throwing
snowballs at your wall, and your objective is to keep your wall as
large as possible for maximum protection.
Thus, the metaphor immediately indicates that the size of the
wall is a very significant variable. If the wall is too small, you
couldn’t avoid getting hit. But if the wall is massive, then you are
probably not going to get hit. Variable 6, the size of your initial
equity, is a little like the size of the wall. In fact, you might consider
your starting capital to be a wall of money that protects you. The
more money you have, assuming the other variables stay the same,
the more protection you will have.
Now imagine that the person throwing snowballs at you has
two different kinds of snowballs-white snowballs and black

snowballs. White snowballs are a little like winning trades. They
simply stick to the wall of snow and increase its size. Now imagine
the impact of having a lot of white snowballs thrown at you. They
would simply build up the wall. It would get bigger and bigger and
you would have more protection.
Imagine that black snowballs dissolve snow and make a hole
in the wall equivalent to their size. You might think of black snowballs as being “antisnow.” Thus, if a lot of black snowballs were
thrown at the wall, it would soon disappear or at least have a lot of
holes in it. Black snowballs are a lot like losing trades-they chip
away at your wall of security.
Variable 1, how often you are right, is a little like focusing on
the percentage of white snowballs. You would naturally want all
the snowballs coming to your wall to be white and add to your
wall. It’s probably easy for you to see how the people who don’t
focus on the big picture might devote all their attention to making
as many snowballs as possible be white.
But let’s consider the relative size of the two kinds of snowballs. How big are the white and black snowballs relative to each
other? For example, imagine that the white snowballs are the size
of golf balls, while the black snowballs are like 6-foot-diameter
boulders. If that were the case, it would probably only take one
black snowball to break down the wall-even if white snowballs
were being thrown at the wall all day. On the other hand, if the
white snowball was the size of a 6-foot boulder, then one snowball
each day would probably build up the wall enough to protect you
from a continual bombardment of black snowballs the size of golf
balls. The relative size of the two kinds of snowballs is equivalent
to variable 2 in our model-the relative size of profits and losses. I
hope that by visualizing the snow fight metaphor you can understand the importance of variable 2.
Variable 3, the cost of trades, is a little like assuming that each
snowball has a slight destructive effect on the wall-regardless of
whether it is white or black. Each white snowball has a slight
destructive effect on the wall, that is, less, one hopes, than its effect
in building up the wall. Similarly each black snowball destroys a
little of the wall just by hitting it, and this simply adds to the normal destructive effect of black snow upon the wall. Clearly, the size
