
96

Figure 7.1 U.S. Dollar (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Figure 7.2 A bullish pattern.

97
If we buy on any day but Thursday, a day we know tends to see selling pressures spilling over into
Friday, we make a little less, $50,037 but bump our average profit per trade up to $555 and increase
accuracy to 86 percent with drawdown going from $8,000 to $6,000. These results use a $2,000 stop to
exit or the first profitable opening exit rule.
We can use this same pattern for setting up trading opportunities in the Bond market as well. This
pattern is so powerful that it can be used in all markets as a stand-alone trading formation, but
stacked-deck Larry still prefers to have additional confirmation to make certain I use only the best of the
best trades. Figure 7.4 shows the results of taking all outside day down closes followed by a lower
opening the next day in Bonds. To get out of the trade, we will take a $1,500 loss or exit on the first
profitable opening. Few traders realize that such a mechanical approach to trading can be so good, we
score an 82 percent accuracy and $212 average profit per trade on the 57 occurrences since 1990.
Can we make this a better performing pattern? You bet. Got any ideas how? You should by now, in
fact, you are probably wondering whether the pattern is better on some days of the week than others. It is.
If we take the trade on any day but Thursday, just as in the previous S&P results, we skyrocket the
accuracy to 90 percent and make $17,245 on 41 trades for an average profit per trade of $420 (see Figure
7.5). Folks, it doesn't get much better than this.

Figure 7.3 Using the first profitable opening exit rule.

98

Figure 7.4 All outside day down closes.

The problem is these outside day patterns do not occur as often as we would like! The next time you
see an outside day with a down close lower than the previous day, don't get scared, get ready to buy!
Time for another bullish looking pattern in the S&P 500. We will now look for any day that closes
above the previous day's high and is preceded by two consecutive up closes, making it the third up day in a
row (see Figure 7.5). Such seemingly strong showings of strength have been known to lure the public into
buying.

Figure 7.5 Trade on any day but Thursday.

99

Figure 7.6 A close that is above the day's high.
For example, checking this pattern from 1986 to 1998 in the S&P 500, there were 25 occurrences of
this pattern on Tuesday setting up sells for Wednesday. Of these, 19 were winners, netting $21,487. In the
Bond market, the same pattern set up 28 trades on Thursday, to sell on Friday, making $13,303 which
challenges the random walk professors with a thoughtprovoking 89 percent accuracy. The Bond test was on
data from 1989 to August 1998! A $1,500 stop was used in Bonds, $2,000 in the S&P 500.
For both markets, we used the simple bailout exit I will teach later. There are several major short-term
patterns like this that I take advantage of in my trading. The search is on each day to see what the current
pattern foretells. I have some stock patterns that I have used for years, but am always on the lookout for new
ones.

The Questions to Ask
Patterns work. I know. I have cataloged hundreds of them over the years and suggest you do the
same starting with the ones I am providing here. It is best to think about why these patterns work. What do
they represent? Can I find the pattern at work in all markets? Does the trading day of the week matter?

100
Those are my stock questions, but the underlying germ of truth I am looking for is some visual
pattern that emotionally sucks the public into buying or selling at just the wrong time ... for them ... and right
time for me. Understanding emotions as reflected on charts is the key to "chart reading." "Trader Rick," a
recent seminar attendee, E-mailed me this note as I was writing this section. Read it to understand what to
look for and reflect on yourself at the same time:
Would you like yet another story that proves you should not be an emotional trader? Well here goes,
you'll find it interesting.
Last weekend I decided to place a buy stop in May Copper at 77.80, first thing Monday morning.
Shortly after Copper opened I called my broker (unfortunately my regular broker does not come in until
around 8 A.M.) and asked, "What's Copper called this morning?" He replied, "I don't follow Copper, I really
don't know, I'd have to look it up. . ." (Oh brother, never mind).
"OK," I said, "what's the last price?" and was told it was trading at 77.00 down from 77.90, this told
me price had already gone above my stop so I thought I'd wait for a pullback.
I called back later, price was at 77.30. Again, I did nothing. Why you ask? I really don't know, except I
thought I'd "watch the market" to see what 1 should do. The funny thing is I now know if it went higher I
would have waited for a pullback, if it went lower I would have been afraid to buy. Up or down would scare
me out, and that's just what happened! What would I have "seen" anyway, handwriting from God?
Later in the day I called back, now Copper was at 80.30. "Damn ... OK, buy one at the market." Now I
knew Copper was really hot, and buying it violated everything you had taught us that weekend. But
something, almost a mysterious force, "pushed" me into the trade. I bought pretty much at the high of the
day, because I was upset I bad not gotten in earlier.
The very next day Copper began a pullback, fortunately it eventually went higher, but it cost me $500.
Dumb, dumb, dumb. Haven't I learned anything yet? Yeah, I have, it's simply this, Plan your trades and don't
deviate, don't let emotions push your over the cliff at just the wrong time.
Rick's comments kind of reminded me of fishing, how I'll toss a worm in and wiggle it just a little, no
bite, then a little more, still no bites, then just a little twitch and ... Blam! I've hooked a nice fish. The market
seems to hook us just like a fish with those little wiggles until we just can't resist and fall for it; hook, line,
and sinker. The problem is that this is not catch and release, it is bite and lose, no more "forced feeding
frenzies" for me! The next time old man greed taps you on the shoulder or your hear an emotional call luring
you to the bait ... don't bite!

101

My Smash Day Patterns
The siren song of greed is what keeps the public on the losing side of the ledger in this business. That
is bad for them but good for us if we can figure out what it is that gets them to bite, what sucks them into
wrong decisions. One such "event" is what I have labeled smash day reversals. These are days where the
market has a major break, up or down, this violent action pulls the public in to the foray.
There are two types of smash days. The first is pretty obvious. A "smash day buy setup" consists of a
day that closes lower than the previous day's low, a "naked close" is what Joe Stowell, who's got a great
eye for charts, calls these. Such days may take out the previous 3 to 8 days' lows as well. To the chartist,
the public, or professional technical analyst, this looks like a breakout to the downside, thus the extreme
selling brings them to the table.
Sometimes they are right, but usually dead wrong if the market immediately reverses itself.
A smash day sell setup is just the opposite (see Figure 7.7). Here what you will be looking for is a day
that closes above the prior day's high and most likely "breaks" out to the upside to close above a trading
range. This is the twitching worm that causes the public to leap before they look. The illustration shows
how this usually looks. What you have here are the buy and sell setups.

Figure 7.7 A smash day sell setup.

102
As mentioned, sometimes this is a valid break. However, if the very next day price moves opposite the
smash day and trades above the high of a down close smash day you have great buy signal. By the same
token, a smash day up, one of those strong closes above the prior day's high, alerts us to sell signal if the
very next day price trades to the smash day's low.
The phenomenon is that there is an immediate reversal the very next day, which means the public
(sellers on the down close, buyers on the up close) are now in a world of hurt; their envisioned breakout has
failed! They swallowed the hook, again, and now price responds with a reversal giving us an excellent entry.
That is the pattern and the rationale, the reason it should work. I am a firm believer that when what "should
happen in the market doesn't" we have powerful evidence to take a trade in alignment with the new
information.
I have selected a few examples of this pattern at work (Figures 7.8 and 7.9). Once we review the other
type of smash day reversal, I will explain how I use this pattern.
My second smash day reversal (Figure 7.10) is a bit more difficult to identify but works on the same
principle of the market not following through on one day's action and reversing the very next day. The
pattern you will be looking for, to establish a buy setup, will be a day that has an up close, not a naked down
close. But, and this is the key or secret to the pattern, the day's close will be in the lower 25 percent of the up
day's range and will also be closing below the opening of the day in the very best patterns. I call this a
"hidden smash day" because of the up close.

Figure 7.8 Smash day pattern at work.

103

Figure 7.9 Another smash day pattern example.

What has happened on these days is that price has either opened much higher and then closed up for
the day but way off the highs, or opened a little higher, rallied way up and then failed to hold the day's
gains. Sure, it closed up a little for the day but way below the high. The buyers got smashed, in either
pattern, and chartists will now come in looking for the kill.
Only to be killed themselves-if the next day-price rallies back and takes out this smash day high. Again
we see the pattern of a market failure immediately reversed the very next day. This is a most bullish set of

Figure 7.10 A hidden smash day buy.

104

Figure 7.11 A hidden smash day sell.

events and calls for going long-if the stage has been set for a rally by our background tools such as
TDW TDM
Market relationships, overbought/oversold, and trend.
A hidden smash day sell is just the opposite. Look for a down close that is in the upper 25 percent of the day's
range and above the open of the day. Our entry comes when price falls below the hidden smash day's low the
very next day indicating the rally has failed. A quick look at Figure 7.11 should establish what this pattern
looks like.

How to Use Smash Day Patterns
There are two ways to use these patterns. Let's first look at the pattern in sharp up and downtrends,
trends you wish You were in or where you want to add a position. In such tight trend up moves the
appearance of a smash down day, hidden or not, sets up our buy for the following day and is precise evidence
the trend is intact and ready for traders to have another go at it. another race to the sun.
In a downtrend, the reverse situation will be found to produce excellent indications of when to get
back aboard the decline. Here you will be looking for either the naked up close day or a down day that
closes in the top of its range. If the very next day prices smash below that day's low. it is time to get short.

105
The examples shown here should help you understand the importance of this technique.
The other way I like to use these smash day setups is to look for a market that has been in a choppy trading
range. I then note a smash day and act accordingly once the high or low of the smash day is penetrated. My
thinking is that we will probably see a breakout of the congestion if the smash day is immediately reversed.
Such action is suggestive of a market that moved to where all the stops were, and elected all the "breakout
babies" who had orders there. The breakout is a magnet for the public to take action and they do. What kills
them is the immediate reversal the very next day. They cannot believe their “Iuck" and decide to hold on
despite the reversal; a few days later, they pitch their positions adding fuel to the move we hooked up with
thanks to the smash day pattern.
Confucius must have been a chartist when he said that one picture (one chart) is worth a thousand words. I
have marked off examples of the smash day pattern in trading ranges for your study. These appear as Figures
7.12 through 7.17.

Figure 7.12 Comex Silver (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

106

107

108

Figure 7.17 CBT Wheat (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

Specialists' Trap
Here is a pattern that uses the smash day idea in yet another fashion. This idea comes from
Richard Wyckoff who authored a course on stock trading in the 1930s. I have a good degree of affinity for
work, because in 1966 and 1967, I worked right across from the library in Carmel, California, where
Wyckoff wrote much of the material that in later years he donated to the library. As fate would have it, I
stumbled on his donation on my lunch hour one day and there after broke bread with his writings for the next
year.
The Wyckoff concept is that markets are "manipulated" perhaps not by a manipulator, as you would
think, but more by a collective consciousness, the great anamorphic "them" or "they." This group of
"them," Wycoff teaches, moves the market to draw the public into the game at the wrong times. The
specialists on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, who keep book on stocks, have often been accused
of "running" and rigging prices to trap the public, hence my, term "specialists' trap," but I do not assign any,
manipulation to them, only to a much more cosmic notion of price movement. I know specialists: one, Bill
Abhrams, has been a friend for 15 vears and has convincingly proven to me they do not rig stock prices.

109
The selling "trap" consists of a nice uptrending market that moves sideways in a box or congestion for 5 to
10 days, then breaks out to the upside with a naked close above the entire trading range. The true low of the
breakout day then becomes a critical point. If it is broken below, or taken out in the next 1 to 3 days, there is
a great probability the upside breakout was false and the public bought a bill of goods. They were trapped
into an emotional buy, and the distributors of stocks or commodities most likely unloaded, on strength, to the
masses.
A specialists' buy trap is just the opposite. Look for a downtrending market that stabilizes sideways for
5 to 10 days, then breaks out to the downside, with a naked close lower than all the daily lows of the trading
range. In theory, you would think this would plummet prices much lower. The truth is it usually does. But,
if a snapback takes place, lifting price above the true high of the break day, a market reversal has most
likely occurred. All the sell stops below the market were triggered; the public started the breakdown and is
now afraid to buy the trend reversal.
I am showing a few actual examples for your observation (Figures 7.18-7.25). The last chart is that of
Exxon, a stock.

Figure 7.18 Comex Gold (daily bars). Graphed by the "Navigator"
(Genesis Financial Data Services).

110

111

112

113

A Vital Note-This Works on Shorter Time Frames as Well
Over the years, I have seen many successful trades using these smash day and traps on 5-minute,
30-minute, and hourly price charts of market activity. You very short-term traders will want to add this to
your intraday arsenal of trading techniques. These patterns represent excellent points of entry for short-term
traders. The key, though, is to make certain you have something else backing the trade, something
suggestive of the action you are taking, otherwise you are just using price to predict price. Your best trades
will come from loading the trade with several qualifiers, not just a price structure.

Oops! This Is Not a Mistake
If there is any mistake to the pattern I am about to reveal, it is my mistake to go public with this
pattern. It is the most reliable of all short-term patterns I have researched and traded. Numerous other
authors and system developers have incorporated it in their work. A few (e.g., the highly talented Linda
Bradford

114
Ratschke; Bruce Babcock, the critic's critic; and Jake Bernstein) have been honorable enough to give me
credit, whereas many more fail to or even claim credit for this pattern that I first taught to my followers in
1978.
The pattern is based on an overemotional response, then a quick reversal of the concomitant
overreaction of price. The overreaction is a large gap in price from last night's close to the next morning's
opening. The precise overreaction we are looking for to give us a buy signal is an opening that is below the
previous day's low. Such a rare occurrence indicates a potential market reversal. The setup is the extreme
selling that causes people to panic with a rush of selling as price opens, so much so that price opens less than
the prior day's range. This is a most unusual occurrence as price almost always opens within the prior day's
range.
That is the setup. The entry comes when, following the lower open, price then rallies back to the
previous day's low. If the market can muster up enough strength to do that, most likely, the selling pressures
have been abated and a sharp market rally will follow.
As you might suspect, a sell is just the opposite. You will be looking for an open greater than the prior day's
high. The emotional response or setup is a huge amount of buying right on the open that causes a large gap,
driving price above the prior high. Our entry then comes from price falling back to the prior high, telling us
the gap could not hold, giving us a strong shortterm suggestion of lower prices to come.
The name Oops! comes from the price action as the public pitches their positions and sells short on the
opening based on news, charts, and the like. For a moment, they appear to be on the right track, but about the
time price rallies back to the prior day's low, their broker calls to tell them price is moving against them
usually saying something like, "Oops! We may have done the wrong thing [again], price is coming back
pretty strong. Do you want to stay short?"
By the time the collective public makes up their mind to now get out of the losing trade, price is above
yesterday's low and their new buying or short covering adds momentum to the rally we positioned ourselves
for. Figures 7.26 and 7.27 show how the Oops! signals will appear.
Okay, now let's see how we might use this pattern as short-term traders. We can start with taking buy
signals in the S&P 500 on any day of the week except Wednesday or Thursday, the days of the week we
know are most apt to lead to declines (see Figure 7.28). The results speak more loudly than anything I might
say about this pattern: the 82 percent plus accuracy, $42,687 of profits, and a very large average profit per
trade of $438 are quite remarkable considering the trade usually lasts 11/2 days. That is, we buy today and
are out on the opening tomorrow. The stop was a flat $2,000 loss. You may want to read about stops and
exits (Chapter 11) to improve on what I am presenting here.

115

Figure 7.26 The Oops! buy signal.

Figure 7.27 The Oops! sell signal.

116

Figure 7.28 The Oops! pattern at work.

How about the Bond market? Here we will take long trades any day of the week except Wednesday
and a stop-loss of $1,800 from the point of entry. Our exit is the bailout technique, soon to be discussed. As
shown in Figure 7.29, the results here sure blow the random walk academicians out of the water and off
their ivory towers with 86 percent accuracy, 527,875 profits, and a very nice average profit per trade of
$201, after commissions of $50.
On the sell side, the rules are to sell on Wednesday if our Oops! opening gap and failure occur. Since
1990, there have been 55 trades with 31 winners netting $9,875 using a closer $1,000 stop and 4-day bailout

Figure 7.29 Using Oops! on bond trades.

117

Figure 7.30 The results of the Oops! technique.

exit. In the S&Ps, the best day to sell has been Thursday, which shows 78 percent winners and $14,200 of
profits. Check out the results as shown here to solidify the value of this technique (Figures 7.30 and 7.31).
The most value will come, not from a mechanical rote approach to trading, but from using this
technique with some intelligence or layered on top of a setup market. Here is one such example of this type
of thinking. The results in Figure 7.32 are derived from taking my Oops! buy signals in the

Figure 7.31 More results with the Oops! technique.

118

Figure 7.32 Buying on any day but Thursdays with the Oops! technique.

Bonds on any day but Thursday if Friday's 9-day moving average is less than Thursday's. The entry is Oops!
as taught. The exit is the close on the first profitable opening after 3 days in the trade: 81 percent of these
trades made money, $24,625, in fact. Check out the high average profit per trade of $373. On the sell side,
the results reflect taking Oops! sell signals on Wednesday if the 9-day average is greater on Tuesday than
Monday, which reflects an overbought market. These signals have been 79 percent accurate netting $13,406,
and a surprising $394 profit per trade-not bad for a short-term trade, using the same rules as above for stop
and exit as on the long trade (see Figure 7.33).

Figure 7.33 Oops! sells on Wednesday.

119

S&P Oops! Trading
The same idea meets with success in trading the S&P; here the best buy days, given the oversold
criteria as established by the 9-day trend, are Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday. This combination shows 81
percent accuracy and $22,650 of profits with an average profit, after losses, of $456, a remarkable feat for
getting in and out the same day (see Figure 7.34). The idea of the. 9-day moving average to set up the trade
is based on work by Joe Krutsinger, a protege of mine and avid system developer.
The best sell in this market, using the 9-day overbought technique is to take sells on Wednesday to
make $18,962 with 89 percent accuracy on 35 trades (see Figure 7.35). The average profit of $486 per
trade drives home the validity of the approach.
Now let's look at another way of using our Oops! entries in the S&P 500. For years, researchers have
noted that stock prices tend to rally around the first of the month. This sets up a perfect Oops! trade. Should
this pattern occur at the end of the month, and trading day after the 17th trading day of the month, our
pattern and the monthly influence come together. These are good trades!
Knowing this end of the month rally spills into the next month, I tested taking all Oops! in Bonds after
the first TDM through the 5th. The results are equally impressive. This combination setup is one of the
most powerful shortterm trades you will find to consistently appear, month in and month out.
Some observers may suggest we are curve-fitting things here by taking the Oops! signals only during
a limited window of opportunity.
