
Gallacher’s Fundamental Trading
Gallacher’s system, as you will recall from Chapter 8, has you
entering the market (1) when fundamental setups are in place and
(2) when the market makes a new lo-day high (i.e., a lo-day channel breakout). The system is a reversal system-so it is always in
the market. It essentially closes out the position (and reenters in the
opposite direction) when the IO-day low is breached (i.e., a lo-day
channel breakout).
However, remember that Gallacher only takes positions in the
direction of the fundamentals. Consequently, unless the fundamentals change dramatically, he will only exit a long position (i.e.,
not reverse it) on a lo-day low, and he will only exit a short position (i.e., not reverse it) on a lo-day high. This is a very simple exit
that probably won’t get you into a !ot of trouble. However, my
guess is that this system could be improved dramatically with
more sophisticated exits.
Ken Roberts’ l-2-3 Methodology
Ken Roberts’ profit-taking approach, in my opinion, is very subjective. It amounts to a consolidation trailing stop approach. If Roberts’
method is correct and has gotten one into a long-term move, then
Roberts would simply recommend that one raise one’s stop and
place it below (or above) a new consolidation once it is formed.
This is an old trend-following approach that worked exceptionally well in the 1970s. Its main drawback is that one may give
back a lot of profits. It still will work now, but Roberts’ methodology would probably work better with many of the exits discussed
in this chapter. I would particularly recommend a multiple-exit
strategy.
NOTES
1. These are hypothetical numbers and not necessarily a recommended
exit for IBM. You need exits that meet your own criteria and that you
test.
2. Once again this points out the importance of deep discount
commissions.
3. Your loss will never be more than 1-R unless the market gets away
from you, which is quite probable from time to time.

CHAPTER

11

CHAPTER 11 The Opportunity and Cost Factors

271

The Opportunity and Cost Factors
Relative Size of Profits to Loses

Reliability of Your Trading System
Figure 11-1 Expectancy illustrated as a txro-dmwnsional

figure relating the
reliability of your system to the relative xe of profits and losses. It 1s hoped
that the area is a large positive number,

You have the essence of trading system design in the first 10 chapters of this book. Most people would be happy with just the material so far, because it covers the areas that most people give all their
focus to. But the two most important areas involving making
money in the market still remain--the opportunity factor (along
with the cost per opportunity) and the position-sizing factor.
The material we’ve covered to this point is really about
expectancy-how to create the best possible expectancy. It’s about
how to obtain the most money per trade per dollar risked. Using
our snow fight metaphor from Chapter 6, we’ve shown you how to
make sure that the total volume of “white” or winning snow arriving at any given time (on the average) is larger than the total volume of “black” or losing snow.
Figure 11-l shows one possible way of illustrating expectancy.
Basically you have created a two-dimensional diagram. The x-axis
refers to the reliability of trading-the percentage winning trades.
The y-axis refers to the size of the average reward compared with
the average risk-how big are your average winning compared
with your average losing trades?
SEVERAL APPROACHES TO TAKE
If you’ve done a great job with the material in the first 10 chapters,
you should be able to come up with a system that has a positive
270

expectancy. You might take any number of routes to get to that system. Here are some possible examples.
Long-Term Trend Following with a Large R-Multiple Objective
Let’s say that you decide you want to be a long-term trend follower
and go for big-R-multiple trades. You decide to use a 40-day channel breakout as a setup. You then enter after a retracement, putting
your stop just below the retracement. You have an initial profit
objective of at least a 10-X profit. This means that either you get
stopped out at a loss or you reach your 10-R profit. Once your 10-R
profit is attained, you then have a 30 percent retracement stopmeaning that you are now willing to give back 30 percent of your
profit before you’ll get out.
This type of trading means that a 1-R risk is very small for you.
It means that you’ll be stopped out frequently (i.e., have lots of
losses), but that your gains will usually be 20-R multiples or bigger.
When you test your system, you find that you make money on 18
percent of your trades, but that your average gain is about 23 times
the size of your average loss. If you put these values into Formula
6-1, it gives you a positive expectancy of $3.32 per dollar ril;kedan excellent expectancy.
After transaction costs are taken into consideration, you find

PART 3

272

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

that your expectancy drops down to $2.90 per dollar risked. You
decide that this level is great. However, the critical question that
now remains is, how often will you get one of the 23-R profits? Will
it come once a year or once a week?
The Standard Long-Term

Trend Follower with a 40 Percent Reliability
and 2:l Reward to Risk Ratio

Others might decide that they cannot tolerate the number of losses
generated by the high-R-multiple approach just described. Instead,
they decide to take more of a standard trend-following approach to
the market. They decide to use an adaptive moving average as an
entry and a three-times-volatility trailing stop-both to protect
one’s initial capital and to serve as a profit-taking exit.
In this case, your initial risk is much greater because it is three
times the average daily range in prices. However, you discover
after a lot of testing that your average loss is only 0.5-R. You also
discover that your average gain is 2.4-R and that you make money
on about 44 percent of your trades. When you work out your
expectancy using Formula 6-1, you discover that your expectancy
is a respectable 77.6 cents per dollar risked. And after transaction
costs, you determine that your expectancy is more like 63 cents per
dollar risked.
Again, you now have a critical question to answer. How often
will you be able to trade this system, and will you be satisfied with
those results?
High-Probability, Low R-Multiple Trading
You’ve decided that you really cannot tolerate the possibility of
long losing streaks. Consequently, you need to be “right” at least 60
percent of the time. Furthermore, you are willing to sacrifice the
size of your profits in order to be correct more often.
As a result, you decide to use a volatility breakout for an entry.
You know that when you get a large move, it’s likely to continue for
a while. You decide that when the market moves either up or down
by 0.7 times the average true range of the last 5 days, you’ll enter.
You also test a lot of such~ entries and notice that the maximum
adverse excursion against you is seldom more than 0.4 times the

CHAPTER 11

The Opportunity and Cost Factors

273

average true range. As a result, you decide to use that as your initial stop. You also are perfectly happy with 0.6 times the average
true range as a profit objective, because you determine that that
objective is reached at least 60 percent of the time. In other words,
either you get out at your stop with a loss or you take your profit
objective.
When you plug these numbers into Formula 6-1, you determine that you have an expectancy of 50 cents per dollar risked.
However, when you add in transaction costs, the number reduces
to 30 cents per dollar risked.
The question you must now ask is can you survive with only
a 30 cent expectancy? Do you generate enough trades, compared
with the long-term trend followers, to compete with them for
investment profits?
The Market Maker Who Gets the Bid-Ask Edge on Bach Trade,
But Occasionally Gets Swept Along by the Market

Our last trader, who represents an extreme, is the market maker.
This person tries to get the bid-ask spread on every trade that
comes along. Let’s say that the bid-ask spread represents a gain of
about 8 cents per trade and that our trader gets it about 90 percent
of the time. Another 5 percent of his trades are small losses of about
8 cents per trade. However, the last 5 percent of his trades represents the big losses (for him) that he sometimes needs to take when
he gets swept along by the market. These losses might amount to
$1 per trade.
When our last trader applies these data to the expectancy formula, he arrives at a figure of about 1.8 cents per dollar risked.
After transaction costs, he clears about 1.2 cents per dollar risked.
How does this particular person make a living? He probably does
not have much chance compared with the person who knows how
to make more than a dollar for every dollar risked. Or does he?
FACTORING IN OPPORTUNITY
Table 11-l shows our four traders with their various expectancies.
Initially, the trader with the largest expectancy seems clearly to be
the trader that one would expect to have the most success. Indeed,

PART 3 Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

CHAPTER 11 The Opportunity and Cost Factors

TABLE 11-l

Expectancy, Cost, and Opportunity Factors for Our Four Traders
Trader 1

Trader 2

Trader 3

Trader 4

Expeclancy

$3.32

$0.776

$0.50

50.018

Alter costs
Opportunity

$2.90

$0.630

$0.30

50.012

0.05

0.5

5

500

“olume.

$0.145

50.315

$0.15

56.00

$/day

this trader’s expectancy is far better than that of most long-term
trend follow&s, so we would expect him to have a great track
record. However, as we’ve shown previously, the opportunity factor clearly changes the element of expectancy. This is also illustrated
in Table 11-l in the dollar volume generated each day by the system.
Let’s say that trader 1 generates one trade on the average every
20 days. Trader 2 gets a trading opportunity every other day, while
traders 3 and 4 generate 5 and 500 trades per day, respectively
With this perspective in mind, trader 1 and trader 3 seem to
generate about an equal volume of potential profit each dayalthough trader 3 is less likely to have extensive drawdown periods.
However, the total advantage clearly belongs to the market maker.
The market maker, if he is smart, should seldom have a losing day.
One of the people in my supertrader program is a floor trader.
He starts each year with $100,000 in trading capital with the goal of
making a living plus as much money as he can. Just because of his
wisdom and knowledge of his edge, he was able to make $1.7 million in trading capital in just over 3 months in 1997. Is that an edge?’
Are you beginning to understand how profits are a function of
the expectancy times the opportunity? The result amounts to a dollar volume in expectancy generated each day That dollar volume
is the most important factor in determining how much money you
will make on a daily basis.
Figure 11-2 is the expectancy figure with opportunity as a
third dimension. What you now have, as illustrated in the diagram,
is a three-dimensional solid equaling the dollar volume generated
by your trading system each day. The new dimension, in dark gray,

Figure 11-2 Expectancy plus opportunity
becomes three-dimensional

is the dimension of opportunity. The resulting profits no longer
depend upon a two-dimensional surface, but rather on a threedimensional solid.

THECOSTOFTRADINGOPPORTUNITY
There is a definite cost of trading. The market maker has to get his
edge. Your broker has to get her cost. And your profit is what
remains, if anything, when these costs are deducted.
The cost per trade is really a part of the expectancy equation,
but it is so important that I wanted to add a little more about cost
reduction. The fewer trades you make, the less the cost per trade
becomes a factor. Many long-term trend followers spend little time
thinking about their trading cost, because it is so insignificant compared with the potential profit to be made. For example, if you are
thinking about making $5,000 per trade, then you probably are not
paying much attention to trade costs of $100.
However, if you are short term in your orientation and make
lots of trades, then trade cost is a lot bigger consideration for youat least it should be. For example, if your average profit per trade
was $50, then you would pay much more attention to a $100 trading cost.

LookforLowCommissions
Unless you need a specific service from your broker, you should pay
attention to getting the best possible execution at the lowest possi-

276

PART 3

Understanding the Key Parts of Your System

ble cost. For example, stock traders can now do unlimited Internet
trading for under $10. This is a big drop from so-called discount brokers who used to charge $50 just to buy 100 shares of stock plus
another $50 to sell those same 100 shares. However, you must be
sure that (1) you are getting good execution at a reasonable price
and (2) that your Internet broker will be available to you during
highly volatile periods when you need to make a trade immediately
Futures traders have long been able to get great commissions.
Typically, a futures broker only charges you one price per “round
turn,” which means getting in and getting out of a position. You can
typically negotiate rates of $30 and under-sometimes much better
depending upon your volume of trading
Execution Costs
The term “execution costs” typically refers to the costs of getting
into and out of a trade that are beyond the broker’s commissions.
These are typically the difference between the bid and the ask price
(i.e., the market maker’s edge) and the cost of high volatility. When
the market maker isn’t sure he can get your position done at a profit
(because the market is moving), your cost of execution will typically go up to cover his risk.
Some traders go to great lengths to control execution costs. For
example, Monroe Trout, interviewed in Jack Schwager’s The New
Market Wizards? needed very low slippage in his trading methodology. Originally, he executed through many brokers and kept
track of the slippage he got on each trade through each broker.
When the slippage got too high, a broker was typically replaced.
Eventually, Trout decided that he needed to buy his own brokerage
company just to be sure his orders were executed correctly.
If you are a short-term trader, then you probably need to give
the same sort of attention to execution costs. What does it cost you
to execute a trade? How can you lower those costs? Interview your
broker carefully, Make sure that anyone who will handle your
orders understands exactly what you are trying to accomplish.
Proper execution for short-term traders could mean the difference
between a solid profit and no profit.

CHAMER 11

The Opportunity and Cost Factors

277

The Cost of Taxes
There is a third kind of cost on profits-the cost that the government imposes. The government regulates the trading business and
there is a cost of the government’s involvement. Thus, there are
exchange fees added to each transaction and to the cost of getting
data. In addition, there is also the very real cost of the government
taxing your profits,
Real estate investors have long been able to avoid some of
these taxes on profits by filling out a Form 1031 and then buying
another, more expensive piece of property. Furthermore, long-term
stock investors (who seldom sell) such as Warren Buffett also avoid
these taxes, because you don’t pay taxes on unrealized profits on
your stock. Consequently, a major cost of doing business in the
market can be avoided by sticking to real estate or being a longterm stock investor.
However, short-term traders must pay full taxes on their profits, and these taxes can be a significant cost. Futures traders, for
example, have their open positions marked to the market at the end
of the year and are required to pay taxes on their unrealized profits. Thus, you might have $20,000 on unrealized profits on
December 31 that you get taxed on by the government. You might
end up giving back $15,000 of those open profits, but you will not
get your taxes back until the next year when your actual profit on
that trade is less.
Tax considerations obviously are an important part of the
costs of a trading business. The overall topic is way beyond the
scope of this book. Nevertheless, it is a real cost and it should go
into your planning.
Psychological Costs
Short-term trading, which gives you lots of opportunity, can have
a large psychological cost. You always have to be in peak form; otherwise you will fail to open a potentially huge trade or you will
make a mistake that could cost you years of profits.
A number of times, short-term traders have called me up with
a statement that goes something like: “I’m a day trader. I’m in and

CHAPTER 11

out a number of times each day. And I almost always make money
each day. It’s great! However, yesterdays I gave back nearly a year’s
worth of profits and I’m really upset.” This is definitely a psychological problem. Such mistakes come either from big psychological
blunders trading or from the psychological blunder of playing a
negative expectancy game that wins most of the time but has huge
R multiples against you occasionally
We’ve been talking throughout this book about numbers.
You’ve learned about the numbers involved in expectancy. You’ve
learned how important it is for you to multiply expectancy times
the opportunity factor. However, the psychological cost factor can
be the most significant factor of all. And the more you trade, the
more it comes into play.
Even long-term traders have a psychological factor. Longterm traders are usually successful because of a few high-R-multiple trades that they make each year. This kind of trader cannot
afford to miss those good trades. When you miss your biggest trade
of the year, quite often you might not have a profitable year. Again,
the psychological factor comes into play!
One of my good friends, who is a professional trader, once
told me that psychological factors didn’t come into play when he
and his partner were trading. They had a game plan worked out
and everything was very mechanical. I said the factors do come
into play because you have to execute those trades. He agreed, but
still didn’t think psychology was that important for their trading.
Several years later, however, his partner got discouraged because
they never made money trading the British pound. When a trade
came up, they didn’t take it. That trade turned out to be the one big
trade that would have made their year. The moral is that psychological factors always come into play in any sort of trading.
SUMMARY
Most of this book has been about developing a high-expectancy
trading system. Expectancy is a two-dimensional surface related to
the reliability of your trading system and the relative size of profits
and losses.
Opportunity to trade makes~ a third dimension that gives
“volume” to your dollars in profits or losses. You must multiply the

The Opportunity and Cost Factors

279

opportunity factor by the expectancy factor to get your potential
volume of dollars that you could reap each day. Thus, a high
expectancy doesn’t necessarily translate into a high dollar volume
each day if you don’t make many trades.
Lastly, there is a cost to trading whichmust be subtracted from
the dollar volume each day This cost is usually figured into the
expectancy. However, there are a number of costs to trading, and
each should be given some consideration. Reducing any one of
them could have a major effect on your bottom line.
The four major types of costs are brokerage commissions, execution costs, tax costs, and psychological costs. Each was discussed
briefly.
NOTES
1. Most floor traders never make it. They go bankrupt (or at least lose
their capital) within a year or two, because they don’t understand
wrhat their edge is or they don’t know how to capitalize upon it.
2. See the Recommended Readings in Appendix I.

CHAPTER 12

What Do You Mean Position Sizing?
I Only Have $10,000 in My Account!

CHAPTER 12 What Do You Mean Position Sizing?

l

.
.
.
.
l

.

It is not that part of your system that dictates how much
you will lose on a given trade.
It is not how to exit a profitable trade.
It is not diversification.
It is not risk control.
It is not risk avoidance.
It is not that part of your system that maximizes
performance.
It is not that part of your system that tells you what to
invest in.

Money management is that part ofyour trading system that anszoers
the question “hozu much?” throughout the course of a trade. How much

When I get a 30 percent profit, I take a third. When I get a Xl percent profit I take another third. When I get a pattern to the reverse,
1’11 take the rest of the profit.

The instructor made the above quote at a stock market seminar,
telling me that it was his formula for money management.
However, in my opinion, it has nothing to do with money management. Instead, it has everything to do with exits.’ Later, after the
seminar, I approached him to ask him what he meant by “money
management”-which was the topic of his talk. His response was,
“That’s a very good question, I think it’s how one makes trading
decisions.”
Money management is the most important aspect of system
development, other than psychology, and yet virtually every book
on the market that talks about trading or system development
totally neglects the topic. In fact, even books that are devoted to
money management say little about ~the most important aspect of
the topic-position sizing. As a result, few people really understand the implications of money management.
Money management (position sizing) is not any of the following:

essentially means how big a position you should have at any given
time throughout the course of a trade. As a result, I’ve elected to call
it “position sizing” throughout this book.
In the process of answering the
question “how much?” you may have
to consider some of the issues mentioned above, but those issues are not
your position-sizing algorithm. For
some of you, elements like risk control
may seem more important than deciding how much. But the question of how
much accounts for most of the variability in the performance of various professional traders.
Remember the snow fight model
described in Chapter 6. Well, positionsizing models include two factors from
that metaphor. Those factors are the
size of the initial protection (i.e., the size
of the snow wall or your starting
equity) and the number of snowballs
that come at the wall at one time (i.e.,
how many positions you have on at one time).
Figure 12-l gives an illustration of how position sizing adds
one more step in determining the total dollar volume that you must
