
to understand that inflation indexation protects them from price-level risks,
and sometimes seem to think that indexation introduces a risk, the risk that
their nominal values will be lower. The path downward does not reflect the
ups and downs of the stock market any more than does the downward path
of nominal interest rates over this interval.
Unfortunately, even with these data, especially in the earlier years of
inflation-indexed bonds, it has not been completely clear what the broad
investing public likely thought over these years about expected real returns
on safe assets. When each of these countries in Figure 2.2 introduced their
inflation-indexed bond markets, they did so in the face of widespread public
indifference. The market for inflation-indexed bonds has grown somewhat
over the decades but is only gradually becoming important enough compared
to the market for nonindexed conventional bonds to pervade public thinking
as some theorists assume.10 And so a few government officials in charge of
the auctions could in principle, by adjusting the amount offered, influence
the prices of inflation-indexed bonds.11 It is one of the puzzles of behavioral

T HE B O N D M A R K E T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS P E CTIVE

17

economics that people mostly just ignore inflation-indexed markets—that they
have so much trouble appreciating the importance of inflation indexation.12
Still, it is clear that prices in both the market for nominal bonds and the
market for inflation-indexed bonds have reached very high levels, and that
this fact ought to be part of our thinking about the stock market. It remains
unclear what this situation implies for the future. Some observers refer to a
“bond market bubble” at the time of this writing in 2014 that might burst,
though it seems that this is not a classic bubble as defined in this book, since
expectations for long-term return are apparently very low—not high, as one
would expect during a bubble. But these trends in the bond market might in
some sense be bubble-like.
Jeremy Stein of Harvard University, in one of the last speeches he gave as
Governor of the Federal Reserve System, in 2014, discussed concerns about a
bond market bubble, though he did not adopt that term. He spoke of “overheating” in the credit markets and warned of economic consequences if the bond
yields were to suddenly correct upward (bond prices correct downward); he
worried about the economic consequences of such a correction.13
There must be some hard-to-pin-down cultural factors driving people to
invest in bonds at a time when their yield is very low or negative and the
stock market has been soaring. Some of the same precipitating factors for
the stock market and housing market booms discussed in Chapter 4 might
apply somewhat to the bond market. Also, falling bond yields have produced
capital gains for bond investors over the decades, making bonds look successful even if they are guaranteed not to do well in real terms over their time
to maturity.14 The extreme low or negative yields after the financial crisis of
2007–9 might also have something to do with a kind of a flight response, at
times of financial turmoil, that does not fit our usual theoretical paradigms.
Where that response goes in future years remains to be seen. There is indeed
reason to be concerned about the possible widespread economic effects of an
end to this decades-long downtrend in real long-term interest rates, and of a
corresponding drop in long-term bond prices.
We turn now to the third of our three major asset classes, the real estate
market, and will see once again the importance of human speculative behavior
in determining market prices.

Three

The Real Estate Market
in Historical Perspective

T

he same forces of human psychology that
have driven the stock market and the
bond market over the years have the potential to affect other markets. The
market for real estate, particularly individual homes, would seem likely to
display speculative booms from time to time, since the psychological salience
of the price of the places we see every day and the homes we live in must be
strong, and because home prices are such a popular topic of conversation.
Yet the market for real estate is different from the stock and bond markets in
important ways.
Home prices increased sharply in the first five years of the twenty-first
century in cities in Australia, Canada, China, France, Hong Kong, Ireland,
Italy, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Spain, the United Kingdom,
and the United States.1 There has been a breathtaking real estate construction
boom in China.2 These real estate booms have not taken place everywhere,
but they have occurred in a variety of places. Many of these booms were followed by crashes. These crashes gave impetus to the financial crisis whose
intensity peaked in 2009, and from which the world is still damaged as of
this writing in 2014.
Real estate booms seem just as mysterious and hard to understand as stock
market booms. When they happen, there are always popular explanations for
them—explanations that are not necessarily correct.
A number of glib explanations have been offered for the run-up in prices
in many places since the late 1990s. One such explanation is that population
pressures have built up to the point that we have run out of land, and that
18

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

19

home prices have shot up as a result. But we didn’t just run out of land since
the late 1990s: population growth has been steady and gradual. Another theory
is that the things that go into houses—the labor, the lumber, the concrete,
the steel—are in such heavy demand that they have become very expensive.
But construction costs are not out of line with long-term trends. Another glib
explanation is that the boom was due to the interest rate cuts implemented
in many countries in an effort to deal with a weak global economy. But while
low interest rates are certainly a contributing factor, central banks have cut
interest rates many times in history, and such actions never produced such
concerted booms.
So what did cause this real estate boom and crash to occur in so many parts
of the world? It is important to understand this phenomenon. Many people
are worrying that the boom in home prices in these places will end as badly
as the dramatic 1980s boom in urban land prices in Japan, with prices declining in real terms for well over a decade after the peak. But understanding any
such price movements, and what they might portend, is a difficult problem—
a problem to which solutions will be offered in various parts of this book.
For starters I want to try to put these recent events into a longer historical
perspective. Is the current situation new, or do we have scads of examples of
such events? Is there really a strong and steady long-run uptrend in home
prices as so many people with a boom mentality say, or are they just imagining this? What does history tell us about the genesis of real estate booms? An
important conclusion of this chapter is that home price speculation is more
entrenched on a national or international scale than ever before.

The Long History of Home Prices
I constructed an index of U.S. home prices all the way back to 1890 by linking
together various available series that were designed to provide estimates of the
price of a standard, unchanging, house, and by creating another index that my
research assistants completed under my direction, to close the gap from 1934
to 1953. Figure 3.1 shows the home price index along with building costs, the
population of the United States, and the long-term interest rate, all since 1890.3
The home price index we constructed, plotted in the figure, is imperfect, and
I hope to improve it someday, but for now it appears to be the best that can be
found for this long time period. Oddly, when this chart was first published in
2005, no such long series of home prices for any country had ever been released.
At the time, no real estate professional I spoke with could refer me to one. So
the unusually rapid appreciation of home prices up to the time of publication
of the second edition of this book in 2005 attracted notice.
The reader must notice the striking recent behavior of home prices since the
late 1990s. Home prices took off sharply between the late 1990s and 2006. There

20

200

1000

180

900

160

800

140

700
Home prices

120

600

100
80
60

500
400

Building costs

300
Population

40
20
0
1880

Interest rates
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Population (millions)

Index or interest rate

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

200
100
0
2020

Figure 3.1
U.S. Home Prices, Building Costs, Population,
and Interest Rates, 1890–2014
Heavy solid line (left scale): real (inflation-corrected) home price index, 1890 =
100, for the United States, constructed by the author from various existing indices
and raw data on home prices; top thin line (left scale): real (inflation-corrected)
building cost index, 1979 = 100, constructed by the author from two published
construction cost indices; middle thin line (right scale): U.S. population in millions, from the U.S. Census; lowest thin line (left scale): long-term interest rate
constructed by the author from two sources. See note 3.

was a “rocket taking off” here, just as in the stock market in the Millennium
Boom. As with the stock market, this rocket eventually crashed after 2006,
and the disaster brought down the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac; mortgage lending giants Countrywide Financial and
Washington Mutual; and financial firms Bear Stearns, Merrill Lynch, and
Lehman Brothers. And by 2008 it had caused the most severe financial crisis
since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
The upswing in home prices during 1998–2006 (along with the stock
market Ownership-Society Boom) that preceded the financial crisis may
be regarded as its ultimate cause. Real home prices for the United States as
a whole increased 85% between 1997 and 2006. The increase was higher in
some areas of the United States and lower in others, but the fact that it was
an 85% increase overall is remarkable. This is nothing like the tripling of the
stock market between 1995 and 2000, but, when viewed in comparison with

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

21

long-run historical patterns in home prices, it is still striking. We could not
appreciate this pattern of home prices by looking at recent years alone; one
could not appreciate how anomalous the early 2000s home boom was. There
was only one other period of similarly large price increases in U.S. history: the
period after World War II. The subsequent decline in the most recent boom,
however, was substantially more precipitous.
The ascent in home prices after 1998 was much faster than the increase in
incomes, and this raised concerns about the long-run stability of home prices,
especially in the most volatile states. According to Standard & Poor’s and the
S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices, the cost of buying a house relative to
renting doubled in the United States from 1997 to 2006 and then fell almost
all the way back down from 2006 to 2013.4
Looking at the figure before the 2006 peak, however, one got the impression
that the end was not near and that the ascent of home prices since 1997 had
been so robust and steady that one would expect it to continue for years. The
steadiness of the path, up for each year between 1997 and 2006, and up at an
increasing rate for almost each successive year, suggested that home prices
could be forecasted to continue to rise.
How can prices be so forecastable? Isn’t it supposed to be very hard
to forecast speculative prices, and aren’t such prices supposed to at least
approximate a random walk? Actually, home prices are somewhat forecastable, as statistical analysis confirms.5 Their forecastability is not well
exploited by “smart money” as it would be in the stock market. The forays
into the single-family house market made by The Blackstone Group and
other investment funds are still, as of this writing, only a tiny part of the
market. So no forces operate to prevent forecastability. The profit opportunities for buying at the right time are just not available to the smart money
that operates in the stock market because of the costs of getting in and out
of the housing market. It is not easy for most people to time the purchase of
their homes to take advantage of trends.
But let us not exaggerate the forecastability of home prices either. Our statistical studies of forecasting models for home prices show that roughly half
of the variability of home prices can be predicted one year ahead. Half of the
variability may seem like a lot, but it still leaves much to be explained. Looking
back at the figure, one would have to say, if one took a pencil to extrapolate
judgmentally the recent trend in U.S. home prices, that there is still substantial
uncertainty about where the price level will be in a year’s time. It is difficult to
judge whether the trend is building up or slowing down, and when it might
eventually stop completely and then reverse itself. Moreover, if one extends
a forecast to five or ten years out, one is likely to have virtually no idea where
prices will be. And it is these longer-horizon forecasts that are most relevant
to homebuyers who will expect to live in their home for many years.

22

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

Ultimately, we learn how to forecast by looking at past episodes.
Unfortunately, there are not really any past episodes of national home price
booms in the United States to look at, except for the period just after World
War II, and that episode appears to have been fundamentally different from
the recent home price boom. We have only one observation of the spectacular
crash of U.S. home prices after 2006, so it is hard to know how to generalize
from this experience. This presents a dilemma for statisticians who want a
scientific basis for their forecasts.
Obviously, there is no hope of explaining home prices in the United States
solely in terms of building costs, population, or interest rates, all shown in
Figure 3.1. The pattern of change from year to year in home prices bears no
consistent relation with any of these factors. None of these can explain the
“rocket-taking-off” effect starting around 1998. Building costs have been
mostly level or declining all the way back to 1980, with no major break in the
trend.6 Population growth has been very steady. While interest rates have
been declining, the decline in long rates has been fairly steady, all the way
back to the early 1980s.7
It is equally obvious, from comparing the home price path shown in
Figure 3.1 with the stock price path shown in Figure 1.1, that in the United
States, the booms in the stock market bear virtually no relation to booms in the
housing market. A possible exception is the most recent boom in the housing
market, which began around 1998, a few years after the sharp stock market
takeoff that began around 1995. There may well be at least some tendency for
home prices to respond to the stock market: a recent Bank of International
Settlements study of house prices in thirteen industrialized countries concluded that peaks in the housing market tend to follow peaks in the stock
market with an average lag of about two years.8
To understand how different the recent home price behavior has been, it
is important to compare the recent behavior with that of long ago. Figure 3.1
shows that real home prices were generally declining from 1890 to 1940. The
chart shows a number of wiggles in home prices before World War I, but our
efforts to find confirming evidence of such sharp price movements in old
newspapers for those dates turned up nothing significant. We suspect that
some of the wiggles in the earliest years plotted in Figure 3.1 are just the result
of sampling error and so do not reflect actual home price changes. I will return
in Chapter 7 to the stories of some price movements from that era that we can
begin to understand. But for now, we should note the downtrend in real prices
and the absence of any major real estate boom before 1940.
The late nineteenth century and early twentieth century saw many local
bubbles surrounding the building of highways, canals, and railroads, bubbles
that do not show up in the national numbers on our chart. Obviously, it is
plausible that the land surrounding such construction projects would suddenly

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

23

become valuable. Even in days gone by, when land was so abundant that one
could buy it, in some places, for a dollar an acre, there could be real estate
booms. If land prices were to go up to two dollars an acre near a new rail line,
an investment could double in value, and this prospect could be quite exciting
to investors. Regional real estate booms are nothing new.
The sharp fall in home prices after World War I probably had something
to do with the great influenza pandemic of 1918–19, which infected 28% of
Americans and killed 675,000 of them. This epidemic caused people to stay at
home and not look for new homes. It must have damaged the economy and
also distracted attention and conversation away from the housing market.
There was also an unusually severe recession in 1920–21.9
It is notable that there was no boom in home prices to accompany the
sharply rising stock market of the Roaring Twenties. The famous Florida
land bubble of the 1920s was not big enough to show up in these national
numbers. Home prices were not carried along by the stock market and did
not overshoot, nor did they drop when the stock market crashed starting
in 1929. There was, however, a drop in nominal home prices after 1929;
that is, home prices fell at just about the same rate as the Consumer Price
Index fell. The drop in nominal home prices, when mortgage debt was
not indexed to inflation, gave many homeowners negative equity in their
homes and an incentive to default on their mortgages. In addition, the high
unemployment rates during the Great Depression meant that many could
not renew their short-term mortgages and so were forced to default on them
and thus lost their homes. But we should not mistake the housing crisis of
the early 1930s for a decline in real home prices. Real home prices showed
remarkable stability over the whole boom-and-bust cycle of the stock market
surrounding 1929.
This brings us to the most significant episode in the national home market
until recent times: the sharp home price increases associated with the end of
World War II. It is clear that there were large real home price increases at least
in the big cities at this time, although the exact magnitude of the increases
may not have been well measured.10
This does not appear to have been a runaway speculative boom. Home
prices did not overshoot their new postwar equilibrium, and they did not
have to come crashing back down. Newspaper accounts of the housing market did not use the term housing bubble, nor did they feature stories of crazy
homebuyers buying just about anything to stay ahead of the curve, like those
we were reading about in the early 2000s. The story that one gleans from the
newspapers just after World War II is quite different.
Government restrictions had severely limited the supply of new homes during World War II. After the war, returning soldiers wanted to start families;
they were about to launch the Baby Boom. Prices of existing homes actually

24

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

started increasing after 1942, before the war was over, probably because
people anticipated the shortage of housing that was to follow. But, even
though demand soared after the war, there was no real buying panic, as the
conventional wisdom of the time was that construction would soon greatly
increase the stock of available homes.
The Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, also called the GI Bill of Rights,
immediately introduced the subsidization of home purchase for seventeen
million people. This major government subsidy did not go away, and it helped
lead to permanently higher home prices. But it did so in the context of the solidarity of the American people, and it never ignited a speculative atmosphere.
President Franklin Roosevelt said that the GI Bill of Rights gave “emphatic
notice to the men and women of our Armed Forces that the American people
do not intend to let them down.”11 The people who bought at the high prices
right after the war were those who felt that they could not wait to get settled
in their new homes, not people who were speculating that prices would go
up even higher. Other people simply found a temporary place to live and
waited for the expected decline in home prices (which never came) or for
their savings to increase to the point that they could afford housing. The
fact that, after World War I, real home prices had gone through a protracted
period of decline must also have served to diffuse any speculative worries.
People must have remembered that episode in the aftermath of World War
II. A widespread worry then that the Great Depression of the 1930s would
reappear after the stimulus of the war ended further deflected any worries
that home prices would soar.
It appears that people were for the most part not afraid of being priced out
of the market, and that they did not fully anticipate the home price increases
to come. They counted on new construction to prevent any severe price rise—
and indeed, construction of new homes rose from 142,000 homes built in the
United States in 1944 to 1,952,000 homes built in 1950. Even though this massive
increase in supply did not stop price increases, the popular understanding
seems to have been that it would.
It has been different in this century. We are increasingly feeling worried
and vulnerable, and the market volatility that flares up from time to time, in
both the stock market and the housing market, reflects this. Before the post1997 boom, there were a couple of false starts (failed launches, so to speak),
one in the late 1970s and one in the late 1980s. These were actually regional
booms that did not extend so much to the nation as a whole. The 1970s boom
was mostly confined to California, and the 1980s boom occurred on both the
west coast and the east coast.
Figure 3.2 shows the path of real home prices for four U.S. cities. Prices in
Boston and Los Angeles have gone through two dramatic swings, and at the
end of the sample period shown, prices were soaring. But, in sharp contrast,
