
CHAPTER

1

The Legend of the Holy Grail

We have only to follow the thread of the hero’s path, and
where we had thought to find an abomination, we shall
find a god. And where we had thought to slay another, we
shall slay ourselves. Where we had thought to travel outward, we will come to the center of our own existence.
And where we had thought to be done, we will one be
with all the world.
Let me tell you a secret about the market. You can make big
money by buying breakouts that go beyond a normal day’s
range of price movement. These are called “volatility breakouts.” One trader is famous for making millions with
volatility breakouts. You can do it, too! You can make a bundle! Here’s how you do it.
First, you take yesterday’s price range. If there’s a gap
between yesterday and the day before, then add the gap
into the range-that’s called the “true range.” Now, take 40
percent of yesterday’s true range and bracket today’s price
by that amount. The upper value is your buy signal and the
lower value is your sell signal (i.e., for selling short). If
either value is hit, get into the market and you’ll have an 80
percent chance of making money tomorrow. And over the
3

PART 1

P

The Most Important Factor in Your Success: YOU!

long run,you’ll make big money.
Did that particular pitch sound interesting to you? Well, it has
attracted thousands of speculators and investors alike. And while
there’s some truth to the pitch-it can be a basis for making big
money in the market-it’s certainly not a magic secret to success.
Many people could go broke following that advice, because it’s
only part of a sound methodology For example, it does not tell you:
How do you protect your capital if the market goes against
you?
. How or when do you take your profits?
. How much do you buy or sell when you get a signal?
. Which market is the method designed for or does it work
in all markets?
l

Most importantly, you must ask yourself, when you put all those
pieces together, does the method fit you? Is it something you’d be
able to trade? Does it fit your investment objectives? Does it fit your
personality?
This book is intended to help traders and investors make more
money by learning more about-themselves and then designing a
methodology to fit their own personality and objectives, It is
intended for both traders and investors, because both of them
attempt to make money in the markets. The trader tends to have a
more neutral approach-being willing to both buy and sell short.
The investor, in contrast, is looking for an investment that can be
purchased and held over a longer period of time. Both of them are
looking for a magic system to guide their decision making-the socalled Holy Grail system.
The journey into finding the profits available in the markets
usually starts another way. In fact, the typical investor or trader, in
preparing to trade, goes through an evolutionary process. At first
he gets hooked on the idea of making a lot of money. Perhaps some
broker gives him a pitch about how much money he can make
playing the market. Here’s one I’ve heard in a radio advertisement
in North Carolina that goes something like this:
Do you know where real money is made year after year? It’s all in
the agricultural sector-people have to eat. And when you consider
the weather we’ve been having lately, there’s likely to be a shortage.

CHAPTER 1

The Legend of the Holy Grail

5

And that means higher prices. And for just a small investment of
$5,000, you can control a lot of grain You’ll make a small fortune if
grain moves just a few pennies in your favor. Of course, there are
risks in this sort of recommendation. People can and do lose money.
But if I’m right about what I’m saying, just think how much money
you can make!*
Once the trader has committed his initial $5,000, he’s hooked.
Even if he loses it all-and in most cases he will-he will still retain
the belief of: “I can make big money playing the markets. Didn’t
Hillary Clinton turn $1,000 into $lOO,OOO? If she can do it, then I certainly can do it.“3 As a result, our investor will spend a great deal
of time trying to find someone to tell him what to buy and selldetermine what the hot prospect is going to be.
I don’t know many people who have made money consistently following other people’s advice--be it the advice of brokers
or investment advisors. The one major exception to this consists of
the people who have bought good stocks on someone’s advice
since 1982 and have held onto them. Even this scenario could
change dramatically and quickly There are other exceptions-but
they are very rare. Generally, most people either lose all their capital or get discouraged and drop out of the picture.
A few people miraculously move on to the next phase, which
is “Tell me how to do it.” Suddenly, they go on a wild search for the
magic methodology that will make them a lot of money. This is
what most people call the “search for the Holy Grail.” During this
search, traders are looking for anything that will provide them with
untold riches because it unlocks the secrets to the universe.
Typically, people go to lots of seminars in which they learn about
various methods, such as:
Now this is my chair pattern. It consists of at least six bars in a congestion range followed by a seventh bar that seems to break out of
the congestion. Notice how it looks like a chair facing to the left? See
what happens on this chart after a chair pattern occurred-the market just zoomed up. And here’s another example. It’s that easy. And
here’s a chart showing how much profit I made with the chair pattern over the last 10 years. Look at that-$92,000 profit each year
from just a $10,000 investment.
Somehow, when the typical investor tries to use the chair sys-

6

PART 1

The Mast Important Factor in Your Success: YOU!

tern, that $10,000 investment turns into large losses. You’ll learn the
reasons for these losses later in this book. The important point,
however, is that the investor simply goes looking for another system. And this process could go on forever-until our investor
either goes broke, gives up, or really learns the meaning behind the
Holy Grail metaphor.
THE HOLY GRAIL METAPHOR
In trading circles, one frequently hears: “She’s searching for the
Holy Grail.” Typically this means that she’s searching for the magic
secret of the market that will make her rich-the secret rules that
underlie all markets. But is there such a secret? Yes, there is one!
And interestingly enough, when you really understand the Holy Grail
metaphor, you will understand the secret of making money in the market.
Several books deal with the topic of the Holy Grail metaphor.’
Few people have ever read the Grail romances, but most
Westerners instantly recognize the Grail quest as a very significant
quest. Scholars interpret the quest as everything from a blood feud
to a search for everlasting youth. Other scholars consider the Grail
quest as a search for perfectionism, enlightenment, unity, or even
direct communion with God. The investor’s search for the Holy
Grail could take on an entirely new meaning when framed within
the context of those quests.
Most investors believe that there is some magic order to the
markets. They believe that a few people know about it, those who
make vast fortunes from the market. Consequently, these people
are constantly trying to discover the secret so that they too can
become wealthy. Such a secret exists. But few people know where
to find it, because the answer is where they would least expect it
to be.
As you complete more and more of this book, you’ll really
understand the secret of making money in the markets. And as that
secret is revealed, you’ll begin to understand the real meaning of
the Grail quest.
One of the more interesting Grail accounts is based upon a
war in heaven between God and Satan. The Grail was placed in the
middle of the conflict by neutral angels. Thus, it represents a spiri-

CHAPTER 1 The Legend of the Holy Grail

7

tual path between pairs of opposites (i.e., such as profits and
losses). The land (or at least the territory of concern) had become a
5
wasteland. Joseph Campbell claims that the wasteland symbolizes
the inauthentic life that most of us lead. Most people typically do
what other people do, following the crowd and doing as we’re told.
Thus, the wasteland represents the lack of courage to lead one’s
own life. The Grail consequently becomes the symbol of leading
one’s own life-the attainment of the ultimate potential of the
human psyche.
If you follow the crowd as an investor, you might make money
during long trends, but overall you’ll probably lose. Instead,
investors make money by thinking independently and by being
unique. For example, most investors ask others for advice (including their neighbors). Yet money is made by developing your own
ideas and following a method that is
designed to fit you. Most investors have
a strong desire to be right about every
trade, and so they find some hot entry
technique that gives them a feeling of
control over the market. For example,
you can require that the market totally
do your bidding before you enter it. Yet
real money is made through intelligent
exits-which allow the trader to cut
losses short and let profits run. This
requires that the trader be totally in tune with what the market is
doing. In summary, people make money in the markets by finding
themselves, achieving their potential, and getting in tune with the
market.
There are probably hundreds of thousands of trading systems
that work. But most people, when given such a system, will not fol,10w it. Why not? Because the system doesn’t fit them. One of the
secrets of successful trading is finding a trading system that fits
you. In fact, Jack Schwager, after interviewing enough “market
wizards” to write two books,6 concluded that the most important
characteristic of all good traders was that they had found a system or
methodology that was right for them. So part of the secret of the Holy
Grail quest is in being unique and following your own way-and

8

PART 1

The Most Important Factor in Your Success: YOU!

thus finding something that really fits you. But there is still a lot
more to the Holy Grail metaphor.
Life starts out in the neutral position between profits and
losses-it neither fears losses nor desires profits. Life just is, and
that’s represented by the Grail. However, as a human being develops self-awareness, fear and greed also arise. But when you get rid
of the greed (and the fear that comes from lacking), you reach a special unity with all. And that’s where great traders and investors
emerge.
Joseph Campbell, the great scholar and leading expert on
myths, says:
Suppose the grass were to say “Well, for Pete’s sake, what’s the use
if you keep getting cut down this way?” Instead, it keeps on growing. That’s the sense of the energy at the center. That’s the meaning
of the image of the Grail, of the inexhaustible fountain of the source.
The source doesn’t care what happens once it gives into being.’
One of the Grail legends starts out with a short poem that
states: “Every act has both good and evil results.” Thus every act in
life has both positive and negative consequences-profits and
losses, so to speak. The best we can do is accept both while leaning
toward the light.
Think about what that means for you as an investor or trader.
You’re playing the game of life. Sometimes you win and sometimes
you lose, so there are both positive and negative consequences. To
accept both the positive and the negative, you need to find that special place inside of you in which you
can just be. From that vantage point,
wins and losses are equally a part of
trading. That metaphor, to me, is the
real secret of the Holy Grail.
If you haven’t found that place in
yourself, then it’s very hard to accept
losses. And if you cannot accept the
negative consequences, you’ll never
succeed as a trader. Good traders usually make money on less than half their
trades. If you can’t accept losses, then

CHAPTER 1 The Legend of the Holy Grail

9

you are not likely to want to get out of a position when you know
you are wrong. Small losses are more likely to turn into giant ones.
More importantly, if you cannot accept that losses will occur, then
you cannot accept a good trading system that will make a lot of
money in the long run but might lose money 60 percent of the time.
WHAT’S REALLY IMPORTANT TO TRADING
Almost every successful investor that I have encountered has realized the lesson of the Holy Grail metaphor-that success in the
markets comes from internal control. This is a radical change for
most investors. Internal control is not that difficult to achieve, but
it is difficult for most people to realize how important it is. For
example, most investors believe that markets are living entities that
create victims. If you believe that statement, then it is true for you.
But markets do not create victims; investors turn themselves into
victims. Each trader controls his or her own destiny. No trader will
find success without understanding this important principle at
least subconsciously
Let’s look at some facts:
. Most successful market professionals achieve success by
controlling risk. Controlling risk goes against our natural
tendencies. Risk control requires tremendous internal
control.
l Most successful speculators have success rates of 35 to 50
percent. They are not successful because they predict
prices well. They are successful because the size of their
profitable trades far exceeds the size of their losses. This
requires tremendous internal control.
l Most successful conservative investors are contrarians.
They do what everyone else is afraid to do. They have
patience and are willing to wait for the right opportunity.
This also requires internal control.
Investment success requires internal control more than any
other factor. This is the first step toward trading success. People
who dedicate themselves to developing that control are the ones
who will ultimately succeed.

CHAPTER 1

The Legend of the Holy Grail

MODELING MARKET GENIUSES

Figure

1-1

Ingredients

of

trading

Let’s explore internal control, the key to trading success, from
another perspective. When I’ve had discussions about what’s
important to trading, three areas typically come up: psychology,
money management (i.e., position sizing), and system development. Most people emphasize system development and de-emphasize the other two topics. More sophisticated people suggest that all
three aspects are important, but that psychology is the most important (about 60 percent), position sizing is the next most important
(about 30 percent), and system development is the least important
(about 10 percent). This is illustrated in Figure l-l. These people
would argue that internal control would fall only into the psychological sector.
Ed Seykota once told me that he taught a college course in
trading (in the late 1970s) that lasted 10 weeks. He spent the first
week of class teaching basic information about trading. He then
spent another week teaching the class Donchin’s lo-20 movingaverage crossover system. However, he needed the remaining 8
weeks of the class to convince people to use the system that he had
taught-to get them to work on themselves enough to accept the
losses that it (or any other good trading system) would generate.
I’ve argued for a long time that trading is 100 percent psychology, and that psychology includes position sizing and system
development. The reason is simple: We are human beings, not
robots. To perform any behavior we must process information
through the brain. Behavior is required both to design and to execute a trading system. And to duplicate any behavior one must
learn the ingredients of that behavior: That is where the science of
modeling comes into play.

Perhaps you have had the experience of attending a workshop conducted by an investment expert who explains his success secrets.
For example, I just told you about a class that one of the world’s
greatest traders taught on trading in the early 1970s. He spent 2
weeks teaching them a method that would have made them very
rich (at the time) and then required 8 more weeks to get them to the
point where they were willing to apply it.
Like the people in the class, you may have been impressed in
some workshop you attended by the expert’s presence and skills.
You may have left the workshop full of confidence that you could
make money using his methods. Unfortunately, when you tried to
put his secrets into practice, you may have discovered that you
weren’t much wiser than you were before the workshop.
Something didn’t work or somehow you just couldn’t apply what
you had learned.
Why does this occur? The reason is that you do not structure
your thinking in the same manner as the expert. His mental structure, the way he thinks, is one of the keys to his success.
When others teach you how they approach the markets,
chances are they only superficially teach you what they actually do.
It’s not that they mean to deceive you. It’s just that they really do
not understand the essential elements of what they do. And even if
they did, they would probably have trouble transferring that information to someone else. This leads you
to assume that perhaps you must have
a certain “gift” or type of talent to be
successful in the markets. Many people,
as a result, become discouraged and
leave the markets because they believe
that they do not have the talent. But talent can be taught!
I believe that if at least two people
can do something well, then that skill can be taught to most other
people. Over the last 20 years, the science of modeling has emerged
almost as an underground movement. That movement comes out
of a technology developed by Richard Bandler and John Grinder,
called Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP, for short).

NLP seminars usually just cover the trail of techniques left
behind by the modeling process. For example, when I give a seminar, I usually just teach the models I’ve developed from modeling
top traders and investors. However, if you take enough NLP
classes, you eventually begin to understand the modeling process
itself.
I’ve modeled three primary aspects of trading and investing
and am in the process of modeling a fourth. The first model I developed consisted of how to be a great trader/investor and master the
markets. Essentially, the steps to developing such a model involve
working with a number of great traders and investors to determine
what they do in common. If you attempt to model one person, you
will find a lot of idiosyncrasies that are unique to that person and
probably fail in the modeling process. But if you model the common elements of a number of good traders and investors, then you
will find what’s really important to the success of all of them.
For example, when I first asked my model traders what they
did, they told me about their methodology. After interviewing
about 50 traders, I discovered that none of them had the same
methodology. As a result, I concluded that their methods were not
a secret to their success except that their methods all involved
“low-risk” ideas. Thus, one of the ingredients that all these traders
had was the ability to find low-risk ideas. I’ll define a low-risk idea
later in the next chapter.
Once you discover the common elements to what they do,
then you must discover the real ingredients of each common task.
What are the beliefs that enable them to master the markets? How
do they think so that they can effectively carry out those tasks?
The last step in determining if you’ve successfully developed
an accurate model is to teach the model to others and determine if
you get the same results. The trading model I’ve developed is part
of my home-study Peak Performance Trading Course.’ We also
teach the model in our Peak Performance Trading Workshop. And
we’ve been able to create some amazingly successful traders, thus
verifying the model.
The second model I’ve developed is how great traders and
investors learn their craft and how they do their research. That’s the topic
of this book. Most people consider~this
to be the nonpsychological

part of trading. The surprise is that the task of finding and developing a system that is right for them is purely a mental one. Most
people have many biases against doing it well. In fact, I generally
find that the more therapeutic work an individual has done, the
easier it is for that individual to develop a system.
One of your primary tasks in beginning the search for the right
trading system is to find out enough about yourself so that you can
design a system that will work for you. But how do you do that?
And once you find out enough about yourself, how do you find out
what will work for you? Those are some of the topics we’ll be
explaining.
The third model I’ve developed is how great traders manage
their money or determine their position size throughout a trade. The topic
of money management is talked about by every great trader. There
have even been a few books on money management, but most of
them talk about one of the results of money management (i.e., risk
control or getting optimal profits) rather than the topic itself.
Money management is essentially that part of your system that
determines your position size-that answers the question “how
much?” throughout the trade. I’ve chosen to call this topic “position sizing” throughout the remainder of this book to eliminate
possible confusion that might arise from the term “money management.”
Once again, most people are doomed to do all the wrong
things in terms of position sizing because of psychological biases
that they have. For example, as I’m writing this, I’m on a speaking
tour of eight Asian cities. In each city, it is clear that most of the
audience does not understand the importance of position sizing.
Most of them are institutional traders and yet many of them don’t
even know how much money they are trading. Many of them don’t
even know how much they can lose without losing their jobs.
Consequently, they have no way to adequately determine how big
or small their positions should be.
As a result, I’ve had my audience play a game to illustrate the
importance of position sizing. Even so, no one has asked me, “Dr.
Tharp, what should I do in terms of position sizing in my situation?” Yet almost all of them could make great strides in their trading by asking that question and getting an appropriate answer.

CHAFTER 1

You’ll learn the key elements about position sizing in this book
because it is an essential part of system development.
The last model is one I’m still working on, although we know
enough about it to give some excellent seminars on the topic--the
acquisition of wealth. One of the biases that most people have that
keep them from adequate position sizing is the fact that they don’t
have enough money to hold even a single position as a low-risk
idea. As a result, I designed seminars to help them acquire money
in ways other than trading. Once again, most people seem to be
psychologically wired to do all the wrong things.
One of the principles of wealth acquisition, f o r example, is to
put the power of compound interest on your side. For example,
someone who is 20 years old and puts aside a dollar each day into
a tax-free account paying 15 percent interest will be a millionaire
many times over by the time he or she reaches retirement. Yet the
average American family has revolving credit card debt-meaning
that the average family has the power of compound interest working against it. It’s estimated that 65 million American familiesabout 200 million people-have revolving credit card debt amounting to $7,000 per family. They are paying as much as 18 percent
interest on that debt, so they certainly have compound interest
working against them.
The topic of wealth, however, is slightly different from the
topic of this book. But I think it’s important for you to know that
this book is written from the perspective of someone who understands all these vital topics-especially the psychological issues
involved.
