and stay there for as long as you wish. I’m sure that we would all like at
least a little bit more freedom in our lives and more control over our own
destiny.
Because the prizes are so fantastic, it’s easy to get excited and lose objectivity regarding trading. Excitement is an emotion that clouds our judgment, and often leads to unrealistic expectations. Trading requires that we
keep ourselves free of emotion, so that we can make clear, rational decisions. This can be difficult when you’re dreaming of owning a large beach
house or a Gulfstream jet.
Traders who are trying to change their lives overnight often do so, but
usually not for the better. Many traders enter this game with high expectations and are quickly vanquished. Remember that more traders fail than
succeed, and the failure rate is especially high among new traders. What is
needed is a commonsense method for setting goals.
The first thing we must do is to rid ourselves of unrealistic expectations; often, we obtain these expectations from things we have seen, read,
or heard. For example, perhaps you’ve heard stories from a friend who
bragged about making some outrageous amount of money, and you’ve decided that if he can do it, so can you.
I think that what you will find over time is that the truly good traders
rarely talk about their gains; they know that the market has a way of humbling traders who get “carried away” or form too high of an opinion of
themselves or their trading.
There are many traders who appear on the scene and immediately
achieve great returns, only to give that money back to the market later.
Anyone can make money in the market over a short period of time with a
little luck, but this is most likely because they are probably using methods
that have a high probability of short-term success but a very low probability
of long-term success.
These new traders haven’t learned the difference between a good trade
and a winning trade; a good trade isn’t always a winning trade, and a winning trade isn’t always a good trade.
Instead of setting your sights too high, create goals that are attainable. The seeming contradiction here is that you can achieve some lofty
goals if you’re willing to break those goals into smaller pieces. So, instead
of asking, “How much time will it take to double my account” (which
is well within the realm of possibility if you are using methods that are
geared toward long-term success), why not break that goal into smaller
pieces?
The good thing about taking this approach is that you don’t have to take
crazy chances with your account to meet your goals and reap substantial
gains. Traders are much more likely to violate their risk management rules
when trying to achieve an unrealistic goal.

chap17

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

212

June 2, 2007

16:55

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

BREAKING DOWN YOUR GOALS
The way to achieve great results is to take an ambitious goal and break it
down into small, achievable pieces.
When I give a seminar or address a group of traders, I sometimes ask
the following question: “How many people in the room feel that a goal of a
100 percent annual return is an aggressive goal?” Many people in the room
will raise their hands at this point, because a 100 percent annual return
does seem to be an ambitious target.
Then, I’ll follow up with this question: “How many people in the room
feel that a goal of a consistent 6 percent monthly return is too aggressive?”
The hands go down, as almost nobody in the room feels that this is an
aggressive target.
The punch line is that the goals are one and the same. If a trader can increase the value of the account by just 6 percent per month on a consistent
basis, he or she will achieve an annual gain of about 100 percent.
I know what some of you are thinking. “Wait a minute—6 percent per
month multiplied by 12 months per year equals a 72 percent return, not a
100 percent return! Ed has surely lost his mind—from all that loud music,
no doubt!”
Perhaps, but don’t fit me for a straitjacket just yet. Whip out a calculator and perform the following exercise: Starting with a base number of 100
(the “account”), multiply by 1.06 (a 6 percent gain) to calculate your first
month’s result (106). Then multiply that result by 1.06, and keep doing this
until you have calculated an entire year’s worth of results (12 months). You
should end up with the following (note that some numbers are rounded,
but this has no material effect on the results):
Month 1: 100 × 1.06 = 106.00
Month 2: 106 × 1.06 = 112.36
Month 3: 112.36 × 1.06 = 119.102
Month 4: 119.102 × 1.06 = 126.248
Month 5: 126.248 × 1.06 = 133.822
Month 6: 133.822 × 1.06 = 141.852
Month 7: 141.852 × 1.06 = 150.363
Month 8: 150.363 × 1.06 = 159.385
Month 9: 159.385 × 1.06 = 168.948
Month 10: 168.948 × 1.06 = 179.084
Month 11: 179.084 × 1.06 = 189.830
Month 12: 189.830 × 1.06 = 201.219
The account has climbed from a base of 100 to over 200 in one year,
an annual gain of just over 100 percent. In order to replicate the results

chap17

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

June 2, 2007

16:55

Char Count=

How to Achieve Spectacular Gains

213

for different-sized trading accounts, add zeros to the base as necessary. In
other words, if the base were 1,000, or 10,000, or 100,000, the percentage
gains would remain the same. Because the gains are a consistent 6 percent,
we are building off of a higher base every month. This is similar to the
power of compounding.

CONSISTENCY IS THE KEY
This is not to suggest that a monthly gain of 6 percent is easy to achieve,
but it does demonstrate the power of breaking our goals down into manageable targets. Consistency is the key; it is not that difficult to achieve a 6
percent return in any given month, but it is considerably harder to achieve
a minimum 6 percent return every month.
We said at the outset that we’d start with a relatively easy target, and
gradually work our way to the next plateau. Instead of starting out with a
monthly goal of 6%, why not begin with a monthly goal of just 1 percent or 2
percent? A goal like this is unlikely to put much pressure on a trader, which
is good—trading can be stressful enough without any additional pressure.
Achieving a goal of just 1 percent per month would put you well ahead
of most traders, since the majority of traders lose money. While a goal of
2 percent per month may not sound awe inspiring, if we can achieve it
consistently, the annual gain will be just shy of 27 percent—and you’ll have
outperformed most mutual funds and hedge funds.
If you have successfully achieved your modest goal for three months
in a row, raise the goal to the next plateau—from a 1 percent monthly goal
to 2 percent, or from 2 percent to 3 percent, and so on. Don’t rush through
this process; remember, as you gain experience and confidence, you will be
a better trader in the future than you are now, and you’ll be better suited to
more aggressive goals.
Here is the breakdown of monthly goals and their annual equivalents
(again, please note that some numbers are rounded, but this has no material effect on the results):
1 percent every month = 13 percent annual return
2 percent every month = 27 percent annual return
3 percent every month = 42 percent annual return
4 percent every month = 60 percent annual return
5 percent every month = 79 percent annual return
6 percent every month = 100 percent annual return
7 percent every month = 125 percent annual return
8 percent every month = 151 percent annual return
9 percent every month = 181 percent annual return
10 percent every month = 214 percent annual return

chap17

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

214

June 2, 2007

16:55

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

By the time you work your way up to consistent monthly returns of 3
percent and then 4 percent, you’ll be putting up respectable numbers, and
you’ll have gained the benefit of months of experience.
At this point, you’ll no longer be like that teenage driver with a learner’s
permit; instead, you’ll be more like a driver who is comfortable and confident behind the wheel, in complete control of your vehicle, with the ability to anticipate trouble before it happens. You will have progressed to a
higher plateau.
Of course, there will still be goals for which to strive. If you can achieve
consistent monthly gains of 5 percent or 6 percent, you will have truly
joined the elite. At this point, you can continue to increase your goals, or
perhaps you will have found your “comfort zone.” Remember, you don’t
have to continually increase your goals if you don’t feel that you’re ready
to do so—or if you just don’t want to. Your personal comfort with your goal
should also be a consideration.

WHAT HAPPENS WHEN I REACH MY GOAL?
Once you’ve achieved your goal, you don’t have to stop trading, but you can
take precautions to safeguard your gains. In trading, we use a stop on every
trade to limit losses and protect gains. Why not use that same philosophy
to protect your monthly returns?
For instance, assume that a trader’s goal is a consistent monthly profit
of 5 percent. After reaching this goal, she continues trading, and her gain
for the month climbs to 10 percent. The trader now calculates a “stop” for
the entire account, at the point where the gain was equal to 5 percent. If
the monthly gain falls back from 10 percent to 5 percent, she stops trading
for the month, and has still achieved her monthly goal. She can continue
trading in a demo account for the remainder of the month.
What if you encounter problems and can’t meet your objective? If you
are consistently failing to meet your goals, they may be too aggressive. Try
for an easier target. If things get really tough, cease live trading and switch
to a demo account until you regain your footing. Some traders feel that
demo trading is beneath them, but sometimes you have to sacrifice your
ego if you’re serious about making money as a trader. Don’t allow foolish
pride to stand in the way of your long-term success.

chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:41

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 18

The Forex
Playing Field

I

f you watch and understand American football, you know the subtleties
of the sport. You understand the importance of intelligent play calling,
the deception of a disguised blitz, and the unique role of special teams
players.
If you don’t understand, you are watching a lot of big men running
around and crashing into each other.
If you watch and understand auto racing, you know about fuel mileage
strategy, the aerodynamics of “drafting” at 200 miles per hour, and the effect of an extra quarter pound of air pressure in the right rear tire.
If you don’t understand, you are watching a lot of cars running around
in a circle.
If you understand the dynamics of the forex playing field, you understand the ability to calculate odds, the consequences of short-term trading,
and the importance of interest rate differentials.
If you don’t understand, you are playing with fire.

EVENING THE ODDS
Trading can be difficult, and in an effort to make it easier, some traders
resort to taking very quick exits. “It’s hard to earn 100 pips,” goes the
rationale, “I’ll just try to make 10 pips on each trade.” It seems to make
sense; surely, it is easier to earn 10 pips than it is to earn 50 or 100 pips.
The trader seeks to win by playing it safe, which would seem to be a commendable trait in the trading world.
215

chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

216

19:41

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

What if I told you that instead of making things easier, this trader is in
fact making his life more difficult? In order to understand why, we need to
delve a little deeper into game theory.

THE HOUSE HAS THE EDGE
Imagine a roulette wheel in a casino. You walk up to the table and place a
bet on either red or black. What are your chances of success?
If you’ve never played roulette, you might think the odds are 50–50.
After all, half of the numbered pockets are red, and the other half are black,
right?
Wrong. In addition to the red and black pockets, there is at least one
pocket that is neither red nor black. This “zero” pocket tilts the odds
slightly against our player.
In European roulette there is only one zero pocket, giving the house a
slight advantage. On this table, the odds are about 53:47 against our player.
American roulette wheels have two 0s, zero and double zero, and this increases the house advantage to about 5.3 percent. This further stacks the
odds against our player, reducing his chances for success.
In the world of forex trading, the zero pockets represent the spread.
The odds are always going to be at least slightly in favor of the “house,”
which in this case is the market maker. The wider the spread, the more
“zero pockets” the trader must overcome. Just as each additional zero
pocket lowers the roulette player’s chances of success, every additional
pip in the spread lessens the trader’s chances of success.

MAKE THE PLAYING FIELD BIGGER
In the forex market, the house determines the spread, which is the equivalent of the “zero pockets” in roulette. We have no control over the
spread—it is determined by the market maker alone, just as the casino
determines the number of zero pockets on a roulette wheel.
Ah, but what if we could control the number of red pockets and black
pockets? Suppose we were to greatly increase the number of red and black
pockets on the roulette wheel, and at the same time keep the number of
zero pockets steady.
What effect would this have on the odds? The odds of winning at
roulette would improve, because the zero pockets would make up a smaller
percentage of the potential outcomes.
As long as there are zero pockets on the wheel, the odds will never be
in our favor. But by adding additional red and black pockets to the wheel,

chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:41

The Forex Playing Field

Char Count=

217

we would lessen the casino’s advantage and push the odds closer to 50–50.
The more red and black pockets we add, the better our chances become. In
a sense, we would be making the wheel—which is in this case the “playing
field”—bigger.
Of course, we can’t add pockets to a roulette wheel. Casinos are too
smart to allow us to dilute their edge. While that edge is not overwhelming,
it is enough to guarantee that the casino will win more often than they will
lose, over a large enough sample of spins.
But in the world of forex trading, we can increase the size of the playing field, and thereby improve our chances of trading success. And unlike
in a casino, we will not be forcefully removed from the premises for doing
so!
How is this done? We make the playing field larger by using wider exits and stops, by using longer time frames, and by trying for larger gains.
You’ve seen the techniques outlined in this book, so let me ask you this:
Am I ever shooting for a 10-pip gain?

BUT THE OTHER TRADING INSTRUCTOR
SAID. . .
No, but I know that many traders are seeking exactly that. In fact, some
prominent trading instructors are teaching their students to seek only a
small 10- or 15-pip gain before exiting the trade. What is their motivation
for teaching people to trade this way?
Well, perhaps your “trading coach” has asked you to open an account
at a particular broker or market maker. If so, you may have signed an “introducing broker” waiver that allows said trading coach to collect a small
cash payment every time you place a trade. This is his reward for introducing you to the market maker.
If you place just a few trades, your trading coach collects just a little
money, but if you place many trades, the instructor will be handsomely
rewarded. So, it’s in the trading coach’s best interest (and the market
maker’s best interest) to have you placing many trades, even though it may
not be in your best interest. Think about that the next time a so-called
trading instructor tries to convince you to shoot for 10 or 15 pips per trade.

LET’S DO THE MATH
What are the odds of success on a trade with a small target? The following
example should give the short-term trader an idea of exactly what it is he
or she is up against.

chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

218

19:41

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

Let’s assume for the purpose of this example that we are trading a currency pair that has a 3-pip spread, since a spread of that size is very common in the forex market.
Our trader just wants to gain 10 pips. That should be easy, right? It’s
understood that the trader will lose the spread (3 pips) upon entering the
trade. So, in order to turn a profit of 10 pips, the trader actually needs the
exchange rate to move 13 pips in his or her favor:
10 + 3 = 13
Now that we know what is required to create a winning trade, let’s see
what would have to happen to create an equivalent loss. This is how we
will determine the odds of success or failure.
In order to generate a loss of 10 pips, the trader would only need an
adverse move of 7 pips. This is because a loss of 3 pips is incurred immediately upon entering the trade, again due to the 3-pip spread.
10 − 3 = 7
We’ve determined that our trader needs a positive move of 13 pips to
gain 10 pips, but an adverse move of just 7 pips will result in an equivalent
loss of 10 pips. The “raw odds” of 10-pip win versus a 10-pip loss for this
trade can be expressed as:
13/7 = 1.857 : 1
The odds of success in this case are 1.857:1, or nearly 2:1 against. That’s
a real eye-opener, isn’t it? Now you know why it’s so difficult to make
money trading for small gains—the playing field is too small! This is the
equivalent of betting “red” on the roulette wheel, when nearly two-thirds of
the pockets are either black or zero pockets.
We can certainly improve the odds of any trade by using good strategies and solid risk management, but it’s hard to see how an individual can
overcome these initial “raw” odds on a consistent basis. If you’ve tried to
trade this way and failed, now you know why. You’re making the market maker rich, and you might be making an introducing broker rich, but
chances are you are one of the many forex traders who lose money.

CHANGING THE EQUATION
How can we rearrange the odds so that we can have a better chance to win
at forex trading? How can we level the playing field? By making the playing
field larger. You see, if we are aiming for larger gains, the spread becomes

chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

May 31, 2007

19:41

Char Count=

219

The Forex Playing Field

a less significant portion of the trade. It’s the same as adding more black
and red pockets to the roulette wheel; unlike roulette, we can choose the
size of the playing field in forex trading.
Let’s review the earlier trading situation, only this time we’ll make the
playing field larger. Once again, we’ll assume a spread of 3 pips, only this
time the trader will be trying to gain 100 pips instead of just 10 pips. In
order to turn a profit of 100 pips, the trader actually needs the exchange
rate to move 103 pips in his or her favor:
100 + 3 = 103
In order to generate a loss of 100 pips, the trader would only need an
adverse move of only 97 pips. This is because a loss of 3 pips is incurred
immediately upon entering the trade.
100 − 3 = 97
We’ve determined that the trader needs a positive move of 103 pips to
gain 100 pips, but an adverse move of just 97 pips will result in a loss of 100
pips. The “raw odds” of 100-pip win versus a 100-pip loss for this trade can
be expressed as:
103/97 = 1.06 : 1
The odds are now much better, as they are closer to 50–50. As we said
earlier, as long as there is a spread, the odds at the beginning of every trade
will be less than 50–50. However, if we are using good trading techniques
and risk management, or if we are collecting interest on the trade, we can
overcome these slightly negative odds.
Now I’m not saying that you have to shoot for gains of 100 pips or
more on every trade. The point is to understand that when the playing field
is larger in forex trading, the odds of success improve considerably. Also,
traders who are aiming for greater gains tend to hold their trades longer,
and consequently they enter trades (and pay the spread) less frequently.
Your market maker and your introducing broker may love you less,
but your account balance will appreciate it. In the end, you are the only
one who either enjoys the gains or suffers the losses in your account.

WHY DOESN’T EVERYONE DO IT?
So why doesn’t everybody trade for larger gains? Why do so many traders
fall into the trap of trading against staggering odds? There are a couple of

chap18

JWPR014-Ponsi (JWBK014-Ponsi)

220

May 31, 2007

19:41

Char Count=

TAKE CONTROL OF YOUR TRADING DESTINY

possible answers:
1. They don’t understand that they are stacking the odds against them-

selves.
2. They have harmful preconceived notions about the nature of trading

itself.
The problem is that trading isn’t always what we believe it to be, or
wish it were. I know exactly what I would like trading to be, and here it
is: I’d wake up in the morning, trade for an hour, make a ton of money,
close my positions, and do whatever I please for the rest of the day. Trading
would be like a video game that we could play anytime we please. The more
we play the game, the more points we score. We could be rich beyond our
wildest dreams, with minimal effort.
That would be ideal in my opinion, but you may have noticed that these
strategies do not allow for this. That’s because strategies need to work
in the real trading world, not in some fantasy world of our dreams. The
problem is that many traders don’t know that their misconceptions about
trading are not based on facts. They are trading a market that exists in their
dreams, not in reality.

HUGE GAINS WITH MINIMAL EFFORT!
How do we acquire counterproductive attitudes toward trading? My guess
is the worst culprits are infomercials that tout huge gains in just minutes
a day. You may have seen these long-form commercials, often designed to
appear as legitimate television shows, where wide-eyed investors proudly
proclaim that they made huge gains with minimal effort.
Huge gains with minimal effort.
It sounds good, and that is no coincidence. You are being told exactly
what you want to hear. Instead of telling you what you’d like to hear, I’m
going to tell you the truth—trading is hard work. Short-term traders are
stacking the odds against themselves. There is no such thing as a huge gain
with minimal effort.
When I explained that we need to make the playing field larger, and
thereby hold our trades longer, this was probably not what you wanted to
hear. Why is that? Because we want huge gains with minimal effort.
Why are the airwaves filled with promises of huge gains with minimal
effort? Because salesmen know exactly what you want to hear, and they
know how to get you to write a big check. Whenever someone tells you
