
106

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

This principle at work-that you need not default for a long
time if you solemnly promise to pay nothing for a long time-has
not been lost on promoters and investment bankers seeking to finance ever-shakier deals. But its acceptance by lenders took a
while: When the leverage buy-out craze began some years back,
purchasers could borrow only on a reasonably sound basis, in
which conservatively-estimated free cash flow-that is, operating
earnings plus depreciation and amortization less normalized capital
expenditures-was adequate to cover both interest and modest reductions in debt.
Later, as the adrenalin of deal-makers surged, businesses began to be purchased at prices so high that all free cash flow necessarily had to be allocated to the payment of interest. That left
nothing for the paydown of debt. In effect, a Scarlett O'Hara "I'll
think about it tomorrow" position in respect to principal payments
was taken by borrowers and accepted by a new breed of lender, the
buyer of original-issue junk bonds. Debt now became something
to be refinanced rather than repaid. The change brings to mind a
New Yorker cartoon in which the grateful borrower rises to shake
the hand of the bank's lending officer and gushes: "I don't know
how I'll ever repay you."
Soon borrowers found even the new, lax standards intolerably
binding. To induce lenders to finance even sillier transactions, they
introduced an abomination, EBDIT-Earnings Before Depreciation, Interest and Taxes-as the test of a company's ability to pay
interest. Using this sawed-off yardstick, the borrower ignored depreciation as an expense on the theory that it did not require a
current cash outlay.
Such an attitude is clearly delusional. At 95% of American
businesses, capital expenditures that over time roughly approximate depreciation are a necessity and are every bit as real an expense as labor or utility costs. Even a high school dropout knows
that to finance a car he must have income that covers not only
interest and operating expenses, but also realistically-calculated depreciation. He would be laughed out of the bank if he started talking about EBDIT.
Capital outlays at a business can be skipped, of course, in any
given month, just as a human can skip a day or even a week of
eating. But if the skipping becomes routine and is not made up,
the body weakens and eventually dies. Furthermore, a start andstop feeding policy will over time produce a less healthy organism,
human or corporate, than that produced by a steady diet. As busi-

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

107

nessmen, Charlie and I relish having competitors who are unable to
fund capital expenditures.
You might think that waving away a major expense such as
depreciation in an attempt to make a terrible deal look like a good
one hits the limits of Wall Street's ingenuity. If so, you haven't
been paying attention during the past few years. Promoters
needed to find a way to justify even pricier acquisitions. Otherwise, they risked-heaven forbid-losing deals to other promoters
with more "imagination."
So, stepping through the Looking Glass, promoters and their
investment bankers proclaimed that EBDIT should now be measured against cash interest only, which meant that interest accruing
on zero-coupon or PIK bonds could be ignored when the financial
feasibility of a transaction was being assessed. This approach not
only relegated depreciation expense to the let's-ignore-it corner,
but gave similar treatment to what was usually a significant portion
of interest expense. To their shame, many professional investment
managers went along with this nonsense, though they usually were
careful to do so only with clients' money, not their own. (Calling
these managers "professionals" is actually too kind; they should be
designated "promotees.")
Under this new standard, a business earning, say, $100 million
pre-tax and having debt on which $90 million of interest must be
paid currently, might use a zero-coupon of PIK issue to incur another $60 million of annual interest that would accrue and compound but not come due for some years. The rate on these issues
would typically be very high, which means that the situation in year
2 might be $90 million cash interest plus $69 million accrued interest, and so on as the compounding proceeds. Such high-rate reborrowing schemes, which a few years ago were appropriately
confined to the waterfront, soon became models of finance at virtually all major investment banking houses.
When they make these offerings, investment bankers display
their humorous side: They dispense income and balance sheet projections extending five or more years into the future for companies
they barely had heard of a few months earlier. If you are shown
such schedules, I suggest that you join the fun: Ask the investment
banker for the one-year budgets that his own firm prepared as the
last few years began and then compare these with what actually
happened.
Some time ago Ken Galbraith, in his witty and insightful The
Great Crash, coined a new economic term: "the bezzle," defined as

108

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

the current amount of undiscovered embezzlement. This financial
creature has a magical quality: The embezzlers are richer by the
amount of the bezzle, while the embezzlers do not yet feel poorer.
Professor Galbraith astutely pointed out that this sum should
be added to the National Wealth so that we might know the
Psychic National Wealth. Logically, a society that wanted to feel
enormously prosperous would both encourage its citizens to embezzle and try not to detect the crime. By this means, "wealth"
would balloon though not an erg of productive work had been
done.
The satirical nonsense of the bezzle is dwarfed by the realworld nonsense of the zero-coupon bond. With zeros, one party to
a contract can experience "income" without his opposite experiencing the pain of expenditure. In our illustration, a company capable of earning only $100 million dollars annually-and therefore
capable of paying only that much in interest-magically creates
"earnings" for bondholders of $150 million. As long as major investors willingly don their Peter Pan wings and repeatedly say "I
believe," there is no limit to how much "income" can be created by
the zero-coupon bond.
Wall Street welcomed this invention with the enthusiasm lessenlightened folk might reserve for the wheel or the plow. Here,
finally, was an instrument that would let the Street make deals at
prices no longer limited by actual earning power. The result, obviously, would be more transactions: Silly prices will always attract
sellers. And, as Jesse Unruh might have put it, transactions are the
mother's milk of finance.
The zero-coupon or PIK bond possesses an additional attraction for the promoter and investment banker, which is that the
time elapsing between folly and failure can be stretched out. This
is no small benefit. If the period before all costs must be faced is
long, promoters can create a string of foolish deals-and take in
lots of fees-before any chickens come home to roost from their
earlier ventures.
But in the end, alchemy, whether it is metallurgical or financial, fails. A base business can not be transformed into a golden
business by tricks of accounting or capital structure. The man
claiming to be a financial alchemist may become rich. But gullible
investors rather than business achievements will usually be the
source of his wealth.
Whatever their weaknesses, we should add, many zero-coupon
and PIK bonds will not default. We have in fact owned some and

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

109

may buy more if their market becomes sufficiently distressed.
(We've not, however, even considered buying a new issue from a
weak credit.) No financial instrument is evil per se; it's just that
some variations have far more potential for mischief than others.
The blue ribbon for mischief-making should go to the zerocoupon issuer unable to make its interest payments on a current
basis. Our advice: Whenever an investment banker starts talking
about EBDIT-or whenever someone creates a capital structure
that does not allow all interest, both payable and accrued, to be
comfortably met out of current cash flow net of ample capital expenditures-zip up your wallet. Turn the tables by suggesting that
the promoter and his high-priced entourage accept zero-coupon
fees, deferring their take until the zero-coupon bonds have been
paid in full. See then how much enthusiasm for the deal endures.
Our comments about investment bankers may seem harsh.
But Charlie and I-in our hopelessly old-fashioned way-believe
that they should perform a gatekeeping role, guarding investors
against the promoter's propensity to indulge in excess. Promoters,
after all, have throughout time exercised the same judgment and
restraint in accepting money that alcoholics have exercised in accepting liquor. At a minimum, therefore, the banker's conduct
should rise to that of a responsible bartender who, when necessary,
refuses the profit from the next drink to avoid sending a drunk out
on the highway. In recent years, unfortunately, many leading investment firms have found bartender morality to be an intolerably
restrictive standard. Lately, those who have traveled the high road
in Wall Street have not encountered heavy traffic.
One distressing footnote: The cost of the zero-coupon folly
will not be borne solely by the direct participants. Certain savings
and loan associations were heavy buyers of such bonds, using cash
that came from FSLIC-insured deposits. Straining to show
splendid earnings, these buyers recorded-but did not receiveultra-high interest income on these issues. Many of these associations are now in major trouble. Had their loans to shaky credits
worked, the owners of the associations would have pocketed the
profits. In the many cases in which the loans will fail, the taxpayer
will pick up the bill. To paraphrase Jackie Mason, at these associations it was the managers who should have been wearing the ski
masks.

110

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW
I.

[Vol. 19:1

Preferred Stock26

We only want to link up with people whom we like, admire,
and trust. John Gutfreund at Salomon, Colman Mockler, Jr. at Gillette, Ed Colodny at USAir, and Andy Sigler at Champion meet
this test in spades.
They in turn have demonstrated some confidence in us, insisting in each case that our preferreds have unrestricted voting rights
on a fully-converted basis, an arrangement that is far from standard
in corporate finance. In effect they are trusting us to be intelligent
owners, thinking about tomorrow instead of today, just as we are
trusting them to be intelligent managers, thinking about tomorrow
as well as today.
The preferred-stock structures we have negotiated will provide
a mediocre return for us if industry economics hinder the performance of our investees, but will produce reasonably attractive results
for us if they can earn a return comparable to that of American
industry in general. We believe that Gillette, under Colman's management, will far exceed that return and believe that John, Ed, and
Andy will reach it unless industry conditions are harsh.
Under almost any conditions, we expect these preferreds to
return us our money plus dividends. If that is all we get, though,
the result will be disappointing, because we will have given up flexibility and consequently will have missed some significant opportunities that are bound to present themselves during the decade.
Under that scenario, we will have obtained only a preferred-stock
yield during a period when the typical preferred stock will have
held no appeal for us whatsoever. The only way Berkshire can
achieve satisfactory results from its four preferred issues is to have
the common stocks of the investee companies do well.
Good management and at least tolerable industry conditions
will be needed if that is to happen. But we believe Berkshire's
investment will also help and that the other shareholders of each
investee will profit over the years ahead from our preferred-stock
purchase. The help will come from the fact that each company now
has a major, stable, and interested shareholder whose Chairman
and Vice Chairman have, through Berkshire's investments, indirectly committed a very large amount of their own money to these
undertakings. In dealing with our investees, Charlie and I will be
supportive, analytical, and objective. We recognize that we are
working with experienced CEOs who are very much in command
26

[Divided by hash lines: 1989; 1994; 1996; 1990; 1995.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

111

of their own business but who nevertheless, at certain moments,
appreciate the chance to test their thinking on someone without
ties to their industry or to decisions of the past.
As a group, these convertible preferreds will not produce the
returns we can achieve when we find a business with wonderful
economic prospects that is unappreciated by the market. Nor will
the returns be as attractive as those produced when we make our
favorite form of capital deployment, the acquisition of 80% or
more of a fine business with a fine management. But both opportunities are rare, particularly in a size befitting our present and anticipated resources.
In summation, Charlie and I feel that our preferred stock investments should produce returns moderately above those
achieved by most fixed-income portfolios and that we can play a
minor but enjoyable and constructive role in the investee
companies.
Mistakes occur at the time of decision. We can only make our
mistake-du-jour award, however, when the foolishness of a decision becomes obvious. By this measure, 1994 was a vintage year
with keen competition for the gold medal. Here, I would like to
tell you that the mistakes I will describe originated with Charlie.
But whenever I try to explain things that way, my nose begins to
grow.
And the nominees are ...
Late in 1993 I sold 10 million shares of Cap Cities at $63; at
year-end 1994, the price was $85 1/4. (The difference is $222.5 million for those of you who wish to avoid the pain of calculating the
damage yourself.) When we purchased the stock at $17.25 in 1986,
I told you that I had previously sold our Cap Cities holdings at
$4.30 per share during 1978-80, and added that I was at a loss to
explain my earlier behavior. Now I've become a repeat offender.
Maybe it's time to get a guardian appointed.
Egregious as it is, the Cap Cities decision earns only a silver
medal. Top honors go to a mistake I made five years ago that fully
ripened in 1994: Our $358 million purchase of USAir preferred
stock, on which the dividend was suspended in September. . . .
[T]his deal [w]as an "unforced error," meaning that I was neither
pushed into the investment nor misled by anyone when making it.
Rather, this was a case of sloppy analysis, a lapse that may have
been caused by the fact that we were buying a senior security or by
hubris. Whatever the reason, the mistake was large.

112

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Before this purchase, I simply failed to focus on the problems
that would inevitably beset a carrier whose costs were both high
and extremely difficult to lower. In earlier years, these life-threatening costs posed few problems. Airlines were then protected
from competition by regulation, and carriers could absorb high
costs because they could pass them along by way of fares that were
also high.
When deregulation came along, it did not immediately change
the picture: The capacity of low-cost carriers was so small that the
high-cost lines could, in large part, maintain their existing fare
structures. During this period, with the longer-term problems
largely invisible but slowly metastasizing, the costs that were nonsustainable became further embedded.
As the seat capacity of the low-cost operators expanded, their
fares began to force the old-line, high-cost airlines to cut their own.
The day of reckoning for these airlines could be delayed by infusions of capital (such as ours into USAir), but eventually a fundamental rule of economics prevailed: In an unregulated commodity
business, a company must lower its costs to competitive levels or
face extinction. This principle should have been obvious to your
Chairman, but I missed it.
Seth Schofield, [then] CEO of USAir, has worked diligently to
correct the company's historical cost problems but, to date, has not
managed to do so. In part, this is because he has had to deal with a
moving target, the result of certain major carriers having obtained
labor concessions and other carriers having benefitted from "freshstart" costs that came out of bankruptcy proceedings. (As Herb
Kelleher, CEO of Southwest Airlines, has said: "Bankruptcy court
for airlines has become a health spa.") Additionally, it should be
no surprise to anyone that those airline employees who contractually receive above-market salaries will resist any reduction in these
as long as their checks continue to clear.
Despite this difficult situation, USAir may yet achieve the cost
reductions it needs to maintain its viability long-term. But it is far
from sure that will happen.
Accordingly, we wrote our USAir investment down to $89.5
million, or 25¢ on the dollar, at yearend 1994. This valuation reflects both a possibility that our preferred will have its value fully
or largely restored and an opposite possibility that the stock will
eventually become worthless. Whatever the outcome, we will heed
a prime rule of investing: You don't have to make it back the way
that you lost it.

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

113

The accounting effects of our USAir writedown are complicated. On our balance sheet, we carryall stocks at estimated market value. Therefore, at the end of last year's third quarter, we
were carrying our USAir preferred at $89.5 million, or 25% of cost.
In other words, our net worth was at that time reflecting a value for
USAir that was far below our $358 million cost.
But in the fourth quarter, we concluded that the decline in
value was, in accounting terms, "other than temporary," and that
judgment required us to send the writedown of $268.5 million
through our income statement. The amount had no other fourthquarter effect. That is, it did not reduce our net worth, because the
diminution of value had already been reflected there.
Charlie and I will not stand for reelection to USAir's board at
the upcoming annual meeting. Should Seth wish to consult with us,
however, we will be pleased to be of any help that we can.
When Richard Branson, the wealthy owner of Virgin Atlantic
Airways, was asked how to become a millionaire, he had a quick
answer: "There's really nothing to it. Start as a billionaire and then
buy an airline." Unwilling to accept Branson's proposition on
faith, your Chairman decided in 1989 to test it by investing $358
million in a 91/4% preferred stock of USAir.
I liked and admired Ed Colodny, the company's then-CEO,
and I still do. But my analysis of USAir's business was both superficial and wrong. I was so beguiled by the company's long history
of profitable operations, and by the protection that ownership of a
senior security seemingly offered me, that I overlooked the crucial
point: USAir's revenues would increasingly feel the effects of an
unregulated, fiercely competitive market whereas its cost structure
was a holdover from the days when regulation protected profits.
These costs, if left unchecked, portended disaster, however reassuring the airline's past record might be. ([Again, if] history supplied
all of the answers, the Forbes 400 would consist of librarians.)
To rationalize its costs, however, USAir needed major improvements in its labor contracts-and that's something most airlines have found it extraordinarily difficult to get, short of credibly
threatening, or actually entering, bankruptcy. USAir was to be no
exception. Immediately after we purchased our preferred stock,
the imbalance between the company's costs and revenues began to
grow explosively. In the 1990-1994 period, USAir lost an aggregate of $2.4 billion, a performance that totally wiped out the book
equity of its common stock.

114

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

For much of this period, the company paid us our preferred
dividends, but in 1994 payment was suspended. A bit later, with
the situation looking particularly gloomy, we wrote down our investment by 75%, to $89.5 million. Thereafter, during much of
1995, I offered to sell our shares at 50% of face value. Fortunately,
I was unsuccessful.
Mixed in with my many mistakes at USAir was one thing I got
right: Making our investment, we wrote into the preferred contract
a somewhat unusual provision stipulating that "penalty dividends"-to run five percentage points over the prime rate-would
be accrued on any arrearages. This meant that when our 91/4 % dividend was omitted for two years, the unpaid amounts compounded
at rates ranging between 131/4 % and 14%.
Facing this penalty provision, USAir had every incentive to
pay arrearages just as promptly as it could. And in the second half
of 1996, when USAir turned profitable, it indeed began to pay, giving us $47.9 million. We owe Stephen Wolf, the company's CEO, a
huge thank-you for extracting a performance from the airline that
permitted this payment. Even so, USAir's performance has recently been helped significantly by an industry tailwind that may be
cyclical in nature. The company still has basic cost problems that
must be solved.
In any event, the prices of USAir's publicly-traded securities
tell us that our preferred stock is now probably worth its par value
of $358 million, give or take a little. In addition, we have over the
years collected an aggregate of $240.5 million in dividends (including $30 million received in 1997).
Early in 1996, before any accrued dividends had been paid, I
tried once more to unload our holdings-this time for about $335
million. You're lucky: I again failed in my attempt to snatch defeat
from the jaws of victory.
In another context, a friend once asked me: "If you're so rich,
why aren't you smart?" After reviewing my sorry performance
with USAir, you may conclude he had a point.
We continue to hold the convertible preferred stocks described in earlier reports: $700 million of Salomon Inc., $600 million of The Gillette Company, $358 million of USAir Group, Inc.,
and $300 million of Champion International Corp. Our Gillette
holdings will be converted into 12 million shares of common stock
on April 1. Weighing interest rates, credit quality and prices of the
related common stocks, we can assess our holdings in Salomon and
