
Opening Range Breakouts
People get tips at parties, from the newspapers, and on TV, that gluebox of mass culture. Investment officers at slow-moving institutions
may sit in a meeting all day before getting permission to buy or sell.
They tend to place orders before the open. Most overnight orders
come from casual investors, gamblers chasing hot tips, and brokers
who want to leave work early to play golf or make marketing calls.
The two busiest times for professional traders are the beginning and
the end of each session, especially the first and last half-hour periods.
The influx of overnight orders gives professionals an opportunity to
perform a public service by accommodating those who are eager to get
in at the opening. They unwind those positions near the close, when
one loser after another throws in the towel. Many pros go out for lunch
in the middle of the day, which is why many markets tend to become
directionless and choppy between 12 and 1:30. The curve of intraday
volume tends to be U-shaped, with peaks at the open and the close,
and a low in the middle.
Serious traders watch openings because they set the tone for the balance of the day. If the total size of buy orders exceeds that of sell orders,
the floor opens the market higher, forcing the crowd to pay up. Pros
establish short positions at such high levels that the very first drop makes
them money. If the volume of sell orders is higher, the pros open the market lower, load up on the cheap, and sell at a profit on the first bounce.
During the first 15 to 30 minutes after the open many stocks and
futures swing up and down on high volume. As the bulk of overnight
orders gets filled, volume starts to dry up, and the swings slow down,
retreating from the high and the low of the opening range. What happens next largely depends on the width of the opening range.
When the opening range is very wide, say 80% of an average daily
range for the past month, it is likely to have set both the high and the
low for that day. The floor loves wide opening ranges because their

152

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

B
E

F

G

H

D
A

C

Figure 6.5 Day-Trading—Opening Range Breakout
Elder-ray, 5-minute chart
Stocks for day-trading should have heavy volume, be volatile, and be
expensive rather than cheap, so that they have decent intraday ranges. At
the time of this writing, Checkpoint is definitely on the list, along with
NVDA, TARO, and a few other swingers. By the time you read this, other
stocks will be in the forefront of day-traders’ attention.
CHKP has been rallying, coming off the market’s recent lows and closing at 39.44. Today it opens at 39.26 at 9:30 (point A) and within 10 minutes runs up to 40.25 (point B), establishing the high of the opening
range. It then drifts lower, hitting the low of 38.93 at 10:10 A.M.—the low
of the opening range (point C). For the next hour and a half CHKP meanders within its fairly narrow opening range of only 1.32, but by 11:35 it runs
up to its upper edge and penetrates it by 3 ticks (point D). The next bar is
7 ticks higher—this is no false breakout, this is a real opening range breakout, the trend is up, and we have to get long. The 13-bar EMA is steadily
rising. Whenever Bear Power returns to the zero line and turns negative, it shows that bears have regained their footing—a good time to add
to longs within an uptrend (points E, F, G, and H). At 15:25 (point I) the EMA
turns down, giving a sell signal—time to take profits on long positions.
At the right edge of the chart, the day is over, and we may count profits before going home. If you bought on the first buy signal following the
opening range breakout and sold when the EMA turned down, your profit
is 42.15 − 40.40 = 1.75. Multiply this by the number of shares you traded,
and add other positions if you pyramided.

TRADING

153

extremes provide two good levels of support and resistance. The pros
keep buying near the lows, shorting near the highs, and spending the
rest of the day unwinding their positions at a profit. A narrow opening
range makes it more likely that the market will break out of it and start
a new trend for the day.
The high and the low of an opening range are like the feet of a
boxer. When they are wide apart, the boxer is stable and in control,
but when they are close, it is easy to knock him off balance and force
him to move.
Outsiders love trends and chase breakouts, but the floor operates in
a reactive mode, selling the highs and buying the lows. It prefers flat
trading ranges to runaway trends. The floor usually wins, but once in
a while outsiders overwhelm the pros and push the market into a
trend. When that happens, smart floor traders cut their losses and run,
while the dumb and the stubborn contribute to the mortality rate.
The opening range has several implications for day-traders:
The opening and closing prices, like two poles of a magnet, tend to
be at the opposite extremes of a day’s bar. If the market opens
near the low of a wide opening range, expect it to close near the
upper edge and look for buying opportunities. If it opens near the
high of a wide opening range, expect it to close lower and look
for shorting opportunities.
Breakouts from wide opening ranges tend to be false. When prices
take out the high or the low of a wide opening range, be alert to
the possibility of the breakout petering out and be ready to trade
its return into the range.
When the opening range is narrow, expect a breakout and be ready
to trade in its direction.
Successful traders test everything. There are hours in most days when
the market is undecided, neither a buy nor a sell. Use that time to
research its opening ranges—how many minutes they take to form in
your stock or future, how wide they tend to be, and so on. Create a
graph linking the height of the opening range with the likelihood of
a breakout, and you’ll acquire a private tool, a real edge in the markets.
Currencies—Trading the 24-hour Markets The United States is the
only country in the world where most people don’t think much about
currencies. We live in the dollar universe, but the moment an American

154

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

sets foot abroad, he realizes that everyone, from executives to taxi
drivers, watches exchange rates. When the people outside the United
States, and even recent immigrants to the United States, get a bit of
trading capital, their first idea is to trade currencies. The bulk of currency
trading takes place in the interbank market, directly between dealers.
Beginners turn to unscrupulous currency trading shops that bucket
their orders (hold their money without executing trades) and kill them
with commissions, spreads, and interest charges. Survivors discover
currency futures, where spreads are more narrow, commissions more
reasonable, and no interest is charged for the privilege of holding a
position.
Aside from the horrors of forex shops, the biggest challenge of currencies is that they trade around the clock. You may enter a trade, analyze it in the evening, and decide to take profits the next day. When
you wake up, there is no profit to be taken. The turning point you saw
coming has already come and gone, not in the United States, but in
Asia or Europe. Someone has picked your pocket while you slept!
Markets are tough enough without exposing yourself to 24-hour risk.
Big financial institutions deal with this problem by implementing a
system of “passing the book.” A bank may open a position in Tokyo,
manage it intraday, and then transfer it to its London branch before
closing for the night. London continues to trade that position and in
the evening passes the book to New York, which trades it until it
passes it back to Tokyo. Currencies follow the sun, and small traders
can’t keep up with it. I once visited a wealthy Thai gentleman who was
planning to install his two sons and himself in three different cities
around the globe to trade currencies, but the boys balked.
If you trade currencies, you should either take a very long-term view
and ignore daily fluctuations, or else day-trade, avoiding overnight
positions. If you trade currency futures, use two sets of data. Use cash
or interbank data for your weekly charts and futures data for the dailies
to pinpoint entries and exits. The daily charts of currency futures are
full of overnight gaps because those markets are open for only a few
hours a day, but the charts of cash are smooth.
S&P 500—False Breakouts S&P futures are notoriously hard to trade,
but newcomers are drawn to them like moths to a flame. “Are you man
enough to trade the S&P?!” is the battle cry of those overgrown boys.
Most traders are woefully undercapitalized for this expensive contract.
It is hard to see how anyone with less than a quarter million in his

TRADING

155

account could trade a single contract of this volatile market, which
often jumps several points of $250 each within minutes.
The floor takes full advantage of the fact that most gamblers do not
have enough money to carry overnight positions, place sensible stops,
or ride out small adverse moves. The floor has got the art of shaking out inexperienced day-traders down to a science. They use false
breakouts to make losers jump like Pavlov’s dogs, buying high and
selling low.
The floor tries to push prices through several well-known levels on
most days, flushing out weak holders. There is always a mass of sell
stops below the low of the opening range and the low of the day.
Shoving the market through those lows leads to selling by weak holders, and the pros then buy their merchandise on sale. There is always
a mass of buy stops at the high of the opening range, the high of the
day, and the high of the previous day, placed by weak shorts. Pushing
the S&P through those levels sets off panicky buying. That’s when
the floor sells short, positioning itself for the next downswing. There
is nothing uniquely devious about this game, only it works especially
well in the S&P because there are so many amateurs and this market
is so expensive that they have no staying power.
A day-trader who recognizes the special challenges of the S&P can
reach several conclusions:
This is not a good market for beginners; it is too expensive and too
fast. Learn to drive an old Chevy before a turbocharged Ferrari.
Have a good-sized account if you plan to trade this market. A quarter of a million dollars for each contract gives you staying power
and allows you to place sensible stops.
Fade false breakouts in the S&P—trade against them. Use oscillators
to detect when a false breakout starts running out of steam, and
trade for the return into the middle of the day’s range.

The Daily Plan
A day in front of a live screen includes many dead hours when nothing
seems to happen. People grow bored and restless, and the next thing
you know, a day-trader turns his screen into an entertainment center.
Professionals tend to follow a timetable to reinforce their discipline.
Your trading day should start before the opening. Give yourself at
least half an hour to assemble and analyze overnight data. Watch the
first half hour of trading with no interruptions, not even phone calls. If

156

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

you put on a trade, then manage it. Otherwise dedicate two hours to
research, database maintenance, reading a trading magazine or a book,
or trolling the net for fresh ideas, all the while in front of the screen.
Suspend everything if the market looks close to giving a buy or sell
signal. Have lunch at your desk if you are managing a trade. Review
trading-related posts on the net and put more time into research.
Consider keeping exercise equipment in your trading room, such as a
stationary bicycle or a rowing machine. A healthy mind in a healthy
body. As the closing approaches, the market again demands your undivided attention, especially if you are exiting a trade.
There are two reasons to have a daily plan. You need to make sure
that all the necessary work gets done, trades found, placed, exited,
recorded, and research conducted. The other reason is to remind yourself that you are day-trading as a business and not for amusement and
that you are serious about success.
Remember that your feelings, desires, and anxieties are part and
parcel of the game. When feelings are unsettled, trading becomes a
problem. I had a client in the late 1990s who had achieved phenomenal success day-trading just one stock, AOL. He looked at yesterday’s
closing price, checked the levels at which AOL traded in Europe, and
reviewed any overnight news. When AOL shot out of the gate after the
open, he traded its first swing, and sometimes two or three more during the first 30 minutes or an hour. He grossed $5,000 almost daily
within the first hour of trading, buying and selling 1,000 shares at a
clip. Then he spent the rest of day pissing that money away and losing!
When he came to consult me, it was obvious that his system worked
well only during the first hour. It tracked an overnight buildup of pressure, and once that pressure equalized, he had no edge. His system
was fantastically effective—as long as he stopped trading an hour after
the opening. But he could not stop!
It turned out that his self-esteem was largely based on trying to win
his old father’s respect. The father was an immigrant who built a successful business by the dint of hard work, and he only respected men
who worked hard and put in long hours. My client felt that he had
to keep on “working” in the markets all day rather than turn off his
computer and go outside to play golf, drive his boat, or putter in the
garden. He did not want psychotherapy. I tried calling him at 10:30
to remind him to stop trading, but then he got caller ID to avoid my
calls. A great system is only half the game; the other is trading psychology. The only goal of successful traders is to grow equity. Every-

TRADING

157

thing else, including love, respect, and so forth, has to be gained outside
the markets.

THE IMPULSE SYSTEM
High volatility during the bull market of the 1990s made momentum
trading very popular. The idea is to jump aboard a fast-moving stock
as it begins to run and hop off after it slows down. Momentum traders
do not care about company fundamentals; they may not even know
what that company does. All they care about is direction and speed.
They buy when a stock rallies (they rarely go short) and hope to cash
out before the impulse runs out.
The game of momentum trading appears deceptively easy. The
owners of trading rooms make fortunes in commissions, while legions
of traders lose even bigger fortunes trying to grab money from fastmoving stocks. Impulse trading tends to degenerate into impulsive
trading, and the game is over.
Momentum trading has a built-in psychological contradiction that’s
deadly to most people. On the one hand, this fast game, like infantry
fighting or video game playing, is best suited for young people with
strong hunting instincts, capable of abandoning themselves to the game.
On the other hand, momentum trading requires the cold detached discipline of a professional card counter in a casino. Successful momentum
trading, like professional gambling, is a boring business. The ability to
accept small steady gains—essential for momentum trading—is very rare.
Few people can walk away from the table just as the party gets going.
One of my favorite clients is a professional trader in London who
sometimes, for entertainment, goes to a casino at night. He plays
blackjack for a minimum stake of £5 and quits when he is either £200
ahead or £400 behind. He has worked out a card-counting method
and a money management system that have him going home with £200
13 times out of 14. He has proven to himself that he can steadily win
at the casino, and now he rarely goes there because he must spend
6 or 7 hours counting and betting before reaching his winning or losing limit. It is hard work, counting all the time. The crowd of amateurs
around him is having a lot of fun losing. My client prefers to stay home
and trade stocks where the odds are much more to his liking.
Successful momentum trading requires great discipline. You must
identify a price move, hop aboard without waiting for a better confirmation, and jump off as soon as that move slows down. The longer

158

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

you wait to identify the momentum, the less money is left for you.
Taking profits is stressful because of a normal human tendency to hold
out for a little more and then beat yourself up for having left too early.
A momentum trader needs a set of technical rules, a money management system, and iron discipline to enter when the time is right and
exit without regrets after hitting his profit target or a loss limit.

Entries
I designed this system to identify the inflection points where a trend
speeds up or slows down. The Impulse System works in any timeframe,
including intraday. It provides buy and sell signals, but leaves it up to
you to select good markets, tweak parameters, and supply the discipline.
Choose an active market whose prices swing in a broad channel.
What happens if you make a C trade and grab only 10% of a channel
width? This result is not too bad if the channel is 20 points wide, but
a C trade is an exercise in futility if the channel is only 5 points wide.
Chase fat rabbits, don’t waste your time on skinny ones.
The Impulse System combines two simple but powerful indicators.
One measures market inertia, the other its momentum. When both
point in the same direction, they identify an impulse worth following.
We get an entry signal when both indicators get in gear, but as soon as
they stop confirming one another, we take that as an exit signal.
The Impulse System uses an exponential moving average to find
uptrends and downtrends. When the EMA rises, it shows that inertia
favors the bulls. When EMA falls, inertia works for the bears. The second component is MACD-Histogram, an oscillator whose slope reflects
changes of power among bulls or bears. When MACD-Histogram rises,
it shows that bulls are becoming stronger. When it falls, it shows that
bears are growing stronger.
The Impulse System flags those bars where both the inertia and the
momentum point in the same direction. When both the EMA and
MACD-Histogram rise, they show that bulls are roaring and the uptrend
is accelerating. When both indicators fall together, they show that bears
are crushing the market. Those indicators may stay in gear with each
other for only a few bars, but that’s when the market travels fast—the
impulse is on!
Before you rush to apply the Impulse System to your favorite market, remember how Triple Screen analyzes markets in more than one

TRADING

159

timeframe. Select your favorite timeframe and call it intermediate.
Multiply it by five to define your long-term timeframe. If your favorite
chart is daily, analyze the weekly chart to make a strategic decision
to be a bull or a bear. Use a 26-week EMA, the slope of weekly MACDHistogram, or both, on the weekly chart.
Once you’ve defined the long-term trend, return to your daily chart
and look for trades only in the direction of the weekly. The Impulse
System uses a 13-day EMA and a 12-26-9 MACD-Histogram. The EMA,
tracking market inertia, is a little shorter than our usual 22 bars, making the system more sensitive.
When the weekly trend is up, turn to the daily charts and wait for
both the 13-day EMA and MACD-Histogram to turn up. When both
inertia and momentum rise, you have a strong buy signal, telling you
to get long and stay long until the buy signal disappears.
When the weekly trend is down, turn to the daily charts and wait for
both the 13-day EMA and MACD-Histogram to turn down. They give you
a signal to go short, but be ready to cover when that signal disappears.
Some technical programs allow you to mark price bars with different
colors. Make them green when both the EMA and MACD-Histogram
rise, and red when both indicators fall. Don’t mark the bars where the
indicators point in the opposite directions. This lets you easily see signals at a glance.
Programming differs for different software packages, but here’s how
I programmed buy signals into Internet Trader Pro:
AlertMarker (mov (c,13,e) > ref (mov (c,13,e), −1) and fml
(“MACD-Histogram”) > ref (fml (“MACD-Histogram”), −1), Below)
Here is the code for sell signals:
AlertMarker (mov (c,13,e) < ref (mov (c,13,e), −1) and fml
(“MACD-Histogram”) < ref (fml (“MACD-Histogram”), −1), Above)
If you know how to program, you can add more features to the system. You can make its EMA length variable and test different lengths,
looking for those that work best in your market. You can program
sound alarms for buy and sell signals and monitor a number of markets without being glued to the screen. There is a fisherman on the
esplanade near where I live who has several fishing poles, each with
a little bell. Whenever a fish bites, a bells rings, the man puts his newspaper down and starts reeling it in.

160

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

B
A

Figure 6.6 The Impulse System
When both EMA and MACD-Histogram point in the same direction,
they identify an accelerating market move. The best way to see Impulse
signals is to program buys and sells in different colors. Trade in the
direction of an impulse to catch the sharpest, most dynamic moves.
Also, never, ever trade against the Impulse. For example, a bullish divergence, a double bottom, and a kangaroo tail in March and April all
point to an important bottom, but you may not buy as long as Impulse
is down. The sell signal disappears at point A, and that’s when you may
go long.
The Impulse System beautifully tracks the bear move in January-March
and the bull move in April–May. In May, bearish divergence B is followed
by the disappearance of an Impulse buy signal, which permits shorting.
The resulting downtrend is not as dynamic as the two preceding moves,
with alternating Impulse buy and sell signals. It is a sign of an indecisive
market, which is hard to trade. If in doubt, stay out.
At the right edge of the chart, a triple bullish divergence of MACDHistogram gives a buy signal. The Impulse System has just gone off its
sell signal. The stock market appears poised for a rally. If you buy, with
a stop below the latest low, make sure that order is stop-and-reverse. If
this bullish divergence gets aborted, the market will give a Hound of the
Baskervilles signal and fall out of bed.

TRADING
