
explain why he needs to "cut his losses." It is even more difficult to explain
how he can do it in a way that suits his unique psychological makeup.
The easiest way to explain how to apply this type of wisdom, without
actually explaining it at all, is to say, "Well, if you want to be a successful
trader, you need to learn self-discipline and emotional control." I don't
believe this type of vague advice was intentional, however, for principally
two reasons. First, self-discipline and emotional control are abstract
concepts that are not easily explained or understood. We all hear or read the
words a lot, but ask anyone you know to define either of these concepts,
and you'll probably get a blank stare.
Second, today's successful traders started out their journey without maps,
signposts, or guidelines or the benefit of knowing exactly where they had to
end up, from a psychological perspective, to accumulate their fortune.
They had to explore the trading world through a means of self-reflection
and readjustment that was very demanding and time consuming. One could
say they more or less stumbled through it learning from each mistake,
many small and others that were devastating both financially and
emotionally.
At some point, they probably realized that something about themselves
had changed because the normal kind of market activity that once had a
very negative emotional impact on them, like anger, stress, anxiety, and
fear, just didn't have that same effect any longer. They must have gained
some measure of confidence in themselves to respond appropriately to all
possible market conditions because there is a direct correlation between a
person's level of confidence and the negative emotions mentioned.
Confidence and fear are states of mind that are similar in nature, only
separated by degree. As a person's level of confidence increases, his or her
degree of confusion, anxiety, and fear dissipates proportionately.
This confidence would naturally develop as people learned to trust
themselves to do whatever needed to be done, without hesitation. As a
result of this kind of self-trust, they would no longer need to fear the
seemingly unpredictable and erratic behavior of the markets. However, the
main point I am making here is that the process of change that took place
was in the mental environment and psychological makeup of each
individual trader; the markets didn't change, the tools that were used didn't
change, the trader did.
Now, when traders go through a transition in their personal development
and learn a new skill on a trial-and-error basis, it is unlikely that they
would keep a detailed record of the steps to that learning process, especially
if that process was characterized by pain, anxiety, and frustration. Obviously,
if someone doesn't know exactly how they acquired the skills they now have,
then, naturally, it would be extremely difficult for them to explain to
someone else how they got them.
Besides, when it comes to trading, once someone is making the kind of
money he had always dreamed of, there isn't much incentive to spend the
17

time and energy necessary to break down these abstract skills into an
effective learning process from which others can derive some benefit.
Developing educational programs to explain how to become a successful
trader requires a completely different set of skills from the skills necessary
to be a trader. As will be explained in a moment, the learning process and the
kind of personal transformation that was necessary to enable me to write
this book was distinctly different from the kind of learning process I
experienced as a trader to realize why a book like this needed to be
written. One learning process was chosen and the other was forced.
What I mean by forced is, I had to lose my house, my car, and
practically everything else I owned to learn some of the ways in which I
needed to change my perspective to operate in the trading environment
effectively. Losing all my possessions was a complete life-altering
experience, an experience that taught me a lot about the nature of fear and
the debilitating effects it has on a person's ability to trade effectively.
The kind of insight I gained as a result of this experience is the type of
learning process I call a forced awareness. This is where the nature and
characteristics of the environment I was operating in were much different
from what I believed they were, first out of ignorance, and because I put up
mental defenses to block my perception of certain information. Eventually I
was forced by the markets to acknowledge many things about myself that I
otherwise wouldn't consider. When all the external symbols that represented
a major part of my identity were gone, I didn't have any other choice and
was forced to perceive myself in new and different ways.
These events occurred in March 1982. At the time, I was an account
executive with Merrill Lynch Commodities at its Chicago Board of Trade
office. Less than a year before, in June 1981, I moved from the suburbs of
Detroit where I was enjoying, at least financially, a very successful career in
commercial property and casualty insurance. I left Michigan and success to
move to Chicago and be a trader. I went to work for Merrill Lynch
because I didn't have enough money to buy a seat at the Board of Trade or
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and didn't know that you could lease
seats at that time.
I had an expensive apartment on the gold coast of Chicago and a Porsche;
I was maintaining a house in an affluent suburb of Detroit that my
girlfriend and her two daughters were living in; and I was driving or flying
back and forth between the two cities almost every weekend to visit them. I
was under extreme financial pressure to succeed because my life-style
expenditures were far and away in excess of what I could afford. Unless I
made it big as a trader, it would be very hard to reconcile some of the
decisions I made to put myself in that kind of a situation.
By the time I moved to Chicago I had already been trading for over two
years. Twice, before moving, I lost all my trading capital. Of course, I would
quickly save up and start again. My brief periods of success and few
winning trades were enough to justify that I continue trying. Once I was
18

very close to making over a quarter of a million dollars on a trade, but I
pulled out of it just before the big move. This devastated me, but I also
became completely hooked on trading and even more determined to be
successful. From that experience I decided to buy all the books I could get
and attend all the seminars I could afford.
Something stated in virtually all the books I read was that it is very
difficult to learn how to trade or sustain any success if one is under a great
deal of financial pressure—meaning don't expect to become a successful
trader if you have limited trading capital or if you are trading with money
you can't afford to lose. I was obviously violating both these rules because I
had very little trading capital relative to my life-style that I absolutely could
not afford to lose. Also I had a lot of other evidence that the odds were not
exactly in my favor.
I came to Chicago because I believed that if I could get close to the action
and meet people who knew how to trade, I could then learn from them. I
was in for a very rude awakening. I was at Merrill Lynch Commodities, its
second largest commodity office, with 38 account executives. At first I was
shocked to find out only one of the account executives had any experience
trading his own money. Then I was further shocked to learn that none of
these account executives had any customers who were making any money.
In fact, the typical customer lost his original stake within an average of four
months.
My next major disappointment came when I began to meet and make
friends with as many floor traders as possible, believing that if the guys up
in the offices don't know how to make money, the floor traders certainly
must. Again, I found the same conditions that existed up in the offices.
Other than a handful of floor traders who had a reputation and a mystique
that everyone seemed to be in awe of, I couldn't find one person who was
making money consistently, who wasn't confused or knew what he wanted
to do and then did it, without first having to ask everyone around him for
confirmation that he was doing the right thing. I am not implying that I
didn't meet traders who at some point in the day hadn't made money. They
just couldn't keep it. I knew many traders who could make $2,000 or
$3,000 the first couple of hours of trading. But they would always lose it
back, plus more, a short time afterward.
Everybody seemed to be suffering from the same kinds of problems and
mistakes that nobody really recognized as problems. Obviously, the nature of
the markets made it easy not to have to confront anything that otherwise
might be perceived as a problem because the next trade always had the
possibility of making everything else in one's life seem irrelevant. Why
deal with anything if the next trade can make you rich? All the traders I
knew, including myself, were affected by this type of "big-trade" mentality.
In fact, my big-trade mentality was so pervasive that I would refuse to take
profits of $500 or $750 in many trades even when I knew that's all there
was to be made. This may sound absurd, but I wouldn't take profits of such
19

small amounts, because, at that time, it felt as if the market was insulting
me by offering such paltry sums compared to what I needed or expected.
As my financial problems grew, so did my desperation. And I certainly
wasn't comforted by anything I saw going on around me. But I still held on
to the belief that I could trade out of these difficulties. That is until March
1982; by then it was all over. A mere eight months after moving to Chicago
to pursue my dreams of financial independence, I had nothing left except
my job, apartment, clothes, a television, and a bed.
Practically overnight, almost all the symbols that validated my identity
were gone. What I mean is, a big part of my self-concept was made up of my
possessions like my house, my car, and especially my credit. Maintaining
flawless credit was something I had always been proud of. Now I found
myself without any of these things. As I've already pointed out, it's not as
if there hadn't been plenty of evidence to suggest the possibility of this
happening, because there had been. But there was a part of me that
wouldn't allow a direct confrontation with this evidence or the implications.
It was just too easy to make excuses for all the things going on around me
that didn't add up.
Refusing to confront or consider the implications of all the conflicting
information created a great deal of stress. And to compound the situation, I
had this intense fear that I would lose everything. But again, I did
everything possible to hide this fear and put it somewhere in my mind
where I couldn't feel it. Yet, there must have been a part of me that sensed
my impending fall. Why else would I have been so consumed with fear?
But how could I face any of this when I had no way of reconciling the
imbalance that losing all of these things would create? What I mean is the
imbalance between what I believed about myself and the things that
validated these beliefs. Who would I be after all these things were gone?
Well it didn't take me very long to find out. As my financial condition
deteriorated to critical levels, my mental defenses also began to break
down. I eventually accepted the inevitability of doing what I believed was
the ultimate act of failure and filed for bankruptcy.
There were a lot of things that changed inside of me as a result of this
experience. And like any one else forced to deal with major changes in his
or her life, I learned a lot about myself. The first thing that happened, which
was quite surprising, was that the stress dissipated. Actually I was
overcome with a great sense of relief with nothing to anticipate, dread, or try
so desperately to defend against. I was living through my worst fear and
found there really wasn't anything about the situation that I couldn't deal
with. It wasn't nearly as bad in reality as I imagined it would be. I was still
alive and healthy, I was able to think and function, and I started to appreciate
my ability to think as my greatest asset.
This sense of appreciation began to grow into a deeper level of
understanding about the basic nature of my identity. For the most part, I
grew up believing that who I was consisted of the things that I owned. The
20

more possessions I owned, the more of a person it made me. What I began
to realize is that I was more than the things I had accumulated. When the
facade was stripped away, it allowed me to sense this deeper dimension
that, up to this point, I had only the slightest inkling of These new
awarenesses, in turn, helped me understand how being wrong and losing
something didn't in any way diminish me as a person. I was beginning to
learn that there was a certain freedom in granting myself permission to be
wrong and maybe there was no such thing as a failure, unless something
positive and useful isn't learned from the experience.
However, I didn't relate these personal experiences because I thought
they were particularly unusual, except for one. Everyone knows there are
many traders who lose everything they own, and even though some of
them will come to the same kind of awarenesses about themselves, they
wouldn't necessarily be able to do it as a trader, considering the financial
requirements. I, too, was not in a financial position to keep on trading,
except that I still had my job at Merrill Lynch. In fact, for me it was
business as usual, as if nothing at all had happened. I certainly wasn't
about to announce to my customers or anyone in the office that I had
just filed for bankruptcy. My job as an account executive was one of the
few things I had left, and as far as I was concerned, it depended on me
being a good trader.
This is the one key difference for me that ultimately lead to the creation
of this book. I was fortunate enough to be able to keep on trading (although
not with my own money) while these major psychological changes were
taking place, putting me in a unique position to examine and study the
various ways in which the condition of my inner psychological
environment affected what I experienced in the outer physical environment.
This relationship between inner and outer isn't always that apparent but in
this situation it was inescapable. I learned that the markets offer the trader
an opportunity to profit from price movement, and these opportunities are
basically in perpetual motion. It is an environment where the individual
has the freedom to create his own results, unimpeded by many of the
constraints that exist in everyday social life. These never ending
opportunities make the market a perfect mirror of the trader's attitude.
What the trader sees in that movement and what he can do about it the
markets have no control over. All the choices and all the power to turn
these choices into experience reside in the mind of each trader.
For example, if I perceived the market as a threat, afraid of what it might
take away from me, it wasn't because the outside conditions were actually
threatening me in some way. It became very apparent to me that my fear was
a result of my inability to anticipate events or act in a way that most
appropriately served my best interests. It was only the lack of trust I had in
myself to do what needed to be done that I was really afraid of.
Furthermore, I discovered that my mental framework was structured to
avoid losses at all costs and in my desperate attempts to do so, I actually
21

created them. You can think of it this way: none of us has the mental
capacity to be aware of everything going on in the environment at once.
The environmental information we focus our attention on, out of all that
exists, will be the information that has the most importance to us. As we
allocate more and more of our attention to certain kinds of information,
because of its importance, we are at the same time systematically excluding
other types of information from our awareness. I created my losses instead
of avoiding them simply because I was trying to avoid them.
Instead of being positively focused on market information that would
indicate the potential for opportunity, I was more concerned with
information that validated what I feared the most. As a result, a great deal of
market information pertaining to other possibilities and opportunities that
existed in any given moment completely escaped my attention, passing me
by. The only way I could have perceived these opportunities (other than
after the fact) would have been to let go of whatever was causing me to
divert my attention away from what was happening in the market "now."
I had no way of knowing what I was missing out on until my beliefs
about the significance of losses and being wrong started changing. Once
this shift in perspective occurred, I started to notice behavior characteristics
of the market and relationships between those characteristics that I was
otherwise totally oblivious to.
At some point, I realized that because I had already lost everything, I
really didn't have anything to fear, and, as a result, I inadvertently learned
one of the most important lessons to becoming a successful trader: how to
"accept" a loss without any negative consequences. No guilt, anger, shame,
or self-punishment.
As my fear of losing dissipated, I was seeing and experiencing a different
market because I was different. It was as if someone had removed blinders,
which I didn't know existed, from my eyes. Up till then, my trading had
always been affected by my fears. I didn't have the slightest notion of what
it would be like to trade without fear or that doing it was even a possibility
and least of all, that it was, in fact, necessary to be successful.
What also became very apparent to me was the extent to which all of
my fears had effectively blocked me from understanding why it was so
absolutely necessary to have some clearly defined trading and money
management rules that must be followed. It was all starting to make sense.
The more I followed my rules the more I trusted myself. The more I
trusted myself the more I could focus my attention on subtle relationships
in the market's behavior to learn new things about the market helping me
become a better trader. Eventually I could gauge the positive effects these
new attitudes had on my ability to shift my perspective and flow with the
markets. The less I cared about whether or not I was wrong, the clearer
things became, making it much easier to move in and out of positions,
cutting my losses short to make myself mentally available to take the next
opportunity.
22

By June 1982 I was starting to make consistent money for my customers
who relied on me for their trades. Not a lot of money by most trader's
standards, but steady. I was having winning days that were turning into
winning weeks and months. Then sometime in August 1982 I thought of
writing a book or at the very least developing a seminar to explain to other
traders what I had discovered for myself.
In the area of education there was a definite void in the market. There
really wasn't any material that addressed trading psychology at a deep
enough level of insight to effectively help someone understand why success
was so elusive. I wrote this book to address what I believe is a critical need
for people who want to trade the futures of stock markets to have an
organized, systematic, step-by-step approach to learn the mental skills
necessary to accumulate wealth as a trader. The secret to this approach is
learning a new thinking methodology.

23

CHAPTER 2

Why a New Thinking
Methodology?

It is my intention in this chapter to demonstrate clearly how a typical social
upbringing that instills in the individual certain values and beliefs that make up a
thought methodology used for being successful is not practical or functional and
is inconsistent with the methods necessary to be successful in the trading
environment. Someone attempting to operate in the trading environment in all
the familiar ways that would assure getting what they want will likely find
themselves in a constant state of frustration, anxiety, and fear, wondering what is
wrong or thinking something must be wrong with them.
The irony is, of course, that, on the surface, trading looks so simple, when in
fact most people will find it to be the most difficult endeavor they ever undertake.
Success will always seem so close, and yet always so elusive. And this frustration
will continue until the trader adapts to the conditions that exist in the trading
environment by learning a new thinking methodology, one that works most
effectively in that environment and not what he thinks will work based on his
cultural and social upbringing.
Perhaps many of you reading this book have heard about a seminar being
offered where you can learn how to walk barefoot over a 20-foot bed of redhot coals. The people who developed the method to make it possible did so
on the assumption that the achievements of people who do things very well
and excel beyond what other members of the same culture of society would
consider possible do so as the result of a specific way they think—a
methodology in which their beliefs are in some way different from everyone
else's. This methodology can be broken down into a system that can be
24

learned and subsequently taught to others. The only difference between
those who excel and those of mediocre achievement is that one group has
learned a thinking methodology that has not occurred to the other.
With this hypothesis, it is my understanding that the people who
developed the program went to the South Pacific and sought out those
who demonstrated an ability to walk over hot coals with their bare feet—
without any physical damage whatsoever. Upon finding a few of these South
Pacific "fire-walkers," the program developers proceeded to analyze their
beliefs and attitudes so as to arrive at a thinking methodology they could
teach in the United States.
I'm sure I don't have to point out the physical and emotional
implications of attempting to walk over a red-hot bed of coals with your
bare feet. The fear generated over just the thought of doing it would
normally be overwhelming. The potential physical damage to your feet—
with the possibility of being crippled for the rest of your life—is quite real.
And yet, as presented by several news organizations, both television and
print, people from all walks of life involved in the seminar accomplished
what we would universally agree to be a tremendous feat. They overcame
their fear and walked 20 feet over a bed of hot coals.
Now, I'm not going to have you fire-walking the futures pit, but habits of
thought die hard. And to make way for the new thinking methodology I
offer as a means of excelling as a trader, you will have to question some of
your beliefs and probe deeply rooted concepts of what is possible.
Sometimes only a thorough mental "house cleaning" can help you throw
away failure to make room for success. And exposing yourself to
information that may cause you to ask yourself "what if it were true" is the
first step to any mental cleansing process.
For many reasons, which will be explored in greater depth in Part II, it
rarely, if ever, occurs to the beginning trader that the markets confront him
with an environment that is categorically different from anything he is
accustomed to or trained to deal with effectively by society. For example,
the markets can be looked at as a never-ending event, always changing,
virtually without structure, in perpetual motion, with an unlimited potential
for profit as well as loss in every trade.
The psychological impact on the individual interacting with such an
environment is formidable—especially when you consider the many ways
in which all of us typically go about structuring our lives with highly defined
boundaries, limits, and rules, so things stay basically the same. For most
people, a static environment is a fundamental component of their sense of
security and well-being.
Not only can the markets destroy a person's sense of security by forcing
the trader to confront, on a moment-to-moment basis, his lack of
acceptance of change, but they also produce an emotional environment of
considerable competitiveness and stress. There's the compulsive need to win
millions, with the simultaneous fear of financial devastation. The markets
25
