
Choosing your entry criteria
Intraday charting systems can be as varied as systems based on daily price
data. An hourly or 30-minute chart may call for entry based on one of the
following criteria:
 A moving average crossover
 An MACD buy signal
 A breakout out of a consolidation phase
 A new hourly bar high
You may base your entry signals on a technical criterion identified above or
on some different technical criteria of your choosing. Just don’t base your
entry criteria on chart patterns. I’ve found that chart patterns formed over a
few hours aren’t as reliable as those formed over several weeks or months.

Balancing the advantages and disadvantages
of intraday trading signals
Your biggest advantage as a full-time swing trader over a trader who can’t
watch the markets throughout the day is the ability to enter an order as soon
as a trading signal appears. This advantage is even greater in securities that
tend to be volatile. By paying attention to the signals generated through your
intraday charting system, you can enter earlier than traders who rely on
end-of-day data.

Chapter 11: Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits
Yet this blessing can easily become a curse, because trading signals generated intraday can be reversed intraday. In such cases, you may need to exit
your position because the original reason for entering was reversed.
One way to mitigate the risk of an intraday trading signal reversal is to execute
orders in the last hour of the trading day.

Investigating who’s behind the bidding:
Nasdaq Level II quotes
Nasdaq Level II quotes, posted prices that show you who’s bidding for and
offering shares of the security you’re about to enter, are more of a staple for
day traders, but they may be helpful in your full-time swing trading arsenal.
They allow you to quickly see the relative positioning of orders by market
makers. Generally, Nasdaq Level II quotes are only available for securities
trading on Nasdaq and can be obtained from most brokers and real-time
charting programs.
The following sections help you dive into the nitty-gritty of Nasdaq Level II
quotes.

Contrasting Level I and Level II quotes
Level I quotes (think of them as the standard quotes you receive from Yahoo!
Finance or Google) report what the current bid and ask prices are. They
also include how many shares are being bid and how many shares are being
offered. But don’t expect any bells or whistles. A Level I quote, like that
shown in Figure 11-1 of shares of Warnaco Group (symbol: WRNC), shows
top-level data that can be helpful as a snapshot.

Figure 11-1:
A Level I
quote of
WRNC.
Source: Yahoo! Finance

Nasdaq Level II quotes give traders a wealth of information on order and
trading activity in Nasdaq-listed securities. Whereas a Level I quote tells you
what the best bids and offers are, Level II quotes tell you who else is bidding

241

242 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
or offering shares away from the market (that is, at prices above the best
offer and below the best bid). This information can be valuable in discerning
short-term price movements.
Figure 11-2 shows a typical Level II quote. You can see that different market
makers are offering to buy (left side) and sell (right side) shares of Microsoft
(symbol: MSFT). Notice that at each price, a market maker offers a certain
amount of shares (shown here as size). The number of market makers
offering shares on both the buy and sell sides at very close prices indicates
that this security has significant market depth.
Avoid thinking that Level II quotes confer some type of trading advantage.
Other swing traders, day traders, and the like have Level II quotes. The key is
how you use the quotes. As a swing trader, you must recognize that you won’t
derive a significant source of alpha, or outperformance, from your near-term
trading by using Level II quotes. You can, however, improve your entry and
exit prices and add a small amount of return during the course of a year.
Your intraday trading overlay may rely on Level II quotes as opposed to
technical signals generated on an hourly or 30-minute chart. In that case, you
may enter on pullbacks in price action. Alternatively, you may wait to see
strong buying or selling activity, depending on whether you’re looking to open
a long or short position.

Figure 11-2:
A Level
II quote
of MSFT
indicates
sizable market depth.

Chapter 11: Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits

The ups and downs of intraday trading
Intraday trading certainly has its ups and
downs. Just take a look at these examples.

compared to a part-time swing trader relying on
after-market data.

If shares of Southwestern Energy move higher
and trigger a moving average crossover or
MACD buy signal at 10 a.m., when shares
are at $25.37, a full-time swing trader is able
to execute a limit order near or at $25.37.
Southwestern Energy may move higher and
close above $26 by the end of the day. The
swing trader who trades on after-market data
has to enter a limit order for the following
trading day — and Southwestern Energy may
rise further the next morning. So the full-time
swing trader may enter a position at a significant
discount or premium (depending on whether
said swing trader is buying or shorting)

But this blessing can be a curse because trading signals generated intraday can be reversed
intraday. In other words, Southwestern Energy
shares may trade at a certain price level to generate an MACD buy signal at 10 a.m. A swing
trader may then buy shares of the company
on that signal. However, a late day sell-off
may send shares lower, reversing the original
signal. The part-time swing trader who relies on
after-market data to trade won’t be whipsawed
like the full-time swing trader. Because the
part-time trader relies on data based on closing prices, the false signal generated intraday
never shows up on his or her screen.

I used to think that having Level II quotes somehow gave me an advantage
over the common man — like I was going to improve my trading game with a
tool akin to X-ray vision. Don’t buy into that idea like I did. Level II quotes are
a short-term guide — and I mean short. Day traders derive more value from
Level II quotes than swing traders because their time horizons are measured
in minutes. Of course, I don’t mean you should ignore the Level II quote
screen. Just consider placing more emphasis on intraday charting (covered
earlier in this chapter).

Evaluating the quotes
Level II quotes have a couple of salient features. First, bids and offers for
securities are separated into two panes. The left pane displays various
market makers’ bids to buy at various prices, and the right pane displays the
offers to sell by various market markers at various prices. Confused? Take a
look back at Figure 11-2.
The left side of the pane shows that LEHM is offering to buy 2,000 shares of
security MSFT at $25.63. LEHM is the market maker and is the four-letter
abbreviation of Lehman Brothers. (All market makers are identified by fourletter symbols.) Directly below LEHM is BRUT, who’s offering to buy 23,300
shares at $25.63. If you look at the right pane, you can see that ARCA is offering to sell 17,700 shares of MSFT at $25.64. (Unlike Lehman Brothers, which is
a market maker, BRUT and ARCA are electronic communication networks

243

244 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
[ECNs] and are likely representing customer orders and not market maker
activities. You can read more about ECNs in Chapter 1.) The bid/ask spread
is only one cent, and the number of shares offered at the bid and ask are
large. This security has significant depth. A swing trader placing a market
order is unlikely to move the security an inch.

Verifying the accuracy of quotes with the Time & Sales report
Market makers play games to cover their true intentions on how many shares
they’re bidding on or offering for sale. They realize that if they show their
hand too much, then traders will react to that information and make their
lives more difficult. Your task is to determine whether their stated intentions
are consistent with their actions.
The Time & Sales report (shown in Figure 11-3 and available from most
brokers and real-time charting packages) shows the actual buys and sells
that occur during the trading day. Sometimes market makers try to deceive
other traders on what their intentions are and whether they’re aggressive
buyers or sellers in the market — or whether they’re indifferent. So keep
an eye on the Time & Sales report, and monitor whether trades are being
executed at the asking price, the bid price, in between the bid and ask, or
outside of the bid or ask.

Figure 11-3:
Use the
Time &
Sales report
to compare
actual
trades to
market
makers’
supposed
intentions.

Chapter 11: Fine-Tuning Your Entries and Exits

Getting the lay of the market-maker
land for direct-access trading
If your broker offers you direct-access trading
(the ability to trade directly with market makers
or specialists), you may be able to direct your
orders to specific market makers. (For further
explanation of direct-access trading and help
deciding whether it’s appropriate for you,
please refer to Chapter 2.) Therefore, you should
have an idea of who the major market makers
are. Following are the top ten market makers
and their four-letter abbreviations for Nasdaqlisted and NYSE-listed securities. For a complete, up-to-date list of both, visit www.
nasdaqtrader.com and click on “Market
Statistics” at the top of the page. Then click on
“Top Liquidity Providers.”
Top Ten Liquidity Providers (at press time):
Nasdaq-Listed Securities

 Citadel Derivatives Group LLC: CDRG
 Goldman, Sachs & Co.: GSCO
 J. P. Morgan Securities Inc.: JPMS
 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC: FBCO
 Knight Capital Group Inc.: NITE
Top Ten Liquidity Providers (at press time):
NYSE-Listed Securities
 Wedbush Morgan Securities Inc.: WEDB
 Morgan Stanley & Co., Incorporated:
MSCO
 J.P. Morgan Securities Inc.: JPMS
 Citadel Derivatives Group LLC: CDRG

 Wedbush Morgan Securities Inc.: WEDB

 Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated: MLCO

 Lehman Brothers Inc.: LEHM

 Instinet LLC: INCA

 Morgan Stanley & Co., Incorporated:
MSCO

 Lehman Brothers Inc.: LEHM

 UBS Securities LLC: UBSS
 Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated: MLCO

 UBS Securities LLC: UBSS
 Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC: FBCO
 Lime Brokerage LLC: LIME

The Time & Sales report is helpful when used in conjunction with the Level II
quote screen, which shows posted prices by market makers, because the
Time & Sales report shows actual trades. These facts help tell you whether
market participants are bluffing. For example, a market maker may post a
large sell order on behalf of a client so as to scare others into selling to him
or her at lower prices. Using the Time & Sales report and Level II quote
screens together can tell you whether
 Buyers are more aggressive than sellers: This scenario is likely the case
if there are major buyers on the bid with large share sizes, and the
shares offered on the ask side are small in comparison. If the Time &
Sales report shows executions at the ask price (or above it), you have
confirmation that buyers are more aggressive.

245

246 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
 Near-term price pressure is coming: This situation tends to happen if
large share sizes are being offered on the ask by multiple market
makers, and the share sizes offered on the bid are small. Confirm price
weakness with the Time & Sales report where trades should be occurring at or below the bid price.
Swing traders who incorporate Level II analysis into their trading systems
often look for signs of short-term strength or weakness to improve their
timing. In such cases, the Time & Sales report must be read in conjunction
with the changing quote system.
In fast-moving markets, the report moves quickly. Trades may occur at the
bid, at the ask, in between the bid and ask, or outside the bid and ask. When
trades are executing at the ask, that’s a sign of short-term price strength.
When trades are executing at the bid, that’s a sign of short-term price
weakness.

Chapter 12

Walking through a Trade,
Swing-Style
In This Chapter
 Looking for market trends and finding top industry groups
 Choosing the best trade candidates and limiting your losses
 Making the trade and recording it in your journal
 Watching your positions and improving your system

R

emember those times in high school or college when your teacher
explained some pretty technical concepts that seemed to fly right over
your head? (If this doesn’t apply to you, congratulations, you’re a genius in
my book.) I can recall several subjects, both boring and exciting, that I never
fully understood, even as the concepts were being explained.
However, when I heard the teacher say, “Let’s walk through an example,” my
eyes lit up. Examples bring color to concepts. They elucidate fine points that
can’t really be fully understood without practical application.
Consider this chapter your own “Let’s walk through an example” moment.
Here, I take the view of the swing trader looking for a trading opportunity,
and this chapter provides an example of identifying a potential trade by
going through the eight major steps. These steps show you how to integrate
concepts covered in other parts of this book. I use the top-down analysis
framework (see Chapters 6 and 8) to identify and execute the trade, and all
the data I use is actual market data. If you see how I approach and research
potential candidates to swing trade, you can build on the techniques I
present or incorporate aspects you agree with.

Step 1: Sizing Up the Market
Mr. Market is where all things start for the swing trader. You have to know
the state of the equity, commodity, fixed income, and even currency markets
to be a savvy trader. Why? Because these markets are related. For example,

248 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
if you notice that currency prices are rising, you should be prepared for a
bear market in bond prices. Or if you see bond prices falling rapidly, you’re
likely to see weakness in equities. Rising oil prices positively affect shares of
energy companies; the weakening dollar helps boost commodity prices; and
so on. Watching all major markets improves your trading ability by giving
you an indication of the likely direction of other markets.
Because you’re likely to trade equities, you may want to closely examine
U.S. equity markets to determine which style (growth or value) is performing
well and which market cap ranges (large cap, mid cap, or small cap) lead the
market. The best way to achieve this analysis is through relative strength
charts, which plot one index versus another (see Chapter 6).

Looking for short-term trends
on the daily chart
At the time I’m writing this, the date is April 4, 2008. I want to analyze how
the equity markets look. Figure 12-1 shows a snapshot of a daily chart of the
S&P 500 Index in late 2007 and early 2008. Also plotted are the MACD indicator and the 17-day moving average. The 17-day moving average smoothes out
price changes and helps determine short-term market direction.
When I examine any market, I ask myself whether the market is in a trading
range or trend. Figure 12-1 shows a market that’s in a trading range. However,
it looks to be entering a trend. Notice any familiar chart patterns on the far
right of the screen? (Check out Chapter 4 for a refresher on popular chart
patterns.)

Figure 12-1:
The daily
chart of the
S&P 500
Index in late
2007 and
early 2008.

Chapter 12: Walking through a Trade, Swing-Style
I see a potential inverse head-and-shoulders pattern (I’ve listed the left
shoulder as “LS,” the right shoulder as “RS,” and the head as “Head”).
This formation is bullish and is near completion, which argues for higher
prices near-term. Also notice that the slope of the 17-day moving average is
positive. Finally, the MACD plot is above the 0 line, indicating that the 12-day
exponential moving average is above the 26-day exponential moving average
(see Chapter 5 for more information). All these factors argue for short-term
price strength.

Analyzing the weekly chart
for longer-term trends
One chart’s time frame isn’t sufficient for your analysis. You must also look at
the weekly chart to determine whether the longer trend is up or down.
The weekly chart in Figure 12-2 shows the S&P 500 Index in late 2006
through early 2008, along with the 17-week moving average and the weekly
MACD. The intermediate trend is down, as measured by the 17-week moving
average’s negative slope. However, the short-term trend is up, as indicated
by the rising MACD histogram (a facet of the MACD indicator explained in
Chapter 5).
The weekly chart shows conflicting data. The daily chart shows a market
with a rising 17-day moving average, a rising MACD signal line, and a potential inverse head-and-shoulders pattern — all bullish items. The weekly chart,
on the other hand, shows a falling 17-week moving average, meaning that the
intermediate trend is down.

Figure 12-2:
The weekly
chart of the
S&P 500
Index from
late 2006
through
early 2008.

249

250 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
But the weekly MACD histogram is rising, which indicates short-term price
strength. Because swing traders have short-term time horizons, they should
trade in the direction of the short-term trend. You can always adjust quickly
to the other side of the market should the short-term trend turn down and be
consistent with the intermediate trend. But the weekly chart indicates that
caution is warranted. The intermediate trend can exert itself at any time.
Keep stop loss orders tight.
If you’re primarily trading stocks, then analyzing other asset classes may
help you identify which sectors to focus on and whether to trade the long
or short side of the market. For example, when the yields on government
bonds become significantly higher than the earnings yield of the S&P 500
Index (see Chapter 8 for a full explanation of how to calculate this), stock
prices may come under pressure as money flows into higher yielding assets.
This first step shows a mixed market. The short-term trend is up, but the
intermediate trend is down. You should focus on trading candidates on
the long side. The market is in rally mode, and you want to ride the wave.
Perform a similar type of analysis in the bond, currency, and commodity
markets.

Step 2: Identifying the
Top Industry Groups
In the example I began in the previous section, the short-term trend is up, so
you should look for new positions on the long side of the market. To do so,
you need to examine the leading industry groups. Buying stocks in leading
groups increases the chances your stock will rise with the overall market.
You can identify leading industry groups in several ways. Investor’s Business
Daily publishes a ranking of all industry groups in the market. You can focus
on that list’s top 10 percent to identify stocks on the long side of the market.
High Growth Stock Investor (HGS Investor) is a software program that provides
a ranking of the leading/lagging industry groups and allows users to plot each
industry group. Analyzing industry group charts is a step up from simply
focusing on the top 10 percent because you can apply the technical analysis
tools I cover in Chapters 4 and 5.
Figure 12-3 shows a chart of the top-performing industry groups from
early February through late April 2008. The groups are ranked in order of
performance. For example, the Construction Residential/Commercial Index
is ranked 99 for the week of April 4, which means it outperformed 99 percent
of all industry groups. Put another way, it performed in the top 1 percent
among all groups.

Chapter 12: Walking through a Trade, Swing-Style

Figure 12-3:
The topperforming
industry
groups
from early
February
through late
April 2008.

So what this step tells you is that you should start your search for promising
swing trades in the industry groups ranking in the top 10 percent for long
candidates and the bottom 10 percent for short candidates.
Now that you know which groups are leading, look for candidates in the top
two industry groups: Construction Residential/Commercial and Steel
Producers. The following section takes you through that step.

Step 3: Selecting Promising Candidates
Knowing which industry groups to focus on is really half the battle, so you
cover most of your assessment in just the first two steps. Your success is
driven more by which side of the market you trade and the industry groups
you select than by which company you select in an industry.
So how do you choose promising candidates on the long side of the market in
the two industry groups cited in the preceding section? Most swing traders
primarily use technical analysis to select a security. I recommend you use
fundamental analysis first to select the most promising candidates. Then use
technical analysis to time your entries and exits.

251

252 Part IV: Developing and Implementing Your Trading Plan
I want to stress the importance of considering a company’s fundamentals:
Even if it’s simply ranking companies in an industry by their PEG ratios
(the lower the better, as explained in Chapter 9) or taking the Earnings Rank
provided by Investor’s Business Daily, HGS Investor, and other products, you’re
better off incorporating some type of fundamental approach in your swing
trading versus no fundamental analysis at all.

Screening securities
Before you select a company to trade, be sure to apply some filter to the security both on the long and short side of the market within the industry group
you’re analyzing. This screen (see Chapter 8 for more on how to use screens)
is primarily designed to filter out thinly traded securities (those that carry significant liquidity risk) and penny stocks (which I define as stock trading below
$5 per share). I recommend the following simple screen, which I use regularly:
 Stock price ≥ $5
 Average daily volume ≥ 100,000 shares
 Market capitalization ≥ $250 million
Applying this screen to the Construction Residential/Commercial industry
group narrows the list down to 17 companies, whereas applying the filter to
the Steel Producers group leaves 14 companies.

Ranking the filtered securities
and assessing chart patterns
After applying a filter to the securities on both sides of the leading and lagging industry groups, rank the remaining securities by some measure — a
fundamental one (such as return on equity) or a technical one (such as days
since last DMI crossover, covered in Chapter 5). Then review the securities in
that industry and isolate the ones that meet your entry criteria (which should
be simple and clear, free of subjective interpretations).
In general, I prefer to rank securities by price to cash flow ratio or earnings
rank. Then I go through the stock charts of the leading securities and look for
the stocks with the most promising chart patterns. I find that this two-step
process works best because it begins with fundamentally strong companies
and then looks for attractive charts. If you begin with attractive charts, you’re
going to have a tougher time finding fundamentally promising companies
among the strongest charts because you’ll be unable to quickly rank the
fundamentals of any prospects to other candidates. (In other words, it’s
easier to find strong charts among undervalued companies than it is to find
undervalued companies among strong charts.)
