
FIGURE 1.25
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 1.26
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

45

46

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

participate in a profit. The key in using these vehicles is for those who like a
specific sector and do not have unlimited resources to buy a wide spectrum
of stocks. It is also appealing to those who want longer-term trades and who
hold a regular day job and cannot day trade for a living, at least not yet.
Once again, the difficulty of choosing the right stock in a competitive
industry in a specific sector can be overcome; and it may be more profitable
by considering trading an ETF. The previous comparisons of Best Buy and
Circuit City, Dell and Apple, and AMD and Intel all are excellent examples
of how an investor may have a difficult time anticipating which stock outperforms another in a specific sector. Therefore, for a longer-term stock
trader, ETF investment vehicles could be a solution, helping to boost the
bottom line, and can be added to his or her investment portfolio.
ETFs and some HOLDRs have the greater advantage of trading put and
call options within a prescribed period of time. An investor can even buy
calls such as on the pharmaceutical HOLDRs. Here is a tactic that I have
used before with some success, especially if there are buy signals on several individual stocks within a sector. Go ahead and purchase, with a reasonable time until expiration, an in-the-money or close-to-the-money call
option on the HOLDR itself. The pharmaceutical HOLDRs can be traded
based on signals from Abbott, Merck, and Pfizer.
So you can utilize ETFs and their respected relatives and apply several
strategies; also you can use intermarket relationships to determine buy or
sell signals and devise a trading strategy dependent on those signals. Once
you have a good feel for a stock that correlates or links best with an
ETF, then you can use a spread or “pairs” trading strategy or even a hedge
strategy using options. Deciding what is best for your risk capital making,
using an ETF, you no longer need to make a precise pick for a stock in a
specific sector.
In conclusion, trading opportunities exist in these investment vehicles
for all investors; and best of all, they respond quite well using technical
analysis to project support and resistance levels as derived from pivot point
analysis and the momentum techniques that certain candle patterns indicate, which are the specific techniques disclosed in this book. This knowledge should give you, the individual investor, quite an edge in the market!

FUTURES MARKETS: LEVERAGE SYSTEM
We will go over several techniques for helping you identify trading opportunities in the futures markets. So far we have gone over using exchange
traded funds versus stocks; pairs trading in related stocks; and using
commodities for identifying opportunities in ETFs, such as the oil service

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

47

HOLDRs (OIH) or the U.S. Oil Fund (USO) versus crude oil futures. The
Euro Currency Trust (FXE) is a more direct move for stock traders playing
the euro currency futures versus the U.S. dollar. Then there is the streetTRACKS Gold ETF (GLD) compared to the CBOT electronic gold futures
contract, or now a trader can use the iShares Silver Trust to trade against
the physical silver market.
Stock traders can now apply and take advantage of so many commodity markets; but as I mentioned, the futures market is a great investment vehicle to many savvy and financially well-funded traders. Even smaller-sized
traders can benefit from trading the futures market through the responsible use of the margin system, otherwise referred to as a “good faith deposit.” What is a futures contract? It is a legally binding agreement to buy
and sell a commodity or financial instrument sometime in the future at a
price agreed upon at the time a transaction was made. Contracts are standardized according to delivery points of interest, quality, quantity, and time
of accepting or making a delivery. It is estimated that less than 3 percent of
all transactions actually result in a delivery. In the case of stock index trading, there is a cash settlement over the value of the contract.

Stock Index Futures
For day or swing traders following the stock market, the futures market
offers an advantage over stocks from tax liability perspective. Always
check with your accountant; but, generally speaking, profits generated in
a futures account are taxed at a rate significantly lower than that for a
stock account.
One confusing aspect and perhaps a drawback for many traders
switching from equities or even forex to trading futures is that there are so
many products with various contract sizes. There is no consistency or
constant in tick value fluctuations or dollar value in the price changes. For
example, the CBOT mini-Dow contract is $5 times the overall Index. When
the Dow was at 10,500, the overall value was 52,500. The margin was set
at $2,600, or just under 5 percent. E-mini–S&Ps are 12.50 per tick (four
ticks per point). If the point value is $50, the overall value of the contract
if the S&P is at 1,200.00 is $60,000. In the currency markets, the euro is
12.50 per tick; the Canadian dollar is 10 per tick; the British pound is 6.25
per point but trades in a minimum two-tick fluctuation. (In my first book
[A Complete Guide to Trading Tactics, Wiley, 2004], I listed all the commodities and the contract sizes on pages 8 and 9; please refer to that for a
comparison. Or you can ask your futures broker to provide the listing of
contract specifications.)
The exchanges where the individual futures products are traded set
the margin requirements. Generally speaking, an initial margin requirement

48

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

on a futures product runs anywhere from 2 percent up to 10 percent of a
contract’s overall value. So now a trader needs to know which exchange
the product is traded on, how much risk capital is needed to invest per contract, and how much each point value is. Let’s look at the New York Mercantile Exchange’s crude oil contract: The contract size is 1,000 gallons;
every tick or point fluctuation equals $10. A $1 move per contract is a $1,000
price move. When prices were at $65 per barrel, the contract value was
$65,000. The margin requirement was, at one point, nearly $9,000 per contract, almost 14 percent of the overall market value. The extremely high
margin requirement reflected the extreme level of volatility and the inherent risk associated with that increased volatility.
The futures markets also have a value for stock traders to make decisions on asset allocations to their stock portfolios. In the agriculture sector,
for example, you can study the price direction of soybeans, use traditional
technical analysis tactics to determine the strength of a trend, and see if
corresponding stocks linked to that market are worth switching or allocating funds toward. In Figure 1.27, we see soybeans making a seasonal harvest bottom at the end of November.
Another advantage futures have is that you can trade signals to diversify in other investments. Anticipating that the market may establish a seasonal bottom, you may want to explore stocks directly linked to the
agriculture industry, instead of being exposed to potential risks due to what
might appear to be an overleveraged investment vehicle, such as a futures
contract. After all, every penny in soybean futures was $50 at the time that
I was preparing this book, and the minimum margin requirement was
$1,148. That means that on a small 20 cent move, you could lose nearly 95
percent of the initial investment per contract.
There are other considerations you could use, such as an options strategy, to effectively reduce risk exposure, such as going long a futures contract and buying a put option for protection; but in this strategy, you need
to time the right option expiration. An alternative strategy would be going
long a related market, such as stock in Monsanto shown in Figure 1.28.
Notice that this stock exploded in early November. The best part here
is that there were seasonal factors to support a buy signal; and the technical picture shows what I call a “high close doji trigger,” which we will disclose in this book. In fact, this is a great example to demonstrate why using
a like or related market analysis approach can help you achieve better results in your trading. Cycle and seasonal studies can really help you in selecting stocks. The futures markets can certainly aid in that analytical
process. Not only do commodities move in cycles, but the economy and
businesses do as well.
There is one man who sticks out above the rest as the premier expert
in the field of intermarket relationships—John J. Murphy. He has written

FIGURE 1.27
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

FIGURE 1.28
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

49

50

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 1.29
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

many books on the subject; the latest, titled Intermarket Analysis: Profiting from Global Market Relationships, will really help you in your educational journey.
Let’s look at two more agriculture related stocks: One in Figure 1.29 is
Archer Daniels Midland, which as you can see did rise but not significantly;
however, it did rise in tandem with the soybean market. The other stock is
Bunge Limited, shown in Figure 1.30, which mirrored the chart pattern in
Figure 1.29 and moved higher at almost exactly the same time that the bottom in the soybean futures was formed.

Tandem Trading Techniques
Intermarket relationships have existed for years. It is very easy to track and
look for trade setups in futures from a historical perspective, but timing a
trade can be difficult due to the magnitude of the leverage as previously
discussed. Don’t get me wrong; futures are a very viable investment vehicle. I have made a very lucrative living trading commodities for the past 26
years. I just want you to learn that you can use futures to help make diver-

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

51

FIGURE 1.30
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

sified investment decisions on a broader scale. The key to making money in
the markets is managing risk . . . end of story. Knowing the right strategy
and having exposure to other markets and strategies can help you achieve
your financial goals. Using similar or like markets or those that trade in tandem, especially markets that have strong relationships, traders can develop
trading techniques or strategies by using signals based on one market and
applying them to another, such as commodities and stocks or an ETF.
Keep in mind that not all relationships work all the time. Look at past market relationships, such as the dollar and gold: Generally when the dollar
goes up, gold goes down; but that certainly was not the case in 2005. How
about when the Fed raises interest rates? Generally, long-term bond yields
rise as well; but that did not occur in 2005 either. In fact, commodities and
bond yields usually trend together; and that did not occur in 2005. Federal
Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan called the decline in long-term yields a
“conundrum.”
As we saw commodity prices rise, we saw the Federal Reserve raise
rates at a “moderate” pace, acting at 16 consecutive meetings to adjust the
Fed funds rate by 0.25 percent each time. This was in response to the per-

52

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

ception that inflation was rearing its ugly head. (As of the printing of this
book, the Fed was still in rate-hiking mode!) Due to higher energy costs and
as reflected in the Producer and Consumer Price Indexes, we had seen a
pickup in inflation; and historically, many commodity prices rise besides
gold and silver, such as sugar, coffee, and cotton.
The Reuters/Jefferies CRB (Commodity Research Bureau) Index, originally developed in 1957, is one of the most often cited indicators of overall
commodity prices, offering investors a broad and reliable benchmark for
the performance of the commodity sector. It is traded on the New York
Board of Trade and started trading back in 1986. The “RJ/CRB” Index was
revised in 2005 to reflect 19 commodity futures prices: aluminum, cocoa,
coffee, copper, corn, cotton, crude oil, gold, heating oil, live cattle, lean
hogs, natural gas, nickel, orange juice, silver, soybeans, sugar, unleaded
gasoline, and wheat.
If you examine the chart of the RJ/CRB Index shown in Figure 1.31, the
stratospheric rise is obvious and would indicate that inflation was or will be

FIGURE 1.31
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

53

trickling down to consumers. Again, price increases in commodities historically signal a rise in inflationary pressures.
Investors and traders can use stocks or ETFs to capitalize on commodity plays; but at times, it pays to diversify and have a commodity account. Not all stocks offer participation in all commodity moves, so it is
wise to explore using commodity markets as an investment.

A Case in Point
A fundamental event, besides an increase in demand, that helped create a
shortage of supplies in energy and other commodities in 2005 was the
weather. Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma gave a lift to sugar and orange
juice futures while harming certified coffee facilities in New Orleans and, to
a lesser extent, Miami. These weather-related events were pure commodity
market plays. Let me walk you through one of these 2005 events: The day
before Hurricane Wilma passed through Florida, my wife and I had watched
the Weather Channel intensely and decided to stick around because all the
news reported that the hurricane would be downgraded to a tropical depression by the time it crossed over Naples and exited on the other side of
Florida, in Palm Beach. The day before, we had played golf; and it was a
splendid day: 83 degrees or so, a light breeze, and not a cloud in the sky. We
were planning to leave for Chicago the following Sunday, and we could
have easily changed our tickets and left early. Well, at 6 A.M. on October 24,
we woke up and discovered that Wilma had gained strength and merged
with another storm, named Alpha; and Wilma had turned into a low-grade
Category 3 hurricane! All I could think of at the moment my wife turned the
TV on was, “I better make some coffee because we are going to lose
power.” By the time the coffee had finished brewing, click, all the lights
went out.
However, we were prepared: The cars had gas, the shutters were up,
and we had a generator; so life was not so bad for that week. The morning
of the hurricane, CNBC had called to see if I was in Florida and asked me
what I thought would happen to the orange juice crop. I did a live interview via my cell phone, reporting on the weather conditions and what
might happen to the orange crop. I stated that “we could see at least a 10
percent price gain from the 1.11 level to possibly as high as 1.25, as the
storm would pass through sections of Indian River County.” It was also
that storm that devastated the soon-to-be-harvested sugar cane crop. As it
turns out, that was a solid prediction and exactly what played out in the
markets. If you had a commodity account, you may have taken up that opportunity in orange juice. In fact, orange juice eventually moved as high as
164 by May 11, 2006.

54

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FUNDAMENTAL EVENTS INFLUENCE
PRICE DIRECTION
There is an old saying, “Think like a fundamentalist, but trade like a technician”—a great line that applies when trading commodities or any market
for that matter. Here is how that line applies to the hurricane situation. The
orange juice crop was slightly damaged; there was a reduction in supplies
in the southern growing region in Florida. Prior to the hurricane, prices
moved higher in anticipation of a loss of inventory; what was unknown was
how much higher. The market traded higher after what appeared to be a
significant damaging hurricane.
Fundamentally, the market was vulnerable for any further price
shocks. Then, as we approached the traditional seasonal frost scare period
in mid-January through February, the market would be more vulnerable to
increased volatility. In fact, that was what occurred in 2006, as Figure 1.32

FIGURE 1.32
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

55

shows. The fundamental supply/demand report outlook, as shown in the
U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) monthly crop report, did not reveal a major supply/demand imbalance to warrant higher prices. But a frost
scare would! The anticipation that crops would suffer from frost damage
propped prices sharply higher. The point is that you need to be aware of
what fundamental factors influence a market. Markets do not always move
when they should on facts presented, but there are circumstances that can
and do make markets move! A hurricane in South Florida before harvest
time is one such situation.

NOT ALL NEWS AFFECTS MARKETS EQUALLY
Hurricane-related damage in 2005 played a major role in the reduction of
supplies to the sugar market more so than it did in orange juice. Also, the
fundamental backdrop of the sugar market was more significant than the
orange juice market because it has a dual role: Sugar is a food product, and
it is used as a biofuel to make methanol. It set record price gains in 2005, especially as energy prices surged. Raw sugar prices more than doubled in
2005, climbing and making new 24-year highs. Brazil, the world’s largest
producer, uses most of its crop to make fuel because of the high cost of
gasoline. With that information, we would expect that after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita impacting the Louisiana crops and then Hurricane Wilma
making a direct hit on Florida’s crop, prices would take off like a rocket!
But don’t forget that sugar is produced all over the world and that there are
sugar beets and sugar cane. It is almost impossible to measure inventories
from all growing regions of the world, and the market knew that after Hurricane Wilma hit. The fundamental event that impacted the orange juice
market had a different effect there than it did on the sugar market.
As you examine Figure 1.33, notice that prices actually decline after
Hurricane Wilma. It took almost one month for the market to realize that
there was a significant loss in Florida’s crop, and speculative money pored
into the market to take advantage of higher prices. A Trend Traders technical price break signals to get long this market, and substantial profits were
made. It may appear that the fundamental and technical outlooks were not
in sync; and by late January/early February of 2006, traders started to sense
that the market was getting slightly ahead of itself, or overbought. Traders
who were long started to liquidate some positions in preparation for the
USDA’s monthly crop report. If you look closely at Figure 1.33, the very
high of the market was formed by a candle pattern named a shooting star.
(Chapter 7 focuses on how to spot reversals like this one.) The market did

56

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 1.33
Used with permission of www.GenesisFT.com.

not behave according to what the fundamentals dictated. Prices rallied in a
delayed effect and then continued higher on speculative buying interest.
What I want to illustrate next is how markets do not act according to
the following:
• What fundamentals dictate.
• Common sense.
• Rational emotional intelligence.
The high was made in the sugar market on February 3 at 19.65, one
week earlier than the USDA crop report. Table 1.1 shows the actual government report, the boldface type indicating that total sugar supplies increased from 11,870 to 12,026! But best of all, total usage declined from
10,523 to 10,365! Ending stocks show there are more surplus inventories.
Since that report, prices have declined significantly.
Therefore, remember: Fundamentals do not always jibe with what
the charts show. Think like a fundamentalist but trade technically.

57

Trading Vehicles, Stock, ETFs, Futures, and Forex

TABLE 1.1
U.S. Sugar Supply and Demand Report 2-9-2006 (1,000 short tons, raw value)
2004/2005
Previous

2004/2005
Feb 9

205/2006
Previous

2005/2006
Feb 9

Beginning stocks
Production 2/
Beet sugar
Cane sugar
Florida
Hawaii
Louisiana
Texas
Imports

1,897
7,877
4,611
3,266
1,693
258
1,157
158
2,096

1,897
7,877
4,611
3,266
1,693
258
1,157
158
2,096

1,347
7,593
4,435
3,158
1,455
260
1,263
180
2,770

1,347
7,593
4,458
3,131
1,428
260
1,263
180
3,090

Total Supply
Exports
Domestic
Food
Other
Miscellaneous

11,870
259
10,215
10,046
169
49

11,870
259
10,215
10,046
169
49

11,710
175
10,215
10,050
165
0

12,026
175
10,190
10,050
140
0

Total Use
Ending Stocks
Stocks/Use ratio

10,523
1,347
12.8

10,523
1,347
12.8

10,390
1,320
12.7

10,365
1,661
16.0

Item

FOLLOW THE MONEY FLOW
Fundamental events are not the only factors that drive prices. We see evidence of increased participation from speculators as reflected by the increase in volume and open interest levels. Most commodity markets,
besides orange juice and sugar, showed massive money inflows by hedge
funds, pension funds, and individual investors in 2005 as commodities
prices rose. The Reuters/Jeffries CRB Index, as shown back in Figure 1.31,
is a great illustration of that fact. This trend may continue in 2006 and possibly beyond into 2008. The hurricanes in 2005 affected not only the agricultural markets described here but also the energy markets, as previously
mentioned. In 2005, natural gas prices skyrocketed, and unleaded gasoline
prices exploded. Many stock analysts may not have been trading commodities directly, but they certainly were watching their price movements
and using that data to track their portfolios.
My point is that we have entered a time period in which our civilization

58

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

and culture are entwined in a very complex financial relationship in which
commodity markets play a serious role. Think about this: Ten years ago, we
did not trade freely or openly as we do now with China; in fact, China now
has its own exchange, the Zhengzhou Commodity Exchange. Then there
are India and other parts of Asia; as their commerce and economic growth
develop, so will the need for trading.
More and more investors are participating in the markets around the
globe, even in Latin America. Markets have become more confusing to
trade, and therefore we need to look for opportunities and to keep our defense up to be more risk averse. Using spread trading in the futures markets
can help you achieve those goals; the opportunities are endless. Keep in
mind the important principles of trading that depend on these elements:
• Prices reflect forces influenced by supply and demand factors.
• Prices represent the collective action of buyers and sellers who are
dictating what the current price of a given product is perceived to be at
a given time.
