
Connecting to the Internet
Depending on where you live, you may have several good high-speed
alternatives for reliably connecting to the Internet. Cable and DSL connections
usually work well.

63

64

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
Because of security concerns, avoid wireless networks unless you’re
absolutely certain that you know how to configure the network to keep
prying eyes from seeing your private trading and account information.

Picking a browser
Any modern browser probably will do. Although stumbling across a site that
uses some browser-specific functions is a possibility, that scenario is becoming
increasingly rare. Microsoft’s Internet Explorer is bundled with the Windows
operating system at no additional charge. It will serve your needs well enough.
Mozilla Firefox (www.mozilla.org) is another excellent — and free — choice.

Securing your computer
The Internet is a dangerous place. You must protect your computer system
and its data against attacks by vandals, hackers, and thieves. Make sure that
you have modern virus-scanning software, and keep your virus definitions up
to date.
Norton’s AntiVirus program gets good reviews and seems to do the job just
fine. It can automatically update its virus definitions. You can get more information about Norton’s program at www.symantec.com. McAfee Security’s
VirusScan also gets high marks from those in the know. Additional information is available on the Web at www.mcafee.com.
We also recommend that you use a firewall. The Windows Vista firewall is
sufficient. Third-party firewalls like the free Zone Alarm firewall from Check
Point Software Technologies (www.zonealarm.com) also work well. Zone
Alarm monitors your connection to the Internet and is able to detect trojans
and worms that are trying to call home. This is an increasingly critical
requirement. In addition, you should consider installing a hardware firewall to
provide an additional layer of security. Most routers include a hardware firewall,
and allow you to share your Internet connection with multiple computers.
Finally, keeping up to date with your operating system’s security patches,
especially when you’re running Windows, is important. More viruses are
written for Windows than for any other operating system.
You can configure Windows to automatically check for system updates. To
do so, go to Security in the Vista Control Panel, or System Properties, under
Performance and Maintenance, in the Windows XP Control Panel. Select
the Automatic Updates tab and check the appropriate settings to keep your
Windows system up to date. You can also go to the Windows Update site
(windowsupdate.microsoft.com) to make sure all your system patches
have been applied.

Part II

Reading the
Fundamentals:
Fundamental Analysis

W

In this part . . .

e show you what you need to know to analyze the
fundamental health of stocks and the markets.
You’ll need that information, because this part is where
you discover how the economy and the business cycle
affect your trading activities and how you can dig into the
financial statements of a company to unearth good trading
candidates. We also explain the roles played by stock
analysts and how you can leverage their efforts as you
trade.

Chapter 5

Fundamentals 101: Observing
Market Behavior
In This Chapter
▶ Exploring business cycle basics
▶ Rotating through sectors
▶ Deciphering economic indicators

Y

ou hear plenty about recession and inflation. You know both can
mean bad economic news, but do you really understand what they
mean and why they happen? Regardless of what the economic gurus do,
the economy cycles between periods of economic growth and recession. If
growth becomes overheated, periods of inflation are likely. Inflation can also
be caused when the value of the currency falls. For example, when the value
of the U.S. dollar falls, that causes an increase in the price of imports and
commodities like oil for U.S. residents. That, in turn, impacts the price of just
about every other good sold in the United States.
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (Fed) oversees moves that
are made in monetary policy in the United States, and the legislative and
executive branches of government are responsible for tax changes and other
fiscal policy moves. The actions of the Fed and the government can minimize
the impact of inflation or recession and spur economic growth, but nothing
can be done to erase economic cycles. Markets and traders try to anticipate
these cyclical moves with an eye toward recording gains. This chapter will
help you understand which economic indicators tend to lead these cycles
and how you can use them to understand the current state of the markets
and the economy.

68

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis

The Basics of the Business Cycle
The old adage, “What goes up must come down,” is as true for the economy
as it is for any physical object. When a business cycle reaches its peak,
nothing is wrong in the economic world; businesses and investors are making
plenty of money and everyone is happy. Unfortunately, the economy can’t
exist at its peak forever. In the same way that gravity eventually makes a
rising object fall, a revved up economy eventually reaches its high and begins
to tumble.
The peak is only one of the four distinct parts of every business cycle —
peak, recession, trough, and expansion/recovery (see Figure 5-1). Although
none of these parts is designated as the beginning of a business cycle, here
are the portions of the business cycle that each represents:
✓ Peak: During a peak, the economy is humming along at full speed,
with the Gross Domestic Product (GDP — more about that later in the
chapter) near its maximum output and employment levels near their
all-time highs. Income and prices are increasing, and the risk of inflation
is great, if it hasn’t already set in. Businesses and investors are
prospering and very happy.
✓ Recession: As the old adage goes, “All good things must come to an
end.” As the economy falls from its peak, employment levels begin to
decline, production and output eventually decline, and wages and prices
level off, but more than likely won’t actually fall unless the recession is a
long one.
✓ Trough: When a recession bottoms out, the economy levels out into a
period called the trough. If this period is a prolonged one, it can become
a depression, which is a severe and prolonged recession. The most
recent depression in the United States was in the late 1920s and early
1930s. Output and employment stagnate, waiting for the next expansion.
✓ Expansion/Recovery: After the economy starts growing again, employment
and output pick up. This period of expansion and recovery pulls the
economy off the floor of the trough and points it back toward its next
peak. During this period, employment, production, and output all see
increases, and the economic situation again looks promising.

GDP

Figure 5-1:
The basic
business
cycle.

Peak

Trough

Peak

One Business Cycle
0
Contraction Expansion

Time

Chapter 5: Fundamentals 101: Observing Market Behavior
How do you know which part of the business cycle the economy is in?
Officially, you don’t usually find out until months after that part of the cycle
has either started or ended. The National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER) officially declares the peaks and troughs. The NBER is responsible
for formally announcing the ends of peaks and troughs and signaling when
a recession (end of a peak) or expansion (end of a trough) starts. You can
see a table explaining the peaks and troughs since 1857 at www.nber.org/
cycles/cyclesmain.html. The NBER identified December 2007 as the
peak of the most recent economic expansion, but did not make that pronouncement until December 2008. By the time the peak was declared, the
market had been in a downtrend for 15 months, including the sharp selloff in
September 2008.
As you can see, the time lag between events and when the NBER makes its
announcements can be lengthy. But it can get worse. For example, the NBER
declared on November 26, 2001, that the peak of the current business cycle
was reached March 21, 2001. That was eight months later. But then, in January
2004, the NBER revised its position by announcing that the peak may have
actually occurred as early as November 2000. The end of the trough for this
cycle, November 2001, wasn’t announced until July 17, 2003. In other words,
the economy was in a period of expansion/recovery for 20 months before the
NBER made it official.
Unfortunately for all concerned, information that the NBER needs to make
its official announcements isn’t always immediately available. The process
of collecting economic data and revised preliminary estimates of economic
activity takes time. Estimates and data don’t become available immediately
after a particular part of any business cycle ends. As a result, before drawing
any conclusions, the NBER must wait until it sees a clear picture of what’s
happening with the economy. Although many economists identify recessions
and expansions based on at least two quarters (six months) of economic
data, NBER uses its own models. Still, a growth spurt that lasts one full
quarter won’t indicate the start of an expansion nor will a decline that lasts a
quarter indicate the start of a recession. Bearing that in mind, a time lag of
at least six months is typically required before the NBER even considers
declaring a recession or a recovery, which effectively renders the official
announcement useless for traders.
The peak of a business cycle occurs during the last month before some key
economic indicators begin to fall. These indicators include employment,
output, and new housing starts. We talk more about economic indicators
and which of them are critical for traders to watch in the “Understanding
Economic Indicators” section, later in the chapter. However, because neither
a recession nor a recovery can be declared until enough data is accumulated,
finding a way around the time lag in official information is impossible.

69

70

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis
Signals that the economy was weakening became clear to the markets as
early as October 2007, when the major indexes hit their peaks. Looking at
an earlier business cycle, you can see the whole process. Just as in October
2007, clear signs that the economy was headed toward a recession were seen
as early as the spring of 2000, which is when the NASDAQ index hit its peak
and began its downward spiral. The effects of the recession took a bit longer
to hit the other major exchanges, but they started a downward trend by the
summer of 2000. Just like in 2008, job losses had started mounting by mid2000, and many economists already were sending alarms that the economy
was headed into a recession.
Even though the NBER announced the official beginning of that recession
as March 21, 2001, and the official end of the trough and beginning of the
recovery as November 2001, no significant recovery was seen in the markets
until October 2002. Job growth remained anemic as of early 2004. The first
sign of job growth was seen during the fourth quarter of 2003, after nearly
three years of job losses. That economic expansion finally picked up steam,
and ultimately lasted through 2007.

Identifying periods of economic
growth and recession
Considering the type of lag time between events and official pronouncements,
we’re sure you’re wondering how you can determine which part of the
cycle the economy is in and how you can use this information as a trader.
Most economists attribute changing business cycles to disturbances in
the economy. Growth spurts, for example, result from surges in private or
public spending. One way public spending can surge is during a war, when
government spending increases and companies in industries related to the
war effort prosper. They often need to increase hiring to fulfill government
orders. Employees at these companies usually receive increases in their
take-home pay and start spending that extra money. As consumer optimism
increases, other companies must fulfill consumers’ wants and needs, so
production and output also increase in companies that are unrelated to
national defense.
When these same factors work in reverse, the start of a recession is sure to
follow. For example, a cut in government spending will likely result in layoffs
at related industrial plants, reduced take-home pay, and finally declines in
output and production to cope with reduced spending.
In addition to government spending, a decision by the Fed to either raise
or lower interest rates is another major disturbance to the economy. When
interest rates rise, spending slows, and that can lead to a recession. When
interest rates are cut, spending usually goes up, and that can aid in spurring
an economic recovery.

Chapter 5: Fundamentals 101: Observing Market Behavior
Another school of economic thought disagrees with the notion that
government policy or spending is responsible for changes in the business
cycle. This second group of theorists believes that differences in productivity
levels and consumer tastes are the primary forces driving the business cycle.
From this point of view, only businesses and consumers can drive changes
in the economic cycle. These economists don’t believe that governmentally
driven monetary or policy changes impact the cycle.
Which camp you believe is not critical; the key is picking up the signs of
when the economy is in a recession and when it’s in an expansion. Peaks
and troughs are flat periods (periods where the high or low stays primarily
even before moving in the opposite direction) and are impossible to identify
until months after they end. As a trader, you can identify shifts in buying and
spending behavior by watching various economic indicators. By doing so,
you can discover when the economy is in the early stages of a recovery or
recession or if it’s fully into a recession or recovery.

Relating bull markets and bear
markets to the economy
You’ve probably heard the terms bull market and bear market. To find out
what they mean, you first need to understand how economic cycles affect
the stock market. Bulls are people who believe that all is right with the world
and the stock market is heading for an increase. They definitely think the
economy is expanding. Bears are people who believe the economy is heading
for a downturn, and stocks will either stagnate or go down. A bull market is
a market in which a majority of stocks are increasing in value, and a bear
market is a market in which a majority of stocks are decreasing. Bears
definitely believe the economy is either in a recession or headed that way.
Regardless of whether the bulls or the bears are right, you can make money
as a trader. The key: Identify the way the market is headed and then buy or
sell into that trend. During a bear market, traders make their money by
selling short, or taking advantage of falling prices (more about that in
Chapter 14). Traders sell short by borrowing stock from their broker and
then selling it with the hope of making a profit when the price falls.
Even during a bear market, some stocks offer opportunities for traders to
make money, including oil and gas stocks and real estate investment trusts
(REITs). Petroleum stocks and REITs pay higher dividends and, therefore, are
most attractive when the rest of the market is falling or showing no growth
potential. During a bull market, riding a stock through recovery but getting
out before a fall is key. We talk more about trends and what they mean in
Chapter 10.

71

72

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis

Sector Rotation
In general, the markets are divided into sectors, and at any given time some
of those sectors will be expanding, even during a bear market. Some traders
are adept at rotating their investments from one sector to another that is
more likely to benefit from the part of the business cycle that is driving the
economy. This basic trading strategy is called sector rotation.
The guru of traders who want to take advantage of sector rotation is Sam
Stovall, chief investment strategist for Standard & Poor’s, who wrote the
classic on sector rotation, Sector Investing, in 1996. Although the book is out of
print, you can still follow his advice about sectors on the BusinessWeek Web
site at www.businessweek.com/investor.
Stovall developed the Sector Rotation Model shown in Figure 5-2. As you can
see, he found that market cycles tend to lead business cycles. Markets tend
to bottom out just before the rest of the economy is in a full recession. The
start of a bull market, on the other hand, can be seen just before the rest of
the economy starts its climb toward recovery. Markets reach their tops first
and enter a bear market before the general economic indicators show a peak.

Technology • Basic Industry • Staples • Utilities
Cyclicals • Industrial • Energy
• Services • Finance

Figure 5-2:
The Sector
Rotation
Model.

Full Recession
Market Bottom

Early Recovery
Bull Market

Full Recovery
Market Top

Early Recession
Bear Market

As a trader, you can take advantage of this knowledge by knowing which sectors are more likely to rise during the various parts of a market cycle. You
need to buy into the sectors with stock prices that are likely to rise, or you
can sell short the sectors in which prices are expected to fall. We discuss
short selling in Chapter 14.

Chapter 5: Fundamentals 101: Observing Market Behavior

Early recovery
You can spot an early recovery when consumer expectations and industrial
production are beginning to rise while interest rates are bottoming out. That
scenario was evident during a recent economic cycle discovered during the
fall and early winter months of 2003. During the early stages of recovery,
Stovall found that industrial, basic industry, and energy sectors tend to take
the lead.

Full recovery
When the economy has fully recovered, you start seeing signs that consumer
expectations are falling and productivity levels and interest rates are flattening
out. These factors were seen during the economy’s recent period of full
recovery leading up to the economic peak in December 2007. During that
period, companies in the consumer staples and services sectors exhibited a
tendency to take the lead, and interest rates had actually started to fall. As
knowledgeable investors know, when that happens, it’s only a matter of time
before a recession follows. Investors know that the staples of life are needed
even in times of recession, so the stocks of those companies tend to benefit.

Early recession
When the economy reaches the earliest part of a recession, consumer
expectations fall more sharply and productivity levels start to drop. Interest
rates also begin to drop. Most of the 2.5 million job losses during the 2001
economic downturn occurred during late 2001 and early 2002. During 2001,
the Federal Reserve cut interest rates 11 times to try to ease the concerns
about the upcoming recession. The Fed started to raise rates in 2004, but
then lowered them again in 2007 during the mortgage crisis. At the time of
this writing, the Fed’s discount rate (the interest rate the Fed charges to
member banks) was 0 percent. Another key recession sign was the mounting
loss of jobs in 2008 and early 2009.
Utilities and finance sector stocks are the most likely to see rising prices
during the first part of a recession, because under those circumstances,
investors seek stocks that provide some safety (because owning them
involves less risk) and pay higher dividends. Gold and other valuable mineral
stocks also look good to investors seeking safety. Though the financial sector
did not follow this pattern in the 2008 recession, it is still typical to see
banks, insurance companies, and investment firms perform well during the
early parts of a recession.

73

74

Part II: Reading the Fundamentals: Fundamental Analysis

Dissecting sector rotation
Some wag once said that the stock market
predicted 15 of the last 8 recessions. And
although it’s true that the market isn’t a terribly
precise economic prognosticator, that’s sort of
beside the point. Economic indicators can help
you understand the big picture, which, in turn,
can help you make better trading decisions.

begin outperforming and which are likely to
fade. Using those projections, you can start
monitoring stocks in those up-and-coming
sectors. For a sector to outperform, the stocks
within it must also outperform. You need to be
monitoring those stocks before they begin their
runs.

Of all the economic tools available, sector
rotation analysis is probably the most valuable.
Even if the Sector Rotation Model can’t help
you identify an economic cycle, it can identify
sectors and stocks that are ripe for further
study.

Plenty of data is available to help you separate
the strongest sectors from the ones that are
underperforming. Investor’s Business Daily, for
example, ranks nearly 200 industry groups by
price performance. Stockcharts.com provides
a similar capability with its Performance
Charts (stockcharts.com/charts/
performance). You can also monitor sectors by
following exchange-traded funds (ETFs),
such as the Select Sector SPDRs (Standard
and Poor’s Depository Receipts) at www.
spdrindex.com.

When we trade, we want the strongest stocks
in the strongest sectors, which is why we
monitor sector performance carefully. Knowing
the sectors that are performing best enables
you to anticipate which sectors are likely to

Full recession
Although it may not make much sense intuitively, during a full recession
is when you first start seeing indications that consumer expectations are
improving, which is seen by increased spending. However, industrial
productivity remains flat, and businesses won’t increase their production
levels until they believe consumers actually are ready to spend again.
Additionally, interest rates continue to drop, because both business and
consumer spending are slow, so demand for the money weakens while
competition for new credit customers grows between banks and other
financial institutions. During a full recession, cyclical and technology stocks
tend to lead the way. Investors look to safety during a recession, so companies
that satisfy that need tend to do best.

Understanding Economic Indicators
The key to knowing where, as a trader, you are during the business cycle is
watching the economic indicators. Every day that you open your newspaper,
you see at least one story about how the economy is doing based on various

Chapter 5: Fundamentals 101: Observing Market Behavior
economic indicators. Popular indicators track employment, money supply,
interest rates, housing starts, housing sales, production levels, purchasing
statistics, consumer confidence, and many other factors that indicate how
the economy is doing.
Economic indicators are useful to your trading. Some are definitely more
useful than others. We don’t have the space here to describe each of the
indicators; so instead, we focus on the ones that can provide you with the
most help in making your trading decisions.
