
Money-flow ratio and money-flow index
Money flow is closing price multiplied by the number of shares traded. That
basic statistic can be manipulated in strange and wonderful ways to generate
new statistics carrying even more information about whether the markets are
likely to have more buying pressure or more selling pressure in the future.
The first is the money-flow ratio, which is simply the total money flow for
those days where prices were up from the prior day (days with positive
money flow) divided by the total money flow for those days where prices
were down from the prior day (which are the days with negative money
flow). Day traders tend to calculate money-flow ratios for short time periods,
such as a week or ten days, whereas swing traders and investors tend to care
about longer time periods, like a month or even four months of trading.
The money-flow ratio is sometimes converted into the money-flow index,
which can be used as a single indicator or tracked relative to prices for a
given period of time. The equation used to figure out the money-flow index
looks like this:

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
MFI = 100 −

100
1 + money ratio

If the money-flow index is more than 80, the security is usually considered to
be overbought — meaning that the buyers are done buying, and the sellers
will put downward pressure on prices. If the money-flow index is less than 20,
the security is usually considered to be oversold, and the buyers will soon
take over and drive prices up. In between, the money-flow index can help
clarify information from other market indicators.

Short interest ratios
Short selling is a way to make money if a security falls in price. In the options
and futures markets, one simply agrees to sell a contract to someone else. In
the stock and bond markets, short selling is a little more complicated. The
short seller borrows stock or bonds through the brokerage firm and then
sells them. Ideally, the price falls, and then the trader can buy back the stock
or bonds at the lower price to repay the loan. The trader keeps the difference
between the security’s selling price and its repurchasing price. (The process
is described in more detail in Chapter 9.)
People take the short side of a position for only one reason: They think that
prices are going to go down. They may want to hedge against this, or they
may want to make a big profit if it happens. In the stock market in particular,
monitoring the rate of short selling can give clues to investor expectations
and future market direction.
The New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ report the short interest in
stocks listed with them. The data are updated monthly, as it can take a while
for brokerage firms to sort out exactly how many shares have been shorted
and then report that data to the exchanges. The resulting number, the short
interest ratio, tells the number of shares that have been shorted, the percentage change from the month before, the average daily trading volume in the
same month, and the number of days of trading at the average volume that
covering the short positions would take.
The loans that enable short selling have to be repaid. If the lender asks for the
securities back or if prices go up so that the position starts to lose money, the
trader is going to have to buy shares to make repayment. The harder it is to
get the right number of shares in the market, the more desperate the trader
will become, and the higher prices will go.
An increase in short interest shows that investors are becoming nervous
about a stock. However, given that short interest is not calculated frequently,

149

150 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
the number would probably not give a trader a lot of information about the
prospects for the company itself. This doesn’t mean short interest doesn’t
carry a lot of useful information for traders. It does. If the short interest is
high, then the security price is likely to go up when all the people who are
short need to buy back stock. Likewise, if short interest is low, there will be
little buying pressure in the near future.
High short interest, along with other bullish indicators, is a sign that prices are
more likely to go up than down in the near future.

Considering Information That Crops Up
during the Trading Day
Technical analysis (described in Chapter 7) and all the indicators discussed
in this chapter offer useful information about what’s happening in the markets, but there’s one problem: Because so many of those indicators are based
on closing prices and closing volume, they aren’t much use during the trading day. In fact, many traders read through the information in the morning
before the open to sort out what is likely to happen and what the mood of
the market is likely to be, but then they have to recalibrate their gauge of the
market as information comes to them during the trading day. That information doesn’t show up on charts or in neat numerical indicators until the day
ends. Fortunately, several sources of information that are updated while the
market is open can give a trader a sense of what’s happening at any given
time.

Price, time, and sales
The most important information for a trader is the current price of the security, how often and in what volume it has been trading, and how much the
price has moved from the last trade. This information is the most basic realtime info out there, and it’s readily available through a brokerage firm’s
quotation screens.
Chapter 11 discusses the different quotation services that traders can obtain
from their brokerage firms. Although your broker may charge you more to
get more detailed quotes, doing so is worth it for most trading strategies.
Knowing how the price is moving can give you a sense of whether the general
mood of the market is being confirmed or contradicted — information that
can help you place more profitable trades.

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators

Order book
High-level price-quote data, such as that available through NASDAQ Level 2
or NASDAQ TotalView-ITCH, include information on who is placing orders
and just how large those orders are. (Flip to Chapter 13 to see what such
high-level price-quote data looks like.) The order book gives you key data
because it gives you a sense of how smart the other buyers and sellers are.
Are they day traders just trying not to be killed? Or are they institutions that
have done a lot of research and are under a lot of performance pressure?
Sure, day traders are often very right and institutions are often very wrong,
but the information you see in the order book can help you sense whether
people are trading on information or on emotion.
An additional piece of information from the order book can help you figure
out what’s happening in the market now — namely, the presence of an order
imbalance. An order imbalance means that the number of buyers and sellers
doesn’t match. This situation often occurs during the open because some
traders prefer to place orders before the market opens, whereas others
prefer to wait until after the open. These imbalances tend to be small and
clear up quickly. However, if a major news event takes place or a great deal of
fear exists in the market, large imbalances can occur during the trading day.
These imbalances can be disruptive, and in some cases, the exchange stops
trading until news is disseminated and enough new orders are placed to balance out the orders.
The order book doesn’t show all the orders. Most brokerage firms maintain
dark pools (also known as dark books or dark liquidity) for large clients or
for their trading desks. Dark pools are collections of orders above or below
market prices that aren’t advertised except in the pool or on electronic communication networks (also known as ECNs, covered in Chapter 3). Traders use
this technique to help buy or sell securities without affecting the price and to
reduce trading costs. The order is executed only if someone matches it inadvertently rather than the market price changing to meet the changing supply
and demand. The bad news for a day trader is that these trades can contribute
to market volatility without giving any advance warning.

Quote stuffing
Quote stuffing is the practice of placing a really large number of orders for
a security, often at a price significantly above or below the current market
price. Almost as soon as the orders are placed, they’re cancelled. The transaction is completely handled by computerized trading systems, not people.
The people behind the placement of these orders are sometimes referred to
as quote-rate pirates.

151

152 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
The official idea seems to be to hide customer orders in order to reduce their
effect on the market, especially to keep them hidden from other computer
trading systems, but in practice, these quotes seem to be a way to lead the
market up or down by placing an unusually high or low order out there.
Hence, quote stuffing may be outright market manipulation. In some cases,
it may simply be that the algorithms in the computer programs place wacky
orders for reasons that make sense only to other computer programs. Either
way, these orders contribute to market volatility. That may be just the way it
goes, unless the orders are placed for nefarious purposes.
Regulators aren’t happy with quote stuffing, and it is prohibited — if it’s
caught.

News flows
Although much of the discussion in this chapter is about the information
contained in price, volume, and other trade data, the actual information that
comes from news releases is at least as important.
Much of the news is regularly scheduled and much predicted: corporate earnings, Federal Reserve discount rates, unemployment rates, housing starts,
and the like. When this information comes in, traders want to know how the
actual results compare with what was expected and how this info fits with
the overall bullish or bearish sentiment of the market.
The second type of news is the unscheduled breaking event, such as corporate takeovers, horrible storms, political assassinations, or other happenings
that were not expected and that take more time for the market to digest.
That’s in part because these events have the ability to change trends rather
than play out against them. In some cases, the markets will halt trading to
allow this information to disseminate; in others, traders have to react quickly
based on what they know now and what they suspect will happen in the near
future.
Many day traders track Twitter and other social-media feeds for information during the trading day, and some brokers include these feeds as part of
the services that they offer to their customers. Social media is a permitted
way for companies to disseminate information to the market, but it can also
be spoofed in such a way as to cause headaches. In April of 2013, someone
hacked the Associated Press’s Twitter feed to announce that there were two
explosions in the White House and that President Barack Obama had been
injured. The story was false, but it created a lot of havoc in the markets and
elsewhere before it was retracted.

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
What’s the difference between risk and uncertainty? Risk is something that
happens often enough that people can quantify the damage. Uncertainty is
something that may happen, but no one can figure out the likelihood. A fire
that knocks out power to Midtown Manhattan sometime in the next ten years
is a risk; the invasion of the planet by aliens from outer space is uncertainty.
News can happen at any time. It can change a trend and throw all your careful
analysis into disarray. For this reason, careful analysis is no substitute for risk
management. Watch your position sizes and have stops in place so that you
exit when you need to. Chapter 2 has a lot of information on these topics.

Identifying Anomalies and Traps
Traders can be superstitious, and that superstition shows up in different
anomalies and traps that affect the mood of the market even when there is
no logical reason for their existence. You want to be aware of them, because
they can affect trading.
An anomaly is a market condition that occurs regularly but for no good
reason. It can be related to the month of the year, the day of the week, or the
size of the company involved. A trap is a situation where the market doesn’t
perform the way you expect it to given the indicators that you are looking
at. You have a choice: Go with what the market is telling you or go with what
your indicators are telling you.
To a long-term investor, perception is perception. When perception is different
from reality, an opportunity exists to make money. To a short-term trader, perception is reality because it affects what happens before everyone figures out
what’s real.

Bear traps and bull traps
Traders talk about getting caught in traps, which neatly fits the language of
bulls and bears. When they stumble into a trap, they’re stuck moving against
the market, which causes them big trouble. After all, day trading is about
identifying trends and moving with them. You only have a few hours to work
before the time comes to close out. In this section, I list a few common traps
to help you identify and, I hope, avoid them.
The best antidote for a trap is to take your loss and move on to the next trade.

153

154 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
Chart traps
If you flip back to Chapter 7 and look at some of the sample charts and if you
look at actual price charts created in the market every day, you may notice
that sometimes it’s really hard to tell whether a breakout is false or real and
whether a trend is changing or just playing out with a smaller subtrend. A
ton of subjectivity goes into reading charts, and some days you read them
wrong. You think you’re ahead of the market when you’re actually just trading
against it. Ouch!
Some traders try to work around these types of chart traps by automating
their trading. Several different software packages are available that can scan
the market and identify potential trading opportunities (see Chapter 13 for
more information). But even the best software misreads the market on some
occasions, which is why you need to monitor your positions and make sure
you stick to your loss limits.

Contrarian traps
Way back in Chapter 1, I note that about 80 percent of day traders lose
money. So maybe you’re thinking that the way to make money is to just do
the opposite of what everyone else is doing. But the reason that day traders
lose money isn’t so much that they’re wrong about the trend; it’s because
they’re sloppy in their trading and don’t limit their losses. (That’s why so
much of this book is about the business of trading rather than the actual
mechanics of placing buy and sell orders.)
In a contrarian trap, the trader has made the decision to trade against the
market, and that’s exactly what happens: He or she loses money because
the market is moving in the opposite direction. Taking a contrary position
doesn’t work too well in day trading. In most cases, you have to go with the
flow, not against it, to make money in a single day’s session. The market is
always right in the short term.
A lot of people make money with a contrarian strategy, but they need to pay
attention to avoid the traps.

Calendar effects
Many trading anomalies follow time periods — which is not completely unexpected — because many economic and business trends follow the calendar.
Companies report their results quarterly. Most close their books for tax
purposes at the end of the year. Investors are also evaluated quarterly. Retail
sales follow holiday seasons, demand for commodities follows the growing
season, and fuel demand varies with the weather. Whatever you decide to

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators
trade, you need to do enough fundamental research (the study of the business and economic factors that affect the security, described in Chapter 7) so
that you know how your chosen securities move over time.
But some of the calendar effects — the January effect, the Monday effect, and
the October effect — make little logical sense, yet they still influence trading.

The January effect
Many years, the stock market goes up in the early part of January. Why? No
one is entirely sure, but the guess is that people tend to sell at the end of
December for tax reasons and then buy back those securities in January. It
may also be that in the new year everyone is flush with excitement and ready
to see the market go up, so they put money to work and start buying.
If stocks go up in January, then you can get a jump on the market by buying
in December, right? And that would make prices go up in December. To get a
jump on the December rally, you could buy in November. And that’s exactly
what people started to do, and the once-pronounced January effect is now
weak to nonexistent. (People still talk about it, though.) In an efficient market,
people eventually figure out these unexplained phenomena and then trade on
them until they disappear. Use these anomalies as a way to gauge psychology,
not as hard and fast trading rules.

The Monday effect
The market seems to do more poorly on Monday than on the other days of
the week. And no matter what the evidence shows (the research is ambiguous, and the findings vary greatly based on the time period and the markets
examined), many traders believe this to be true, so it has an effect. Why?
There are two thoughts. The first is that people are in a bad mood on Monday
because they have to go back to work after the weekend. The second is that
people spend all weekend analyzing any bad news from the end of the prior
week and then sell as soon as they get back to the office.
The 2008 stock market crash happened on a Monday. Over the previous weekend, the different regulatory agencies decided to allow the old-line brokerage
firm of Lehman Brothers to fail. The firm failed to open on Monday, September
15, and the rest of the market went into a tailspin.

The October effect
The stock market has had two grand crashes and one smaller but profound
one in October:
✓ October 29, 1929: On this day, known as Black Tuesday, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average declined 12 percent in one day as market speculators

155

156 Part II: Exploring Popular Day-Trading Strategies
caught up with the less rosy reality of the economy. This crash kicked
off a general decline that contributed to the Great Depression of the
1930s.
✓ October 19, 1987: This day, known as Black Monday, saw the Dow Jones
Industrial Average decline 23 percent. No one is really sure why this
crash happened, but it did.
✓ October 13, 1989: On this day, the Dow Jones declined 7 percent in the last
hour of trading when a leveraged buyout for United Airlines fell through.
Because of these crashes, many traders believe that bad things happen in
October, and they act accordingly. Of course, bad things happen in other
months. The crash in the NASDAQ market that marked the end of the 1990s
tech bubble took place in March 2000, but no one talks about a March effect.
The 2008 crash took place in September; maybe, like the January effect, the
October effect is starting to roll earlier into the year.

Building on Some Standard Strategies
This chapter has a lot of information about different indicators that you can
look at, and this information can be used to form all types of trading strategies. Many traders work out their own systems after they’ve been trading for
a while, but they often start with something standardized.
You can start trading in a lot of ways (many of which you can read about in
this book; Chapter 13 in particular has advice on how to evaluate different
trading systems that you can subscribe to, if you are looking for a system). In
this section, I cover a few basic styles that you can use to launch your trading
business. All the strategies outlined in the following sections are based on the
indicators discussed in this chapter. They include range trading, or working
within normal high and low movements; contrarian trading, or going against the
momentum; news trading, or looking to buy and sell as soon as a juicy tidbit
comes across the newswire; and pairs trading, in which a trader goes long a
strong stock and short a weaker one in the same category. The idea is that in
an up market, gains on the long will outpace losses on the short, and in a down
market, gains on the short will outpace losses on the long.
No one of these strategies is better than another. Each has advantages in
different market conditions. The key is finding a strategy that fits your temperament and style so that you can act on it. A strategy is only as good as the
trader who executes it.
Many brokerage firms offer practice accounts and backtesting services that
you can use to play around and see what fits. And then you can start working
with real money.

Chapter 8: Following Market Indicators

Range trading
Range trading, sometimes called channel trading, starts with an understanding
of the recent trading history of a given security. Getting this history involves
looking at the charts (see Chapter 7) to identify typical highs and lows during
the day as well as the typical difference between these two prices. With
this information, the trader simply buys low and sells high. When the
security dips in price, the order to buy is placed; when it rises, the order
to sell goes in.
Most range traders use stops and limits to keep their trading in line with
what they see. Covered in more detail in Chapter 2, a stop limits the loss if the
security keeps dropping below your entry point, and the limit order gets you
out at a profit if the security moves to the top of the range.
Range trading works in a normal market with just enough volatility to keep the
price wiggling around during the day but not so much that it breaks out of the
range and starts a new trend.

Contrarian trading
Momentum traders buy securities when prices are rising and sell when
prices are falling. These traders figure that something that goes up in price
will continue to go up and something going down will continue to go down.
Momentum trading is one strategy, and it works well for many traders,
especially in a strong bull market.
Contrarian trading, on the other hand, is just the opposite of momentum
trading, and it can work well, too. The logic behind a contrarian strategy is
that nothing goes up forever; for that matter, nothing falls forever, either. The
contrarian trader looks for assets than have been rising in price and sells
them; she prefers to buy things that have been falling. The point is not to
buy cheap or sell dear, but rather to sell what seems to be overpriced and
buy what seems to be a bargain. Contrarian traders may just be quick to spot
when a trend ends. For example, they may buy on a rumor and sell on the
news, jumping out right when everyone else is ready to jump in.
The people I’ve known who use this strategy well tend to be bargain hunters
in every aspect of their lives. They stock up on frozen vegetables when the
grocery store has a once-a-year loss leader, and they sell their apartment if
their neighborhood’s real estate gets too hot. They have a nose for value and
put that to work during the trading day.
Contrarian traders are fighting the trend, and that can work against them
sometimes. This style favors people who know a market inside and out so
that they know when to move against it.
