
CIIAP'I'lnt 13

Advanced Option
Selling Strategies

All that glitters is not gold.
-William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice

he epigraph chosen for this chapter is intentionally misquoted. The
original sentence from the play is "All that glisters is not gold." Over
the years we have given the original a modernized turn of phrase.
While there are only subtle differences between glitters and glisters, they
are significant enough to warrant two separate words. That is the case with
the subject of this chapter.
The majority of the book has focused on pairing up your buy and sell
strategies. Whether you were purchasing options to protect your futures
positions or putting on spread positions with two or more futures positions, you were constantly covering one risk with another. In this chapter
we shift gears. Prevailing knowledge says that "90 percent of options expire worthless"; but if that is the case, why would anyone ever buy options?
Just as the Shakespearean quote "All that glisters is not gold" has changed
over time, so has a real understanding of what it means that 90 percent of
options expire worthless.
In this chapter we return to charts used in Chapter 4 to review how
to sell a strangle and a straddle, as well as how to put on a naked short
position. Yet before we can delve deeply into the strategies, a popular myth
about options must be busted. The myth that "90 percent of options expire
worthless" leads to a fallacy of logic that can create problems for the savvy
trader attempting to make money selling options.
With any statement there is an inverse logic that can be used to test the
accuracy or truthfulness of the statement itself. So if 90 percent of options

T

197

198

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

expire worthless, that means that if you only sell options you will have a
90 percent success rate. Anyone who has ever attempted to test this theory has soon found himself or herself at a disadvantage. The presumed 90
percent success rate rarely, if ever, materializes.
In life there are few absolutes, and possibly even fewer near absolutes.
The idea that "90 percent of options expire worthless" simply doesn't ring
true, but somehow it has stuck. Although options do have a high expiration rate, there is a reason for that high rate that is best understood before
attempting any of the income-generating ideas in this chapter.

DO 90 PERCENT OF OPTIONS
EXPIRE WORTHLESS?

~

A lie told often enough becomes the truth.
-Vladimir Lenin
Allover the Internet the option rhetoric is the same: 90 percent of options expire worthless. Others will claim that the figure is not as high as
90 percent, but possibly 70 to 80 percent. Where do any of these figures
come from? Let's look at the language of the research to see if there is
a discrepancy between this statement and the statements of some the research studies that have been done regarding options.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) has been maintaining
data on options since 1973. The CBOE's researchers discovered a largely
overlooked fact: that not all options are held until expiration. This is monumentally important when attempting to determine where figures such as
90 percent actually come from. The CBOE broke down option outcomes
into a simple formula: 10/60/30. Ten percent of all options are exercised
(converted to the underlying asset); approximately 60 percent of the options are closed (offset) before expiration; and the remaining 30 percent
are held until expiration.
It is very likely that all of the remaining 30 percent of options actually
expire worthless; the CBOE's formula does not mean that 90 percent of
all options expire worthless. In a study done by the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange (CME), ranging from 1997 to 1999, the researchers decided to
come to a definitive conclusion on the exact percentage of options that
expire worthless. In their research they concluded that 76.5 percent of the
options that were held until expiration expired worthless.
This is significant. If only 30 percent of options are held until expiration, and of those that are held until expiration 76.5 percent expire worthless, then the statement that "90 percent of options expire worthless" is not

Advanced Option Selling Strategies

199

only false, but a bold-faced lie-a lie that has been perpetuated over and
over until it has become a marketing fact. The idea of "options held until
expiration" and "options expiring" have been merged into one monolithic
idea that is simply comparing apples to oranges.
The fact that only 30 percent of options reach expiration does not mean
that the remaining 70 percent of options are successful. We know that
10 percent of all options are converted into the underlying asset; this is a
sign that 10 percent of all options are guaranteed to be successful. We also
know that about 60 percent of options are offset before they ever reach
expiration. Some of those are profitable and some are not profitable, but
none of them have ever reached expiration. So where does the 90 percent
figure come from?
It likely derives from the fact that only 10 percent of options are converted into their underlying asset. That means 90 percent of options aren't
converted into the underlying futures contract or stock. So undoubtedly
the assumption is that if 90 percent of options aren't converted then they
must expire worthless. This is a false assumption that is simply not supported by the numbers. Even in the small percentage of options that do
expire, 30 percent, some of these expire with a cash value (13.5 percent,
according to the CME).
So while we know that the percentage of options that expire worthless
is not 90 percent, there is reason to believe that a majority of options do
lose money. With 50 to 60 percent of contracts being offset before expiration and the majority of options that reach expiration expiring worthless,
the odds are in favor of 50 to 60 percent of options to be losing trades. While
50 to 60 percent is less than the touted 90 percent figure, selling options is
still a promising opportunity.

Becoming an Option Seller
It is exciting to hear that "90 percent of options expire worthless." It gives

you the feeling of being an insider and the hope of finding a magic bullet
with which to win the so-called trading game. Only once you attempt it do
the numbers not add up to the hype. It is easy to be down on yourself and
assume that somehow you are doing something wrong. This is not the case;
it is just the classic example of being overpromised and underdelivered on
that promise.
There are some empowering realities in knowing the truth about options that will make your option sales easier. First, the fact that the majority of options are not held until expiration releases you from holding on
to the hope that the option that you sold, that is now losing you money, is
worth holding on to until the absolute end. This reinforces the concept of
cutting your losses as quickly as possible.

200

ADVANCED STRATEGI ES

Second, you can feel confident, as a seller, that if you make money on
the contract you can sell it into the marketplace (offset) along with the majority of traders with little or no worry that you have somehow missed out
on profits. You are doing nothing different from what other option traders
are doing.
Finally, you are releasing yourself from making a financial commitment
that you cannot afford to make. When you sell options, you are limiting
your profit to the premiums that you collect and exposing yourself to unlimited risk. If you believe that 90 percent of options expire worthless, it
becomes easier to take risks and chances that you would otherwise avoid,
because you believe the odds are in your favor.
How differently will a trader operate if he knows that when he sells
an option he possibly has a 60 percent chance of the trade going in his
direction, and only half of those will make it to expiration? One hopes he
will operate with the caution and respect that selling options requires, and
will sell options with his eyes wide open.
The following option selling techniques-selling straddles, strangles,
and naked options-all have the opportunity to be profitable, in much the
same way that purchasing options is successful. Selling options requires
the same vigilance and common sense as purchasing options if you hope
to make your trading plan successful. The ability to stick with your money
management techniques and your trading goals will help you make sure
that selling options is worthwhile.

WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN
SELLING OPTIONS
In Chapter 4, where we began this journey, we introduced the concepts
of straddles and strangles. At that time we looked at the straddle and
strangle as opportunities to take advantage of sideways markets and news
announcements, and to hedge your bets against wild fluctuations in the
market's movements. One of the key drawbacks to both the straddle and
the strangle is the possibility that the market will do nothing. If that occurs, you have the opportunity to lose part or all of your option premium,
on both your put and your call, if you are not careful.
Options and futures trading is a zero-sum game; as we have discussed before, the premium you pay doesn't simply evaporate into thin air.
Someone on the other side of your buying transaction has collected that
premium. There is a trade-off, though. While the option buyers have an
opportunity to make as much money as possible, the option sellers are restricted to the premium they receive, while being exposed to unlimited risk.

Advanced Option Selling Strategies

20J

With added exposure to unlimited risk, the question is, "Why would
anyone sell options?" As we have seen, the old adage "90 percent of options expire worthless" is not true, but the reality still favors that at least
60 percent of options most likely lose money. Couple the fact that more options lose money than make money with the advanced knowledge of what
type of return on your money you will receive when you sell options, and
selling options becomes a more comfortable alternative to the unknown.
Selling options cannot occur in a vacuum, though. You can't sell an
option and forget about it. You must use stops, stop limits, and preferably
protective buy options to back up your option sales. However you protect
yourself from your option sales, it is simply important to do it. The reality
still is that 40 percent of options are likely profitable. If you are caught on
the wrong side of your option sale it can be disastrous. One misstep can
wipe out all of your accumulated profits.

Margins and Option Selling
In futures and commodities trading it is not easy to sell options. While long
and short futures contracts are treated the same, options are not treated
with the same deference. When you purchase an option, your entire capital
commitment is limited to the cost of the option premium. If the option
premium is $500, then you are required to put up $500. Option selling is
different.
Selling options exposes the seller to unlimited risk. This risk, while the
responsibility is on the seller, is shared by the brokerage and the clearing
firm. If the market moves excessively against the seller and for some reason
he cannot pay, the loss first falls on the shoulders of the brokerage to pay
for the loss, and it is extended to the clearing firm to cover any difference.
Similar to how protective the stock market is against shorting shares,
selling options can be difficult to accomplish. While the stock market monitors shorting shares by restricting the number of shares available for borrowing, selling options has no such mechanism. Instead, clearing firms
and brokerages force option sellers to make a capital commitment to their
trade. This typically comes in the form of putting up the equivalent margin
that would be needed to take an actual futures position.
For example, if you decide to sell an option worth $500 on corn and the
margin is $1,350, you will receive a credit in your account for the premium,
but you will also be required to have at least $1,350 in your account in order
to initiate the option sale.
Another quirk of options is the fact that you will not be able to collect 100 percent of the premium until the option has expired. Only at that
time will you have the profits transferred to your account free and clear.

202

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

This can be frustrating for those who want to accumulate the premium to
initiate new trades, as we saw earlier when we discussed ratio spreads.
If you succeed in holding on to your sold option until expiration, the
odds are in your favor (76.5 percent according to the CME) that you will
collect your full premium. Alternatively, you can offset your successful
sold option at any time by purchasing the corresponding option back. This
same concept applies to selling calls.
For example, if you sell a put at a particular strike price, you must
purchase a put at that exact same strike price in order to offset it. If you
sold the put at $500 and you purchase the same put back at $200, your net
profit will be $300. Your account will be adjusted accordingly, and you will
lose $200 in premium from your account.
There are numerous reasons why you would offset your option
position ahead of expiration; perhaps you achieve your target profit, you
are worried that the market may shift suddenly based on some news event,
or it is part of a broader strategy. Whatever the reason, do not hold on to a
losing position until expiration in hopes that the trade will turn around all
ofasudden.

STRANGLES, STRADDLES,
OR NAI{ED OPTIONS
Strangles, straddles, and naked options-which type of trade is best?
Naked options have a tendency to fall into the same category as simply
buying options. If you have a bearish market bias, you sell calls; if you have
a bullish market bias, then sell puts. While having a market bias is essential
to anyone's long-term success, trading that market bias can be dangerous,
particularly when you have all or nothing riding on one premium. This is
what selling naked options means.
If the trade fails, we know that selling options exposes you to unlimited
risk. The worst-case scenario for a naked option seller is for the underlying
asset to become lock limit against the option. The underlying asset cannot
be exited, so the option's volatility increases exponentially. The potential
to lose thousands to gain a few hundred quickly becomes not worth it.
While there are ways to salvage or at least minimize the impact of
a market moving against a naked option seller, it is best to have the
proper option selling strategy set in place at the outset. This can best be
accomplished by selling options only in sideways markets and using a sell
straddle or sell strangle to let the market dictate what direction it wishes to
go. This eliminates the need to have a market bias, while at the same time
expanding your trading opportunities.

Advanced Option Selling Strategies

2(n

Naked option selling can be profitable. By monitoring the theta (decline of option time value) and the vega (measure of increase and decr a.....
of option based on volatility), along with the expiration date, you can a tempt to go through the option candidates and cherry-pick the ones mo ...
likely to sell. However, if you overoptimize your decision-making progre ".
you may find that there is not enough intrinsic value to make selling tlw
option worthwhile.
When executing straddles and strangles, the same type of market bia.c.,
as in selling naked options evolves from the market's movement, not from
any type of arbitrary decision-making process. Selling two options can be
expensive, but it is a solid way to be able to participate in some of the most
profitable options around. Theta and vega are also important, but there is
no need to be 100 percent dependent on these two values in order to determine what options to select. They become secondary monitoring tools to
reinforce a decision that the market has already made.
In the following exan1ples we analyze straddles, strangles, and naked
options in order to determine the best opportunity. From there we will
learn exactly how to pick profitable opportunities.

SELL STRADDLE
A sell straddle is also known as a short straddle. This is a strategy that
is designed to take advantage of the market's volatility. The object is to
sell a put and a call, both at-the-money options. At-the-money options have
the highest built-in premium because of their high level of volatility. This
volatility works in the option sellers' favor because they collect the maximum amount of money possible, knowing for a fact that when the volatility
decreases they have an opportunity to profit from both the put and the call
simultaneously.
The primary drawback of a straddle is the fact that the market rarely
stays at the exact same price. So it is important to pay attention to the value
of the underlying asset in relation to the options that were sold.

Short Straddle Examples
In Figure 13.1 we have a view of the gold chart on February 26, 2008. The
underlying contract expires in April, and the option has one more month
before expiration on March 28, 2008. The market is flat in anticipation of
the upcoming February 27, 2008, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
interest rate announcement.
We have an opportunity to sell a 940 call for $1,830 and a put for $1 ,950.
When selling options, we have to take into consideration the break even

204

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

MovmgAvg IC,50J - n2.5 02l26nOOS_aS3,8{0<3.4)

....
: 98s.G

-- 9811.0
S7~.O

5111,0

FIGURE 13.1

Short Straddle
Source : TradeNavigator.com © 2007. All rights reserved.

point of the option buyer. Options purchases don't break even on their
purchase until the underlying price of the option exceeds the cost of the
premium paid.
Breakeven for the person who buys the call occurs when the underlying price of gold reaches $958.30-total of premium paid ($18.30) plus the
strike price (940). The person who buys the put won't break even until the
price reaches $920.50-premium paid ($19.50) minus the strike price (940).
(See Table 13.1.)
As an option seller you are collecting nearly as much premium as possible. An optimal at-the-money option delta is approximately 50 percent,
the 940 call's delta is at 48.3 percent, and the 940 put's delta is at 51.4 percent. This means that you have to be willing to cut your losses on the losing

'rABLE 13.1

Short Straddle Premiums

Margin
Premium
Delta
Return on investment

Gold 940 Call

Gold 940 Put

$5,400
5 1,830
.483

55,400
$1,9 50
.514

34%

36%

205

Advanced Option Selling Strategies

option position as quickly as possible in order to retain as high a return on
investment (ROI) as possible.
If you have to exit either option, the projected ROIs of 34 percent and
36 percent are cut in half. Once you have to pick the call position to keep.
then your 34 percent ROI on $5,400 becomes a 17 percent return based
on $10,400, minus whatever loss you may incur on your put position. The
inverse is equally true. Once you decide to keep the put position, your 36
percent ROI turns into an 18 percent ROI.
The only factor working in the option seller's favor is the decreasing
time value. Every day the contract gets closer to expiration it loses more of
its value, as long as the underlying asset fails to move significantly toward
either breakeven point. In Figure 13.2 we see the market's big spike over
the next 30 days.
On February 26, 2008, we see the underlying gold market begin to take
off. In one day it moves $13. This is an obvious cue to exit the gold market
call option. The obvious winner in this pair, for the option seller, is the put
option. By letting go of the call option as close to breakeven as possible,
the option seller can keep the put option premium of $1,950, minus the call
expenses.
With a delta of almost 50 percent, that means every $1 move was equal
to 50 cents. If you exit after the $13 move, the potential hit would be $6.50

GC.067: Gold

co.m.x(Pit) Cidj (!Ii' IOony bars) '-"~'''''''·~ - .......MOvingAV9fC,SO) .

'S• ._ -• •

ut 03/3112008 -921 ,' 1~;4••)

Option Call Buyer Breakeven

~ . ..",'+

i-~,~~r~tr· ~I~+~
i. +.. .......... .

~. .. . . .

": 1020,(f

, .. ~++, ._

··············7························· . ...

+. ~ ... . . . .. I. ~ "'.
,.0.0
" 351M

"'.0

Option Put Buyer Breakeven
O3IT7JOa

FIGURE 13.2 Offsetting Gold Call Option
Source: TradeNavigator.com © 2007 . All rights reserved.

206

ADVANCED STRATEGIES

or $650. This puts your total profits at $1,300, approximately a 12 percent
return on $10,800 in 30 days.
While the return is a little way away from the hoped-for 18 percent,
and a third of the value had you simply sold a naked option, it is still
significantly better than the stock market's historical return of 12 percent
a year. This is the reason option sellers are willing to endure the potential
for unlimited risk. The ability to not only calculate your potential returns
in advance, but also hold on to your money in your account the entire time
is a significant comfort for a certain type of investor.
As we look at Figure 13.2 we see the roller-coaster ride that the market
can take. It actually moves up rather quickly, only to die down and reverse
itself as the option gets closer to expiration. Had we held on to the call we
offset early on in the move we, would have profited from both positions.
That is the beauty of having 20/20 hindsight. With money management
rules and profit goals in place we couldn't hold on to the call we sold. We
could only follow what the rhythm of the market was at that time. For this
reason alone the statistical option model of 10/60/30 is most likely true.
Had we held on to both the call and put until expiration, we would
have fallen into the 30 percent category, with the majority of those expiring
worthless. Unfortunately, the reality of the short-term situation didn't allow
us to hold on with the threat of unlimited risk hanging over our heads. So
instead we fell into the 60 percent category (with the call option) of those
who offset their options contract before the expiration date and into the
30 percent category (with the put option) of those options that are held
until expiration.

Short Straddle Wrap-Up
There are a great number of benefits in putting on a short straddle; you
can take advantage of volatility, you're able to gain the maximum premium
possible, and you can collect your return on your investment ahead of time.
The risks and rewards have to be weighed out, though. Selling options exposes you to unlimited risk, and even though they don't move in tandem
with the underlying asset, if you are not careful you will quickly erode
whatever little returns you expected.
Unlike the unlimited profit potential of purchasing options, selling options limits your profit to the initial premium, and any unexpected movements or volatility in the markets can jeopardize your opportunity to keep
this profit. The primary saving grace of selling options is the simple fact
that the majority of options do lose value. This and this alone makes it
worthwhile to incorporate shorting straddles into your trading plan from
time to time.
