
 I had no plates, the taillights didn’t work. The cop was fixing to write up a ticket. Warren said, “Look, officer, we just have to get it home to my garage so we can fix it up to meet all of the safety requirements.” He was talking and talking and he just kept talking until the cop said okay. 

 Danly kept the Rolls in the Buffetts’ garage. They spent the summer fixing it up—though, of course, Danly was the one who was under the chassis. Warren would sit on a stool, entertaining his friend with business stories and reading from a book they thought was a scream— How to Lose Friends and Alienate People . 
 The Rolls was a 1928 Ladies’ Shopping Car. It had a single seat in front and a wide berth in back, and a hand crank for show. Danly and Norma Jean painted it dark blue. They rented it out a few times, but the real point was to be seen in it. Warren proposed that they drive downtown, posing as a rich couple with their chauffeur—but he would play the rich “aristocrat,” Danly the chauffeur. Danly put on Howard Buffett’s black overcoat and took the wheel, and Warren, wearing a muskrat coat and top hat, sidled in next to Norma Jean. As they approached the Times-Herald building, Danly, following a script, cut off the ignition and coasted to a stop. Then he got out and started tinkering under the hood, as if he were trying to figure out what was wrong. When people started to stare, Warren—the aristocrat—tapped on the windshield glass with a cane and pointed, as if indicating where the trouble might be. Danly fiddled a bit more and—behold—it was “fixed.” † 
 But without a script, Warren was hardly so suave. He dated Norma Jean’s cousin, Barbara Worley, over the summer, and took her to hear Billie Holiday. But though Warren was a lively companion, he ruined any hope of romance by subjecting Worley to an unending series of riddles and “brainteasers”—presumably, an activity that relieved Warren’s awkwardness. When he finally screwed up his courage and invited her for a weekend at Penn, Worley turned him down. 
 In his sophomore year, Warren lived at the Alpha Sigma Phi house, a Victorian mansion on Spruce Street with high ceilings and a stately spiral stair. He was ambivalent toward his fraternity brothers—not aloof, but not quite part of their rituals, either. After lunch, he would plop himself in a curved bridge chair by a bay window and join in a game of hearts or bridge. In a conversational setting, such as at mealtimes, Warren was very alive—loose and confident with his opinions. In those years, fraternity members were served by waiters and dressed in jackets and ties for dinner. Anthony Vecchione, recalling Warren’s table chatter, said, “When he was on he was fun—a lot of laughs.” 

 He was a very funny kid, very clever. It wasn’t boffo slapstick, it was dry. He had a semicynical view of the way things worked. I remember he said if he ever got rich, he’d install steam-heated toilet seats in the bathroom. He said that had to be the ultimate. 

 But Warren was aching for some sort of intellectual—or financial-stimulus. Penn was a rah-rah school; campus life in 1948 revolved around pep rallies and the top-ten football team. Ironically, Warren was portrayed on the cover of Penn Pics , a student magazine, as the model fan, decked in a derby hat and raccoon coat, one hand waving a banner, the other offering a brandy flask to his apparent date, with a cigar extending from a jaunty grin, all against a photographic montage depicting the Penn marching band and a leather-helmeted ball carrier. 
 The cover was a joke; Warren’s friend Jerry Orans was one of the editors. In truth, Warren was everything that the cover boy was not. He was a nondrinker, was uncomfortable with women, and was not a big socializer. On a campus with so many older students—returned GIs—he even looked out of place. With his hair unslicked, the skinny eighteen-year-old student looked like a visiting kid brother. 
 His youthfulness was especially apparent in the context of sex. Besides being inexperienced with women, he was noticeably ill-at-ease with the fellows’ locker-room humor. “I remember distinctly,” said Vecchione, the son of a Long Island subcontractor, “when people started talking about sex, he’d look at the floor. His face would get flushed.” 
 On weekends, when Alpha Sigma threw beer parties, the monastic frat house was flooded with women. Warren usually did not have a date, but—of importance for a future investor—he was comfortable without being part of the crowd. While most of the guys had their arms around a date, Warren would sit on the couch and entertain the party with a little dissertation on the gold standard. He was so captivating that the fellows made a party routine of having Warren stand in a corner and peppering him with questions about economics and politics. “He’d start holding forth, and before a minute or two had gone by he’d have an audience, maybe ten to twenty people,” remembered William Wayne Jones, a fellow nondrinker and a future Methodist missionary. “He would do it so humbly you were just in thrall. He’d say, ‘I really don’t know much about this, but it looks to me …’ ” 
 Warren’s fraternity mates were in awe of his intellect. 26 He would read a chapter, they recalled, and recite it by rote. In class, when a graduate lecturer would parrot an answer from the text, Warren, who had it memorized, would burst out, “You forgot the comma.” 27 Moreover, the way he glibly critiqued the faculty left his fellows spellbound. One of the frat brothers, Richard Kendall, said, “Warren came to the conclusion that there wasn’t anything Wharton could teach him. And he was right.” 
 When the brothers returned to Wharton in the fall of 1949, they were stunned to find that Warren wasn’t there. Vecchione said, “He just evaporated at the end of the second year. Nobody ever heard from him again.” 28 In short, he had run away once more. His father had been defeated in 1948 and had returned with the family to Omaha, leaving Warren alone in the East. In Wharton, there had been nothing to keep him—no paper route, no pinball. He transferred to the familiar University of Nebraska at Lincoln, where his parents had met. “I didn’t feel I was learning that much,” Warren explained. “Nebraska called, Wharton repelled.” 29 
 Among his Alpha Sigma brothers, the memory that stuck was of Warren’s playing bridge, in an alcove by the great bay window. Otherwise, he almost seemed not to have been there. 
 From the time he returned to Nebraska, Buffett was a student only in name. In fact, he was launching his career. During the summer, he took a job at J.C. Penney, where he was offered (but declined) a position for after college. Feeling more comfortable on his home turf, he also began to date more. Writing to “Dear Monster” (Jerry Orans), a jocular Buffett was feeling his oats: 

 The latest girl I have been dating casually mentioned to me that she played tennis so thinking I would impress the little gal with a show of cave-man masculinity I offered to give her the opportunity to see me work out from across the net. She trounced me. 30 

 He planned a Herculean load—five courses in the fall of 1949 and six in the spring of 1950, mostly in business and economics. But his focus was off-campus. Buffett had taken a newspaper job, he explained to Orans, that involved “50 little boys calling me ‘Mr. Buffett.’ ” He was supervising paperboys in six rural counties for the Lincoln Journal , traveling southeastern Nebraska in a 1941 Ford. The job paid seventy-five cents an hour. Mark Seacrest, the head of circulation, was dubious that a student could handle the load. But Buffett was “all charged up.” He would come in each week to get his assignments and be off in a flash. To Buffett, it was a man-sized job. In his words: 

 If you have a down route in Seward or Pawnee City or Weeping Water, Nebraska, you’re looking for a kid to deliver fifteen papers a day or something of the sort and you got to find him late in the afternoon or early in evening while you’re attending college—it’s an education. 31 

 In Lincoln, Buffett lived with Truman Wood, then affianced to Warren’s sister Doris, in the upstairs of a Victorian house on Pepper Avenue. Buffett would come back from his newspaper work in the late afternoon, read the Wall Street Journal , and go out with Wood to a greasy spoon for a dinner such as mashed potatoes, beef, and gravy. Wood, intrigued that Buffett had read the Bible three or four times and remained agnostic, could not resist trying to convert him. They had the usual debates about faith and the afterlife, but Buffett was immovable. For every argument that Wood raised, Buffett had a deadly logical response. 
 Apart from their bull sessions, Buffett was rushing to finish college in three years, working a virtually full-time job, keeping up his bridge game, and racking up A’s. Also, as he wrote to Orans in the fall, he had submitted a dozen entries in the hopes of winning a $100 Burma-Shave jingle contest, ‡ and had lined up a date with “a German gal that looks all right.” 
 In the winter, Buffett revived his golf-ball business—this time as a serious enterprise, with Orans as his agent in Philadelphia. In January 1950, Buffett implored his friend to get down to business. 

 I don’t imagine the boys back there are playing much golf yet and I can guarantee March 1st delivery on the type of balls you want so don’t hesitate on getting orders. 32 

 Buffett promised to make good the losses on any “duds” and assured Orans that the quality of his golf balls was okay. Nonetheless, he added, “don’t get them near any real heat.” As an afterthought, Buffett mentioned that he had gotten through finals “pretty good” and listed his courses for the spring. In April, having sent Orans a shipment, he sent his chum a lighthearted—but pointed—reminder that “Buffett’s Golf Enterprises” was not a charitable venture. 

 By this time I imagine you are bathing in luxury with the enormous profits you undoubtedly reaped from the sale of those gleaming beauties I mailed your father’s partner in crime. However, don’t forget that Philadelphia’s prosperity is not shared by Lincoln until you dispatch a check for the token sum of $65.94. 33 

 In the summer, Buffett continued his breakneck pace, moving in with his parents and taking three courses in Omaha so he could get the credits to graduate. By July, he had sold 220 dozen golf balls and had reaped $1,200 from them. 34 From all his ventures combined, he had saved $9,800. 
 That trifling grubstake would be the source of every dollar that Buffett would earn. 35 He had tracked every penny—the Cities Service stock, the paper route, the golf-ball sales, the pinball—in squiggly, uneven handwriting. So prophetic was his ledger of later exploits that it called to the mind of one journalist the papers that “Horatio Alger might have donated to the Baker Library at the Harvard Business School.” 36 
 Buffett had in fact applied to Harvard Business School. He confidently wrote to Orans, who had opted for Columbia Law School: “Egad! Big Jerry, reconsider and join me at Harvard.” 37 In the summer, Buffett took a train to Chicago to meet an alumnus. Scrawny and unpolished, and merely nineteen, he struck his interviewer as not quite Harvard. The session was over in ten minutes. 38 Writing “Big Jerry” on July 19, Buffett needed five paragraphs to work up to the news. He informed his friend that he was taking a tax course and learning “all the shrewd angles that clip the dollars from the return.” There followed talk of his “famous cannonball serve,” get-well wishes for Orans’s convalescing father, and an update on golf-ball sales. 

 Now for the blow. Those stuffed-shirts at Harvard didn’t see there [ sic ] way clear to admit me to their graduate school. They decided 19 was too young to get admitted and advised me to wait a year or two. Therefore I am now faced with the grim realities of life since I start paying room and board here in four weeks. My dad wants me to go on to some graduate school but I’m not too sold on the idea. 

 Two weeks later, there was no holding back. “Dear Big Jerry,” he wrote. 

 To tell you the truth, I was kind of snowed when I heard from Harvard. Presently, I am waiting for an application blank from Columbia. They have a pretty good finance department there; at least they have a couple of hot shots in Graham and Dodd that teach common stock valuation. 39 

 Buffett was being a bit too nonchalant. Benjamin Graham, in fact, was the dean of the securities profession; he and his colleague David Dodd had written the seminal textbook in the field, Security Analysis . And Buffett had read Graham’s new book, The Intelligent Investor , while at Lincoln, and had found it highly captivating. Wood, Buffett’s housemate, said, “It was almost like he had found a god.” 40 His jocular reference to Columbia’s “hot shots” may be taken as posturing at a moment when he feared being rejected again. But in August, Buffett got some good news. He was going to New York, to study with the master. 

 * Orans would be a Buffett investor and a lifelong admirer. He later suggested that Beja also invest, but Beja was determined to prove that he could do as well on his own. Thereafter, he said, Orans would call him a couple of times a year to tell him what Warren was worth. “It would just go up and up.” 
 † Danly went on to have an accomplished career as a chemical engineer with Monsanto. In retirement, he bought a Jaguar. 
 ‡ Buffett’s best: “If missin’ on kissin’—Hey Listen, try thissen—Burma-Shave.”

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

   Chapter 3 GRAHAM 

 Mr. Market is very obliging indeed . Every day he tells you what he thinks your interest is worth . 
 B ENJAMIN G RAHAM , T HE I NTELLIGENT I NVESTOR 

 Buffett had been fascinated by stocks since he had first chalked them up on the blackboard. He had traded stocks, studied the market, consulted oracles, and looked for the great epiphany—some mystical correlation in the charts, some system that would make him rich. Yet he was no further, really, than when he had combed the floor of the racetrack, looking for discarded ticket stubs. Some stocks would place, but many more would not. 
 Ben Graham opened the door, and in a way that spoke to Buffett personally. He gave Buffett the tools to explore the market’s manifold possibilities, and also an approach that fit his student’s temper. Armed with Graham’s techniques, Buffett could dismisss the oracles and make use of his native talents. And steeled by the example of Graham’s character, Buffett would be able to work with his trademark self-reliance—with the “sweetness” of Emersonian independence of which Buffett had heard from his father. 
 Yet Graham was far more than Buffett’s tutor. It was Graham who provided the first reliable map to that wondrous and often forbidding city, the stock market. He laid out a methodological basis for picking stocks, previously a pseudoscience similar to gambling. Investing without Graham would be like communism without Marx—the discipline would scarcely exist. 
 And groundbreaking as they were, Graham’s writings did not explain in full the hold he had on his disciples. Unlike other Wall Street practitioners, Graham was open with his thoughts and freely shared his ideas. Wall Street interested him merely as an abstraction—the money meant nothing to him. In a field that was filled with narrow minds, Graham was also classical scholar, a student of Latin and Greek, a translator of Spanish poetry, and the author of a Broadway play—which closed in four nights. Oddly, for one who revolutionized investing, he spent much of his time working on quirky avocations and inventions, such as a new kind of slide rule and “more practical” pieces of furniture. (That was abstract, too; it is unlikely that Graham ever held a hammer.) 1 He was short, with penetrating, light blue eyes and thick lips—“a funny little guy, sort of ugly,” as an associate said—but possessed of a spark. 2 
 He came into the world as Benjamin Grossbaum, in London, in 1894. 3 When he was a year old, his father moved the family to New York to open a branch of a china-importing business. However, he died when Ben was nine. His mother put her savings in the market, and was wiped out in the panic of 1907. Ben took odd jobs, excelled at Boys High in Brooklyn, and entered Columbia. When he graduated, in 1914, he was offered posts in three departments—English, mathematics, and philosophy. But he took the advice of a college dean and went to Wall Street. 4 
 Graham started at the lowest rung, earning $12 a week chalking prices on a blackboard. 5 While there were no securities analysts in those days, merely “statisticians,” he quickly made his mark as an investor and also began to write. By the late 1920s, he was lecturing on finance after work. 
 His Wall Street lectures reflected his passion for geometry. Namely, he was anxious to systematize investing—to devise a set of Euclidean principles that would work for the stock market. 
 Graham’s approach—an oddity in the speculative climate of the late 1920s—was to look for companies that were so cheap as to be free of risk. In 1926, for example, he discovered that Northern Pipe Line, an oil transporter, owned, in addition to its pipeline assets, a portfolio of railroad bonds worth $95 for each of its shares. Yet the stock was trading for only $65. Graham bought two thousand shares, and suggested that the company sell its bonds as a means of recouping its buried portfolio value. The management, which was controlled by the Rockefellers, refused. But Graham mounted a proxy fight and was elected to the board. Northern Pipe capitulated, liquidated its bonds, and paid a $70-a-share dividend. 
 By 1929, the “Benjamin Graham Joint Account,” Graham’s partnership, had $2.5 million of capital, and Graham was riding high. 6 By then, of course, Wall Street was full of rich men. Speculators were driving prices to the moon. That very year, the unfortunate Professor Irving Fisher of Yale proclaimed: “Stock prices have reached what looks like a permanently high plateau.” 7 
 Graham, though, was careful. When the Crash came, the Joint Account lost a tolerable 20 percent. In 1930, Graham—like so many—was convinced that the worst was over. He borrowed on margin and plunged into stocks. And then the bottom fell out. “The singular feature of the great crash,” as John Kenneth Galbraith observed, “was that the worst continued to worsen.” 8 
 The smart money—the fellow who had waited out the panic—was wiped out with the rest. By 1932, the Joint Account had fallen 70 percent. Graham was close to ruin. His family left its park-view duplex in the Beresford for the relative austerity of a small rear apartment in the nearby El Dorado, where space was going empty. His wife, a dance teacher, went back to work. Graham was ready to quit, but a relative of Jerome Newman, Graham’s partner, put up $75,000 of capital that enabled the firm to survive. 9 When Security Analysis appeared, in 1934, its forty-year-old coauthor had gone five straight years without being paid. 10 
 Graham, in the introduction, frankly acknowledged that investing in common stocks seemed “discredited.” 11 At the market’s recent lows, a third of American industry was selling at less than its liquidation value. 12 The experts who only a few years back had seen in Wall Street a place of unending milk and honey now advised, as one said, that “common stocks as such are not investments at all.” 13 Gerald M. Loeb, a commentator whose popular book The Battle for Investment Survival appeared at about the same time as Security Analysis , held that investing for profit was impossible. If the Dow Jones Industrial Average could register 381.17 in 1929 and 41.22 in 1932, who was to say what “real” value was? “I do not think anyone really knows,” he averred, “when a particular security is ‘cheap’ or ‘dear.’ ” Instead, Loeb counseled, “It is necessary to speculate … to foresee [the] tides.” 14 
 Loeb stressed that the thing to watch was not the earnings of an enterprise but the public psychology: 

 The importance of full consideration of popular sentiment, expectations and opinion—and their effect on the price of the security—cannot be overstressed. 15 

 Yet how was one to gauge the public sentiment? The chief method was to follow the prices of stocks themselves, to “watch the tape.” If a stock declined it should be sold, and quickly; if it advanced, it should be purchased. It was not enough to buy something cheap—one must only buy “just as it starts to get dearer.” 16 
 If Loeb failed to grasp the paradox of millions of investors each reacting to one another and yet all trying to stay a step ahead of the crowd, it was not lost on Graham and Dodd: 

 For stock speculation is largely a matter of A trying to decide what B, C and D are likely to think—with B, C and D trying to do the same. 17 

 Security Analysis offered an escape from such a trap. Graham and Dodd urged that investors pay attention not to the tape, but to the businesses beneath the stock certificates. By focusing on the earnings, assets, future prospects, and so forth, one could arrive at a notion of a company’s “intrinsic value” that was independent of its market price . 
 The market, they argued, was not a “weighing machine” that determined value precisely. Rather, it was a “voting machine,” in which countless people registered choices that were the product partly of reason and partly of emotion. 18 At times, these choices would be out of line with rational valuations. The trick was to invest when prices were far below intrinsic value, and to trust in the market’s tendency to correct. 
 Given that the Depression had far from run its course, it was a remarkable time to assert one’s faith in markets. Many companies’ shares were being quoted for less than the value of their cash in the bank . 19 But Graham, a classicist, could recognize Wall Street’s gloom as part of an all-too-human cycle: 
