
they wouldn’t have minded if it had gotten bigger. It was their chance to shine. The TV people were
particularly obnoxious. They wanted us to hurry up for the five o’clock news, or the six o’ clock news, and I
wouldn’t cooperate with them. And I could just feel it. I could just tell it. I had to fall on my face. I had to be
found a phony. They wanted it to develop that way. There were all kinds of book contracts floating around
that room, but only if somehow Salomon failed.”
Sitting on the dais, Buffett crossed his arms; he looked weary. Maughan, his light brown hair brushed into a
neat pouf, stared wide-eyed at the crowd like the proverbial deer caught in the headlights. Both were clad in
navy suits, white shirts, and funereal ties. “I had no preparation, zero,” Maughan says. “‘You’re tagged’ was
my complete set of instructions.” He did not know a single detail that had transpired upstairs. They began.
What happened? the reporters wanted to know.
Buffett, suit jacket bunched up around his ears, explained: “The failure to report is, in my view, inexplicable
and inexcusable. I have seen similar dumb things happen in other operations that I am more intimately
involved in but not with such consequences.”
Had the culture contributed to the scandal? “I don’t think the same thing would have happened in a
monastery,” Buffett said.
Somebody asked him what he would get paid. “I’m going to do this for a dollar,” he said. The board, sitting in
the audience, was dumbfounded. This was the first they had heard of it.
The reporters declined to be soothed. Were records altered? Who altered them? Was there a cover-up? Who
participated in the cover-up?
Yes, some records had been altered. There had been something resembling a cover-up. At that, the pack grew
excited, throwing questions hard and fast. Here, perhaps, was the stumbling prey they were hunting, close to
capture, ready to be torn apart by their sharp teeth. Alas, the trail grew cold when the cover-up included no
one significant beyond those who had already been sacked.
Someone came out to the stage and told Buffett he had a phone call from the Treasury. He hurried from the
dais, leaving Maughan, astonished, twisting in the wind alone. Nevertheless, Maughan managed to answer
some questions in the perfectly articulated monotones of a BBC announcer narrating a documentary about
the mating habits of the wildebeest.
Buffett returned with a press release from the Treasury Department, announcing that Salomon had part of its
credibility back. The journalists were not mollified. They pressed on.
Did the ex-executives really resign or had they left through arm-twisting? Buffett assured them repeatedly
that Gutfreund, Strauss, and Meriwether had resigned voluntarily. Were the ex-executives getting special
compensation? Was Salomon paying their legal fees? How much money did illegal actions earn the firm?
After well over an hour, one of the directors who was sitting next to Munger nudged him and said, “Isn’t
Warren ever going to end this thing?”
“Maybe he doesn’t really want to,” Munger said. “Warren knows what he’s doing.”94
How much did the phony trades cost the government? How many customers had told Salomon they wouldn’t
do business with the firm? What severance would be paid to the ex-executives? Why didn’t Wachtell, Lipton
take the situation more seriously? What were the details of the strange fraudulent trade the investigators had
discovered, the one referred to in the press release as the “billion-dollar practical joke”?
“It is not a joke. I suppose if you had to characterize it in some way—” began Buffett.
“Those were your words in the release,” retorted the reporter, sharply.

“Those were not my words. It was in the release. My name is not on the bottom of the release. You can
characterize it as a bizarre incident. My definition of a practical joke is one you can laugh at after hearing it. I
don’t see it as the least bit funny.”
The reporters, most of whom had read Liar’s Poker, waited for an explanation. Salomon, they knew, was
famous for its “goofs.” Traders were constantly stealing the clothes out of each other’s suitcases and
replacing them with wet paper towels or lacy pink panties. The most famous goof at Salomon concerned the
game of liar’s poker itself, which Gutfreund once allegedly offered to play Meriwether for a million dollars
on a single bet, no tears. Meriwether supposedly countered with ten million, causing Gutfreund to stand
down. While even this story was thought to be a sort of goof, containing apocryphal elements, until now ten
million dollars was the outside limit that anyone had ever imagined for a Salomon goof.
But for a billion dollars, you could fill New York Harbor with rubber chickens as high as the Statue of
Liberty’s thighs. What, then, could have been the “billion-dollar practical joke”?
“Apparently a woman was leaving the department after many, many years—retiring, I guess,” Buffett said.
“An order was worked out with somebody, to give her a very large order. A billion dollars. A billion-dollar
order on a new offering of thirty-year Treasury bonds. Then—and this gets vague—I guess the plan was to
maybe convince her somehow that the order was not submitted and have the client question the fact that it
was not submitted. It was to try to scare the hell out of her or something. I don’t know.
“The bid actually did get submitted.”
A hundred fifty reporters sat in silence. Salomon had bought a billion dollars’ worth of bonds in a practical
joke gone wrong. Buffett was not kidding that the culture of Salomon was going to have to change.
“It should have been crossed out. My guess is that whoever did it did intend to cross it out. It has to be the
dumbest joke ever attempted to be perpetrated.”
No one said a word.
Maughan: “Any more questions?”
The hot air had been let out of the room. After this bit of truth-telling, what could anyone ask? Only a few
more mild questions followed.
The press conference ended. Buffett looked at his watch as they walked off the stage. “I’ve got to get back to
Omaha,” he said.
“Warren, what’s happening here?” asked Maughan. He had never spoken to any of the angry government
officials, had never attended a Salomon board meeting, and the ship was sinking. “Do you have any views on
who should form the management? Is there any direction you want to give me as a strategy?”
“If you have to ask me questions like that, I picked the wrong guy,” Buffett said. He walked away without
another word, leaving his $700 million and his reputation in the hands of a man he had met thirty hours
before.95
“And then, when it was over, they were swinging cameras in our faces and banging us. It was a mob scene. I
went out and got in a cab. And one or two reporters noticed that, which they felt was the new Salomon.
Instead of a string of black cars waiting for us out there.”
On Monday morning, Maughan went out to The Room to shore up the staff’s devastated morale. He took off
his jacket and rolled up his sleeves. The firm, he said, had faced three tests. The first was character. By firing
Mozer and his number two, Thomas Murphy, and accepting the others’ resignations, the firm had passed that
test.

The second was confidence. By regaining at least partially the Treasury Department’s good graces, Salomon
had passed that test.
The third was will. “This is not the same firm,” said Maughan, “but we must keep aspects of the old culture
while we bring in a new one.”96
Some of the traders stirred uneasily. What did that mean, a new culture?
But at least Salomon had gotten one lucky break. Overnight, news had flashed over the wire that Soviet
Premier Mikhail Gorbachev had been ousted in a coup. The stock market immediately dropped 107 points.
Business coverage, which had been drilling on Salomon all day Friday, suddenly shifted focus as the world
turned its attention toward Gorbachev, held under house arrest by eight of his own military and state officials.
With tanks rolling into Moscow and Russians demonstrating in Parliament and protesting in Leningrad,
customers got on the phones, and the bond desk did a brisk business that morning.
“There are lots of ways of getting off the front page,” said a salesman, “but sending in the Red Army has got
to be the most creative.”97

49
The Angry Gods
New York City • 1991–1994

The regulators’ confidence that Salomon could survive on Buffett’s reputation alone was almost certainly
misplaced. Salomon barely survived even after the Treasury partially reversed itself. Some of its biggest
customers simply felt revulsion toward the firm. First the huge and influential California Public Employees’
Retirement System, then the World Bank washed their hands of Salomon. Buffett fell asleep each night with
visions of the hundreds of billions of dollars of Salomon debt that would fall due over the next few weeks
staggering through his dreams like sickly sheep. He had a sense that, for once, matters were simply not under
his control. “Events could do me in, and I couldn’t get off the train. I didn’t know where the train was going
to go.
“I couldn’t do anything about what the troops were going to do every day. I couldn’t do anything about
discovering things that I didn’t know existed when I went in. I couldn’t do anything about what Jerry
Corrigan felt about everything that had taken place, or what the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of
New York or the Antitrust Division of the Justice Department would do. I knew it was terribly important
that it get worked out right, and I knew that was something that—no matter how hard I worked—I had no
control over. I could stay up all night and think about things, but that wasn’t necessarily going to guarantee
a good outcome. And it made a lot of difference to a lot of people. It would change my whole future life.”
Buffett had to return to New York the following week. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan wanted to see him
about Salomon, and there were many other matters that required his presence. He and Munger took
Moynihan up to a private dining room on Salomon’s forty-seventh floor, where the chef prepared a proper
Wall Street meal for Moynihan, including the correct wines. Moynihan looked at Buffett and Munger, who
had ordered sandwiches, in disgust. The aftermath of Hurricane Bob was still pounding the East Coast.
Suddenly, cascades of rain began pouring in through a leak in the windows. “The gods are angry with
Salomon,” Buffett remarked.1

Later that week, he and Munger went down to Washington to see Bill McLucas and Dick Breeden at the
SEC. They came into the office looking like “two guys you would see at the Greyhound bus station,”
according to McLucas. Then they started talking and laying out their plan to save Salomon; McLucas then
understood, he says, why one person he was talking to was considered a legend and the other could finish the
legend’s sentences.2
Afterward, Buffett visited the Treasury Department himself to see Nick Brady, who told him that he had
thought Buffett was bluffing. “Warren,” he said, “I knew you were going to take the job no matter what we
did.”3 It was only the sincerity of Buffett’s plea that had touched him. Wind up the job as fast as you can,
Brady said, and get out of there.
Buffett was determined that whatever was wrong at Salomon be found, confessed, and fixed right away. “Get
it right, get it fast, get it out,” he said. When he said fast, he meant fast; he talked to his new secretary, who
had worked for Gutfreund and knew everybody well. Paula, he suggested, why don’t you start talking to the
board members and ask them questions about what they knew and when.4 Bob Denham, the cautious,
thorough Munger, Tolles lawyer who had been airlifted in from Los Angeles to head the investigation, got
wind of this plan and put a stop to it. The investigating would be done by lawyers.
The first thing Denham did was interview Don Feuerstein. Afterward, Feuerstein was fired summarily. He
asked to talk to Buffett, who told him only “You could have done more.” Since Buffett had known that from
the beginning, Feuerstein couldn’t understand the about-face.5 Buffett, however, had gradually settled on the
conclusion that in his loyalty to Gutfreund, Feuerstein had put his boss’s interests ahead of Salomon’s. Now
Denham got the job of general counsel. As Buffett began to assume control, he discovered how much the
board had been subjected to what he called adroit “information rationing” by Salomon’s management. He
and Munger now learned that when Mozer had first admitted in April to submitting an unauthorized bid, the
firm had also discovered that he had tried to cover it up, and had misled the customer whose name he had
used by claiming their falsely submitted order for Treasury bonds was a clerical error.
“It was as if Mozer had lit a match. And Mr. Gutfreund could, on April twenty-ninth, have blown out that
match that Mozer lit, and instead he did nothing about it.
“And it turned out that Mozer had certain characteristics of a pyromaniac and tended to light matches
more often than we thought. Mr. Gutfreund’s responsibility was to do something about that when he saw it.
He at first did nothing and then later started, perhaps in panic, pouring gasoline on it.
“The end result was that the shareholders of Salomon would be cost hundreds of millions of dollars, and
eight thousand employees and their families would fear for their jobs.
“I think it was the simplest thing in the world to do. Here you have a fellow, Paul Mozer, who admits
submitting false bids to the most important client and regulator in the world, the U.S. government. And then
you know he’s tried to cover it up by dragging in a customer and trying to get that customer to cooperate
with a cover-up so that the government won’t find out.
“None of that was Mr. Gutfreund’s fault at all.
“But when you hear about an action like that, it is very obvious in ten seconds that you pick up the phone
and say, Mozer, you’re fired. Then you go right over to Jerry Corrigan and say, Jerry, you know, this is the
problem of running a place with eight thousand employees. This guy went off the reservation, and I fired
him as soon as I heard about it. What do you want me to do next?”6
Of course, it wouldn’t be obvious in ten seconds to many people. They would be thinking about all sorts of
other things. Mozer was so valuable to the firm; he had turned around the foreign-exchange department;
firing him would be unpleasant; might it be possible to rehabilitate him; it was going to be painful to confess
to the regulators; their reaction might be scorching; and no less than a major law firm had said that reporting
it wasn’t technically required. Buffett skipped all that. He thought in probabilities; he extrapolated right away

to whether a catastrophic outcome was possible—then worked out very fast what it would take to get to the
lowest probability of catastrophe. Here, it was firing Mozer and confessing right away. Buffett also thought in
black-and-white terms about honesty; he had no tolerance for liars and cheaters. So that was that.
Now he found that the situation unfortunately involved more lying and cheating than he had previously been
told. The investigators reported to him that Feuerstein had said at the time that Mozer’s actions were
“criminal in nature”—a startling contrast to the firm’s agreeable response to later legal advice that no
disclosure was required. And nobody had ever told the firm’s compliance department—which was charged
with overseeing regulatory conduct—of Mozer’s behavior. True, Salomon had an attitude toward compliance
that was best described as loose. There would later even be an argument over who should be considered a
member of the compliance committee.7 Nevertheless, the head of compliance had been disturbed when he
found out that he was out of the loop and was angry that such procedures as did exist had been ignored.
Buffett and Munger also learned about the time in early June when Gutfreund had met with Treasury
Undersecretary Bob Glauber to defend the firm against accusations that it had engineered the May squeeze.
They found out that Salomon’s management had considered whether to disclose the February false bid to
Glauber immediately after that meeting, and had decided that the time was not right. Glauber later said he felt
that he was played for a sucker because Gutfreund had not told him. Nothing had inflamed relations with the
government and compromised Salomon’s credibility more than this meeting with Glauber. It smacked of an
outright cover-up.
The second press release that the board had approved, saying that the delay occurred thanks to “a lack of
sufficient attention to the matter,” had made the board look like part of the cover-up, given that Gutfreund
met with Glauber and clearly had the opportunity to tell him. But of course the board itself had been ignorant
of the Glauber meeting.
Buffett was angry that he had known nothing of these matters during the entire weekend of the crisis when
he had been negotiating with the government. Everybody whose number one job was to protect the firm’s
franchise had failed to do so and in fact had acted in a way that actually jeopardized it. Yet even with all of
this to outrage him, Buffett still did not know about one last thing: the “cocked gun” Sternlight letter that had
been sent and ignored.
A few days later, the board met, and Buffett explained his thinking based on what he had learned. The board
canceled the former executives’ magazine subscriptions. It took away their secretaries and got rid of
chauffeurs and limousines. It cut off their long-distance phone service and messenger services. They were
barred from entering Salomon’s offices. It tried to cancel their health insurance. Wachtell, Lipton offered to
step aside as counsel. Initially, Buffett demurred, but then he agreed. The universal opinion was that Marty
Lipton’s legal advice had not protected Salomon’s reputation.8
Denham was now helping to oversee Salomon day to day. To augment the legal team for outside matters,
Buffett brought in Ron Olson, the most recent name partner of Munger, Tolles & Olson, who had worked on
the Buffalo Evening News case and now represented Berkshire Hathaway.9 MTO had finely tuned radar for
how to get the best results for the client from the legal system—and a long-standing knowledge of how
Buffett thought.
Buffett told Olson that he wanted to pursue a novel strategy.10 Already staggering under the near-mortal
blow to its reputation, Salomon could not, in his view, survive a criminal indictment.11 It was like a late-stage
cancer patient. To save it, Buffett felt, radical techniques must be applied, even if it left the patient in a
weakened state. The therapy he thought was Salomon’s best hope of avoiding a criminal indictment was to
show extreme contrition. He would surgically dig out every last cell of the cancer and, with scorching
radiation, cleanse the firm and burn out any trace of a recurrence.
On Olson’s first day on the job, he was sent to see Otto Obermaier, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern
District of New York, who would make the decision whether to criminally indict Salomon.

“The argument we made to Otto Obermaier was that we would set an example. This was going to be an
example of the most extraordinary cooperation that a target has ever given, and the outcome would have
an effect on the behavior of future defendants and how the justice system worked.”
Olson had to make an extraordinary pledge. On the spot, he waived Salomon’s attorney-client privilege,
which shielded communications between the firm and its lawyers from prosecutors. He said that whatever
MTO found in its investigation, Obermaier would know it as soon as MTO knew it.12 In plain English, this
meant that MTO, on behalf of Salomon, had volunteered to act as an arm of the government.
Obermaier was “incredulous,” Olson says. “He thought we were some Midwest aw-shucks group, come to
sell him a bill of goods.”13 He could not believe that any company would make an offer voluntarily that was
so against its own best interest. After all, Salomon was in no imminent danger of indictment. It would have
months to prove its case. Clearly, this was more than a lip-service promise to “reform.”
Then Olson flew to Washington and told Breeden at the SEC—who was “equally skeptical”—the same
thing.14
Initially, it was not clear what waiving the privilege meant. Frank Barron, an attorney from Cravath, Swaine
& Moore, one of Salomon’s other law firms, was put in charge of negotiating what this extraordinary gift
would mean to the Justice Department. Negotiating terms was difficult, since the commitment had already
been made. Salomon had little leverage. The Justice Department pressed hard for a broad interpretation of
the commitment and largely got its way.15 The agreement put the firm in a peculiar and paradoxical situation
of prosecuting its own employees. The more evidence that MTO found that employees were guilty, the more
proof it could show that Salomon had cooperated and cleansed itself. The employees, meanwhile, must
cooperate or be fired, their statements to investigators unprotected by the normal attorney-client privilege.16
Asked to help Buffett prepare for upcoming congressional testimony, Gutfreund and his lawyer met with
Olson a few days later. Gutfreund had volunteered to cooperate, but when his lawyers tried to lay down
ground rules for the conversation, Olson refused to accept them. In the end, Gutfreund and his lawyers
walked out.17 Olson reported back to Buffett that he had been “stonewalled.”18
Everything at Salomon was turned topsy-turvy as the new culture of openness went into effect. A couple of
days after meeting with Obermaier, Olson and Buffett walked into a room at 7 World Trade Center for a
meeting. Someone, acting on autopilot, had hired a new public-relations firm. Around a large square table,
two dozen people sat waiting for them. Some worked for Salomon, but most were public-relations people and
lobbyists who were billing by the hour. Buffett listened for fifteen minutes as they described how they
wanted to manage the crisis. Then he stood up. “I’m sorry, but I’ve got to excuse myself,” he said. He leaned
over, whispered in Olson’s ear, “Tell them they won’t be needed,” and walked out of the room.19
“It isn’t that we’re misunderstood, for Christ’s sake,” said Buffett afterward. “We don’t have a publicrelations problem. We have a problem with what we did.”
On his birthday, August 30, Buffett went down to Washington. He had decided to prepare for upcoming
congressional testimony and had arranged with Steve Bell, who ran Salomon’s Washington office, to gather a
group to try to anticipate what questions the Congressmen might ask him.
He checked in to the Embassy Suites hotel next to GEICO’s offices. As the emergency continued, he holed
up in his room for two days. He encountered a telephone operator at the hotel, Carolyn Smith, who became
his de facto secretary and Daisy Mae, manning the phones and sending cookies upstairs for him to eat for
dinner. They never met in person, but when Nick Brady from the Treasury Department called, she got word
to Buffett even when he was tied up on the single line in his room.20
After a couple of days, Buffett found time to go over to Salomon’s fancy offices, where Bell had gathered
people to brainstorm. Bell had called New York in advance, asking what to feed Buffett. “Something
