
book_c03.qxd

24

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 24

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“How is it, working with Herb?”
I was not about to lose my job from a stupid comment, so I answered
as honestly as possible. “We’ll be working more closely now that he’s the
senior partner.”
“True. Where did you go to school?”
I didn’t really understand what he was asking, so I said, “Cardozo.”
“Oh, that’s a fine law school,” he said.
For a moment I thought about correcting him—I hadn’t gone to Benjamin Cardozo law school. I’d gone to Benjamin Cardozo High School.
What he didn’t know wouldn’t hurt him.
“You from the city?” He asked.
“Yep, born and raised.”
“Who did you have for Corporations?” He asked, never letting his eyes
off mine.
I must have let my eyes fall out of my head at that moment, because it
was easily apparent that I had no idea what he was talking about. So I
acted like I hadn’t heard him and stared out the window.
“Busy day today on the trading floor,” I told him. I said this with a matterof-fact tone, as if I visited trading floors all the time and was pleased to see
everyone busy at work.
“Sure is. CPI rocked the markets this morning. Sent stocks way up in a
hurry.”
Stocks were irrelevant. My buy trade on the GBP/USD was far more
important.
“And the dollar?” I asked.
He grinned. “So you’re a student of the markets, I see.”
I nodded. “I do a bit of trading myself.”
“Well, then,” he said, “You’ll be happy if you’re short dollars today.”
Short dollars? That meant selling dollars. I had bought British Pounds.
This should not have been so confusing, but it was. I had bought the GBP
today, which meant that I had sold USD, which meant that I was short dollars. And he was telling me that the dollar had gone down! That meant that
more sweet profit was waiting for me upstairs.
“Actually,” I told him, “I should be short dollars as we speak.”
This pleased him immensely. “Fine, very fine. We need to make sure
that we keep in touch. Anyway, about Corporations, who’d you have?”
Now I was screwed. “I’m embarrassed to say that I don’t even remember.”
With a quiet chuckle, he let me off the hook. “Too much trading, I presume! Understood. Skipped corporations myself. By third year, I was skipping class and calling my broker to place trades. I paid more in
commissions in my third year than I made in profits on every trade.” And
then he patted me on the shoulder. Thankfully, our discussion about my
law school experience, which I never had, was nearly over. He continued.

book_c03.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 25

A Trip to the Thirty-First Floor

25

“Well, catch up on some of your corporations material—because we’re
going to form an in-house forex fund, and we’re going to need a lot of help
on that. We’ve got investors from all over the place—some in mainland
China, some in the Middle East. Will probably raise some eyebrows and
need some background checks. This is not just the ordinary setup. We’re
putting five billion behind this to start.”
Five billion dollars? Whoa! I am happy he hadn’t asked how much
money I was making on my trades.
“Tell that to Herb when you get back. Tell him we might need some
help with the fund and he should call me.”
All I could say was, “Will do,” and then I got out of the conference
room as quickly as I could stumble over myself.
I walked across the entire trading floor to make my way back. Once
again, it seemed as if time stood still for me while it moved for everyone else. I felt like I was on a people mover, or a ride at Disneyland; I couldn’t
quite wrap my head around what I was watching and hearing. It didn’t matter
that I took my time, anyway, because I knew my trade was okay, and I knew
that I wanted to soak up as much of this experience as possible.
This was a wild ride that I was going to have to repeat.
On the way back to the office, I hoped that Anderson and I could talk
again. Imagine how much he could teach me about currency trading!
Since I knew that my trade had done well, I stopped by Herb’s office
first. Poking my head in his office, I gave him a thumbs-up sign, to let him
know I had delivered the letter. He was talking on the phone, had two other
attorneys in the office with him, but still took the time out to say, “Don’t
ever misplace a file again, or you’re fired.”
I don’t know what came over me at that point, maybe all the yelling
and testosterone from the 31st floor had rubbed off on me. I looked him in
the eye and said: “Well, don’t look in the wrong place next time, or you’ll
have to call me again.”
Then I walked away, positive that I was going to get fired and feeling
really good that I had stood up for myself. Wow! Just a few minutes in the
midst of all those traders, and I had recaptured my optimism. It hit me so
hard when it came back that I got chills up my spine.
I could be working down on the 31st floor, I told myself. If I wanted to,
I could work there. And if Herb fired me, I could just start trading on my
own. I should be trading for a living already. That was where I belonged.
The job didn’t really matter. The overdue rent didn’t matter. The credit
card debt seemed so much smaller. No matter how suddenly I had found
this new path, it was pointing in the right direction. And I was going to
take it.
As I walked down the hall, I heard Herb loudly call to the other attorneys, “Well, let’s hope to God he didn’t talk to Anderson that way. Head of

book_c03.qxd

26

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 26

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

trading for the entire operation, and he probably walked in there and told
him to find his own letters from now on.”
I stopped cold. The head of all trading? Anderson? The thin, pale guy
with the Nerd Club for Men glasses? That’s the person I had talked to?
Most excellent! My new friend on the 31st floor was a master trader!
The wheels started turning in my head. Could I go back down there?
Could I ask him a bunch of questions about currencies? Would he offer me
a job? What would I say? In this moment of supreme confidence, it seemed
like a great idea.
Even if Anderson didn’t want to sit and talk about currencies with
me—he was certainly a very busy man—maybe he would let me just
watch the traders for a while and learn while sitting there. Yes! That was
a good idea. I literally propped myself up against my cubicle to keep from
falling. How much time had just passed? Twenty minutes from the time I
went downstairs until now? An hour at the most? Maybe I should go back
down there immediately and ask if I could watch the traders for the rest
of the day.
But I had a trade to check on. How much profit had I made? Another
$300? More? When I get a flash of euphoric optimism, I believe that I am
king of the world and all humanity should bow down before me and do my
bidding.
I found Scott in the break room pouring himself a gigantic cup of coffee.
He smiled when he saw me. “You’re gonna be happy.”
“I knew it! I knew it! Tell me the good news.”
“You got 20 pips, bro!”
“Pips?”
“Points. They call them pips in the forex market.”
“Just 20? Not more?”
He lowered his voice, like he was about to tell me a secret. “Well, it
was something like four hundred dollars in profit.”
I knew he was lying. Making $400 was impossible on the trade if he just
got 20 points, or pips. I had traded again for $10 per point, and he had made
20 pips. That was $200, not $400. I told him this.
“Well, that’s true. But I exited your trade at 10 pips when the software
told me to get out. And it kept moving up, so fast, so I got in again.”
I was nervous, happy, and upset all at the same time. “You got in again?
Did the software tell you to?”
“No, but it was moving up fast! I had to get a piece of that for you.”
“And you got 10 more pips?”
“Yep. I traded three times your usual trade size so I could make more
money for each point.”
Oh, gosh, I thought. I had never thought of that. I could trade for more
value per point, or pip, when I really thought the market was moving fast.

book_c03.qxd

12/20/06

2:01 PM

Page 27

A Trip to the Thirty-First Floor

27

Scott was right in doing that for sure. But I was still not happy that he had
taken a trade without permission from the software.
He was drinking his coffee in big gulps, obviously excited about his
performance that morning. And I could not be too angry with him. Why, I
had started with $1,000 a day ago, and now I had $1,700. If I could nearly
double my account value every couple of days, this was going to be the easiest money I had ever made.

book_c04.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 28

CHAPTER 4

Two Promising
Conversations

ecause I knew that I could trust John Murphy, I stopped by his office
later that day.
He was happy to make time for me. “How is your daughter?” he
asked.
I gave him a blank stare and said, “She’s fine,” in a way that clearly told
him it was a strange question. I had forgotten the lie that I had told the day
before about the emergency room.
“You’ve got a great new office.” The view was amazing from where we
sat—we were looking out over midtown Manhattan.
“Thanks. This actually used to be a partner’s office. Charlie Flank. He
left to start his own practice on the East Side, writing wills for rich people
who want to leave everything to their poodles. Anyway, when Charlie left
the firm last week, Herb let me move in.” It was obvious that John hadn’t
had much time to move in. Some of Charlie’s stuff was lying on the floor
near the door: a photo of Charlie with Mayor Bloomberg, a coffee mug with
“MS Walk 2002” on the side, and a box of business cards. John continued:
“Of course, I begged Herb to let me have it, so I could finally have a view.
So what’s on your mind? Is this about the firm’s benefits?”
I then remembered my lie. “Oh no, not that. My daughter’s doing much
better now and everything worked out. I appreciate that.” He nodded,
happy to know that he had cared deeply about a problem that I had never
even had. “Actually, I wanted to ask you about trading. Have you ever been
down to the 31st floor?”
“Sure. I’ve got a friend who works down there. It’s pretty amazing.”

B

28

book_c04.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 29

Two Promising Conversations

29

I then told John about my errand down to the 31st floor and that I had
met with Anderson that day.
“Anderson told me that they are going to be starting a new forex fund.”
“Did you tell that to Herb?”
I shook my head.
“Why are you telling this to me?”
“Herb scares me,” I admitted, “So he doesn’t deserve the news
just yet.”
John smiled widely. He seemed to like that.
“And,” I continued, “I heard Anderson say some stuff that I want to figure out.”
“Shoot. I’ll help where I can.”
I took a deep breath. “Could they really be raising five billion?”
He looked at me sideways. “Oh, yes. Definitely. They could probably
raise twice that if they wanted to. Forex—currencies—it’s hot right now,
white-hot. They are probably raising capital to do their own fund, rather
than sell people shares in other forex funds. Other firms are doing it now,
and it’s big business. These companies take high-net worth clients, even
corporations, and put their money in a fund that only trades international
currency.”
“What do all those guys do for a living down there? What are they
doing?”
“They’re trading. Some of those guys are actually my classmates from
law school.”
“Trading? From law school?” Just like Anderson.
“Yes. Some of the guys in school just didn’t want to practice in a firm.
So they interviewed on Wall Street instead. These firms are looking for a
pedigree, and Harvard Business or Harvard Law do equally well. It might
be a bit tougher for the law guys, but there are fewer of them in the first
place that want to go down there and scream and yell for a living. To tell
you the truth, it’s the guys down in the bottom of the law school class that
went to work on Wall Street.”
“Why is that?” I speculated that the smart guys were getting the good
job offers, and that at the bottom of the class you had to settle for a job on
Wall Street. It almost sounded like they were taking a step down when they
went to work as traders. John confirmed that and then rejected it.
“They are taking a step down, right, in a certain sense. Those guys
didn’t do well in law school because they were always going to Red Sox
games instead of Constitutional Law. Or they were sleeping in. Or they
were reading the business section or the stocks tables, or watching CNBC.
Some of those guys just had it in their blood. One of my friends dated the
girl at the front desk on 31—and then spent every day for two weeks at a
trading desk down there, acting like he was busy. He had a computer setup

book_c04.qxd

30

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 30

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

and everything. He didn’t attract attention, didn’t go to lunch with anyone,
but he sat there for two weeks like he owned the place. He called me a few
times a day and started shouting into the phone to act like he was doing
something.”
“What happened to him?”
“Anderson caught up with him.”
“Did he get thrown out?”
John laughed. “No. He got hired on the spot. Anderson knew about it
from day one. You can’t get anything past that guy.”
Except, I thought, that I was not an attorney. John continued: “Anderson watched Craig sit there and act like a trader for two weeks, dressing
the part, banging on the keyboard, yelling into the phone. And Craig knew
his stuff. He was smart, he knew currencies—and Anderson picked up on
that. He interviewed Craig right there, right in the middle of the trading
floor.”
I was stunned. Maybe I could do the same thing. This guy Anderson
seemed like the kind of person who would understand. If he threw me out,
I really didn’t need the job anyway. At $400 per day, my own trading was
plenty enough. Then John continued: “In fact, Craig begged him at first not
to throw him out. Craig thought he was going to be arrested. But Anderson
wanted to talk shop. He started asking Craig what he thought about the
value of the Euro to the Japanese Yen. He made some passionate speech
about interest rates or trade balances, and the current outlook for each
economy, and that now was the absolute perfect time for a buy based on
his technical analysis. Anderson logged into Craig’s computer and right
there, bought five million Euros against the Japanese Yen.”
“Whoa.”
“Right. And the trade worked out, and Craig got the job. Good story.
So,” he continued, clearly satisfied with his telling of the story, but now
pressed for time, “What can I do for you?”
“I want to talk to Craig. Or Anderson. Or anyone who knows about
trading.”
“Why? You want to be a trader?” He wasn’t making fun of me. Rather
he appeared to be sincere.
“Right. I want to be a trader. Maybe not down there. But maybe on my
own.”
“Caught the bug, have you? That’s awesome.”
“So do you think I could meet Craig?”
Even though he wanted to help me, I could see that I was stretching
the bounds of our relationship. He probably didn’t know if Craig would really want to answer all my questions.
“Listen,” I said. “I have never been passionate about this job. I do
good work for the firm. I’ve been doing good work for 11 years, before

book_c04.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 31

Two Promising Conversations

31

you even got here. But something happened when I went down there. It
must be what you felt like when you first walked into a big law firm for an
interview.”
“Probably not, but go ahead,” he said.
“I just want to talk to him. Find out what is going on down there on the
trading floor. I swear, I would sneak in there and do what Craig did if I had
the guts. But I don’t. I would barf all over the desk on the first day.”
This was the best job of begging that I could do, but John wasn’t going
for it. I could see that something was bothering him. Most likely, it was the
fact that he was going out of his way to help me when I had nothing in return to offer him. Or did I?
“How much is this forex fund deal worth to the firm?” I asked.
He shrugged. “It’s a lot of money. It’s not just the offering documents,
but registrations, compliance issues, ongoing legal support—maybe even
some introductions to some of our clients, and of course the background
checks that Anderson mentioned to you. Probably over two million dollars
in fees.”
“Herb doesn’t know about this yet.”
John stopped shrugging and looked me straight in the eye. “What are
you saying?”
“You get me lunch with Craig.”
“And?”
“I’ll get you a meeting with Anderson about the forex fund.”
“You really think you can set up a meeting with Anderson and me?”
I nodded. “I’m positive. He nearly hired me on the spot to start work on
it.” That wasn’t exactly true, but it wasn’t all wrong, either.
“And Herb?”
Now it was my turn to shrug. “What about Herb?”
“What if he finds out?”
I grinned. “I won’t be working here any longer anyway. And you’ll have
to go to Herb, anyway, and tell him about the deal. The most you’ll get out
of this is credit, but it will be big credit.”
With that, we shook hands and the deal was done. John called Craig,
right there, and while they were talking—even from a few feet away—I
could hear the roar of the voices on the trading floor. It sounded like sweet
music to me.

WHY TAKE PROFITS WHEN I CAN RISK MORE?
To say the least, my wife was impressed with the profits. We had a conversation that I will never forget. Word for word, I can remember it perfectly
six years later.

book_c04.qxd

32

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 32

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

MY WIFE: Do you think we should take some of the money out?
ME: Definitely not.
MY WIFE: Why not?
ME: I can now increase the size of the trades.
From the look on her face, I could tell that my wife was not privy to the
obvious wisdom of this strategy. It was frustrating to have to explain to her
the intricate details of how I was on my way to becoming a currency trading tycoon, that I was on a hot streak, and that I was going to have a pool
with midnight blue water and with attendants who served me drinks. I
needed to be trading for more money per pip now, and I’d need all the
money in the account.
I told her about my experience on the 31st floor as well.
“Do you think you could get a job there?”
“I don’t think so,” I told her. “Those guys all have Harvard degrees.”
“You could do it. I am sure you could do a great job there,” she told me,
and this made me happy. It pleased me greatly to hear that my wife could
tell that I knew what I was doing.
“I think I would like working there. I would never have expected it or
thought about it. But when I walked through that steel door and saw that
trading floor, something clicked inside me. I couldn’t hear anything but
yelling and screaming. But for the first time in months, maybe years, I felt
peaceful about our financial problems. I started to see how we could pay
our rent consistently. Something clicked. I was standing on . . . well, it
sounds lame but I was standing where I should be. It was like I should have
been there all along.” She was smiling at me now. She realized that I had
never felt this way about a job before. “All along, I should have been working as a trader. I don’t have the degrees, I don’t have the math, but I do have
a secret weapon.”
“What’s that?” I could see that she was practically giggling. My wife!
Happy! Pregnant, poor, wife of a lowly file manager, but happy!
“Connections. I am having lunch today with Craig Taylor, one of the
traders at Ernest Wellington. He’s going to help me do even better than I’ve
done so far.”
I wanted to trade again that night, but the kids and my wife got in the
way and I didn’t get the chance. I determined that tomorrow I’d make more
trades. If I really wanted to turn up the heat and make some coin, I was
going to have to make more trades every day. One or two trades was just
not enough.

book_c05.qxd

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 33

CHAPTER 5

Lessons
Learned

he next day, Craig took me to lunch at an outdoor café. He was a bit
over 6 feet tall, with an athletic frame and a cheerful, charismatic
face. This was the type of guy who you knew had been elected class
president and who set up the weekly poker tournaments in the dorms,
stayed up all night taking money from his friends, and then ran in a track
meet the next day. I immediately liked him.
Even better still, Craig was happy to help from the first moment that I
met him. He didn’t seem to mind that I was totally using him. I had a zillion
questions, and he was ready for them. He didn’t even care that I interrupted him during an answer, so that I could ask another question. This
was a good omen. I had a friend on the inside. It was lunchtime, and I still
had not traded yet for the day, and talking to Craig was making me more
anxious than ever to get back to making money instead of just talking
about it.
“How long have you been trading?” was my first question.
Craig took a bite of his sandwich and spoke with his mouth full. “Four
years. About as long as John Murphy has been wasting his life at the law
firm.”
“Why did you want to trade instead of practice law?”
He grunted happily. “Besides the fact that I was at the bottom of my
law school class and I was interviewing at public defenders’ offices, while
my classmates were already interviewing top law firms, and I had $100,000
in student loans?”
“So you did it as a last-ditch effort when you couldn’t . . .”

T

33

book_c05.qxd

34

12/20/06

2:02 PM

Page 34

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“Oh, not at all. Sorry that I made it sound like this was a job that I didn’t
want. But really, this was the only job I wanted.”
“And you knew that from the start?”
He smiled. “Well, I knew it when I walked onto the trading floor.”
“And you didn’t worry about your student loan debt?”
“Nope. I knew I was going to do everything necessary to make it work.
Failure was not an option in my mind. I knew there would be bad days. But
I was not going to give up.”
“Were you a good trader from the start?”
“Oh, no. Very no. I was terrible. But,” he added, “I knew I was going to
be a trader. And that is all I needed to know.”
“That is how I felt, too. I knew that I was supposed to be a trader.”
He looked at me and furrowed his eyebrows. “You sure you want to
trade?”
“That’s why I’m here.”
“Well, it’s not easy.”
I couldn’t agree entirely with him, but I nodded. “I know.”
“And,” he continued, “trading on your own is way more difficult that
trading in a firm. Are you trading stocks?”
“Forex.”
His eyes widened like he didn’t believe me. “Forex? On your own?
Dude, you do need help. That’s a Wild West market—you can get cleaned
out fast. What kind of leverage are you using?”
“Leverage?”
He laughed. “You’re really out there on a ledge, Harry. Leverage is
credit. It’s a way for your forex dealer to loan you money that you don’t
have.”
“How’s that?” I hadn’t heard about this before.
“Let’s say you have an account of $10,000 to trade with. These crazy
forex brokers will let you trade $1 million in currency with that $10,000.
That’s 100 to 1 leverage. This means that for every $1 you put up for the
trade, your dealer allows you to trade $100 worth of currency.”
“Holy moley,” I said. “How much is each point worth on a $1 million
trade?”
“$100 per pip.”
That means that when I was making $10 per pip, I was trading $100,000
in currency. That made sense. That meant that I was using leverage, too. I
started to remember something about getting 400-to-1 leverage at my
dealer. I decided that Craig didn’t need to know this.
“At Ernest Wellington, we might use 2-to-1 leverage. That’s it. We
don’t mess around with crazy leverage. We’d all wash up. We’re not that
good.”
