
Agrimony. This herb denotes that there will be sickness in your house.
Anemone, predicts love.
Auriculas, in beds, denote luck; in pots, marriage: while to gather them, foretells
widowhood.
Bilberries, predict a pleasant excursion.
Broom-flowers, an increase of family.
Cauliflowers, predict that all your friends will slight you, or that you will fall into poverty
and find no one to pity you.
Dock-leaves, a present from the country.
Daffodils. Any maiden who dreams of daffodils is warned by her good angel to avoid
going into a wood with her lover, or into any dark or retired place where she might not be
able to make people hear her if she cried out. Alas! for her if she pay no attention to the
warning! She shall be rifled of the precious flower of chastity, and shall never again have
right to wear the garland of virginity.
"Never again shall she put garland on;
Instead of it, she'll wear sad cypress now,
And bitter elder broken from the bough."
Figs, if green, betoken embarrassment; if dried, money to the poor and mirth to the rich.
Heart's-ease, betokens heart's pain.
Lilies, predict joy; water-lilies, danger from the sea.
Lemons, betoken a separation.
Pomegranates, predict happy wedlock to those who are single, and reconciliation to those
who are married and have disagreed.
Quinces, prognosticate pleasant company.
Roses, denote happy love, not unmixed with sorrow from other sources.
Sorrel, To dream of this herb is a sign that you will shortly have occasion to exert all your
prudence to overcome some great calamity.
Sunflowers, show that your pride will be deeply wounded.

Violets, predict evil to the single and joy to the married.
Yellow-flowers of any kind predict jealousy.
Yew-berries, predict loss of character to both sexes.
It should be observed that the rules for the interpretation of dreams are far from being
universal. The cheeks of the peasant girl of England glow with pleasure in the morning
after she has dreamed of a rose, while the paysanne of Normandy dreads disappointment
and vexation for the very same reason. The Switzer who dreams of an oaktree does not
share in the Englishman's joy; for he imagines that the vision was a warning to him that,
from some trifling cause, an overwhelming calamity will burst over him. Thus do the
ignorant and the credulous torment themselves; thus do they spread their nets to catch
vexation, and pass their lives between hopes which are of no value and fears which are a
positive evil.
OMENS. -- Among the other means of self-annoyance upon which men have stumbled,
in their vain hope of discovering the future, signs and omens hold a conspicuous place.
There is scarcely an occurrence in nature which, happening at a certain time, is not
looked upon by some persons as a prognosticator either of good or evil. The latter are in
the greatest number, so much more ingenious are we in tormenting ourselves than in
discovering reasons for enjoyment in the things that surround us. We go out of our course
to make ourselves uncomfortable; the cup of life is not bitter enough to our palate, and
we distil superfluous poison to put into it, or conjure up hideous things to frighten
ourselves at, which would never exist if we did not make them. "We suffer," says
Addison, ["Spectator," No. 7, March 8th, 1710-11.] "as much from trifling accidents as
from real evils. I have known the shooting of a star spoil a night's rest, and have seen a
man in love grow pale and lose his appetite upon the plucking of a merrythought. A
screech-owl at midnight has alarmed a family more than a band of robbers; nay, the voice
of a cricket has struck more terror than the roaring of a lion. There is nothing so
inconsiderable which may not appear dreadful to an imagination that is filled with omens
and prognostics. A rusty nail or a crooked pin shoot up into prodigies."
The century and a quarter that has passed away since Addison wrote has seen the fall of
many errors. Many fallacies and delusions have been crushed under the foot of time since
then; but this has been left unscathed, to frighten the weakminded and embitter their
existence. A belief in omens is not confined to the humble and uninformed. A general,
who led an army with credit, has been known to feel alarmed at a winding-sheet in the
candle; and learned men, who had honourably and fairly earned the highest honours of
literature, have been seen to gather their little ones around them, and fear that one would
be snatched away, because,
"When stole upon the time the dead of night, And heavy sleep had closed up mortal
eyes,"

a dog in the street was howling at the moon. Persons who would acknowledge freely that
the belief in omens was unworthy of a man of sense, have yet confessed at the same time
that, in spite of their reason, they have been unable to conquer their fears of death when
they heard the harmless insect called the death-watch ticking in the wall, or saw an
oblong hollow coal fly out of the fire.
Many other evil omens besides those mentioned above alarm the vulgar and the weak. If
a sudden shivering comes over such people, they believe that, at that instant, an enemy is
treading over the spot that will one day be their grave. If they meet a sow when they first
walk abroad in the morning, it is an omen of evil for that day. To meet an ass, is in like
manner unlucky. It is also very unfortunate to walk under a ladder; to forget to eat goose
on the festival of St. Michael; to tread upon a beetle, or to eat the twin nuts that are
sometimes found in one shell. Woe, in like manner, is predicted to that wight who
inadvertently upsets the salt; each grain that is overthrown will bring to him a day of
sorrow. If thirteen persons sit at table, one of them will die within the year; and all of
them will be unhappy. Of all evil omens, this is the worst. The facetious Dr. Kitchener
used to observe that there was one case in which he believed that it was really unlucky
for thirteen persons to sit down to dinner, and that was when there was only dinner
enough for twelve. Unfortunately for their peace of mind, the great majority of people do
not take this wise view of the matter. In almost every country of Europe the same
superstition prevails, and some carry it so far as to look upon the number thirteen as in
every way ominous of evil; and if they find thirteen coins in their purse, cast away the
odd one like a polluted thing. The philosophic Beranger, in his exquisite song, "Thirteen
at Table," has taken a poetical view of this humiliating superstition, and mingled, as is his
wont, a lesson of genuine wisdom in his lay. Being at dinner, he overthrows the salt, and,
looking round the room, discovers that he is the thirteenth guest. While he is mourning
his unhappy fate, and conjuring up visions of disease and suffering, and the grave, he is
suddenly startled by the apparition of Death herself, not in the shape of a grim foe, with
skeleton ribs and menacing dart, but of an angel of light, who shows the folly of
tormenting ourselves with the dread of her approach, when she is the friend, rather than
the enemy, of man, and frees us from the fetters which bind us to the dust.
If men could bring themselves to look upon Death in this manner, living well and wisely
till her inevitable approach, how vast a store of grief and vexation would they spare
themselves!
Among good omens, one of the most conspicuous is to meet a piebald horse. To meet two
of these animals is still more fortunate; and if on such an occasion you spit thrice, and
form any reasonable wish, it will be gratified within three days. It is also a sign of good
fortune if you inadvertently put on your stocking wrong side out. If you wilfully wear
your stocking in this fashion, no good will come of it. It is very lucky to sneeze twice; but
if you sneeze a third time, the omen loses its power, and your good fortune will be nipped
in the bud. If a strange dog follow you, and fawn on you, and wish to attach itself to you,
it is a sign of very great prosperity. Just as fortunate is it if a strange male cat comes to
your house and manifests friendly intentions towards your family. If a she eat, it is an

omen, on the contrary, of very great misfortune. If a swarm of bees alight in your garden,
some very high honour and great joys await you.
Besides these glimpses of the future, you may know something of your fate by a diligent
attention to every itching that you may feel in your body. Thus, if the eye or the nose
itches, it is a sign you will be shortly vexed; if the foot itches you will tread upon strange
ground; and if the elbow itches, you will change your bedfellow. Itching of the right-hand
prognosticates that you will soon have a sum of money; and of the left, that you will be
called upon to disburse it.
These are but a few of the omens which are generally credited in modern Europe. A
complete list of them would fatigue from its length, and sicken from its absurdity. It
would be still more unprofitable to attempt to specify the various delusions of the same
kind which are believed among Oriental nations. Every reader will remember the
comprehensive formula of cursing preserved in "Tristram Shandy:" -- curse a man after
any fashion you remember or can invent, you will be sure to find it there. The Oriental
creed of omens is not less comprehensive. Every movement of the body, every emotion
of the mind, is at certain times an omen. Every form and object in nature, even the shape
of the clouds and the changes of the weather; every colour, every sound, whether of men
or animals, or birds or insects, or inanimate things, is an omen. Nothing is too trifling or
inconsiderable to inspire a hope which is not worth cherishing, or a fear which is
sufficient to embitter existence.
From the belief in omens springs the superstition that has, from very early ages, set apart
certain days, as more favourable than others, for prying into the secrets of futurity. The
following, copied verbatim from the popular "Dream and Omen Book" of Mother
Bridget, will show the belief of the people of England at the present day. Those who are
curious as to the ancient history of these observances, will find abundant aliment in the
"Every-day Book."
"The 1st of January. -- If a young maiden drink, on going to bed, a pint of cold springwater, in which is beat up an amulet, composed of the yolk of a pullet's egg, the legs of a
spider, and the skin of an eel pounded, her future destiny will be revealed to her in a
dream. This charm fails of its effect if tried any other day of the year.
"Valentine Day. -- Let a single woman go out of her own door very early in the morning,
and if the first person she meets be a woman, she will not be married that year: if she
meet a man, she will be married within three months.
"Lady Day. -- The following charm may be tried this day with certain success: -- String
thirty-one nuts on a string, composed of red worsted mixed with blue silk, and tie it round
your neck on going to bed, repeating these lines -'Oh, I wish ! oh, I wish to see Who my true love is to be !'

Shortly after midnight, you will see your lover in a dream, and be informed at the same
time of all the principal events of your future life.
"St. Swithin's Eve. -- Select three things you most wish to know; write them down with a
new pen and red ink on a sheet of fine-wove paper, from which you must previously cut
off all the corners and burn them. Fold the paper into a true-lover's knot, and wrap round
it three hairs from your head. Place the paper under your pillow for three successive
nights, and your curiosity to know the future will be satisfied.
"St. Mark's Eve. -- Repair to the nearest churchyard as the clock strikes twelve, and take
from a grave on the south-side of the church three tufts of grass (the longer and ranker the
better), and on going to bed place them under your pillow, repeating earnestly three
several times,
'The Eve of St. Mark by prediction is blest,
Set therefore my hopes and my fears all to rest:
Let me know my fate, whether weal or woe;
Whether my rank's to be high or low;
Whether to live single, or be a bride,
And the destiny my star doth provide.'
Should you have no dream that night, you will be single and miserable all your life. If
you dream of thunder and lightning, your life will be one of great difficulty and sorrow.
"Candlemas Eve. -- On this night (which is the purification of the Virgin Mary), let three,
five, seven, or nine, young maidens assemble together in a square chamber. Hang in each
corner a bundle of sweet herbs, mixed with rue and rosemary. Then mix a cake of flour,
olive-oil, and white sugar; every maiden having an equal share in the making and the
expense of it. Afterwards, it must be cut into equal pieces, each one marking the piece as
she cuts it with the initials of her name. It is then to be baked one hour before the fire, not
a word being spoken the whole time, and the maidens sitting with their arms and knees
across. Each piece of cake is then to be wrapped up in a sheet of paper, on which each
maiden shall write the love part of Solomon's Songs. If she put this under her pillow, she
will dream true. She will see her future husband and every one of her children, and will
know, besides, whether her family will be poor or prosperous -- a comfort to her, or the
contrary.
"Midsummer. -- Take three roses, smoke them with sulphur, and exactly at three in the
day, bury one of the roses under a yew tree; the second in a newly-made grave, and put
the third under your pillow for three nights, and at the end of that period burn it in a fire
of charcoal. Your dreams during that time will be prophetic of your future destiny, and,

what is still more curious and valuable (Mother Bridget loquitur), the man whom you are
to wed, will know no peace till he comes and visits you. Besides this, you will
perpetually haunt his dreams.
"St. John's Eve. -- Make a new pincushion of the very best black velvet (no inferior
quality will answer the purpose), and on one side stick your name in full length with the
very smallest pins that can be bought (none other will do). On the other side, make a
cross with some very large pins, and surround it with a circle. Put this into your stocking
when you take it off at night, and hang it up at the foot of the bed. All your future life will
pass before you in a dream.
"First New Moon of the Year. -- On the first new moon in the year, take a pint of clear
springwater and infuse into it the white of an egg laid by a white hen, a glass of white
wine, three almonds peeled white, and a tablespoonful of white rose-water. Drink this on
going to bed, not making more nor less than three draughts of it; repeating the following
verses three several times in a clear distinct voice, but not so loud as to be overheard by
anybody:-' If I dream of water pure Before the coming morn, 'Tis a sign I shall be poor, And unto
wealth not born. If I dream of tasting beer, Middling then will be my cheer- Chequer'd
with the good and bad, Sometimes joyful, sometimes sad; But should I dream of drinking
wine, Wealth and pleasure will be mine. The stronger the drink, the better the cheerDreams of my destiny, appear, appear!'
"Twenty-ninth of February. -- This day, as it only occurs once in four years, is peculiarly
auspicious to those who desire to have a glance at futurity, especially to young maidens
burning with anxiety to know the appearance and complexion of their future lords. The
charm to be adopted is the following: Stick twenty-seven of the smallest pins that are
made, three by three, into a tallow candle. Light it up at the wrong end, and then place it
in a candlestick made out of clay, which must be drawn from a virgin's grave. Place this
on the chimney-place, in the left-hand corner, exactly as the clock strikes twelve, and go
to bed immediately. When the candle is burnt out, take the pins and put them into your
left-shoe; and before nine nights have elapsed your fate will be revealed to you."
We have now taken a hasty review of the various modes of seeking to discover the future,
especially as practised in modern times. The main features of the folly appear essentially
the same in all countries. National character and peculiarities operate some difference of
interpretation. The mountaineer makes the natural phenomena which he most frequently
witnesses prognosticative of the future. The dweller in the plains, in a similar manner,
seeks to know his fate among the signs of the things that surround him, and tints his
superstition with the hues of his own clime. The same spirit animates them all -- the same
desire to know that which Infinite Mercy has concealed. There is but little probability that
the curiosity of mankind in this respect will ever be wholly eradicated. Death and illfortune are continual bugbears to the weak-minded, the irreligious, and the ignorant; and
while such exist in the world, divines will preach upon its impiety and philosophers
discourse upon its absurdity in vain. Still, it is evident that these follies have greatly

diminished. Soothsayers and prophets have lost the credit they formerly enjoyed, and
skulk in secret now where they once showed their faces in the blaze of day. So far there is
manifest improvement.

BOOK III.
THE MAGNETISERS.
Some deemed them wondrous wise, and some believed them mad. -- Beattie's Minstrel.
The wonderful influence of imagination in the cure of diseases is well known. A motion
of the hand, or a glance of the eye, will throw a weak and credulous patient into a fit; and
a pill made of bread, if taken with sufficient faith, will operate a cure better than all the
drugs in the pharmacopoeia. The Prince of Orange, at the siege of Breda, in 1625, cured
all his soldiers who were dying of the scurvy, by a philanthropic piece of quackery,
which he played upon them with the knowledge of the physicians, when all other means
had failed. [See Van der Mye's account of the siege of Breda. The garrison, being
afflicted with scurvy, the Prince of Orange sent the physicians two or three small phials,
containing a decoction of camomile, wormwood, and camphor, telling them to pretend
that it was a medicine of the greatest value and extremest rarity, which had been procured
with very much danger and difficulty from the East; and so strong, that two or three drops
would impart a healing virtue to a gallon of water. The soldiers had faith in their
commander; they took the medicine with cheerful faces, and grew well rapidly. They
afterwards thronged about the Prince in groups of twenty and thirty at a time, praising his
skill, and loading him with protestations of gratitude.] Many hundreds of instances, of a
similar kind, might be related, especially from the history of witchcraft. The mummeries,
strange gesticulations, and barbarous jargon of witches and sorcerers, which frightened
credulous and nervous women, brought on all those symptoms of hysteria and other
similar diseases, so well understood now, but which were then supposed to be the work
of the devil, not only by the victims and the public in general, but by the operators
themselves.
In the age when alchymy began to fall into some disrepute, and learning to lift up its
voice against it, a new delusion, based upon this power of imagination, suddenly arose,
and found apostles among all the alchymists. Numbers of them, forsaking their old
pursuits, made themselves magnetisers. It appeared first in the shape of mineral, and
afterwards of animal, magnetism, under which latter name it survives to this day, and
numbers its dupes by thousands.
The mineral magnetisers claim the first notice, as the worthy predecessors of the quacks
of the present day. The honour claimed for Paracelsus of being the first of the
Rosicrucians has been disputed; but his claim to be considered the first of the magnetisers
can scarcely be challenged. It has been already mentioned of him, in the part of this work
which treats of alchymy, that, like nearly all the distinguished adepts, he was a physician;
and pretended, not only to make gold and confer immortality, but to cure all diseases. He
was the first who, with the latter view, attributed occult and miraculous powers to the
magnet. Animated apparently by a sincere conviction that the magnet was the
philosopher's stone, which, if it could not transmute metals, could soothe all human
suffering and arrest the progress of decay, he travelled for many years in Persia and
Arabia, in search of the mountain of adamant, so famed in oriental fables. When he
practised as a physician at Basle, he called one of his nostrums by the name of azoth -- a

stone or crystal, which, he said, contained magnetic properties, and cured epilepsy,
hysteria, and spasmodic affections. He soon found imitators. His fame spread far and
near; and thus were sown the first seeds of that error which has since taken root and
flourished so widely. In spite of the denial of modern practitioners, this must be
considered the origin of magnetism; for we find that, beginning with Paracelsus, there
was a regular succession of mineral magnetisers until Mesmer appeared, and gave a new
feature to the delusion.
Paracelsus boasted of being able to transplant diseases from the human frame into the
earth, by means of the magnet. He said there were six ways by which this might be
effected. One of them will be quite sufficient, as a specimen. "If a person suffer from
disease, either local or general, let the following remedy be tried. Take a magnet,
impregnated with mummy [Mummies were of several kinds, and were all of great use in
magnetic medicines. Paracelsus enumerates six kinds of mummies; the first four only
differing in the composition used by different people for preserving their dead, are the
Egyptian, Arabian, Pisasphaltos, and Lybian. The fifth mummy of peculiar power was
made from criminals that had been hanged; "for from such there is a gentle siccation, that
expungeth the watery humour, without destroying the oil and spirituall, which is
cherished by the heavenly luminaries, and strengthened continually by the affluence and
impulses of the celestial spirits; whence it may be properly called by the name of
constellated or celestial mummie." The sixth kind of mummy was made of corpuscles, or
spiritual effluences, radiated from the living body; though we cannot get very clear ideas
on this head, or respecting the manner in which they were caught. -- "Medicina
Diatastica; or, Sympathetical Mummie, abstracted from the Works of Paracelsus, and
translated out of the Latin, by Fernando Parkhurst, Gent." London, 1653. pp. 2.7. Quoted
by the "Foreign Quarterly Review," vol. xii. p. 415.] and mixed with rich earth. In this
earth sow some seeds that have a congruity or homogeneity with the disease: then let this
earth, well sifted and mixed with mummy, be laid in an earthen vessel; and let the seeds
committed to it be watered daily with a lotion in which the diseased limb or body has
been washed. Thus will the disease be transplanted from the human body to the seeds
which are in the earth. Having done this, transplant the seeds from the earthen vessel to
the ground, and wait till they begin to sprout into herbs: as they increase, the disease will
diminish; and when they have arrived at their full growth, it will disappear altogether."
Kircher the Jesuit, whose quarrel with the alchymists was the means of exposing many of
their impostures, was a firm believer in the efficacy of the magnet. Having been applied
to by a patient afflicted with hernia, he directed the man to swallow a small magnet
reduced to powder, while he applied, at the same time, to the external swelling a poultice,
made of filings of iron. He expected that by this means the magnet, when it got to the
corresponding place inside, would draw in the iron, and with it the tumour; which would
thus, he said, be safely and expeditiously reduced.
As this new doctrine of magnetism spread, it was found that wounds inflicted with any
metallic substance could be cured by the magnet. In process of time the delusion so
increased, that it was deemed sufficient to magnetise a sword, to cure any hurt which that
sword might have inflicted! This was the origin of the celebrated "weapon-salve," which
