
 Your focus while reading this book and practicing in simulated accounts should be to develop a strategy worth trading, and it’s my pleasure to assist you with that process. Remember, the market is always going to be there. You don't need to rush this. A day trading career is a marathon and not a sprint. It's not about making $50,000 by the end of next week. It’s about developing a set of skills that will last a lifetime.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Trading Based on the Time of Day 

 I categorize day trading sessions based upon the time of day: the Open, Mid-day, and the Close. Each time period should be treated differently, and you have to be careful because not all strategies are effective in every time period. Good traders make note of what time of day their most profitable trades occur and adjust their trading and strategies to fit such times. 

 The Open tends to last about 1.5 hours (9:30 to 11 a.m. New York time). I trade with the most size, and most frequency, during the Open, which statistically is my most profitable time period. As such, I increase my size during this time and make more trades. 

 Bull Flag Momentum and VWAP trades tend to be the best strategies for the Open. 

 During the Mid-day (11 a.m. to 3 p.m.) the market is slower. This is the most dangerous time of the day. There is less volume and liquidity. A small order can cause a stock to move much more than you would anticipate. Strange and unexpected moves will stop you out more frequently during the Mid-day. A review of my trades indicates that I do the worst during the Mid-day. Accordingly, should I decide to trade during the Mid-day, I lower my share size and keep my stops tight. I will only make trades that offer the best risk/reward during this period. New traders tend to overtrade at Mid-day. At times, good trading, and smart trading, is to not be trading at all. It is best to gather information during the Mid-day in preparation for the Close. Watch the stocks, prepare for the Close, and be very, very careful with any trading you do. 

 Reversal, VWAP, Moving Average, and Support or Resistance trades tend to be the best strategies for the Mid-day. I never trade Bull Flag Momentum in Mid-day or at the Close. 

 Into the Close (3 to 4 p.m.), stocks are more directional, so I stick with those that are trending up or down in the last hour of the trading day. I raise my tier size from the Mid-day, but not as high as it is at the Open. The daily closing prices tend to reflect the opinion of Wall Street traders on the value of stocks. They watch the markets throughout the day and tend to dominate the last hour of trading. Many of the market professionals take profits at that time to avoid carrying trades overnight. If the stock is moving higher in the last hour, it means the professionals are probably bullish on that stock. If the stock is moving lower in the last hour, the market professionals are probably bearish. It is thus a good idea to trade with the professionals and not against them. 

 VWAP, Support or Resistance, and Moving Average trades tend to be the best strategies for the Close. 

 Many traders lose during the day what they have profited in the Open. Don’t be one of them. I created a rule for myself. I am not allowed to lose more than 30% of what I have made in the Open during Mid-day and the Close. If I lose more than the allowed 30%, then I either stop trading or start trading in a simulator.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Chapter 8: Step-by-Step to a Successful Trade 
 Now let’s take a look at one of my trades. Later I’ll explain in detail how I did it.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Building a Watchlist 

 On the morning of June 2, 2016, before the market Open, SRPT hit my watchlist scanner. Please see Figure 8.1 below. It was gapping down 14.5%, had a relatively low float (only 36 million shares, which meant the stock had the potential for good movement intraday) and a high Average True Range of $1.86 (which meant the stock on average moves in a range as large as $1.86 during the day). Higher ATRs are desirable for day trading. 

 Figure 8.1 - My watchlist at 6:15 a.m. (9:15 a.m. New York time) - SRPT is on my watchlist.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Trading Plan (entry, exit, and stop loss) 

 I looked at the chart and decided to wait and see the price action for the first ten minutes of trading. You can follow along with my commentary in Figure 8.2. When the market opened, I saw that the buyers could not push the price any higher. There was no interest in buying back the stock. Therefore, I decided to do a VWAP trade. I monitored VWAP and the price action around VWAP for two 5-minute candlesticks. I realized that the sellers were in control and that the buyers could not push the price higher than VWAP and hold it. I knew it must be a good short with a stop above VWAP. 

 Figure 8.2 - 5-minute chart on June 2, 2016. Market open ed at 9:30 a.m. New York time.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Execution 

 After ten minutes, when SRPT closed below VWAP, I entered the trade by shorting stock around $18.20 with a stop loss in mind just above VWAP. As expected, the sellers took control, and the stock price tanked to $17. I exited when a new 5-minute chart made a new high. When the candlestick made a new high, it meant that the buyers were then gaining control. I covered my shorts at around $17.40 and locked in a $650 profit, as you can see in Figure 8.3 below. 

 Figure 8.3 - My profit on June 2, 2016 (only 12 minutes into my day).

How to Day Trade for a Living

 How Did I Do It? 

 My philosophy in trading is that you need to master only a few solid setups to be consistently profitable. In fact, having a simple trading method consisting of a few minimal setups will help to reduce confusion and stress and allow you to concentrate more on the psychological aspect of trading, which is truly what separates the winners from the losers. 

 Now that you have learned the basics of a few trading strategies, let’s review the actual process of planning and making a trade. You now understand the setup you want to trade, but as a beginner trader, you will have a hard time planning and initiating a trade beforehand. It is very common to have a good setup but then enter or exit a trade at the wrong time and lose money while everyone else is making money. I believe the solution lies in developing a process for your trading. Plan a trade, and trade a plan. 

 I have a Ph.D. in chemical engineering, so I firmly believe in the process approach to trading. I can safely and confidently say that this is a major reason for my success. My trading process looks like this: 

 Morning routine 
 Develop my watchlist 
 Organize a trade plan 
 Initiate the trade according to plan 
 Execute the trade according to plan 
 Journaling and reflection 

 You must remember that what makes a trade profitable is the correct execution of all of the steps in the above process. Write down your reasons for entering and exiting every trade. Everyone can read this book or dozens of other books, but only a few people have the discipline to execute correctly. You might have a good setup but select a wrong stock to trade, such as a stock that is being manipulated by computers and institutional traders. Perhaps you will find a proper stock to trade, but you will enter the trade at the wrong time. A bad entry will make a mess of your plan and you will eventually lose your money. You can find a good stock to trade and enter a trade correctly, but if you don’t exit properly, you will turn a winning trade into a losing one. All of the steps of the process are important. 

 Think about something significant that you do frequently in your life, and then think of how it can best be done. Now, consider how you do it currently. This is a great thought process for traders to have. When you take a trade, you need to ensure that you are focused on the right things both prior to entering it as well as during the trade. Creating a system for this thought process will take away most of the emotional hang-ups traders experience when looking to enter into a trade as well as managing it while they are in it. 

 This brings you to my final rule: 

 Rule 11: Profitable trading does not involve emotion. If you are an emotional trader, you will lose your money. 

 Education and practice give you a perspective of what matters in trading, how you trade, and how you can grow and develop your skills. Once you have a perspective on what matters, you can proceed to identify the specific processes on which to focus. The key to success is knowing your exact processes. Often you will learn them the hard way - by losing money. 

 I have found that trading, sticking to my plan and the discipline inherent in my trading methodology have had a snowball effect of positive habits in my life in general, and these habits have contributed to even more trading success. For example, I start my trading process by following the same routine when I get up each morning. I always go for a morning run before the trading session starts. As I mentioned before, I live in Vancouver, Canada, and the market opens at 6:30 a.m. my time. I wake up at 5 a.m. every morning. I go for a run from 5 to 5:45 a.m. (usually between 7 and 10 kilometers (4 to 6 miles)). I come home, take a shower, and at 6 a.m. start developing my plan. 

 I have found that when my body has not been active prior to trading, I will make poor decisions. There are scientific studies showing that aerobic exercise has a positive effect on the decision making process. People who regularly participate in an aerobic exercise (such as running for at least thirty minutes) have higher scores on neuropsychological functioning and performance tests that measure such cognitive functions as attentional control, inhibitory control, cognitive flexibility, working memory updating and capacity, and information processing speed. You can easily read about these topics on the Internet. Very often, our moods are influenced by our physical state, even by factors as delicate as what and how much we eat. Keep a record of your daily trading results as a function of your physical condition and you will see these relationships for yourself. Begin preventive maintenance by keeping body, and thus mind, in their peak operating condition. I stopped drinking coffee and alcohol, and I have stopped eating animal-based food, and my performance levels have increased significantly. Not eating meat and fish (any living beings that are marked with blood), and not using alcohol, coffee, tobacco and all other drugs lifts you above the curse and accelerates you forward in every facet of life. Likewise, in trading, your focus should be about being better than your current state, in all aspects of your life. 

 In day trading, simply being better than average is not sufficient. You must be significantly above the crowd to win in day trading. Unfortunately, day trading often appeals to impulsive people, gamblers, and those who feel that the world owes them a living. You cannot be one of them, and you should not act like one of them. You need to start developing the discipline of a winner.Winners think, feel, and act d iff erently than losers. You must look within yourself, discard your illusions, and change your old ways of being, thinking and acting. Change is hard, but if you want to be a successful trader, you must work on changing and developing your personality. To succeed, you will need motivation, knowledge, and discipline. 

 In 2014, I was visiting New York City and decided to go for a walk along Wall Street during lunchtime on a working day and perhaps take a selfie with Charging Bull, the famous 3.5-ton bronze sculpture of a bull located near Wall Street that symbolizes New York’s financial industry. 

 I assumed that most of the people walking around in that area in a weekday must either be traders or working in the financial sector. I knew there was a good chance that the person sitting next to me in a coffee shop was taking home a 2-million-dollar bonus at the end of the year. I tried to observe people’s attitudes, how they walked, how they dressed and how they treated themselves. I rarely saw anyone who was not well-dressed, without confidence and without being in excellent physical shape. I wondered to myself, are these people well-dressed, confident, in great physical shape and disciplined because they are rich and successful or did they become rich and successful because they were disciplined, confident and ambitious? I think this is a chicken and egg problem with no real answer, but I believe it is the latter. Based on what I saw, successful traders have often succeeded in almost everything they have done. They are ambitious and they expect a lot from themselves and they expect it at an early age. They expect to be the best. Success has been their history, so why should trading be any different? 

 Winners think, feel, and act d iff erently than losers. If you want to know if you have the self-discipline of a winner, try right now, starting today, to stop a habit that has challenged you in the past. If you have always wanted to be in better physical shape, try adding exercises such as running into your routine, and also take control of your salt and sugar intake. If you drink too much alcohol or coffee, try to see if for one month you can stay away from them. These are excellent tests to see if you are emotionally and intellectually strong enough or not to discipline yourself in the face of a losing trade. I am not saying that if you drink coffee or alcohol, or that if you are not a regular runner, you cannot become a successful trader, but if you make a try at these types of improvements and fail, then you should know that exercising self-control in trading will not be any easier to accomplish. Change is hard, but if you wish to be a successful trader, you need to work on changing and developing your personality at every level. 

 Often traders who fail to make money in trading get frustrated and go out and study more about the market to learn new strategies and additional technical indicators. They don’t realize that their lack of self-discipline, impulsive behavior and their bad life habits are the main cause of their failure, not their technical knowledge. 

 As discussed previously, trading cannot be looked at as a hobby. You must approach trading seriously. As such, I wake up at 5 a.m., go for a 30-to-45 minute run, take a shower, get dressed, and eat oatmeal for breakfast prior to firing up my trading station at 6 a.m. I am awake, alert, and motivated when I sit down and start building my watchlist. This morning routine has tremendously helped my mental preparation for coming into the market. So, whatever you do, starting the morning out in a similar fashion will pay invaluable dividends. Rolling out of bed and throwing water on your face fifteen minutes in advance just does not give you sufficient time to be prepared for the market’s opening. Sitting at your computer in your pajamas or underwear does not put you in the right mindset to attack the market. I know, because I have experienced all of these scenarios. 

 My watchlist comes from a specific scan that I use every morning. I will not look anywhere else because I am confident that the stocks on that scanner will have the best opportunity to set up for me to trade. I will vet each stock in the same way, using a checklist to determine if it is actually tradeable for me. My watchlist is built by 6:15 a.m., and I will not add anything to it after that time because there won’t be enough time to review new stocks and plan for a trade. This allows me to watch the tickers on my watchlist for the fifteen minutes prior to opening. This actually leads into the next step in my process. 

 During the fifteen minutes prior to opening, I watch the tickers on my watchlist and develop trade plans for them based on the price action I am seeing. This is the most difficult part, and it requires experience, knowledge and education. Many traders fail at this step. When the bell rings at 6:30 a.m. (9:30 a.m. New York time), I’ll have my plans in place, written on note cards because it is too easy to forget what I’ve seen on each ticker coming into the Open. What is my plan if it sets up to the long side? What’s my plan if it sets up to the short side? What setup do I want to see? What are my profit targets? Where will my stop be? Is the profit window large enough for the trade to make sense? Just asking yourself questions like these when you are planning your trades will give you a significant advantage because you can then go in with a battle plan and stick to it. If it is written down close to my face I can easily refer to it, and that eliminates the anxiety that I used to feel when the opening bell rang. All I am doing at the opening is looking for my signal and trigger to enter the trade. 

 In the above example, I saw that SRPT had gapped down 14.5% (please see Figure 8.1). I knew that there wasn’t much interest in buying the stock. Who would dare to buy when a stock gapped down almost 15% overnight? Most investors will be actually trying to get out and sell before the stock goes down even further, as though there’s something seriously wrong with the company. I could not find any support or resistance nearby, therefore I decided to watch VWAP and I chose a VWAP short trade, as outlined in Figure 8.2. 

 Once the stock sets up, signals, and triggers an entry, I will enter without question (well, that’s the plan anyway). Sometimes I may second-guess myself, but not too often. I have my profit targets written out on my trade plan, as well as the technical level that I am basing my stops on, so after entry I am just concentrating on hitting my marks and booking profit. There are some that say that knowing when to exit is the hardest part of the trade. It can be extremely tough not to exit the trade too early if you do not have a pre-set plan. If you have a plan ahead of time and you stick to it, you will have a much better chance of letting your winning trades work and cutting your losses off quickly instead of the other way around. This will also help with managing your emotions while in the trade. Recently I talked to one of my students about filtering out the noise. This strategy goes a long way to help do that so you can focus on the trade. 

 Once the trade is done, I will reflect on how well my plan worked and how well I stuck to what I had written. Most of the reflection on my trades will come in the evening when I review and recap my trades from the day. I believe one of the key things forgotten by many is reflection. “What did I do right?”, “What did I do wrong?” and “Should I have sold earlier?” are all extremely important questions for the development of your trading strategies. Just because you made a good profit does not mean you are a perfect trader. How you play both sides of the table is extremely important. Write down or do a video recap of the trade and everything that comes to mind lesson-wise, and then file it away with other past lessons, and use them all as a reference for the future. Some lessons hit harder than others, but be confident that with time you will only get better. It only takes one incident of getting your hand slammed in a door to figure out that you must be more careful, but it may take two or three times to learn to turn on the lights before walking around your house at night. 

 Why is this process in trading important? This process is important because it describes how things are done to prepare for a trade and then provides the focus for executing them. It helps to filter out the emotional social noise and gives you a better chance for a more successful winning trade. It provides you with a tool to go back to and reflect on your trades and makes you a better trader. If you focus on the right processes, in the right way, you can design your way to trading success.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Chapter 9: Next Steps for Beginner Traders 
 Successful day trading is based on three important skills. 

 You need to constantly analyze the balance of power between buyers and sellers and bet on the winning group (Chapter 6). 
 You need to practice excellent money and trade management (Chapter 3). 
 And you need sufficient self-discipline to follow your trading plan, to avoid getting overexcited or depressed in the markets, and to resist the temptation to make emotional decisions.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 The Seven Fundamentals for Day Trading 

 To become a consistently profitable trader you need to follow these seven fundamental steps before entering into the world of trading. Some of them you should do before and after each and every single trade you make: 

 Education and simulated trading 
 Preparation 
 Hard work 
 Patience 
 Discipline 
 Mentorship and a community of traders 
 Reflection and review 

 Education and Simulated Trading 

 Now that you have read this book, you should be in a better position to make a decision on whether or not day trading is right for you. Day trading requires a certain mindset, as well as a discipline and a set of skills that not everyone possesses. Interestingly, most of the traders I know are also poker players. They enjoy speculation and the stimulation that comes from it. Although poker is a type of gambling, day trading is not. Day trading is a science, a skill, and a career, and has nothing to do with gambling. It is the serious business of selling and buying stocks, at times in a matter of seconds. You should be able to make decisions fast, with no emotion or hesitation. Doing otherwise results in losing real money. 

 After you’ve made up your mind and decided that you want to start day trading, the next step is to get a proper education. This book equips you with the basic knowledge essential for day trading, but you still have a long way to go before you will be a consistently profitable trader. Can you be a mechanic by just reading a book? Can you perform surgery after reading a book or taking First Aid 101? No. This book develops a foundation that you can build upon. This book introduces straightforward trading setups to simply show what day trading looks like. It is not meant by any means to be a stand-alone book. You are not a trader yet, not even close. 
