coffee, so Livermore investigated. The European markets had
closed, and now all coffee was being shipped to the United States.
The price of coffee was actually below its prewar level. Livermore
felt that the efficient German submarine force would continue to
sink freighters, which would eventually stop the flow of coffee
into the United States. As a result, prices would rise. It seemed
simple enough.
Livermore started buying coffee in the winter of 1917. Nine
months later, the price was flat, and he closed out his options at a
big loss. He went back into the market, where he sent out more
probes, buying more futures. He still believed he was right. This
time he was proven right—the price rose. He increased his positions as the price rose steadily. He was already counting his extra
paper millions when he got a big surprise.

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 124

• 124 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

The people who were on the other side of the coffee market,
the short sellers, knew they would take a huge hit when they had
to settle up because of the high price. They went to Washington,
and convinced those in power that the coffee drinkers of America
should be protected.
They told the wartime Price Fixing Committee that Livermore
had cornered the entire coffee market and was about to take the
prices sky-high. The committee immediately fixed on a maximum
price and established a limited time to close out all positions in the
commodity futures market.
The committee also closed the coffee exchange. Livermore did
what he was forced to do. He sold out his positions. His millions
in profits drained away like a cup of coffee disappearing down a
thirsty gullet. The Livermore lesson was explained in the press:
“America needs its cheap caffeine fix and the government agrees!”
But this taught Livermore another valuable lesson: Once again
he was right, but he did not profit from it. So now he added the
unexpectable to his list of stock market pitfalls. There was nothing
he could do under these conditions but lick his wounds and carry
on. There were some things that he could not predict, and therefore he could not guard against them. He could only react.
Livermore also was convinced that there was no one powerful
enough to control or fix a market for long. If the market was
driven to excess in either direction, it would always eventually
return to its true value.
If a stock was raided, the stock would go only so low before the
insiders, who knew its true value, stepped in to buy, joined by
astute investors, who also knew a bargain when they saw one. In a
free market, the proper price would always eventually be restored.
Livermore also came up with a method of watching stocks that
had broken badly on the downside: He watched for the rebound.
When the stock reached its ultimate decline—its nadir—it would

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 125

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 125 •

rebound strongly, swiftly, and head back up to prior levels, if in fact
the break had truly just been a raid and there was nothing inherently wrong with the stock. Conversely, if the stock just languished after the break in price, wallowing along in a tight
sideways channel, this was a signal that there might be an inherent
weakness in the stock. It would probably keep following the line
of least resistance and go down some more. Livermore watched for
the deciding move in the trend before he made his own move.
Livermore’s other stock and commodity trades in 1917 were
very successful. Since he was considered the mightiest bear on Wall
Street, he often got blamed for price breaks in stocks that looked
like bear raids. Because of these price drops, he was also accused of
being unpatriotic, regardless of whether he was guilty. Mostly, Livermore concluded, it was an easy way to explain away the erratic
movement of a wartime stock market.
In October 1917, Livermore was finally legally divorced from
Nettie in Reno, Nevada. How did he do it? He simply gave her
what she wanted. He gave her his $500,000 personal trust fund
and the house he had purchased in Long Island for her, with all its
furnishings. He was not worried. He still had millions in his trading account. He was also clear of over $1 million in debt that he
had repaid, even though he had had no legal responsibility to do
so. He was finally free and clear of all encumbrances, and free to
trade on his own terms. Free to enjoy life again.
Livermore did not care about the money for Nettie. He let it all
go with no angry feelings toward her, he was so sure of his ability
to make more money again. He kept his railway car, his Rolls, and
his yacht. He believed that as long as he had a stake, he would simply eventually make up in the market whatever he had given to her.
On December 2, 1918, Livermore married Dorothy Wendt in
the St. Regis Hotel. Magistrate Peter B. Barlow performed the

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 126

• 126 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

brief ceremony. She was 18, he was 41. She looked beautiful in her
wedding dress. He stood tall and straight, his blond hair slicked
back, his black tails fashioned perfectly from the finest cloth, a
smile on his face, as he slipped the wedding band on her finger.
Later, in the bridal suite, Dorothy read aloud the inscription
inside her wedding band: “Dotsie, for ever and ever, J.L.” Years
later, it still made her blush and tingle with excitement.
This was a major moment for Livermore. He was happy. This
time—unlike 1907, when he had everything going for him only to
lose it—he would try to deal properly with his success. He vowed
that his hubris, conceit, and vanity would be kept under control.
He would not lose his head. He had already plunged into those
dark chasms of depression and grief. He would strictly follow his
hard-earned rules, his laws for trading the market. He would not
be careless and lose his fortune this time.
Livermore loved Dorothy. He was ready to settle down and start
a family, a family he could be proud of. But he was to find out that,
as in his adventure in the coffee market, in life there is the unexpected and then there is the unexpectable. He would come face to
face with the unexpectable years later, when Dotsie would shoot
their son.

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 127

*

chapter seven

*

Perfecting His Market Theory

He seldom lives frugally who lives by chance.
Samuel Johnson, Life of Dryden

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 128

• 128 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

LIVERMORE WANTED TO SUPPLY HIS YOUNG BRIDE

Dorothy with everything a woman could desire. The day after they
were married, Livermore showed Dorothy their new home, a
beautifully furnished townhouse at 8 West Seventy-sixth Street. It
was filled with the best of the best: beautiful rugs from Persia, the
finest Wedgwood dishes, and glistening crystal glasses. The works
of great artists hung on every wall. The bedrooms were sumptuous—Egyptian cotton sheets, pillows filled with pure goose down
and covered in silk cases, and feather-filled duvets. The bathrooms
all had new fixtures and fittings, including oversized tubs that still
looked small in the huge space.
Dorothy was from a well-to-do background, but this overwhelmed her. This was the pure luxury reserved for the very few.
She ran from one room to the next, each one better than the last.
Livermore stood proudly in the expansive living room, waiting for
her to complete her inspection. It was extravagant, but he could
easily afford this home.
They celebrated with vintage champagne chilled in a silver
Tiffany ice bucket, sipped from Waterford crystal glasses. There
was nothing too good for his new love, nothing at all. She looked
dazzling in the white gossamer cotton dress she wore, imported
from Paris. She stood glowing in the New York morning, sunlight
streaming through the clear glass of brand-new windows.
And when he was not with her, he was doing what he loved,
what brought all his nerve endings to life—trading the market.
Livermore loved the fact that in trading the market there was no
end to the learning process. The game was never over, and he
could never know enough to beat the market all the time. The
puzzle could never be solved. He had learned this lesson the hard
way, and that was why he never considered himself a market master. He always considered himself a market student who occasionally traded correctly.

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 129

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 129 •

Around this time, on January 2, 1920, Livermore purchased a
seat on the New York Curb Exchange for $5,000. It was never
clear why he did this, since he was never seen trading on the curb.
He was also never seen inside the New York Stock Exchange.
Livermore’s understanding that he would be a student of the
markets all his life was exactly what drew him to the profession. It
was never the same; no day was like any other. The market was a
fast track where fortunes were made and lost in a heartbeat. Anyone could be a winner if they made the right moves.
Among the most mysterious parts of the puzzle were what other
people called Livermore’s hunches. But these were not impulsive
moves as far as he was concerned; they just looked that way to the
uninformed observer. His actions were simply a result of his entire,
conscious and unconscious, mind at work—distilling facts; churning information; recalling prior events; reacting to current events;
watching his fellow traders; and, most of all, relying on his own
judgment, not the judgment of others.
All his life, Livermore spent a lot of time trying to understand his
subconscious mind, the mind that never sleeps. He studied Freud
and Jung. He knew the power and mystery of the inner mind. It was
the wellspring of creative expression. It was the land of mystifying
dreams. It was free-ranging, pure random-access thought. Could the
subconscious hold deeper answers? Could it be harnessed?
Livermore’s swift, seemingly instinctive actions on certain occasions were to become part of his Wall Street legend. People often
observed these actions, and many later declared that he acted on a
sixth sense—a trader’s instinct, or gambler’s luck—or that he
received subliminal messages from the tape, reserved only for him.
Livermore himself did not fully understand some of his actions.
He had been trading from the age of 14. He was now 41—27
years of trading, with millions and millions of dollars passing
through his accounts. Livermore read Aristotle. He believed the

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 130

• 130 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

great philosopher’s dictum that “We are the sum total of our experience.” It was this pure, real-life experience, distilled through
intellect, that fascinated Livermore. Some people called it intuition. Could it ever be understood, captured on a regular basis?
One evening at Bradley’s Beach Club in Palm Beach, Livermore was sitting with Ed Bradley for dinner, just the two of them.
After dessert Bradley asked him, “J.L., what makes a good stock
speculator?”
“Ed, that’s a funny question. What makes a good gambler?
Maybe similar traits?”
“I think maybe they’re a little different, J.L.”
“Well, for a stock speculator it’s an aptitude for the game, a
stomach for the ride, and the ability to see what is happening
without emotion. The ability to make observations that others
don’t and a good memory to remember facts correctly, particularly
mathematical facts.
“Finally, Ed, and most important, is experience. To learn from
your experiences is paramount. And you need them all. A speculator could have good powers of observation and memory, but not
the experience. Or a trader could have experience, but poor memory or poor observational ability, or no mathematical aptitude. A
successful trader needs all these characteristics, but the key one—
the essential one for sustained success—I believe is experience.”
“And the stomach for it,” Bradley added.
“Yes, it’s not everybody’s calling. Not everybody could or
should be a speculator.”
“Or a gambler, like me. But can you be a little more specific
J.L.?”
“I’ll make it quick. Only speculate if you can make it a full-time
job. Don’t take tips of any kind, no matter where they come from.
Don’t worry about catching the tops or bottoms, that’s fool’s play.
Keep the number of stocks you own to a controllable number. It’s

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 131

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 131 •

hard to herd cats, and it’s hard to track a lot of securities. Take your
losses quickly and don’t brood about them. Try to learn from them,
but mistakes are as inevitable as death. And only make a big move,
a real big plunge, when the majority of factors are in your favor.”
“Kinda like holding a royal flush?” Ed Bradley smiled.
“In the market you very rarely get a sure thing. The market
always keeps you on the edge.”
“Gambling too, J.L.”
“That’s why every once in a while you must go into cash, take
a break, take a vacation. Don’t try to play the market all the time.
It can’t be done, too tough on the emotions. And finally, and I
know you’ll like this one Ed, keep some cash in reserve. Like you,
Ed—you probably have a hundred grand on you right now.”
“Eighty.” Bradley smiled.
“I have made some of my biggest moves and biggest profits
because I had some cash sitting in reserve.” Livermore smiled
back. “Now it’s your turn Ed. What makes a good gambler?”
“Pretty much what you just said, J.L.”
“There must be something else.”
“Well, J.L., you know I’m a good Catholic and I never discuss
religion, but the fear and love of God was put in me by my mother
from when I could talk till I was about twelve or thirteen and I hit
the road. So a good gambler always wants God on his side. Second,
you live in a nice gentlemanly world up there on Wall Street. At
least no one is beating you up or trying to shoot you, which, sad
to say, often happens in the life of a gambler. I believe a man must
know the manly art of self-defense, not to be a bully but so he
doesn’t ever have to have any fear of another person.”
“The men on Wall Street do all their maiming and killing mentally and financially,” Livermore added.
“Yeah and through lying, stealing and cheating, which I will not
abide.” Bradley sipped his drink and continued, “Finally, like the

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 132

• 132 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

market, you gotta do and love the math. So while others are talking,
and talking, and talking, like they always do, you can be thinking
and thinking and thinking, figuring the percentages and the probabilities. This will ensure a fella of financial success—like you, J.L.”
“Ed, flattery will get you everywhere with me.” Livermore
raised his old-fashioned and Bradley raised his glass of soda water.
They smiled and clinked glasses, the Great Bear of Wall Street and
America’s most successful gambler.
Livermore’s winters in Palm Beach were more than a vacation.
They took him away from New York and the market. Even though
he often played the market from E. F. Hutton’s Palm Beach office,
it was different for him, because it was a different environment.
Plus, the Atlantic Ocean fascinated him. It made him feel small.
His life fell into better focus when he got out onto the ocean.
Some of his greatest thinking was done fishing, trolling along the
100-fathom bar a few miles off Palm Beach, following the great
underwater canyon that ran from Cuba to Nova Scotia, a nautical
highway for the great gypsy fish. Or cruising easily on his new
Anita Venetian II, heading down to Key West for some tarpon fishing, and watching those great Florida Keys sunsets. The ocean was
always exciting, ever changing, and it refreshed his soul.
In the 1920s, Livermore made another important discovery that
he applied to his trading strategy: industry group movements. He
deduced from observation that stocks did not move alone when
they moved. They moved in industry groups. If U.S. Steel rose,
then sooner or later Bethlehem, Republic, and Crucible would
follow along. Livermore observed this time and time again, and it
became an important trading tool in his arsenal. As Figures 7.1 and
7.2 illustrate, nothing has changed since Livermore’s day. The
automotive group—here, General Motors and Ford—basically
moves in lockstep.

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 133

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 133 •

FIGURE 7.1 General Motors Corporation, July 15, 1997 to July 15,
1999. (Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

The group movement premise was quite simple to Livermore.
He explained to his son Paul: “If the basic reasons are sound for
U.S. Steel’s business to come into favor in the stock market, then
the rest of the steel group should also follow for the same basic reasons. This, of course also works for the short side of the market.
When a group goes out-of-favor for basic, solid reasons it will
include all the stocks in that industry group.”
For example, Figures 7.3 and 7.4 show companies in the “oil
patch” group. As the price of oil plummeted in the late spring of
1998, stock prices of Transocean and Triton Energy, both offshore
oil drillers, plummeted because their profit margins were threatened. In fact, all the oil drillers suffered a steep drop in the price of
their stocks.
It was also an important clue for Livermore if a particular stock

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 134

• 134 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

FIGURE 7.2 Ford Motors Company, July 15, 1997 to July 15, 1999.
(Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

in the favored group did not move up and prosper with the others.
This could indicate that the stock was weak or sick, and therefore
might be a good short sale. At the very least, a trader should be
cautious in buying any stock that does not follow the overall group
action.
This works in reverse, as well—if the group is going down, and
one stock is bucking the trend and going up, then the speculator
should beware.
The only exception to group movement is when a single stock
makes up 50 percent or more of the total sales of the group—
sooner or later, the rest of the group must follow this stock. For
example, Figures 7.5 and 7.6 show charts for Lucent, a leading
telecommunications company, and for the overall telecommunications equipment and service group. It is clear how important the

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 135

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 135 •

FIGURE 7.3 Transocean Offshore, Inc., July 15, 1997 to July 15,
1999. (Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

dominant stock is to this group—in fact, in such cases, the leading
stock is the group.
Livermore believed in trading the market leader, trading the
most powerful stock in the group. He didn’t look for the bargain,
the weak sister; he went with the leader, the anchor of the group.
He also noted that this was not always the conventional leader of
the group. Occasionally, a smaller, well-managed stock in the
group would assume leadership, perhaps with a new product, and
knock out the old leader.
Livermore observed that entire groups went in and out of favor
with each new major bull market. The leading stock groups of one
market most likely would not be the leading groups of the next
major market. And Livermore followed only the leading groups,
because he believed that if he could not make money with the

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 136

• 136 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

FIGURE 7.4 Triton Energy, Ltd., July 15, 1997 to July 15, 1999.
(Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

leading active issues and groups, then he would not make money
speculating in the market as a whole.
It was Livermore’s experience that stock group behavior was an
important key to overall market direction, a key ignored by most
traders, big or small. He believed that groups often provided the
key to predicting changes in trends. As favored groups got weaker
and collapsed, it usually meant a correction in the market as a
whole. This was how he called the market turns in 1907 and
1929—the leaders always rolled over first.
Livermore also used this same group-action technique in trading commodities.
Personally, things were going well for Livermore. In 1919,
Dorothy gave birth to a son, Jesse Jr. He and Dorothy talked things

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 137

PERFECTING HIS MARKET THEORY

• 137 •

FIGURE 7.5 Lucent Technologies, Inc., July 15, 1997 to July 15,
1999. (Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

over and decided it would be best to bring up their family outside
New York City. They went house hunting and eventually settled
on King’s Point in Great Neck, on Long Island.
The estate they bought, Locust Lawn, sat on 13 acres of beautifully landscaped grounds and was bordered on one side by Long
Island Sound. It was more than a century old and had once been a
farmhouse. Dorothy enthusiastically took on the project of renovating her new home.
Dorothy’s mother became her constant companion; she actually
had a suite of rooms designed for her mother in the renovated
mansion. Dorothy did nothing without first consulting her
mother. When they were finished with the designers, they simply
went to J.L., and he wrote them a check for whatever they wanted.
The estate was renovated and soon filled up with antique furniture,

8467_Smitten_07_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 138

• 138 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

FIGURE 7.6 Telecommunications equipment and service group,
July 15, 1997 to July 15, 1999. (Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

beautiful art, exquisite silver, and tapestries. One tapestry, worth
over $25,000, was 60 feet long, and depicted Greek soldiers and
gods in full battle.
When Dorothy and her mother were finally finished some two
years later, the house contained 29 rooms and 12 bathrooms. In
the basement was a bar, a playroom, and a full barbershop. There
was a full-time live-in barber to shave Livermore and clip his hair
every day. J.L. and Dorothy each had massive walk-in closets and
huge bathrooms.
Livermore had more than 50 custom-made suits, along with
hundreds of ties and custom-made shirts. Livermore stood 5 foot
101⁄2, but he had always wanted to be 6 feet tall, so he had 20 pairs
of custom-made elevator shoes that raised his height 11⁄2 inches.
