
•

IBD TV: Watch Your Results Improve

IBD TV offers a unique way to reinforce and master the strategies outlined in
this book.
The IBD Market Wrap and Daily Stock Analysis videos show you, on a daily
basis, how to apply CAN SLIM in the current market conditions. We also produce special video and audio analysis as needed to help you navigate major
market events, such as the financial crisis in 2008.
The key is to tune in regularly. Make IBD TV a part of your routine and you’ll
see your investing skills and confidence improve significantly. For the latest
videos, visit www.investors.com/IBDtv.

Tap into the IBD Community
Since we started publication in 1984, IBD has helped countless people
achieve financial success. It has created a vibrant community of investors
who proactively share their ideas and knowledge, both online and offline.

How I Use IBD to Find Potential Winning Stocks

Here are two ways you can get involved in and benefit from the IBD community.
IBD Meetups

The IBD Meetup program gives you the chance to meet face-to-face with
fellow IBD investors in your city. It’s an excellent opportunity to share ideas
and experiences with like-minded investors who follow the CAN SLIM system. There are over 400 groups worldwide, and membership is free. To find
the IBD Meetup in your area, visit http://ibd.meetup.com.
IBD Forums

IBD Forums is the official online message board for IBD and CAN SLIM
investors. On IBD Forums, you can post, read, and reply to messages on a
wide variety of investing and other related topics. You can register for free
on Investors.com.

381

17

• CHAPTE R •

Watching the Market
and Reacting to News

Tape Reading Is Emotional
Ticker tape watching or being glued to your PC or watching the market on a TV

channel all day can get dangerously emotional. Sometimes a stock keeps rising
to the point where everyone—including you—is convinced it’s going “straight
through the roof.” That’s when discipline is most needed because the stock is
probably topping. When a stock’s merits are so obvious that it looks fantastic to
everyone, you can be sure almost everyone who can buy it has already done so.
Remember, majority opinion is rarely right in the stock market.
Winners in the stock market need perspective, discipline, and self-control above all else. Those who continually sit in front of the moving ticker
tape that shows many stocks as they change prices or their PC monitoring
hundreds of stocks changing prices, risk making emotional decisions.

Is the Stock in a Base or Is It Too Extended?
There’s an easy way to keep your head if you’re keeping your eye on the tape
or on your PC.
When you see activity that impresses you, always refer to a weekly chart
to see if the stock is building a base or if it is extended too far past its buy or
pivot point. If it is extended, leave it alone; it’s too late. Chasing stocks, like
crime, doesn’t pay.
If the stock is building a base, then apply the CAN SLIM system. Are current earnings up a meaningful amount? Is the three-year earnings record
good? Have you checked all the other CAN SLIM criteria?

382

Watching the Market and Reacting to News

More than half the stocks that look inviting on the tape will fail the
CAN SLIM test and prove to be deficient, mediocre investments. However,
sooner or later, convincing market action will point you to a golden opportunity that meets all your criteria for a possible star performer.

Scan Chart Books Weekly
and List Buy Points
Another way to use the tape or market action productively is to review a
comprehensive chart book every week and make a list of stocks that meet
your technical and fundamental selection criteria. Then jot down the buy
point at which you would consider buying each stock. Also note the average
daily volume for each stock on your prospect list so that you can easily verify any noteworthy increases in volume.
Keep this shopping list with you every day for the next couple of weeks as
you watch the market. In time, one or two of the stocks on your list will
begin to approach your buy point. This is the time to get ready to buy—
when the stock trades at your buy point, you anticipate the day’s volume will
be at least 50% above average and the general market direction is positive.
The more demand there is for a stock at the buy point, the better.
Tape and market watchers expect the pace of activity to slow down
around lunchtime in New York (12 p.m. to 1 p.m. Eastern). They also know
the market frequently shows its true colors in the last hour of the day, either
coming on and closing strong, or suddenly weakening and failing to hold the
gains established earlier in the session.

Don’t Buy on Tips and Rumors
I never buy stocks on tips, rumors, or inside information. Doing so simply
isn’t sound. Of course, tips, rumors, and inside information are what most
people are looking for. However, I should remind you again that what most
people believe and do in the market doesn’t work very well. Beware of
falling into the typical market traps.
Certain advisory services and columns in some business newspapers are
fed by Street gossip, rumors, and tips, along with planted personal opinions
or inside information. These services and columns, in my opinion, are
unprofessional and unsophisticated. There are far sounder and safer methods of gathering information.
Bernard Baruch stressed the importance of separating the facts of a situation from tips, “inside dope,” and wishful thinking. One of his rules was to
beware of barbers, beauticians, waiters, or anyone else bearing such gifts.

383

384 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
Watch for Distortion around the End of the Year and in Early January
A certain amount of distortion can occur in optionable stocks around option
expiration dates. There’s also a significant amount of year-end distortion in
stocks during December and sometimes through January and early February.
Year-end is a tricky time for anyone to buy stock, since numerous trades
are based on tax considerations. Many low-grade losers will suddenly seem
strong, while former leaders lie idle or start to correct. In time, this misleading activity dissipates and the true leaders reemerge.
General market sell-offs also occasionally start after the beginning of a
new year, which further adds to the difficulty. Fake-out action can occur
with one big “up” day followed by a big “down” day, only to be followed by
another big “up” day. There are times when I’d rather take a vacation in January. The January effect, where small- and mid-cap stocks get a boost during January, can be a misleading and spurious indicator. At best, it “works”
for only a brief period.
It’s important that you stick with your rules and don’t get sidetracked by
questionable, less-reliable indicators, of which there are many.

Interpret and React to Major News
When domestic or foreign news of consequence hits the street, capable
market sleuths are sometimes less concerned with whether the news is good
or bad than they are with analyzing its effect on the market. For example, if
the news appears to be bad but the market yawns, you can feel more positive. The tape is telling you that the underlying market may be stronger than
many people believe. On the other hand, if highly positive news hits the
market and stocks give ground slightly, the tape analyst might conclude the
underpinnings of the market are weaker than previously believed.
Sometimes the market overreacts to or even counteracts favorable or disappointing news. On Wednesday, November 9, 1983, someone ran a fullpage ad in the Wall Street Journal predicting rampant inflation and another
1929-type depression. The ad appeared during the middle of an intermediate correction in the market, but its warnings were so overblown that the
market immediately rebounded and rallied for several days.
There’s also a difference between a market that retreats in the face of
news that’s scary but easy to understand and explain, and one that slumps
noticeably on no apparent news at all.
Experienced market investigators have long memories. They keep records
of past major news events and how the market reacted. The list would include
President Eisenhower’s heart attack, the Cuban missile crisis, the Kennedy

Watching the Market and Reacting to News

assassination, an outbreak of war, the Arab oil embargo, expectations of government actions such as wage and price controls, 9/11, war in the Mideast
and, more recently, in early September 2008, when subprime real estate news
got worse and the market expected a very liberal president to be elected.

Old News versus New News
After it’s been repeated several times, both good news and bad news
become old news.
Old news will often have the opposite effect on the stock market from
what it had when the news first broke.
This, of course, is the opposite of how propaganda and disinformation
work in totalitarian dictator-controlled countries. There, the more often a lie
or distortion is repeated to the masses, the more it may become accepted as
truth. Here, when news becomes widely known or anticipated, it’s “discounted” by experienced individuals in the marketplace, blunting the effect
of its release—unless, of course, the news keeps getting worse than expected.
To market neophytes, news can be paradoxical and confusing. For example, when a company releases a bad quarterly earnings report, its stock may
go up in price when this is reported. When this occurs, it’s often because the
news was known or anticipated ahead of time, and a few professionals may
decide to buy or to cover short sales once all the bad news is finally out. “Buy
on bad news” is what some wily institutions use as a guide. Others believe
they should step in and provide support for their large positions at difficult
times.

Analyzing Our National News Media
How the national news is edited and presented or suppressed dramatically
affects the economy and public confidence. It can also influence public
opinion of the government, elections, our presidents, and our stock market.
Several excellent books have been written on the subject of analyzing our
national news. Humphrey Neill, author of the 1931 classic Tape Reading
and Market Tactics, also wrote The Art of Contrary Opinion. It carefully
examines the way identical news stories are reported quite differently in the
headlines of different newspapers and how that can be misleading to stock
owners and the public. Neill developed contrarian theories based on how
frequently conventional wisdom or consensus opinion expressed in the
national media turns out to be ill-conceived or just plain wrong.
In 1976, media expert Bruce Herschensohn wrote The Gods of Antenna,
which tells how some TV networks manipulate the news to influence public

385

386 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
opinion. Another book on the subject is The Coming Battle for the Media,
written in 1988 by William Rusher.
One of the most outstanding studies on the subject is The Media Elite,
written by Stanley Rothman and Robert Lichter in 1986. Rothman and
Lichter interviewed 240 journalists and top staffers at three major newspapers (the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal and the Washington
Post), three news magazines (Time, Newsweek and U.S. News & World
Report), and the news departments of four TV networks (ABC, CBS, NBC
and PBS). On average, 85% of these top national journalists were found to
be liberal and to have voted the Democratic ticket in national elections in
1964, 1968, 1972 and 1976. Another survey showed only 6% of national
journalists to have voted Republican.
A Freedom Forum poll reinforced The Media Elite when it documented
that 89%—9 out of 10—of Washington reporters and bureau chiefs voted
for Clinton in 1992 and 7% voted for the first George Bush.
More recently, Tim Groseclose of UCLA and Stanford and Jeff Milyo of
the University of Chicago published “A Measure of Media Bias.” They
counted the number of times a news outlet quoted certain think tanks and
compared this with the number of times members of Congress cited the
same think tanks when speaking from the floor.
Comparing the citation patterns enabled them to construct an ADA
(Americans for Democratic Action) score for each media outlet. They found
that Fox News Special Report was the only right-of center news outlet in
their sample. The most liberal was CBS Evening News followed by the New
York Times, the Los Angeles Times, USA Today, NBC Nightly News, and
ABC’s World News Tonight.
More surprising was the astonishing degree to which the mainstream
media in these surveys are much more liberal than the general voting public.
In the 1984 presidential election, Mondale vs. Reagan, the ABC, CBS, and
NBC prime-time news programs from Labor Day to Election Day were taped
and dissected by Maura Clancy and Michael Robinson. They focused only on
reports in which spin for or against each candidate was definite. Public Opinion
magazine found Reagan got 7,230 seconds of bad press and only 730 of good,
while Mondale enjoyed 1,330 seconds of good press and 1,050 seconds of bad.
Leading up to Reagan’s reelection run, the Institute for Applied Economics surveyed how the network news treated economic news during the
strong recovery in the last half of 1983. It discovered that nearly 95% of the
economic statistics were positive, yet 86% of the networks’ stories were primarily negative.
Emmy Award winner Bernard Goldberg spent nearly 30 years with CBS
News. His book Bias documents in detail how network television has pro-

Watching the Market and Reacting to News

vided one-sided news with little balance or fairness. This is a book all younger
people in America should read.
Goldberg tells how journalists decide what news they want to cover and
the slant they want to impart. More damaging, they determine what news to
minimize or keep quiet. They take sides and assign labels to people.
MSNBC’s Chris Matthews, a leading media figure, was a speechwriter for
Jimmy Carter and an aide to House Speaker Tip O’Neill. The late Tim
Russert of NBC was a political advisor to New York’s former governor, Mario
Cuomo. ABC’s Jeff Greenfield was a speechwriter for Robert Kennedy,
PBS’s Bill Moyers was Lyndon Johnson’s press secretary, and ABC news
anchor George Stephanopoulos was Clinton’s communications director.
To succeed, both as individual investors and as a nation, we need to learn
to separate facts from the personal political opinions and strong agenda-driven biases of the majority of the national media. This could be the number
one problem in our country today.
In addition to one-sided bias in the national media, freedom can be jeopardized by either infiltration or propaganda designed to undermine the
nation and its people. This is intended to confuse national issues; pit one
group against another; stir up class envy, fear and hatred; and tear down or
demean certain key people or established institutions.
The most questionable practice of the one-sided media is how they select
which stories and facts to cover and continually promote. Even more important are the critically relevant stories and facts they choose not to cover
because those stories or facts don’t support their agenda or the slant they
want the story to have.
In late 2008, public fear that the recession that was then underway might
become like the Great Depression of 1929 and the 1930s escalated, and yet
most Americans weren’t even born then and know little about that period.
Here are three outstanding books about the 1930s and early 1940s every
American should read:
Since Yesterday, The 1930s in America by Frederick Lewis Allen, gives a
good account of what happened during that period. The Life & Death of Nazi
Germany, by Robert Goldston, covers Hitler and the rise of the Nazis from
the late 1920s to the end of World War II in 1945. Masters of Deceit by former
FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, covers how communism functions and operates. A well-informed and aware nation can protect and defend its freedoms.

It’s Not Like 1929, It’s 1938
I’ve overlayed a chart of the Nasdaq Composite Index from the “Anything
Goes 1990s” through March 2009 over the Dow Jones Industrials in the

387

388 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
Roaring 1920s and the Depression era of the 1930s. They are almost exact
duplicates. The Nasdaq was used because it trades more volume now than
the NYSE and represents more entrepreneurial new America companies
that have driven our markets in recent years. The Nasdaq from September
1998 to the wild peak in March 2000 actually soared 2.5 times the Dow’s
1928-29 climax run up. The Nasdaq dot-com bubble was like the tulip bulb
mania of 1636 in Holland. The Nasdaq declined 78% whereas the Dow’s
1929 crash declined 89%.
The reason history repeats in this amazing manner is that the market is
made up of millions of people acting almost 100% on human emotions. It’s
crowd psychology: human hopes, desires, fears, pride and ego behind so
many decisions. Human nature is pretty much the same today as it was in
1929. These two periods happened 70 years apart, about a lifetime. So, few
people today know what happened then. Like now, the banks had excessive
loans, then to farmers, plus stocks were bought on excessive leverage.
Unemployment at the Depression lows in 1932 peaked at 25% but was still
20% in 1939 just before WWII began.
The rally from the 1932 low to the 1936-37 peak lasted the same amount
of time as our Nasdaq recent rally back from the low of 2002 to 2007 . . . and
both fell around 50%.
History is now on the march, but it’s not like 1929, it’s like 1938.
So, what was happening in 1938?
900
Nasdaq 1992–2009
Dow 1921–1942
800

700

500

400

300

© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

Indexed Value

600

200

100

0
Nov-1921
Feb-1992

Nov-1923
Feb-1994

Nov-1925
Feb-1996

Nov-1927
Feb-1998

Nov-1929
Feb-2000

Nov-1931
Feb-2002

Nov-1933
Jan-2004

Nov-1935
Jan-2006

Oct-1937
Jan-2008

Nasdaq Composite February 1992–March 2009 compared
to Dow Jones Industrials November 1921–December 1942.

Oct-1939

Oct-1941

Watching the Market and Reacting to News

The Nazi party in 1930 won 107 seats in the Reichstag. Hitler became
Chancellor of Germany in January 1933. He already had his storm troopers,
the Hitler youth and other Nazi organizations. Only months later, the
Reichstag gave Hitler all its constitutional powers and by July all other political parties were outlawed. Hitler kept saying he was only interested in
peace.
By 1938, Britain and France negotiated with Hitler and tried to appease
him by making concessions. Britain believed they had a peace agreement
with Hitler, “Peace in our time.” The crowds cheered. In Parliament,
Churchill said, “We’ve suffered a defeat.” No one believed him. He was
booed. World War II began in 1939. Germany rolled over France in two
weeks.
Today, Iran is a sponsor of terrorist organizations and will have nuclear
weapons very soon plus the missile ability to deliver them. Have we learned
anything from history in the 1930s? Will we repeat Neville Chamberlain’s
mistaken belief in an agreement on a piece of paper?
I’m including two editorials by Thomas Sowell, whom I mentioned earlier in Chapter 16. His work always shows unexpected facts and wisdom.
Roman Empire Outlasted U.S., But It Too Fell
December 9, 2008
THOMAS SOWELL
Will the horrors unleashed by Islamic terrorists in Mumbai cause any second thoughts by those who are so anxious to start weakening the American
security systems currently in place, including government interceptions of
international phone calls and the holding of terrorists at Guantanamo?
Maybe. But never underestimate partisan blindness in Washington or in
the mainstream media where, if the Bush administration did it, then it must
be wrong.
Contrary to some of the more mawkish notions of what a government is
supposed to be, its top job is the protection of the people. Nobody on 9/11
would have thought that we would see nothing comparable again in this
country for seven long years.
Many people seem to have forgotten how, in the wake of 9/11, every great
national event—the World Series, Christmas, New Year’s, the Super Bowl—
was under the shadow of a fear that this was when the terrorists would strike
again.
They didn’t strike again here, even though they have struck in Spain,
Indonesia, England and India, among other places. Does anyone imagine
that this was because they didn’t want to hit America again?

389

390 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
Could this have had anything to do with all the security precautions that
liberals have been complaining about so bitterly, from the interception of
international phone calls to forcing information out of captured terrorists?
Too many people refuse to acknowledge that benefits have costs, even if
that cost means only having no more secrecy when making international
phone calls than you have when sending e-mails, in a world where computer
hackers abound. There are people who refuse to give up anything, even to
save their own lives.
A very shrewd observer of the deterioration of Western societies, British
writer Theodore Dalrymple, said: “This mental flabbiness is decadence, and
at the same time a manifestation of the arrogant assumption that nothing
can destroy us.”
There are growing numbers of things that can destroy us. The Roman
Empire lasted a lot longer than the United States has lasted, and yet it too
was destroyed.
Millions of lives were blighted for centuries thereafter, because the barbarians who destroyed Rome were incapable of replacing it with anything at
all comparable. Neither are those who threaten to destroy the United States
today.
The destruction of the United States will not require enough nuclear
bombs to annihilate cities and towns across America. After all, the nuclear
destruction of just two cities was enough to force Japan to surrender—and
the Japanese had far more willingness to fight and die than most Americans
have today.
How many Americans are willing to see New York, Chicago and Los
Angeles all disappear in nuclear mushroom clouds, rather than surrender to
whatever outrageous demands the terrorists make?
Neither Barack Obama nor those with whom he will be surrounded in
Washington show any signs of being serious about forestalling such a terrible choice by taking any action with any realistic chance of preventing a
nuclear Iran.
Once suicidal fanatics have nuclear bombs, that is the point of no return.
We, our children and our grandchildren will live at the mercy of the merciless, who have a track record of sadism.
There are no concessions we can make that will buy off hate-filled terrorists. What they want—what they must have for their own self-respect, in a
world where they suffer the humiliation of being visibly centuries behind
the West in so many ways—is our being brought down in humiliation,
including self-humiliation.
Even killing us will not be enough, just as killing Jews was not enough for
the Nazis, who first had to subject them to soul-scarring humiliations and
dehumanization in their death camps.
This kind of hatred may not be familiar to most Americans but what happened on 9/11 should give us a clue—and a warning.
