
invalidate those beliefs, then you will know how each group is likely to
behave.
I want to remind you that this approach is to help you stay detached and
understand that price movement is a function of traders acting individually
and collectively as a force expressing their beliefs in future value. The
greatest number with the strongest belief will always be right. The easiest
way to make money is to go with the flow. To identify the flow, you need
to stand apart from the crowd and suspend what you believe about relative
value so that you can determine who is likely to do what and with how much
force, how is everyone else likely to react, and if it doesn't happen, what
will traders do then?
By asking yourself these questions you are automatically keeping your
focus of attention on the market and what the possibilities are. Any
limitations you place on the market's behavior will cause you to focus on the
impossibility instead of the possibility of something happening. Your belief
that the market has to behave in certain ways proscribed by your mental
structure will cause you to focus your attention on what the market is doing
to you, and if what it is doing is causing pain, then the potential exists for
you to avoid or distort information, usually resulting in a painful forced
awareness.
STEP SIX:

LEARNING TO BE OBJECTIVE

To achieve a state of objectivity you need to operate out of beliefs that
allow for anything to happen, as opposed to beliefs that allow only for the
market to express itself in a limited fashion. If you operate out of a belief
that anything can happen, then whatever does happen won't be threatening
to you in any way, thereby causing you to avoid or distort certain categories
of market information. Any limits you place on the market's behavior will
be a compensating factor for your lack of trust and confidence to act
appropriately in any given situation. This will be evidenced by the fear,
stress, and anxiety that you will feel when the market expresses itself
beyond your mental limits and you can't do anything to control the
situation.
However, you do have to have some belief or expectation about the
future or you wouldn't ever put on a trade in the first place. To be
objective, you will need to release yourself from "demand-backed
expectations" and make what I call "uncommitted assessments of the
probabilities." Unlike the markets, in our everyday social lives we can and
do exert control over the environment to assure ourselves of the outcomes
that we desire. The rules we learn to abide by in order to interact with one
another are our expectations about the future. Once we learn these rules,
especially if we have learned them in a painful way, we can demand certain
outcomes from the environment. Hence, our expectations of the future are
actually demands that the environment conform to our expectations of it.
180

Without really thinking about it, we will carry these same kinds of demands
with us into the trading environment because of our natural resistance to
letting go of our expectations. That is, staying committed to any limited
belief about the possibilities that exist in the markets is virtually the same as
making a demand.
If you have any doubts about this, consider that if we weren't demanding
that the market conform to our expectations, then we wouldn't ever have a
reason to get angry when it doesn't. Have you ever gotten angry at the
market? Anger is a natural defense mechanism. When we feel anger, it is an
indication that the environment is assaulting us in some way, creating an
imbalance between the mental and outer environments. The outer
environment is either showing us something about itself or ourselves that
we don't want to accept. We protect ourselves with our anger to ward off
this assault. In our everyday lives our anger can be an effective tool to get
what we want (change what the outer environment is showing us about
itself that we can't accept) or to ward off what the environment is showing
us about ourselves that we can't accept.
However, if we interact with the market with demand-backed or
committed expectations of its behavior, we will cut ourselves off from the
information that we need to make accurate assessments of its potential to
move in any given direction. If we don't have the power to control the
markets in such a way as to make them do what we expect them to do and at
the same time we aren't willing to give up our expectations and accept the
way things are, then it would create what would otherwise be an
irreconcilable dilemma if it weren't for our ability to distort, alter, or
exclude information from our awareness. Perceptual distortion is the one
compensating factor that will, at least temporarily, correct the imbalance
between what we expect and what the market is offering, when there is a
difference between the two.
Our committed expectations about the future will act as a force on our
perception of market information to control its flow into our mental system
in such a way as to avoid a confrontation with anything that doesn't
conform with what we already believe is possible.
Which, of course, is always going to be less than what is possible from
the market's perspective. If we are perceiving much less than what is
available, then we are out of touch with what is possible from the market's
perspective and setting ourselves up for a painful forced awareness. To be
objective you have to make "uncommitted assessments of the probabilities."
Which simply means that you have no commitment to any particular
outcome. You just observe what is happening in each moment as an
indication of what will probably happen next.
Here is what objectivity feels like, so that you can recognize when you
have achieved it.
You feel no pressure to do anything
181

You have no feeling of fear
You feel no sense of rejection
There is no right or wrong
You recognize that this is what the market is telling me, this is what I
do
You can observe the market from the perspective as if you were not in a
position, even when you are
You are not focused on money but on the structure of the market
To stay objective anticipate as many possibilities as you can and how
probable each of these possibilities are. Then decide in advance what you
are going to do in each situation. If none of your scenarios is working out as
you anticipated, then get out. Release yourself from the need to be right.
The more uncommitted your assessments are the less potential for distortion
and experiencing a painful forced awareness.
STEP SEVEN: LEARNING TO
MONITOR YOURSELF
As outlined in the exercise to develop self-discipline in Chapter 14, you
need to start paying attention to what you are thinking about and what
market information you are focused on.

Trading Rules
When you are in a trade constantly ask yourself if anything "has to
happen." Obviously, you want the market to go in your direction; however,
what I want you to do is monitor how you feel, your Level of commitment to
what has to happen. Remember there is a big difference in perspective between
"what is happening" and something that "has to happen." If you find that your
commitment levels are rising, keep on telling yourself that it is all right for
anything to happen because you are confident in your ability to respond
appropriately to whatever does happen.
Ask yourself what can't happen? What can't the market do? When you
find yourself rationalizing the market's behavior to support your position,
you are operating in the realm of illusion and setting yourself up for a
painful forced awareness. Remember the market can do anything, even take
your profits away if you allow it. Always take something out of the markets
when you find yourself in a winning trade.
A question to ask yourself is if you are prepared to give yourself money
today. If the answer doesn't come back a resounding yes, then find out
why before you trade. If you can't reconcile the issue or set it aside, then
you would be better off not trading, until you do. If you are determined to
182

trade anyway, at the very least make a substantial reduction in the number
of contracts you normally trade.
When you find yourself focused on the monetary value of a trade instead
of the structure of the market (i.e., what the trade is worth to you in dollar
terms, dreams, goals, and so forth instead of what the market is telling you
about its potential to move in any given direction) then assume you are
distorting or avoiding certain information and either don't put the trade on
or take what you have off until you become more objective.

183

CHAPTER 17

Final Note

Even after you have learned all of the skills set forth in this book, at some
point in time it will probably occur to you that your trading is simply a
feedback mechanism to tell you how much you like yourself in any given
moment. After you have learned to trust yourself to always act in your best
interests, the only thing that will hold you back is your degree of selfvaluation. That is, you will give yourself an amount of money that directly
corresponds with what you believe you deserve based on some value system
you acquired at some point in your life. The more positive you feel about
yourself, the more abundance that will naturally flow your way as a byproduct of these positive feelings. So, in essence, to give yourself more
money as a trader you need to identify, change or decharge anything in your
mental environment that doesn't contribute to the highest degree of selfvaluation that is possible. What's possible? Stay focused on what you need to
learn, do the work that is necessary, and your belief in what is possible will
naturally expand as a function of your willingness to adapt.

184

