
Unconventional easing
Central banks can only directly influence the level of short term interest rates. Longer-term interest
rates, the ones used by markets to set business and consumer lending rates, are determined by bond
investors and are based on their views of growth, inflation, and creditworthiness. For example, the
10-year U.S. Treasury rate is the benchmark for U.S. mortgage rates.
When central banks cut their benchmark rates to near-zero levels, they were faced with the zerolower bound of interest rates. To further support their economies, they sought to drive down
longer-term lending rates through unconventional means, typically large-scale asset purchase
programs where the central bank buys longer-term government bonds. (Remember, bond prices
move inversely to bond yields — it’s just bond math. Buying longer-maturity bonds theoretically
pushes bond prices higher and yields lower, hopefully sending consumer and business lending
rates down in the process.)
Such large scale asset purchase programs are frequently referred to as quantitative easing (QE)
because the central bank is increasing the money supply, the quantity, by creating money to buy the
bonds. In the United States, the Federal Reserve initiated two rounds of quantitative easing, while
in the UK and Japan, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan also undertook large-scale asset
purchase programs. (Japan had also pursued QE repeatedly in the prior decade, well before the
GFC.)
Currencies of countries pursuing such unconventional easing typically tend to weaken because
such measures may drive down interest rates relative to other countries’ rates, at least while the
program is in place. Some investors also view an increasing money supply as a currency negative
(the greater the supply, the lower the value). But I think that’s too simplistic and relies on that
extra money actually entering the economy.
A good case in point is what happened when the U.S. Federal Reserve indicated in August 2010 it
was considering undertaking a second round of QE, known as QE2. Initially, the USD weakened
as the Fed was seen to be trying to lower rates further. But when the actual program was
announced, the USD began to strengthen and U.S. yields moved higher. It might look like a case of

“sell the rumor, buy the fact,” but it was more in response to U.S. data and the immediate outlook:
The Fed was looking at QE2 in response to a slowdown in the summer of 2010, but by the time
QE2 started in November 2010, U.S. data and the outlook had rebounded. And all that money the
Fed was supposedly printing? It mostly ended up back at the Fed in the form of excess reserves
held by the banking system, meaning it never entered the real economy.

Watching the central bankers
If you’ve read this chapter from the beginning, you’ve probably gotten the impression that
determining monetary policy is mostly an exercise in shades of gray rather than a simple blackand-white equation — and you’d be exactly right. But given the significance of monetary policy to
currencies, currency traders devote a great deal of attention trying to divine the intentions of
central bankers. This has not always been an easy task, but recent trends among central banks to
improve the openness of communications with markets, frequently referred to as transparency,
have made the process less of a guessing game.
Central bankers communicate with the markets in a number of ways, and their comments can
provoke market reactions similar to major economic data releases — by that, we mean sharp
initial price movements followed by continued volatility or a potential change in direction.
Rate decisions: Interest rate setting committees of central banks meet at regularly
scheduled times. At the conclusion of a meeting, they issue a formal announcement of the
policy decisions made at the meeting. They can raise, lower, or hold interest rates steady.
They can also make changes to reserve requirements or liquidity operations.
Policy statements or guidance: Along with the interest rate decision, central banks
frequently issue an accompanying statement that explains the basis for their policy action.
These statements are also used to provide guidance to markets on the future course of
monetary policy. The statements are carefully parsed by markets intent on discovering
what the central bank is thinking, which way it’s leaning, and what the timing may be for
future changes. Rate announcements and accompanying policy statements are included on
economic data/event calendars.
Public speeches: Central bankers frequently appear before community and business
groups, and address subjects ranging from trends in the financial industry (such as the rise
of hedge funds or the use of derivatives) to relatively mundane governance issues (such as
financial reporting requirements). But when a central banker gives a speech that assesses
the economic outlook or the future course of monetary policy, forex markets are all ears.

Appearances by central bank officials typically are included on most economic event/data
calendars, and you need to be aware of them to avoid being taken by surprise. Sometimes, the
topic of the speech is given in advance; other times, it’s not. The most important speeches are

those that focus on the economic outlook or the current monetary policy assessment.

In most cases, a prepared text is released by financial newswires at the scheduled start time
of the speech. Accredited news agencies receive copies of speeches in advance to allow
their reporters to prepare stories and headlines, but the release of the information is
embargoed until the designated time. The remarks are then encapsulated into a series of
headlines that capture the main points of the speech; this is the news that markets receive at
the appointed time. When these headlines hit traders’ screens, market prices start to react. If a
question-and-answer session follows, the central banker’s comments will be posted by the
newswires as they’re delivered live. This setup can make for some exciting headline-driven
trading.

Currency traders need to be aware of and constantly follow the current market thinking on
the direction of interest rates because of the strong relationship between interest rates and
currency values. The best way to do this is to follow market commentaries in print and online
news media, always keeping in mind that such outlets (especially print) are usually one step
behind the current market. This makes online news commentaries that much more relevant.
Some of the best sites for timely insights and market reporting are Bloomberg.com,
Reuters.com, and MarketWatch.com. Best of all, these sites are free.

Look for currency brokers that offer real-time market analysis and news updates.
In the next section, I delve a bit deeper into how monetary policy is presented to financial markets
by central bank officials. I also look at currency-specific policies and rhetoric. Sometimes, how a
message is delivered or who delivers it is more important than the message itself. This is certainly
true of monetary or currency policy comments from central bank or government finance officials.

Interpreting monetary policy communications
Earlier in this chapter, I cover the various ways in which central bankers communicate their
thinking to market participants (see the preceding section). But the process is far more nuanced
and evolved than relying simply on official policy statements or speeches before the Rotary Club
of Indianapolis. Central bankers are keenly aware that their comments have the ability to move,
and potentially disrupt, financial markets all over the world. So they choose their words very
carefully, leaving traders to act as interpreters. Before you start interpreting monetary policy
statements and commentary, it’ll help to know the following.

Not all central bankers are created equal

The interest rate setting committees of central banks, frequently known as Monetary Policy
Committees (MPCs) — the Fed’s FOMC is one of these — typically operate under a onemember/one-vote rule. But when it comes to delivering a message to the markets, the chairman or
president of the central bank holds far more sway than any other individual member. This is partly
in deference to the central bank chief’s role as first among equals, but also because that person is
frequently viewed as expressing the thinking of the entire committee. Central bankers strive for
consensus in reaching their decisions, and who better to represent and present this view than the
chairman or president?

When the head of the central bank gives an update on the economy or the outlook for interest
rates, listen up. A scheduled speech by the chair of the Fed, for instance, is likely to be
preceded by market speculation similar to that of a major economic data report. And the
reaction to his comments can be equally sharp.
In the case of the Fed, the FOMC is composed of 12 voting members consisting of the board of
governors and a rotating slate of regional Federal Reserve Bank presidents each year. So when a
Federal Reserve Bank president is set to speak, make sure you know whether he’s a voting
member in the current year before acting on his comments.

Remarks by nonvoting FOMC members are frequently discounted or ignored by traders
because the speaker is not going to be casting a vote at the next meeting. But this is a bit of an
oversimplification and can be risky. Before downplaying a nonvoter’s comments, you need to
consider her comments in the context of the FOMC consensus. Is she expressing her own
views or elaborating on a shift in consensus thinking?

Birds of a feather: Hawks and doves
Central bank officials are frequently a known commodity to market analysts and traders, either
from past policy statements or from their academic or policy writings prior to becoming central
bankers. Markets typically refer to central bankers in terms of being hawks or doves. A hawk is
someone who generally favors an aggressive approach to fighting inflation and is not averse to
raising rates even if it will hurt economic growth. A dove, on the other hand, is a central banker
who tends to favor pro-growth and employment monetary policy, and is generally reluctant to
tighten rates if it will hurt the economy. In short, hawks tend to be fixated on fighting inflation, and
doves tend to stress growth and employment.
Don’t get me wrong: There are plenty of central bankers in the middle who can wear both hats (or
feathers, in this instance). In those cases, the middle-of-the-roaders tend to reveal their hawkish or
dovish leanings only at the extremes of the policy cycles.

So if a hawk is slated to speak on the outlook for monetary policy, and he cites the risks
from inflation or the need to prevent any increase in inflationary pressures, guess what?
You’re not going to see much of a reaction from the markets because he’s a known quantity
speaking true to form. You get a much sharper reaction when a hawk downplays the threats
from inflation or suggests that inflationary pressures may be starting to recede. Markets will
jump all over dovish comments coming from a hawk, and vice versa with hawkish comments
made by a dove.

Official Currency Policies and Rhetoric
Another major influence on currency values is government policies or official stances regarding
the value of individual currencies. Some of the largest changes in currency values in recent
decades have been brought on by official policies and multilateral agreements among the major
industrialized economies. For instance, the Plaza Accord of 1985 stands out as a watershed in
forex market history, ultimately resulting in a roughly 50 percent devaluation of the U.S. dollar
over the course of the next two years.
National governments have a great deal at stake when it comes to the value of their currencies.
After all, in a sense, a nation’s currency is the front door to its economy and financial markets. If
the currency is viewed as unstable or too volatile, it’s tantamount to slamming the front door shut.
And no major economy can afford to do that today.
In this section, I look at the major objectives of national currency policies, who sets them, and
how they’re implemented.

Currency policy or currency stance?
Referring to official government thinking on currencies as a currency policy may be a
mischaracterization. Instead, you may do better to think of it as a stance on particular currency
values at a particular point in time.
Daily trading volumes in the forex market dwarf most national central bank currency reserve
holdings. (Currency reserves are the accumulated stocks of international currencies held by
central banks for use in market interventions and overall central bank reserve management.) Japan
and China together have more than $2 trillion in central bank currency reserves. That may seem
like a lot to you and me, but average currency trading volume in the global forex market is over $4
trillion per day. This means that even if national governments wanted to routinely manage the
value of their national currency, they would be hard-pressed to overcome market forces if they
were at odds with the official policy.

To summarize why governments are generally reluctant to get involved in trying to influence
currency values, it comes down to the following:
They can’t because they’re too small. Forex markets are much bigger than any one
nation’s foreign currency reserves.
They can’t because of market structure. Forex markets operate outside national
jurisdictions.
They can’t agree on what to do. Currencies always have another country or countries on
the other side of the pair. You may want your currency to weaken, but do others want their
currencies to strengthen?
They don’t want to meddle in the free market. Tampering with international capital
flows is a recipe for economic disaster.

Generally speaking, then, governments prefer to refrain from getting involved in setting
currency rates or trying to influence overall currency direction. They recognize that their
power is extremely limited and that it must be used sparingly, usually only when extreme
circumstances demand action from the national government or collective action from several
governments. Moreover, the global economic superpowers are believers in the power of free
markets to best allocate capital and maximize long-run economic potential. It simply would
not do for them to openly reject free-market policies by regularly seeking to influence
currency rates. You have to practice what you preach, or you start losing your following. For
governments, that translates to credibility — and that’s a trait most governments seek to
cultivate and protect.

But — and this is a big but — governments do seek to influence currency rates from time to
time. And when they do, it’s usually a key long-term turning point in currency values.
In the next section, I look at the principal actors in each country or currency zone and what their
recent actions on currencies suggest for their currency policy goals.

Calling the shots on currencies
In the “Currency policy or currency stance?” section, earlier in this chapter, I list a number of
reasons why national governments are reluctant to get involved in trying to influence the value of
their currencies. Chief among these are the size and extent of the global forex market and the need
for nations to reach agreement on whether adjustments are even needed. The Group of Seven (G-7)
used to be the main body where currency issues would be handled, but globalization has brought
more economies to the table in the form of the Group of Twenty (G-20). (I list the membership of
the G7 and G20 at the end of Chapter 3.) With an even larger collection of competing national

interests in the bigger G-20, collective action on currencies seems less likely.
If governments had their way, they would probably prefer to see fixed exchange rates replace
floating rates and avoid the subject entirely, but that’s not a realistic option for the foreseeable
future. Confronted with the realities of forex markets, most government currency officials go to
great lengths to avoid discussing currency values out of fear that their comments will be
misinterpreted and lead to sharp exchange rate shifts. That fear was born out of experience, and
today’s top currency officials are much more discreet than their predecessors just a few decades
ago.
Responsibility for currency matters typically falls to the finance ministry or the central bank in the
nations of the most heavily traded currencies. In the following sections, I take a look at who has
responsibility for setting and implementing currency policies in the five major currencies and what
their major motivations are.

The United States
The Department of the Treasury has the legal mandate for all currency matters, from printing the
notes and minting the coins to ensuring the soundness of the U.S. dollar in international markets.
The secretary of the Treasury is the primary spokesman for the U.S. dollar. The deputy Treasury
secretary for international affairs is the hands-on Treasury official responsible for day-to-day
currency matters.

When the U.S. Treasury secretary speaks on the value of the dollar, or any other currency
for that matter, FX markets listen.

The Eurozone
The European Central Bank (ECB) is responsible for both monetary policy and currency matters
under the agreement that created the single-currency Euro in 1999. The ECB’s governing council
is the primary decision-making body; it’s composed of the presidents of the central banks of the
participating nations, with the ECB president as the group’s chief policy maker and spokesman.
When the ECB needs to intervene in the market, it can do so by itself, along with the central banks
of the member states on its behalf.

However, individual European countries continue to exert influence over currency policy
through their finance ministers, who had responsibility for currencies prior to the introduction
of the euro and the creation of the ECB. The Eurozone finance ministers meet regularly as a
group and frequently weigh in on forex market developments. There still appears to be great
consideration given to the member states’ governments by markets with regard to currency

values, with the two largest European economies — Germany and France — wielding the
greatest influence. But consensus appears to be the key element in deciding if the euro is too
strong or too weak, and a clear majority of member states needs to be on board in opposing
market movements before the market will pay attention.
The ECB is primarily concerned with fighting inflation and seeks to achieve currency stability as a
means of fostering long-term economic growth. Europe remains heavily export oriented, so
extreme euro strength is the most likely risk factor for any future forex market interventions out of
Europe.

Japan
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is responsible for currency matters in Japan. The MOF is the most
powerful government ministry in Japan and can wield more influence over economic affairs than
even the Bank of Japan (BOJ), the central bank. The MOF devotes a great deal of attention to the
value of the JPY. The primary day-to-day currency spokesman for the MOF is the vice minister for
international affairs, but during periods of volatility the finance minister will frequently issue
statements. It is not at all uncommon for the MOF to issue daily comments on the forex markets,
particularly when JPY volatility increases. The MOF last ordered an intervention (see the next
section) in September 2010 as the JPY was strengthening and USD/JPY was threatening to drop
under the key 80.00 level as the Fed geared up for a second round of quantitative easing.

Japan’s economy remains highly export oriented, so the value of the JPY is important to
export competitiveness and corporate profitability. Excessive JPY strength, which makes
exports more expensive abroad and lowers the profit from foreign sales, is usually the trigger
point for the MOF to express concern and possibly take action in the market.

Great Britain
The Chancellor of the Exchequer (treasury secretary or finance minister) is the individual
responsible for the British pound’s fate. The governor of the Bank of England (BOE) also shares
responsibility for the pound in a bit of a holdover arrangement from when the BOE became
independent from the government in the late 1990s.
The chancellor/BOE generally stays out of currency matters and appears most concerned with the
pound’s exchange rate versus the euro, because the bulk of UK trade is conducted with the
Eurozone.
The United Kingdom is closely aligned with European economies and would be a candidate to
join the Eurozone single currency, but nationalism runs deep when it comes to getting rid of the
pound. The standing government line is that no decision on joining the euro would be made
without conducting a national referendum.

Switzerland
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is charged with responsibility for the Swiss franc along with
setting monetary policy. The SNB is most concerned with the Swiss franc’s exchange rate versus
the euro, because nearly 80 percent of Swiss trade is conducted with Eurozone nations. The SNB
has been known to speak up in opposition to CHF strength or weakness whenever the EUR/CHF
exchange rate approaches extreme levels. During the Eurozone debt crisis in late 2009–2010, EUR
weakened sharply against the CHF and prompted the SNB to intervene repeatedly to stem CHF
strength, but without any success.

Currency market intervention
In every big-bank currency trading room in major financial centers, there is a direct line to the
open market trading desk of the central bank. When that line lights up, the whole dealing room
erupts. That line is reserved for open market intervention by the central bank, and when it rings, it
usually means only one thing: The central bank is intervening in the market.
Intervention refers to central banks buying or selling currencies in the open market to drive
currency rates in a desired direction. Direct intervention in the market is usually taken only as a
last resort. It also may be a stopgap measure to stabilize markets upset by extreme events, such as
a stock market collapse or a natural disaster. When it’s not necessitated by emergency
circumstances, markets are generally aware of the increasing risks of intervention.
