
energy and stored in our mental environment as a memory and/or dis- I think all of this is fairly selfevident to most people, but there are some profound implications here that aren't self-evident, and we
typically take them completely for granted.
First of all, there's a cause-and-effect relationship that exists between ourselves and everything else that
exists in the external environment. As a result, our encounters with external forces create what I am
going to call "energy structures" inside our minds. The memories, distinctions, and, ultimately, the
beliefs we acquire throughout our lives exist in our mental environment in the form of structured
energy. Structured energy is an abstract concept. You might be asking yourself, "How does energy take
shape or form?" Before I answer this question, an even more fundamental question needs to be
addressed.
How do we know that memories, distinctions, and beliefs exist in the form of energy in the first place?
I don't know if it's been scientifically proven or completely accepted by the scientific community, but
ask yourself in what other form could these mental components exist? Here's what we know for sure:
Anything composed of atoms and molecules takes up space and, therefore, can be observed. If
memories, distinctions, and beliefs existed in some physical form, then we should be able to observe
them. To my knowledge, no such observations have been made.
The scientific community has dissected brain tissue (both living and dead) examined it at the level of
the individual atom, mapped various regions of the brain in terms of their functions, but nobody, as yet,
has observed a memory, distinction, or belief in its natural form. By "in its natural form" I mean that
although a scientist can observe the individual brain cells that contain certain memories, he can't
experience those memories first hand. He can only experience them if the person to whom the
memories belong is alive and chooses to express them in some way. If memories, distinctions, and
beliefs don't exist as physical matter, then there really isn't any alternative way for them to exist except
as some form of energy. If this is in fact the case, can this energy take on a specific shape? Can it be
structured in a way that reflects the external forces that caused it to come into existence? Most
definitely! Is there anvthing in the environment that is analogous to energy having shape
Thoughts are energy. Because you think in a language, your thoughts are structured by the limitations
and rules that govern the particular language in which you think. When you express those thoughts
aloud, you create sound waves, which are a form of energy. The sound waves created by the interaction
of your vocal cords and tongue are structured by the content of your message. Microwaves are energy.
Many phone calls are relayed by microwaves, which means that the microwave energy has to be
structured in a way that reflects the message it is carrying.
Laser light is energy, and if you've ever witnessed a demonstration of a laser light show, or laser art,
what you've seen is pure energy taking a shape that reflects the creative desires of the artists. All of
these are good examples of how energy can take shape, form, and structure. Of course, there are many
more, but there is one more example that illustrates the point in the most graphic way. At the most
fundamental level, what are dreams? I am not asking you what dreams mean or what you think their

purpose is, but rather, what are they? What are their properties? If we assume that dreams take place
within the confines of our skulls, then they can't be composed of atoms and molecules, because there
wouldn't be enough space for all of the things that exist and take place in our dreams. Dream
experiences seem to have the same proportions and dimensions as the things we perceive when we are
awake and experiencing life through our five senses.
The only way this could be possible is if dreams were a form of structured energy, because energy can
take on any size or dimension, but, in doing so, doesn't actually take up any space. Now, if it hasn't
already occurred to you, there's something here that's really profound. If the memories, distinctions,
and beliefs we've acquired as a result of our encounters with the external environment represent what
we've learned about that environment and how it works; and if these memories, distinctions, and beliefs
exist in our mental environment as energy; and if energy doesn't take up any space; then it also could
be said that we have an unlimited capacity for learning.
Well, not only do I think it could be said, I'm saying it. Consider the development of human
consciousness and what to know to function effectively compared to just 100 years ago. There is
absolutely nothing to indicate that we don't have an unlimited capacity to learn. The difference between
what we are aware of now and what we can do as a result of this expanded awareness would boggle the
mind of anyone living 100 years ago.
PERCEPTION AND LEARNING
However, we must be careful not to equate storage capacity with learning capacity. Learning, and
becoming aware of what is available to be learned, is not just a function of storage capacity. If it were,
then what would stop us from knowing everything? And if we knew everything, then what would stop
us from perceiving every possible characteristic, property, or trait of everything that is expressing itself
in any given moment? What stops us now? These questions get to the very heart of why you have to
understand that mental components like memories, distinctions, and beliefs exist as energy. Anything
that is energy has the potential to act as a force expressing its form, and that is exactly what our
memories, distinctions and beliefs do.
They act as a force on our senses from the inside, expressing their form and content, and, in the process
of doing so, they have a profoundly limiting effect on the information we perceive in any given
moment, making much of the information that is available from the environment's perspective, and the
possibilities inherent within that information, literally invisible.
I am saying here that, in any given moment the environment is generating an enormous amount of
information about its properties, characteristics, and traits. Some of that information is beyond the
physiological range of our senses. For example, our eyes can't see every wavelength of light nor can
our ears hear every frequency of sound the environment produces, so there's definitely a range of
information that is beyond the physiological capabilities of our senses. What about the rest of the

information the environment is generating about itself? Do we see, hear, taste, smell, or feel through
our senses every possible distinction, trait, and characteristic being senses? Absolutely not! The energy
that's inside of us will categorically limit and block our awareness of much of this information by
working through the same sensory mechanisms the external environment works through. Now, if you
take a moment and think about it, some of what I just said should be self-evident. For example, there
are many ways in which the external environment can express itself that we don't perceive simply
because we haven't learned about them yet.
This is easy to illustrate. Think back to the first time you ever looked at a price chart. What did you
see? Exactly what did you perceive? With no previous exposure, I'm sure, like everyone else, you saw
a bunch of lines that had no meaning. Now if you're like most traders, when you look at a price chart
you see characteristics, traits, and behavior patterns that represent the collective actions of all the
traders who participated in those particular trades. Initially, the chart represented undifferentiated
information. Undifferentiated information usually creates a state of confusion, and that's probably what
you experienced when you first encountered a chart.
Gradually, however, you learned to make distinctions about that information, such as trends and trend
lines, consolidations, support and resistance, retracements or significant relationships between volume,
and open interest and price action, just to name a few. You learned that each of these distinctions in the
market s behavior represented an opportunity to fulfill some personal need, goal, or desire. Each
distinction now had a meaning and some relative degree of significance or importance attached to it.
Now, I want you to use your imagination and pretend that I just set before you the very first price chart
you ever saw. Would there be a difference between what you see now and what you saw then?
Absolutely. Instead of a bunch of undifferentiated lines, you would see everything you've learned about
those lines between then and now. In other words, you would see all the distinctions you've learned to
make, as well as all the opportunities those distinctions represent.
Yet, everything you can see as you look at that chart now existed then, and, furthermore, was available
to be perceived. What's the difference? The structured energy that's inside of you now—the knowledge
you have gained—acts as a force on your eyes, causing you to recognize the various distinctions that
you've learned about. Since that energy wasn't there the first time you looked at the chart, all the
opportunities that you now see were there, but at the same time invisible to you. Furthermore, unless
you've learned to make every possible distinction based on every possible relationship between the
variables in that chart, what you haven't learned yet is still invisible. Most of us have no concept of the
extent to which we are continually surrounded by the invisible opportunities inherent in the information
we're exposed to.
More often than not, we never learn about these opportunities and, as a result, they remain invisible.
The problem, of course, is that unless we're in a completely new or unique situation or we're operating
out of an attitude of genuine openness, we won't perceive something that we haven't learned about yet.
To learn about something, we have to be able to experience it in some way. So what we have here is a

closed loop that prevents us from learning. Perceptual closed loops exist in all of us, because they are
natural functions of the way mental energy expresses itself on our senses. Eveiyone has heard the
expression, "People see what they want to see."
I would put it a little differently: People see what they've learned to see, and everything else is invisible
until they learn how to counteract the energy that blocks their awareness of whatever is unlearned and
waiting to be discovered. To illustrate this concept and make it even clearer, I am going to give you
another example, one that demonstrates how mental energy can affect how we perceive and experience
the environment in a way that it actually reverses the cause-and-effect relationship. Let's look at a very
young child's first encounter with a dog. Because it's a first-time experience, the child's mental
environment is a clean slate, so to speak, with respect to dogs. He won't have any memories and
certainly no distinctions about a dog's nature. Therefore, up to the moment of his first encounter, from
the child's perspective, dogs don't exist. Of course, from the environment's perspective, dogs do exist
and they have the potential to act as a force on the child's senses to create an experience. In other
words, dogs expressing their nature can act as a cause to produce an effect inside the child's mental
environment. What kind of effect are dogs capable of producing? Well, dogs have a range of
expression. By range of expression I mean dogs can behave in a number of ways toward humans.
They can be friendly, loving, protective, and fun to play with; or they can be hostile, mean, and
dangerous—just to name a few of the many behaviors they're capable of. All of these traits can be
observed, experienced, and learned about. When the child sees the dog for the first time, there is
absolutely nothing in his mental environment to tell him what he is dealing with. Unfamiliar, unknown,
and unclassified environmental information can generate a sense of curiosity—when we want to find
out more about what we're experiencing—or it can generate a state of confusion, which can easily turn
to fear if we can't place the information into an understandable or meaningful organizational
framework or context. In our example, the child's sense of curiosity kicks in and he rushes to the dog to
get more sensory experience.
Notice how children are literally compelled to thrust themselves into a situation they know nothing
about. However, in this example, the environmental forces at hand do not react favorably to the child's
advances. The dog the child is interested in is either inherently mean or having a bad day. In any case,
as soon as the child gets close enough, the dog bites him. The attack is so severe that the dog has to be
pulled off the child. This kind of unfortunate experience is certainly not typical, but it's not that
uncommon either. I chose it for two reasons: First, most people can relate to it in some way either from
their own direct experience or through the experience of someone they know. Second, as we analyze
the underlying dynamics of this experience from an energy perspective, we're going to learn about
1) how our minds are designed to think,
2) process information,
3) how these processes affect what we experience and
4) our ability to recognize new possibilities.

I know this mav seem like a lot of insieht from iust one example, but the principles involved apply to
the dynamics beneath virtually all learning. As a result of being physically and emotionally
traumatized, the little boy in our example now has a memory and one distinction about the way dogs
can express themselves.
If the boys ability to remember his experiences is normal, he can store this incident in a way that
represents all of the senses the experience had an impact on: For example the attack can be stored as
mental images based on what he saw, as well as mental sounds representing what he heard, and so on.
Memories representing the other three senses will work the same way.
However, the kind of sensory data in his memory is not as important as the kind of energy the sensory
data represents. We basically have two kinds of mental energy: positively charged energy, which we
call love, confidence, happiness, joy, satisfaction, excitement, and enthusiasm, to name a few of the
pleasant ways we can feel; and negatively charged energy, representing fear, terror, dissatisfaction,
betrayal, regret, anger, confusion, anxiety, stress, and frustration, all representing what is commonly
referred to as emotional pain. Because the boy's first experience with a dog was intensely painful, we
can assume that regardless of what senses were affected, all of his memories of this experience will be
in painful, unpleasantfeeling, negative energy.
Now, what effect will this negatively charged mental energy have on his perception and behavior if and
when he encounters another dog? The answer is so obvious that it may seem ridiculous even to ask, but
the underlying implications are not obvious, so bear with me. Clearly, the moment he comes into
contact with another dog, he will experience fear. Notice that I used the word "another" to describe the
next dog he has any contact with. What I want to point out is that any dog can cause the boy to feel
fear, not just the one that actually attacked him. It won't make a bit of difference if the next dog he
comes into contact with is the friendliest dog in the world, one whose nature is only to express
playfulness and love. The child will still be afraid, and furthermore, his fear could quickly turn to
unrestrained terror especially if the second dog (seeing a child and wanting to play) attempts to
approach him. Each of us has at one time or another witnessed a situation in which someone was
experiencing fear, when from our perspective there wasn't the least bit of danger or threat. Although we
may not have said it, we probably thought to ourselves that this person was being irrational.
PERCEPTION AND RISK
If we tried to point out why there was no need to be afraid, we probably found that our words had little,
if any, impact. We could easily think the same thing about the boy in our example, that he is just being
irrational, because it's clear from our perspective that other possibilities exist than the one his mind has
focused on. But is his fear any less rational than, let's say, your fear (or hesitation) about putting on the
next trade, when your last trade was a loser?
Using the same logic, a top trader would say that your fear is irrational because this "now moment"

opportunity has absolutely nothing to do with your last trade. Each trade is simply an edge with a
probable outcome, and statistically independent of every other trade. If you believe otherwise, then I
can see why you're afraid; but I can assure you that your fears are completely unfounded. As you can
see, one person's perception of risk can easily be perceived as irrational thinking by another. Risk is
relative, but to the person who perceives it in the moment, it seems absolute and beyond question.
When the child encountered his first dog, he was bubbling with excitement and curiosity. What is it
about the way our minds think and process information that could automatically flip the boy into a state
of fear the next time he encounters a dog, even if it's months or years later? If we look at fear as a
natural mechanism warning us of threatening conditions, then what is it about the way our minds
function that would automatically tell the boy that the next encounter with a dog is something to be
afraid of? What happened to the boy's natural sense of curiosity? There is surely more to learn about
the nature of dogs than this one experience has taught him, especially in light of the fact that our minds
seem to have an unlimited capacity for learning. And why would it be virtually impossible to talk the
boy out of his fear?
THE POWER OF ASSOCIATION
As complex as these questions may seem at first glance, most of them can be answered quite easily. I'm
sure many of you already know the answer: Our minds have an inherent design characteristic that
causes us to associate and link anything that exists in the external environment that is similar in quality,
characteristics, properties, or traits to anything that already exists in our mental environment as a
memory or distinction. In other words, in the example of the child being afraid of dogs, the second dog
or any other dog he encounters thereafter, doesn't have to be the dog that attacked in order for him to
experience emotional pain.
There just has to be enough of a likeness or similarity for his mind to make a connection between the
two. This natural tendency for our minds to associate is an unconscious mental function that occurs
automatically. It's not something we have to think about or make a decision about. An unconscious
mental function would be analogous to an involuntary physical function such as a heartbeat. Just as we
don't have to consciously think about the process of making our hearts beat, we don't have to think
about linking experiences and our feelings about them. Its simply a natural function of the way our
minds process information, and, like a heartbeat, it's a function that has a profound effect on the way
we experience our lives.
I'd like you to try and visualize the two-way flow of energy that reverses the cause-and-effect
relationship that will make it difficult (if not impossible) for the boy to perceive any other possibilities
than the one that's in his mind. To help you, I'm going to break this process down into its smallest parts,
and go through what happens step by step, All of this may seem a bit abstract, but understanding this
process plays a big part in unlocking your potential to achieve consistent success as a big trader. First,

let's get right down to the basics. There's structured energy on the outside of the boy and structured
energy on the inside of the boy. The outside energy is positively charged in the form of a friendly dog
that wants to express itself by playing.
The inside energy is a negatively charged memory in the form of mental images and sounds that
represent the boy's first experience with a dog. Both the inside and the outside energy have the
potential to make themselves felt on the boy's senses and, as a result, create two different kinds of
situations for him to experience. The outside energy has the potential to act as a force on the boy in a
way that he could find very enjoyable. This particular dog expresses behavior characteristics like
playfulness, friendliness, and even love. But keep in mind that these are characteristics that the child
still has not experienced in a dog, so from his perspective they don't exist. Just as in the price chart
example I presented earlier, the child won't be able to perceive what he hasn't yet learned about, unless
he is in a state of mind that is conducive to learning.
The inside energy also has potential and is just waiting, so to speak, to express itself. But it will act on
the boy's eyes and ears in a way that causes him to feel threatened. This in turn will create an
experience of emotional pain, fear, and possibly even terror. From the way I've set this up, it may seem
as if the boy has a choice between experiencing fun or experiencing fear, but that's really not the case,
at least not in the moment. Of the two possibilities that exist in this situation, he will undoubtedly
experience the pain and fear, instead of the fun. This is true for several reasons. First, as I've already
indicated, our minds are wired to automatically and instantaneously associate and link information that
has similar characteristics, properties, and traits. What's outside of the child in the form of a dog, looks
and sounds similar to the one that's in his mind. However, the degree of similarity that is necessary for
his mind to link the two is an unknown variable, meaning
I don't know the mental mechanism that determines how much or how little similarity is required for
our minds to associate and link two or more sets of information. Since everyone's mind functions in a
similar way, but, at the same time is unique, I would assume there is a range of tolerance for similarity
or dissimilarity and each of us has a unique capacity somewhere within the range. Here's what we do
know: As this next dog comes into contact with the boy's eyes or ears, if there is enough similarity
between the way it looks or sounds and the dog that's embedded in his memory, then his mind will
automatically connect the two.
This connection, in turn, will cause the negatively charged energy in his memory to be released
throughout his body, causing him to be overcome with a very uncomfortable sense of foreboding or
terror. The degree of discomfort or emotional pain that he experiences will be equivalent to the degree
of trauma that he suffered as a result of his first encounter with a dog. What happens next is what
psychologists call a projection. I'm going to refer to it simply as another instantaneous association that
makes the reality of the situation from the boy's perspective seem like the absolute, unquestionable
truth. The boy's body is now filled with negatively charged energy.
At the same time, he is in sensory contact with the dog. Next, his mind associates whatever sensory
