
Bear Credit Spreads
If you have a neutral or bearish bias on the underlying futures market, you
could use bear credit spreads. In this strategy you sell a close-to-the-money
call and buy a further out-of-the-money call. The idea is to collect premium
in a steady or declining market as time decay decreases the value of the option. The purpose for doing a spread like this is to capture some premium
and to limit your risk in case of an extremely unpredictable adverse market
move. Your risk is limited and so is your profit. This is the exact opposite
strategy of the bull credit spread. A margin requirement or good-faith deposit may be required for this trade as well.

Ratio Spreads
The term ratio implies that there is a weighted difference for the ratio spread
strategy. This is usually a credit spread or an even cost spread, meaning
traders receive money or pay no premium for entering this trade. For this
illustration, I use a bull call ratio spread. Traders would use this strategy if
they were slightly bullish on the market, buying a close-to-the-money or
in-the-money call option, and then selling or writing two or more out-of-themoney higher strike price call options. Generally, because of the exposure
from the upside risks, the common strategy is a one to two ratio, buying one
call and selling or writing two call options.
This is usually a strategy that gives you a little premium or credit, which
is one of the motivating factors for deciding to do this particular trade. It
uses the market’s money to help finance your trade or even pays you to
have a position in the market. If you think the price of a particular futures
contract may rise in a certain period of time but may not exceed a certain
level, then this is a good strategy to implement. If the market remains flat or
reverses lower at expiration, then the out-of-the-money call options will off-

Options Strategies

229

set the loss of the close-to-the-money or in-the-money calls and possibly
provide a profit after commission and fees.
Because this particular strategy involves writing or selling calls on a
ratio basis, one or more calls are usually uncovered, and a margin requirement or good-faith deposit would be required for this trade. Remember, because you have at least three positions in this strategy, there are three or
more separate commissions and related fees involved.
As with other spreads, you have the flexibility to leg in or out of one or
any combination of the call options. This is a practice known as adjusting
your position. Anytime you adjust your position, you may be increasing or
reducing your risk. When your exposure to risk increases, usually so does
your margin requirement. The probabilities that an explosive upward price
change will not happen in the market are on your side. However, if an unexpected event does occur, then this position will expose the trader to an
unlimited loss potential.
A bear ratio put spread would be the exact opposite of this trade. In
this strategy, you would buy a close-to-the-money or in-the-money put and
sell two or more further out-of-the-money puts. You would use this strategy
if you are slightly bearish on the market. Again, due to the exposure of the
downside risks, the common strategy is a 1-to-2 ratio where you buy one
put and sell or write two put options. Because this particular strategy involves writing or selling puts on a ratio basis, one or more puts are usually
uncovered and a margin requirement or good-faith deposit would be required
for this trade.

Ratio Back Spreads
The term ratio implies that there is a weighted difference for a ratio back
spread trade. There is one major twist to this strategy versus a ratio spread,
and that is the term back, which refers to a backward ratio. This spread is
usually a debit spread or an even cost spread, meaning traders may have to
pay a little money or have no premium costs for entering this trade.
A call ratio back spread is an example of this kind of strategy. First, you
would sell or write one close-to- or at-the-money call. You would collect premium for that call and then use that money to buy or help finance two or
more of the next or higher strike price call options. You would use this strategy if you were very bullish on the market. As a result of writing the call options, there may be, and usually is, a margin or cash deposit associated with
this strategy in addition to the premium if it is a debit spread, plus commission and related fees.
In times of extreme volatility when a market is rising, call options may
be inflated or overvalued. These circumstances would be an ideal time to
use this strategy. It would allow you to enter the market using little, if any,

230

OPTIONS: A Primer

out-of-pocket money to pay for the option premiums and still participate in
a market move. Again, with at least three positions, you have three or more
commissions and fees to account for in your profit/loss calculations.
As with the other spreads, you have the flexibility to leg in or out of one
or any combination of the call options to adjust your position. You need to
monitor the underlying futures market and the time value constantly with
this strategy. Generally, this particular strategy is initiated with more than
90 days and not less than 30 days until expiration. You need to evaluate
carefully the out-of-the-money long call option values when the time gets to
within 30 days of expiration as the time decay will erode the value of the
out-of-the-money long calls quickly, leaving exposure to the short close-tothe-money option.
This strategy allows you to participate in a market move with defined
risk and unlimited profit potential. Although the maximum loss is limited
with this strategy, there are two different loss parameters. One level of your
risk is if the market at expiration is above the strike price of the call option
you sold or wrote and below the two or more calls you bought (plus the premium, if any, that you paid and commissions and related fees). You need to
calculate the price difference between the two strike price levels to establish a loss scenario here. The second level of risk is if the market at expiration settles below the call you wrote or sold. Then your risk is limited to the
premium you paid plus the commissions and related fees. The payoff for
the risks involved in this strategy is again the potential for unlimited profits that may occur in a runaway bull market.

Ratio Put Back Spread
A ratio put back spread is the exact opposite of the previous strategy and
involves selling a close-to-the-money or in-the-money put and buying two or
more further out-of-the-money puts. You would use this strategy if you
were extremely bearish on the market. Again, because of the costs associated with buying options, the common strategy is a one-to-two ratio. Because
this particular strategy involves writing or selling a put and exposes a trader
to a slightly larger risk between the two strike prices, a margin requirement
or good-faith deposit would be required for this type of strategy.

Covered Calls or Puts
The covered calls or puts method is used when you are long the underlying
futures contract and may want to sell or write a call option to collect the
premium from that option. The term covered refers to the fact that if the
market does move higher and if the short call option is assigned a short futures contract, then there are no inherent risks as the option writer holds

Options Strategies

231

the underlying futures contract that would, in effect, offset the position at
a profit.
The purpose for this type of strategy is to earn money if the market
price remains stable or lower than the strike price of the option at expiration. There are no additional margin requirements involved for this strategy
other than the initial margin requirement for the underlying futures contract, but there are additional commission and transaction fees involved.
The drawback to this strategy is that if the market does take off to the upside, the covered call option strategist profit potential is limited. Because
they are long a futures contract, the risk parameter is still unlimited.
The exact opposite is true for a covered put option writer. You would
be short a futures contract and would sell or write an out-of-the-money put
to collect the premium.

Synthetic Futures Positions
The term synthetic futures positions refers to the effect of using a combination of option strategies that will, in essence, give you more or less similar results and consequences that are much like an underlying futures
position. A synthetic long futures contract is a long call and a short put. In
this case you are basically financing part or all of the call purchase with the
premium that was collected from the put option. This is another example of
using the market’s money to buy the premium rather than debiting your
account.
Because this strategy also requires writing options, you should be aware
that the risks are unlimited. However, the profit potential is unlimited as
well. As a result of the risks involved, there is a margin deposit required in
addition to the commission and related transaction fees. A synthetic short
futures contract would be the exact opposite, a long put and a short call.

Delta Neutral Option Spread
The term delta refers to the calculation of the percent change you can expect
in an option’s value based on a price move in the underlying futures contract.
A delta neutral option spread usually is a strategy that involves simultaneously selling an equal amount of out-of-the-money calls and out-of-the-money
puts. Looking at the delta figures, you want to write both the put and the call
with the same delta numbers or balance a futures position with the number
and type of options that keep delta for the total position near zero.
This strategy is used when you believe the market may remain in a trading range or in a sideways channel. The theory behind the delta neutral option spread strategy is simple. If the underlying futures market moves higher,
then call options should appreciate and put options should depreciate. Under

232

OPTIONS: A Primer

ideal circumstances, the value of your net position may not change much,
if at all, keeping the monetary difference of the equity in your trading account neutral. Remember, with every change in the underlying futures contract, there will be a change in the delta. If the market trades lower again,
then the values of the put options should increase and the values of the
calls should depreciate.
You profit from this type of strategy when the futures market remains
in the trading range at expiration or the time decay erodes the premium
values to a point that the trader can cover both sides of the trade with a
profit after commission and fees. Generally, it is possible to cover the position at any time prior to options expiration. The concept is to be as equal or
neutral in regards to the delta number as you can at all times.
Many variables can be applied to the delta neutral option spread. For
instance, you could sell one put and then sell a combination of calls. If the
delta on an out-of-the-money put is, say, 39 and you think the underlying
market is too close to the strike price of a call with a delta of 39, then you
could sell three calls of a higher strike price that may only have a delta of
13. So 3 × 13 = 39. You are short one put with a delta of 39 and short three
calls with a combined delta of 39, keeping your total position neutral or
equal on either side. This strategy can be adjusted if the market breaks out
of its trading range by adding more short calls or puts.
Because this strategy requires writing options, you should know that
the risks are unlimited while the profit potential is limited. As a result of the
risks involved, there is a margin deposit required in addition to the commission and related transaction fees.

Long Straddles
I was once told to think about riding a horse when thinking about the concept of long straddles. When you ride a horse, your legs are straddled on
both sides of the animal’s back. The same is true with this trading strategy.
When you initiate this strategy, you are on both sides of the market by purchasing a call and a put option, usually at the same time. Generally speaking, you buy at-the-money or close-to-the-money calls and puts within the
same expiration month.
You might initiate this strategy when you have no opinion on market direction other than that you believe a breakout of the current trend or trading range is imminent. The risks involved are limited to the premium you
pay for both of the options if the market price of the underlying futures contract does not move by the options expiration date plus the commissions
and related transaction fees. The parameter for profit potential is unlimited
once the costs of the option’s premiums, commissions, and fees are cov-

Options Strategies

233

ered. As a spread, you do have the flexibility to leg out of one side of the
straddle if your market opinion changes and market conditions permit.

Short Strangles
To help me understand short strangles, I was told to think about what strangling someone is like. When implementing this strategy, you are writing or
selling both puts and calls and you want to choke or suck the premium values out of the market. Short strangles are very similar to the delta neutral
option spreads except that you are not so concerned about keeping the
delta equal.
Generally, you sell both at-the-money or close-to-the-money puts and
calls because you have an opinion that the market does not have any definite trend direction and prices may stagnate for a while. Time decay will
usually erode the premium values, and that is what you want. This is really
an unlimited risk spread, which involves two commissions and related fees.
Again, because this strategy requires writing or selling options, you should
know that the risks are unlimited while the profit potential is limited. As a
result of the risks involved, a margin deposit is required.
This is a short version of some of the more popular options strategies.
There are many other variables to trading options. If you are not familiar
with how options work, my suggestion is that you read up on the various
strategies. Many books have been written on the subject. If you want to get
a little deeper into options, anything written by Larry McMillan will give you
a solid education.

CHAPTER 14

Closing Bell
My Top 10 List

Whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe, it can achieve.
—Napoleon Hill (Think and Grow Rich, 1937)

o sum up this book, I wanted to deliver trading methods, techniques,
and terms in a logical and simple approach. I certainly gained a lot
from writing this book as the mental cobwebs were cleaned out, and
I was able to get an exciting and comprehensive refresher course from all
the old techniques and the new developments and products that have been
introduced throughout the years. I sincerely hope that this information was
enlightening for the novice as well as for the advanced trader.
This is my first book. It combines two of the most exciting and volatile
trading decades in the history of speculating in futures and the relatively new
world of options trading. No matter how much I study and no matter how
much research I do, there is still not a perfect trading plan that will generate
profits every time I trade.
The goal that every trader wants to attain is to just make sure that the
profits exceed the losses in the end. There are two ways to achieve this goal.
One is to reduce losers and let winners ride so the capital amount that is
taken in exceeds the losses. The other method is to have more winning trades
than losers. I am a firm believer that the markets act randomly. Not every
pattern develops as expected, not all support levels hold, and there certainly
are plenty of instances of head fakes, false breakouts, and just plain old bad
trading days.
You can take many different approaches to trading. Each individual
trader must try to find what works best for him or her. You need to discover

T

235

236

CLOSING BELL: My Top 10 List

whether you can emotionally handle extreme stress from holding large positions overnight or finding a niche in day-trading techniques or simply developing the patience needed for long-term trend trades.
The purpose of this book is just to show you what works for me and to
describe some of the techniques that I have used and picked up over the
years. One casual observation is that I have noticed a common denominator
among the more successful traders: They exhibit a genuine sense of confidence and are hard-working and well-organized in their thoughts and actions. Some are a little cocky but, for the most part, the more successful
traders are more reserved or quiet individuals. Maybe that comes from the
concept of “walking quietly but carrying a big wallet.”
In this business you need to start with a desire to make money and, of
course, the old saying applies, “It takes money to make money.” You do
need trading risk capital. Again, my definition of risk capital is money you
can afford to lose, money that you are not afraid of losing, and money that,
if you do lose it, will not make you hold a grudge against the markets. That
statement was made as a reminder that education is expensive, bad trades
do happen and that if you lose, then you need to reevaluate and reeducate,
and then understand what went wrong.
A very successful trader once told me that fundamental, technical, or any
other analysis “won’t do me a damn bit of good if I don’t have the money to
trade or the courage to pull the trigger.” You also need confidence, you need
to rely on your own trading skills, and you absolutely need to be honest
with yourself and admit when you are wrong, then act accordingly.
For those who do experience trading success, take money out of your
trading account! Diversify your trading profits. One great analyst and trader,
Fibonacci expert Joe Dinapoli, told me before going on the radio show that
he likes to buy selected properties in real estate, whether it is in Bangkok,
Massachusetts, or Florida.
I have heard many a trader start out with $5,000 or $10,000, make a large
sum trading a particular market move, and decide to just build their account. Quite frankly, I really do not remember any of those people achieving that goal. I have seen traders give most, if not all and more, back to the
markets. One reason is they become overconfident. They think, “If I can take
$5,000 to $30,000, maybe I can take $30,000 to $1 million!” Greed sets in, they
trade larger positions, take on more risk, and forget what got them their initial profits. If you are a one-lot or two-lot size trader, then take money out
of the market on a consistent basis and reinvest elsewhere. Wealth creation
is the goal, and diversification is the key to success in life.
There are no guarantees that you will become a more successful trader
as a result of reading this book. However, I do believe it will help you achieve
a better understanding of this business and excite your interest to continue
your technical and fundamental analysis of the markets. Every individual

Thoughts from Other Experts

237

has a desire to improve his or her life: Wishing, dreaming and goal-setting
are all fine traits to have. The biggest obstacles to success are the inner
demons or character defects we have as human beings. I am not the first
and will certainly not be the last to say this, but understanding human psychology is a vital part of trading.
The importance of gaining control of some of the negative personality
traits, which we all have as human beings, cannot be overemphasized if you
want to be a successful trader. These traits, if not overcome quickly in the
early stages of trading, can lead to destructive trading habits and eventually
the demoralizing agony of defeat. Although this book was intended mainly
to illustrate the importance of integrating pivot point analysis with candlestick charting signals and other indicators, I really can’t stress enough the
importance of human psychology.

THOUGHTS FROM OTHER EXPERTS
Not only do I believe that psychology is important for trading, but so do some
of my peers and those who I consider to be master traders and technicians.
Here are comments from some of the top experts in their field, highly
respected traders who were kind enough to appear as guests on my radio
program. (The recordings are archived and can be heard on my web site
www.nationalfutures.com.)
• When I asked Larry Pesavento, president of Trading Tutor, which book
(out of the seven or so that he wrote) he would recommend to a new
trader, I thought he would say something about pattern recognition combined with Fibonacci analysis. His answer surprised me. His choice was
Mark Douglas’s book, The Disciplined Trader.
• I also asked Alan Farley, author of The Master Swing Trader, writer for
the street.com, and founder of the hard right edge.com, what book he
would recommend, giving him an opportunity to plug his very successful and highly acclaimed book. Instead, he admitted that his favorite
trading book was also Mark Douglas’s The Disciplined Trader. Farley
revealed that he reads three to five pages of that book every night before he goes to bed.
• I had the opportunity to have John Bollinger, Chartered Market Technician and creator of the famed Bollinger bands, as my radio guest twice in
2003. (As an aside here, just to show you the interesting backgrounds
that some traders and analysts have, Bollinger was a professional gripper
and a cameraman in Hollywood where he says he “tinkered” with computers. He had a strong passion for the markets and began to trade his
own money. Much to most people’s surprise, he was never a broker.)

238

CLOSING BELL: My Top 10 List

Bollinger’s work with computers dates back nearly 30 years. Not only
does his expertise on Bollinger bands benefit all kinds of traders from
individuals to institutions and from stocks to commodities, but his studies on group sectors and the equity markets also are immense. (His latest achievement is found at www.powergroup.com.)
The first time he appeared on my program, he offered fabulous advice on the market and instructed listeners with a real-time example on
using Bollinger bands on the mini-sized Dow futures contract. With the
Dow at 8500 at the time and at the top band of resistance, he explained
how the market could “walk the band” and continue higher. The Dow,
in fact, managed to rally another 800 points.
As you can imagine, this seemed like a good time to ask, “John,
what do you think folks should do? Buy your book?” His surprising answer: Go to your local community college and take a course in human
behavioral psychology. (For the record, we also did discuss his book,
and he offered to send an autographed copy if purchased directly from
his web site at www.bollingerbands.com. I believe that is a standing
order. If not for the education, you might want it as a collector’s item
from one of the great market technicians.)
I also asked Bollinger what was the first book he read on technical
analysis, and he said it was one of Martin Pring’s books. Interestingly
enough, I had had Pring on the radio show earlier in the year and asked
him what was the first book he read on technical analysis. He said Edwards and Magee’s Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. That also was
one of the first books I had ever read on technical analysis in the early
1980s. It is still a classic to this day, and many principles I use have
come from those teachings.
