
No Uptick Rule: Just as Easy to Profit in a Falling Market as in a Rising
One
Just as it's easier to row with the current than against it, it's easier to profit by trading in the direction
of an established market trend. Unlike with stocks (and other financial markets), in forex it's as easy
to profit from falling markets as from rising ones. This is a huge advantage of forex markets.
During an uptrend, when prices are rising, most traders go long, meaning they buy the asset with the
hope of selling it at a higher price. They're attempting to buy low and sell high, the classic way most
people view investing.
During a downtrend, when prices are falling, it's easier to profit by trading with that downtrend. So,
the more sophisticated equities traders try to exploit that downward momentum and sell short; that is,
sell borrowed shares with the hope of buying them back later at lower price, returning the borrowed
shares, and profiting on the difference—for example, sell borrowed shares for $100 per share, buy
them at $80, return them to a broker, and pocket $20 per share.
However, most stock exchanges are controlled and regulated by those who have an interest in
keeping stock prices high. The politicians who oversee market regulations and the executives who run
the listed companies look better when prices are up and are more likely to keep their jobs. Falling
prices make them look bad, and extended downtrends can be toxic for their careers.
Many of the major stock exchanges tend to make profiting from downtrends harder. For example,

many exchanges have some kind of uptick rule that permits shorting the stock only when price is
rising. That keeps short sellers out when prices are moving lower and the odds are in their favor, and
forces them to sell into rising prices and absorb losses until the downtrend resumes. During the
strongest downtrends that offer the fastest profits, upticks are rare so many have no chance to ride the
move lower at all. In times of market panics, which can be incredibly profitable for short sellers,
exchanges have banned short selling altogether. Since the start of the Great Financial Crisis, short
selling has been periodically banned during the juiciest downtrends in both the United States and
Europe:
In the United States, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) did so in September of
2008.3
Regulators in Spain, Italy, Belgium, and France banned short selling of their banking stocks in
August of 2011.4
Some markets employ circuit breaker rules that automatically stop trading once an instrument has
fallen a certain percentage in a given day.
Though ways exist to circumvent these restrictions, they can be more complicated, expensive, and
riskier. These added obstacles effectively exclude many individuals from playing strong downtrends
even as the big institutions and professionals feast on them.
As we'll learn in Chapter 2, no such restrictions exist against selling a currency, or more precisely,
a currency pair (they always trade in pairs), so it's as easy to profit during a downtrend as an uptrend.
Indeed we'll see that the essence of trading a currency pair always involves buying (being long) one
pair and selling (being short) another, depending on whether you buy or sell the pair.

Low Correlation to Other Financial Markets
In other words, because some currencies move in the opposite direction of stocks and other risk
assets, there's always a bull market somewhere in forex. This is a critical advantage. As we'll learn
later, most globally traded assets tend to move together. For example, most equities move in the same
direction as their relevant index. With forex, however, different currencies move in different
directions under the same market conditions. So, you have a way of profiting from fear even when
regulators ban or limit short sales of stocks or refuse to recognize the rights of those holding insurance
against sovereign bond defaults to collect.5
One reason it's easier to profit in bear markets with forex is that the process of profiting from a
decline in a currency pair is no different than it is for profiting from its appreciation. We'll explain
that in detail later.
Another reason it's easier to profit with forex than with stocks is the availability and ease of
commodities trading at most forex brokers, which enhances your chances of profiting regardless of
market direction because, as we'll see later, certain commodities like oil can and do lose their normal
market correlations. At least one commodity, gold, isn't connected with market optimism or
pessimism like other assets but moves with something else entirely, the need to hedge against loss of
purchasing power of the major currencies.
As we'll see when we discuss intermarket analysis as a trading tool, currency traders frequently
find currency and commodity trading to be nearly interchangeable. You use the same account, trading
platform, and analysis. Whether they trade a currency or related commodity often depends on which

offers a better way to exploit the same idea.

The Most Flexible Hours
Forex markets trade in a seamless 24-hour session, 5.5 days a week, from Sunday 5:15 p.m. EST until
Friday 5:00 p.m. EST. So, those with work or family commitments can trade a fully liquid market
whenever convenient.

Forex Markets Offer the Best Liquidity
A liquid market is one that has many buyers and sellers. The more buyers and sellers at any given
moment, the more likely you are to get a fair market price when you buy or sell. The more liquid a
market is, the less likely it is that a few otherwise insignificant orders or players can move prices in
wild, unpredictable movements. Indeed, unlike in stock markets, even the biggest players will have
trouble manipulating the price action in major currency pairs beyond a matter of hours. Two
exceptions to that, which we'll discuss later, are a few central banks and crooked forex brokers.
Fortunately, dishonest brokers can be identified and avoided with some research, 6 and central bank
intervention risk is usually known or soon uncovered after the first incident, putting markets on guard.
The more liquid the market, the easier it is to be profitable. Prices are fairer and more stable, less
subject to sudden unpredictable movements. You should generally avoid trading in illiquid markets,
except on rare occasions when trying to enter positions at bargain prices offered by those desperate to
close a position.
Forex markets trading volumes dwarf those of equities. Latest estimates put average daily forex
turnover at around $4.71 trillion, of which individual retail traders alone account for about $1.5
trillion.7 For perspective, look at Figure 1.1 to see how this volume dwarfs that of the world's leading
stock exchanges individually and combined.
FIGURE 1.1 Average Daily Trading Volume

That huge trading volume, going on 24 hours a day, means abundant buyers and sellers are usually
present at any given time. That means you're more likely to get a fair price no matter when you buy or
sell. It means that you rarely see partial fills, which are cases in which you can only buy or sell part
of your intended order. For more on the most liquid hours of the trading day, see Appendix C.

No Centralized Exchange with Specialists Holding Monopoly Power to
Regulate Prices
In most stock markets, the specialist is a single entity that serves as buyer and seller of last resort and
controls the spread, which is the difference between the buy and sell price for a given stock. Though
in theory they are regulated and supervised to prevent their abusing that power to manipulate prices at
the expense of the trading public, specialists are experts at knowing when they can get away with a
degree of this and force you to buy higher or sell lower.
In forex, no single specialist regulates prices of individual currency pairs. Rather, multiple
exchanges and brokers are competing for your business.
Though the lack of centralized exchanges can complicate regulation, competition and easy access to
pricing information has brought competitive pricing.

Less Slippage
Slippage is the difference between the stated price on your screen and the actual price you pay or
receive. The less liquid the market, the more often slippage happens because fewer traders are
present to take the other side of your trade. For example, let's say you buy 1,000 shares at $30, and to
protect yourself in case the price falls, you place a protective stop loss order to sell the shares at $29.
However, if there are no buyers at $29, then the price “gaps” lower until it hits the next buy order, so
you incur a greater loss.
Because forex markets are:
typically running at full speed in at least one if not two continents 24 hours a day, over five days
a week
have no specialists controlling prices, and
trade at such larger volumes than equities,
forex players face lower risk of slippage. Indeed, many forex market makers provide some kind of
“no slippage” policy that lessens the degree of price uncertainty.

The Best Risk/Reward Potential
Forex trading or investing offers some of the best risk/reward opportunities of any financial market IF
(big if here) you know how to exploit it. The availability of leverage, meaning the use of borrowed
funds to control large blocks of currencies and thus magnify gains and losses, creates unmatched
profit potential for those with limited trading capital IF (again, really big IF here) they learn how to
control the downside risk. For example, with 100:1 leverage, a 1 percent move means 100 percent
profit. It also means 100 percent loss.
Understanding and controlling this risk, and knowing how much is appropriate in a given situation,
is what distinguishes the winners and professionals from the losers on whom they feed. Risk and
money management (RAMM) is what allows you to survive the learning stages with your funds and
confidence intact.
Therefore, throughout this book we will cover how to reduce risk of large losses while retaining the
exceptional profit potential. This involves learning the right attitudes, expectations, as well as the key

analytical and trade planning skills. If you do what we teach, and continue your education in the ways
we suggest, then if you have the talent, you'll have a chance to earn more with less capital than in
other markets like stocks or bonds. At the same time, you'll keep losses from the losing trades at
affordable levels so that you remain consistently profitable over the long run.

The Lowest Startup and Trading Costs
Forex trading has among the lowest entry or startup costs in money and time of any financial
market, in terms of trading capital and training/equipment costs, as follows: Unlike most markets,
you do not need many thousands of dollars to get started. That's because in forex, we can trade
with leverage (borrowed funds), typically 100:1 or more. This allows us to make substantial
profits on small price movements. However, as noted above, that also means:
For every $1 you have at risk, you control $100. For every $1,000, you control $100,000.
For every 1 percent move in price, you have a 100 percent profit or loss. Much of this guide is
about how to minimize that risk of large losses while maximizing the odds of profiting. It
involves learning to cut losing trades short and let winners run so you can be profitable even
when wrong on most of your trades.
In theory, you can often start with as little as $100. However, you'll learn that you'll lower
your risks and have more chances to profit by starting with at least a few thousand dollars (or
the equivalent) if possible. As we'll see later, the small position sizes available from mini and
micro accounts allow those with limited funds to trade smaller positions, which keeps the
percentage of capital risked per trade acceptably low. More on that later.
Training and equipment costs: Forex brokers typically provide free full-featured trading
platforms and data feeds, and the better brokers offer extensive archives of free training materials
and market analysis. With online stock brokers, traders typically need to maintain minimum
balances or minimum trading volumes to get free quality charting and trading platforms from their
brokers or get access to worthwhile research.
Risk-Free Practice Accounts: Even better, they typically provide full-featured practice or demo
accounts that allow smart beginners to simulate most of the trading experience and practice with
play money until they feel ready to risk their capital.
Low transaction costs: Most forex brokers charge no fees, commissions, or hidden charges. They
earn their money on the difference, called the spread, between the buy and sell price, typically a
few ten-thousandths, called pips, of the price. Depending on the lot sizes traded, a typical twopip spread, four pips total to open and close a position, can cost anywhere from $0.40 to $40. In
general transaction costs are very competitive compared to those of online stock brokers
In sum, you can earn more with less investment. Better still, you can do it while keeping your
current job. The first step is to study this book.

FACT 3: YOU CAN DO THIS
As with any kind of financial market trading, you need to be able to answer the following question:

How Can I Compete against the Pros and Big Institutions?

Whenever you are trading in global asset markets, most of your competition consists of the top
professionals who are responsible for most of the trading volume. They have nearly every advantage
over you: skill, experience, and any advantage that money can buy, the best equipment, information
sources, industry insider contacts, whatever.
You have no better chance of beating someone like David Woo or Stephen Jen at short-term forex
trading than you do at beating Michael Jordan or Lebron James at basketball.8
So how can you compete?
You don't.
The real answer obviously is, don't even try to trade like they do.
That's fine; there's plenty of money to be made if you know the secret, which is really no secret. It's
just common sense.
In the beginning, don't try to be a bad imitation of an experienced pro. Instead, focus on becoming a
great beginner. That means finding and using the trading techniques, styles, and instruments that even a
beginner can, in measured stages, start to implement successfully. You'll spend most of your time
calmly and persistently searching the charts for those few easier opportunities, rather than spending
long hours glued to your computer, frenetically making lots of trades based on rash decisions, based
on short time frames in which price movements are harder to predict, with the odds firmly against
you.
How do you identify and execute these simple, low-risk, high-yield trades? Funny you should ask.
The following is a summary of how we'll do it.

How David Beats Goliath: More on What This Book Will and Won't Do
As I've said before, you have to start somewhere. Welcome to the somewhere. We'll teach a variety
of ways to harness the power of forex markets that are safer, simpler, and more likely to be profitable
than the higher-risk methods most commonly practiced. Regardless of your skill level or risk
tolerance, there are solutions here to suit you.
A prime focus of this book is to be a trader's roadmap for finding, planning, and executing trades
that are safe and simple enough for beginner to intermediate skill levels. More specifically:
We will teach you how to identify and trade only the lowest risk, highest potential yield
opportunities with easy to identify low-risk entry and exit points. When prices are rising, that
means finding the trades where you can buy close to the likely near-term low price, called
support, and sell at the likely high price, called resistance, for a given holding period. When
prices are falling, you'll do the opposite. In other words, sell a currency at its likely high, and buy
it back at a lower price, and profit on the difference, which is called “going short” a given
currency pair. If that seems confusing, don't worry because we'll explain it in depth later. Just
know it can be done.
Unlike almost every other forex book, we will show you simple ways to trade the more
predictable, persistent, and thus safer, longer-term forex trends. We will show you alternative
instruments to the usual high leverage spot market forex trading.
We will show you to how to be a disciplined trader, focused on profits, not gambling. This
includes doing something you'll rarely see in forex books. We will NOT encourage you to trade
short-term intraday moves in which you enter and exit within a matter of minutes or hours. Day

trading forex is suicidal for most traders, particularly the less experienced ones. Why? Intraday
price movements are dominated by short-term, unpredictable money flows from large players.
Most traders don't have the technical skills and information resources to monitor and interpret
what these large institutions are doing, why they're doing it, and what these large orders suggest
about future price movements. Intraday trading is great for broker trading volumes and profits,
which is why so much of the free analysis they provide focuses on this kind of short-term cowboy
trading in which you enter and exit within minutes or hours, rarely longer than a few days. For all
but the most skilled traders, trading those time frames is just gambling. This book's aim is to help
you make money, or at least minimize the losses that are an unavoidable part of the learning
process.
New or uneducated forex traders who attempt to day-trade forex really aren't even attempting to
be serious traders. Instead, they're looking for some gambling fun. They'd be better off at a
casino, where at least they might get some free food and drinks. This widespread gambler's
mentality is a prime reason why the failure rate for new traders is so high. Many new traders
never treat trading like a business. They fail to prepare, so inevitably they've prepared to fail.
We will coach you to manage risk so you can be profitable even when most of your trades lose
money. That means:
Know when and how to exit quickly and minimize losses when the odds go against you, and
accept those losses as part of the business.
Know when and how to stay in the trade until your indicators show the odds are no longer
with you, and know to avoid the temptation to grab a quick profit and get out too soon.
Create a simple but thorough trading plan so your decisions about position size and entry and
exit points are made beforehand and not under the emotional duress of an ongoing trade with
money at risk.
Manage your trading capital so you can survive sudden unanticipated losses.
Help you practice the techniques we teach with some trade simulation exercises.
We will explain the basics of trader psychology so you don't defeat yourself with the wrong
expectations, and you will learn how to handle winning and losing streaks.

A War Story: One View of the Typical Forex Trader
A smart CEO of one forex company once said this about his typical customers: “Just between
us girls, most of them would just as soon take that money and go to Atlantic City or Las Vegas,
but for whatever reason they trade forex instead.” (I'm quoting from memory, but this is the jist
of it.)
Even though there's nothing wrong with having some fun if you like gambling, this book is
aimed at the serious minority seeking not just fun but profit.

What's the Catch?
There is a catch: Forex trading requires time and effort as with any other competitive, lucrative field.
In Chapters 0 and 11, I will show you some approaches that are easier than the usual trading methods,
but even these require study and practice. Like achieving anything else worthwhile, especially a
lucrative, stimulating career, you'll need the discipline for a sustained investment of time, effort, and

money. You'll suffer some uncertainty, frustration, and failure, with no guarantee of success, as you
would in achieving anything else worth attaining.
Sorry if I'm bursting anyone's bubble. Fortunately, you've got the right book to minimize the drain on
your time, emotions, and finances.

Most Traders Fail within Their First Two Years
While I'm trashing get-rich-quick illusions, here's a helping of fear to keep you motivated and paying
attention. In case you forgot (or skipped) what I wrote in the Read This First section earlier, here's a
little fact I've never seen acknowledged in any forex book, though it's a well-worn topic of forex
trader forums on such major forex content websites like ForexFactory.com.9
The fact is this: Per available data, the odds are firmly against you. Most forex traders lose money
and are gone within a matter of months.10
U.S.11 regulators have reported that the vast majority (around 80 percent or more) of forex traders
fail within their first two years. Few manage to last at day trading in general.12 At least one large
publicly traded forex brokerage reports that 70 percent of its traders are unprofitable, close enough to
provide additional confirmation.13
Many take a rather simplistic view that because most traders fail, forex trading should be avoided
altogether by amateur traders or investors. By that same reasoning, one should avoid real estate and
insurance sales and any other field that offers low barriers to entry, is potentially lucrative, and
attracts intense competition from which only a minority prosper.
Consider that one cannot even begin to practice in most lucrative, skilled professions without years
of professional training, typically costing over $100,000 in tuition, related expenses, and lost wages.
After that, there's a demanding battery of exams, followed by years of relatively low-paying jobs with
grueling hours, commuting, office politics, and ass kissing thrown in as you learn how the job is done.
Even after passing through all those hoops, only a minority will make the big money. From my own
experience working in large accounting firms, I'd be surprised if 10 percent of the new hires out of
college eventually become partners or find equally lucrative roles in the field.
Having worked with traders for years in various capacities as fellow trader and chief analyst
tasked with advising clients, it's clear that most traders don't do the preparation needed to have even a
chance to succeed. The small minority that attempt a serious program of study and practice have the
huge additional obstacle of needing to somehow figure out how to design their own training program
to duplicate the theoretical, practical, and mentoring aspects of other professional training programs.
What sources to study? Which skills to learn in which order? What websites or forums to browse?
What trading styles to start with?
I wrote this book for those like you, the sincere, serious traders or investors who seek the path to
better results.
Here is the good news:
The failure rates are inflated by all those casual gamblers who were never serious traders.
That you're reading this book puts you in a different category of trader altogether. You're doing
the right preparation as you would for any profit-making endeavor, and you're going to get sound,
conservative advice. If you heed my lessons, the losses you incur as part of your learning will be
