
Pullbacks
For long positions, a pullback entry is based on the concept of ﬁnding an ETF with a
clearly established trend, and then waiting for the ﬁrst retracement (pullback) down to
support of either its primary uptrend line or MAs. For short positions, it’s the opposite
scenario, as in selling short a steadily downtrending ETF when it rallies into resistance
of its downtrend line or moving MAs.
With pullback trading, it’s critical to ensure that a clearly deﬁned trend is already in
place. Otherwise, you risk entering the trade in no-man’s-land by getting in too early.

91

Strategies for Entry
FIGURE 7.2 ETF Breaking Out above Downtrend Line with Test of Support
GLD – Daily
After an ETF breaks a downtrend line,
wait for confirmation that the
breakout will hold (A). Point B is
the entry, above the prior high.

72.00
70.00
68.00
66.00
65.85
64.00
62.00

B

60.00
58.00
A

56.00
20,000,000.00
10,035,800.00

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Source: TradeStation

A clearly deﬁned trend means you are looking for at least two higher highs and two
higher lows for longs (two lower highs and two lower lows for shorts). Starting from the
ultimate lowest price since the start of the new trend, the higher lows are formed when
each pullback reverses back up after forming a higher price than the previous low. The
same is true of a higher high. This trend will also form at least three individual anchor
points connecting the highs and lows. The time frame of these highs and lows depends
on the time frame of your trades. If you are swing trading, use the daily charts as the
basis for your decisions. For longer-term trades, the weekly charts provide the same
technical information.
A key point here is to remember a basic rule of trend trading: The longer a trend
has been intact, the more likely the established trend will continue in the same direction. If an ETF has been steadily trending higher for six months, forming successively
higher highs and higher lows, odds are much greater that it will continue higher as
compared to an ETF that has only been trending higher for one month. This is largely
the result of trendline support becoming a self-fulﬁlling prophecy. When professional
traders see support of a trendline, they place their buy orders in anticipation of a
resumption of that trendline. The very act of their doing so is largely what causes
trendlines to work as a method of low-risk trade entry. It’s essentially a self-fulﬁlling
prophecy.
Here again, you must sometimes ﬁght the urge to let human nature dictate its
logic. When I was a new trader, I constantly avoided long-established trends, thinking
I was too “late to the party” for a low-risk entry. In the beginning of learning technical analysis, it’s normal to think this, but it’s faulty thinking. Remember that steady

92

Timing Your Entries and Exits

trends are formed through institutional buying of individual sectors. When the “big
boys” start buying stocks within a particular industry, they typically continue throwing their money in that area until the next promising idea comes along. You only need
to look at recent charts of the oil and utilities sectors to see that institutional money
ﬂow can often continue for years. Of course, there is always the risk that your pullback
entry may also coincide with the end of the trend, but this pullback method of entry
helps to minimize that risk.
Though it may be tempting to do so, avoid new trade entries on their ﬁrst test
of price or trendline support. Rather, stalk the setup like a sniper, waiting for the ﬁrst
sign of conﬁrmation that the currently established trend is ready to resume. Doing so
decreases your risk of stopping out immediately after your entry.
To look for conﬁrmation on pullback entries, you simply drill down to the next
lowest time frame, and then look for a breakout above resistance. If, for example, you
are looking to buy a pullback to trendline support on the daily chart interval, you would
subsequently wait for the newly formed hourly downtrend line to break. When it does,
you then enter the position in anticipation of a ride back to the prior highs and onward.
If the pullback comes but never moves back above resistance of the shorter time frame,
you simply don’t enter the trade.
Basic trendlines work great for pullback entries, but the 20-day MA is another
useful indicator, as buyers tend to step in immediately upon the test of the 20-day MA
support with strongly trending ETFs. Note that the best trending ETFs can go many
months without ever retracing down to their 50-day MAs. If the 20-day MA happens to converge with support of the trendline, that’s even better. An entry with the
pullback to the 20-day MA, followed by conﬁrmation of the trendline resumption, is
illustrated in Figure 7.3, a daily chart of Materials Select Sector SPDR Fund (XLB).
In Figure 7.3, the initial entry point came at point A, which was the ﬁrst pullback
to the 20-day MA after the breakout above the high of the consolidation (C). Brief
probes below support are common after breakouts, but it’s key that the 20-day MA
caught the price of XLB. If the initial breakout or pullback entry had been missed, any
of the retracements to the 20-day MA (each one is circled) would have provided other
opportunities for long entry. After the trend became established and the 20-day MA
became support, all pullbacks to the 20-day MA could be bought until the price eventually broke the 20-day MA, as it did at point B. Intraday probes below the 20-day
MA are okay, but a ﬁrm close below the 20-day MA often precedes a steeper correction
down to the 50-day MA.
When doing pullback entries, the use of Fibonacci retracement levels is a great
tool for determining the likelihood of a resumption of the previous trend. If the position deliberates after rallying to only the 38.2 percent or 50 percent retracement level
from the prior high down to the prior low, you may want to trail a stop higher to lock
in gains. On the other hand, a rapid rise to the 61.8 percent retracement level indicates good odds of a subsequent rally to the prior high and beyond.
When waiting for conﬁrmation that the trend is resuming before buying, remember your goal is not to squeeze every potential dollar of proﬁt out of the trade. Rather,
your job is to take a big chunk out of the middle, with the least amount of risk.

93

Strategies for Entry
FIGURE 7.3 Pullback Entry to 20-Day MA with Conﬁrmation of Trend Resumption
XLB – Daily S&P Sel Materials Spdr Fund
When ETFs are steadily trending higher,
each pullback to the 20-day EMA
(circled below) can be bought until
the ETF closes firmly below the 20-day
EMA (point B).

35.00
34.00
B

33.12
33.00
32.99

A

C

32.00
31.48
31.00

8,000,000.00
4,620,000.00
4,620,000.00
Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Source: TradeStation

Short-Term Corrections
When trends are strong and price retracements are minimal or very short-lived, it can
be tempting to just enter at any price, but waiting for at least a short-term market correction still provides you with the opportunity for proﬁts, without the risk that comes
from being a “late-to-the-party Charlie” chasing the big moves that already occurred.
The ﬁrst thing you must remember is that market corrections always happen in one
of two ways: by price or by time.
A correction by price (a pullback or retracement) occurs when a stock or index
reverses against the direction of its primary trend until it hits some sort of resistance
or support level, depending on whether it’s in a downtrend or uptrend. In a steadily
downtrending market, retracements up to resistance of both the 20-period and
40-period MAs on the hourly charts often provide ideal entry points for new short
positions. A very weak ETF will often retrace only up to the 20-MA and then resume
the downtrend, while an ETF with a bit more strength might make it all the way up
to the slower 40-MA.
Figure 7.4 is a recent example of such a correction by price of the iShares Russell
2000 (IWM), which was sold short when it rallied into resistance of its 20-MA on
the hourly chart on May 16, 2006, and was covered for nearly a 4 percent gain three
days later.
Looking at the hourly chart in Figure 7.4, notice how the ﬁrst time IWM ran
into its 20-MA since the sell-off began was on May 16, the same day it was sold short.
Notice how, following that date, the 20-MA perfectly acted as resistance that ensured
a continuation of the downtrend. Each bounce into the 20-MA that you see circled in
Figure 7.4 is a clear example of a short-term correction by price.

94

Timing Your Entries and Exits

FIGURE 7.4 ETF Correction by Price
IWM – 60 min
77.00
Notice how the 20-MA on the 60-min.
chart acted perfectly as resistance
over the past five days.

76.00
75.00
74.00
73.00
72.19
72.00
71.49
71.00
70.99
70.00

I sold short
into the 20-MA
on May 16.
I covered into weakness.

14,000,...
8,417,700
5/15

5/16

5/17

5/18

5/19

5/22

5/23

Source: TradeStation

When a stock or index is showing absolutely no signs of buying interest, it will
still correct from a large sell-off, but it will often have a correction by time instead.
This simply means that, rather than retracing a portion of the trend, it will trade sideways, near the bottom (or top) of the range. A good example of this can be found on
the daily chart of the Oil Services HOLDR (OIH) in Figure 7.5.
FIGURE 7.5

ETF Correction by Time, May 2006

OIH – Daily

160.00
154.26
151.65
150.00
144.56
140.00
OIH attempted to bounce off support
of its 50-day MA two days in a row,
but failed to do so. It subsequently
moved lower.

133.18
130.00
120.00
15,498,781.00
10,233,073.54

Mar

Source: TradeStation

Apr

May

Strategies for Entry

95

Notice how OIH came down to its 50-day MA (the circled area), but failed to
bounce off that support level. Instead, it “corrected by time” for two short days and
then broke down to new lows. When this occurs, you can enter a new short position
on a break out of the range. In this case, you could have shorted OIH when it fell
below the lows of both May 15 and 16. When the lows also converge with a pivotal
moving average such as the 50-day MA, it further increases the odds of a successful
trade. I didn’t short OIH when this occurred, but I did realize a substantial proﬁt from
a short position in the Energy Select Sector SPDR Fund (XLE), which had a similar
chart pattern.
Having a basic understanding of the ways in which markets correct will prevent
you from being late to the party and selling short at the bottom of a sell-off or buying
at the top of a breakout. If the ETF has so much relative weakness that a correction by
time is the only correction you get, it is advisable to reduce your position size in order
to compensate for the slightly increased risk of not getting the most ideal entry point.
The same is true of buying ETFs that only correct by time in uptrending markets.
The Opening-Gap Rules

Due to large changes in overnight supply or demand, the major market indexes, individual stocks, and ETFs often open much higher or lower than where they closed the
previous day, which is known as a “gap.” Buying long or selling short an ETF that
hits its trigger price due to an opening gap is sometimes riskier than entering an ETF
that trades through its trigger price in an orderly fashion. Likewise, open positions
sometimes gap open beyond their stop prices but immediately reverse in the right
direction. The following rules will help you manage positions that gap open beyond
their trigger or stop prices:
• ETFs that gap open beyond their trigger prices. For a long setup, buy the ETF
only if it subsequently sets a new high after the ﬁrst 20 minutes of trading. For a
short setup, sell short the ETF only if it subsequently sets a new low after the ﬁrst
20 minutes of trading. In both cases, the ETF must exceed its 20-minute high (for
longs) or 20-minute low (for shorts) by at least 10 cents before you enter the position. Also, don’t follow the gap rules for any opening gap of less than 10 cents above
or below the trigger price.
• ETFs that gap open beyond their stop prices. If a long position gaps down to open
at or below its stop price, continue to hold the position for the ﬁrst 20 minutes of
trading, at which point the new stop price is adjusted to 10 cents below the low
of the ﬁrst 20 minutes. For short positions, adjust the stop to 10 cents above the
high of the ﬁrst twenty minutes.
The above rules are designed to keep you out of trouble by preventing you from
entering or closing a trade at the worst price of the day. Nevertheless, just like every
other rule in trading, there are always exceptions that enable experienced traders

96

Timing Your Entries and Exits

to occasionally deviate from these rules with high success rates. These are nuances
that cannot be taught, but can only be learned through experience. These rules are
designed to avert major losses, which is much more important than whether you leave
some proﬁt on the table or not.
Here are four ways the opening gap rules apply to trades, in more detail.
1. If an ETF hits its trigger price due to an opening gap, do not enter the position
until the ETF trades through the high of the ﬁrst 20 minutes (or the low of the
ﬁrst 20 minutes if you are looking to short). For example, let’s assume the plan is
to buy SMH if it trades above 24.55 today. Due to positive news that occurred
overnight, the broad market gaps up and SMH opens at 24.67, which is 12 cents
above the trigger price. After opening, the highest price that SMH trades within
the ﬁrst 20 minutes of trading is 24.79. This means that, despite the fact that the
trigger price was only 24.55, you do not enter the trade on the open, and you
enter this trade only if it trades above 24.79 after 20 minutes of trading.
Even though this sometimes results in paying a higher price for the trade,
the probability of the ETF going higher is statistically much greater because
stocks and ETFs that set new highs after their ﬁrst twenty minutes of trading
typically go much higher. If the ETF is unable to break above its 20-minute
high, however, the opening gap will often represent the highest price the stock
will trade that day, which is why you do not want to buy a gap up beyond its
trigger price unless it breaks the 20-minute high. This rule prevents losses time
and time again by preventing you from entering a high-risk trade. When entering a trade that has broken above its opening 20-minute high (or low), you
should tighten the initial stop-loss to a price that is usually equal to twenty cents
below the low of the morning (or the high of the morning if you are short). It is
important to raise the stop because you are entering the trade at a higher price
than initially anticipated.
2. On some occasions, a trade triggers on the open and fails to set a new high, but
consolidates by trading sideways near the intraday highs of the ﬁrst 20 minutes.
If other market internals such as volume, the advance/decline line, and the tick
are strong, you can sometimes enter a trade despite the fact it has not yet broken
the high of the ﬁrst 20 minutes. When doing so, the stop is typically set about
10 cents below the low of the day (gap up), which reduces the risk of entering.
Buying without a break of the 20-minute opening high or selling short without a
break of the 20-minute opening low is a riskier and more advanced type of trade
that beginning traders may wish to forgo.
3. If there is an opening gap of 2 percent or more in the direction of a trade held
overnight, you usually close half of the position immediately on the open to
lock in proﬁts and easy money with at least a 2 percent gain. Otherwise, the gap
can quickly reverse going into the 9:50 a.m. reversal period, causing proﬁts to
disappear. It is important to note that half of the position is kept open because it
often will realize even larger proﬁts on the second half of the shares if the trend

Strategies for Entry

97

continues in the direction of the gap later that morning. When keeping half of
the share size open after a large opening gap, you should typically tighten the stop
to just above or just below the high or low of the day (as explained above).
4. In the event that the market has a large gap (that is, more than 2 percent) in
the opposite direction of a trade you held overnight and causes your trade to be
stopped out due to an opening gap, you should consider handling the situation
as follows: If you are long, let the ETF trade for ﬁve minutes before selling it and
taking the loss. After the ﬁrst 5 minutes of trading, mark the low price that was set
during the ﬁrst 5 minutes. If the trade subsequently trades below that 5-minute
low, immediately cut the loss on the whole position. If the trade never violates
the 5-minute low, however, hold the trade and watch for a bounce into the 9:50
a.m. reversal period, which you also mark so that you know what the 20-minute
high price is. If the trade now heads south, cut the loss by selling into the bounce
near the 20-minute high. But if the trade takes out the 20-minute high, you can
continue to trail a stop higher. The purpose of this rule is not to prevent taking a
loss (because you will usually still have a loss), but rather to minimize the loss by
waiting for a better opportunity to sell into a rally. If the rally never comes, get
out when the 5-minute low is violated. Statistically, it is worth the risk to wait out
the ﬁrst 5 minutes because stocks will usually have at least an initial bounce if they
get whacked on the open. The inverse of this rule applies if you are short.
Breakout or Pullback Entry?

By now, you may be asking yourself, which type of entry is better, a breakout or
pullback? The answer depends on two factors: overall broad market conditions and
personal comfort level.
Breakouts work better in certain types of markets, while pullback entries can
effectively be used in nearly any market environment. The most important thing to
realize when buying breakouts is that they have a much higher rate of success in bull
markets than in choppy, range-bound markets. Similarly, breakdown entries are more
successful in steadily downtrending or bear markets.
Approximately 80 percent of stocks follow the general pattern of the major
indexes. Therefore, it is not prudent to attempt breakdown short entries in raging bull
markets, nor is it wise to buy breakouts in weak markets. While doing so occasionally
works, why ﬁght against the odds? Go with the overall trend and you’ve automatically
increased your chances for a proﬁtable trade dramatically.
Choppy markets yield a low batting average for both breakouts and breakdowns,
as there is usually a tug-of-war going on between the bulls and bears. If you are buying breakouts and you ﬁnd yourself continually getting “chopped up,” or realizing
an overall large loss through a series of small losses, take an objective look at overall
market conditions. Chances are that you’re attempting to do so in the midst of an
indecisive, possibly quite erratic, broad market. Stick to steadily trending markets,

98

Timing Your Entries and Exits

always trading in the direction of the overall trend, for the highest chance of success
when buying breakouts or short selling breakdowns.
Although you might be inclined to dismiss the idea of individual personality
being a relevant factor in trading, don’t underestimate its importance. If you’re the
type of person who is always thinking that an ETF at new highs is overbought or too
expensive, buying breakouts to new highs is probably not a good idea. You’ll either
ﬁnd yourself selling the position too early, missing most of the proﬁt potential, or selling the position at the ﬁrst hint of a potential short-term correction. Buying a trend
reversal or a break of a downtrend line may be better suited to your personality. There’s
nothing wrong with that, as both types of entries have distinct advantages. Be honest
with yourself and act on your instinct.

Trading ETFs: Gaining an Edge with Technical Analysis, Second Edition
by Deron Wagner
Copyright © 2012 Deron Wagner

CHAPTER 8

Strategies for Exit
Given that an average of 30 to 40 percent of your overall trade entries will result in net
losses, it’s critical to know when to exit them. If you don’t have a proper understanding
of when to close positions, proﬁtable trades will frequently turn to losing ones; you
will prematurely close winning trades without a valid reason and exit losing trades at
the worst possible times. This chapter presents strategies to help you manage trades
that are going the right way, as well as strategies for efﬁciently exiting losing positions.
Strategies for Closing Winning Positions

When you ﬁnd yourself on the winning side of an exchange-traded fund trade, emotions have a natural tendency to run high. Though the best professional traders keep
their emotions in check with both winning and losing positions, human psychology causes emotions like fear and greed to creep in. Fear of losing unrealized proﬁts
and greed for higher proﬁts can be equally damaging. Having a sound set of objective strategies for managing winning trades is the best way to keep away from these
destructive emotions.
With all types of trade setups, your goal is constantly to take a large chunk of
proﬁts out of the middle of the move, while leaving the “amateurs” to call absolute
tops and bottoms. Remembering this rule alone is an excellent way to get a head start
on properly exiting winning trades. Though you will occasionally get lucky and nail
an exit at the end of the trend, intentionally trying to do so will inevitably cause substantial proﬁts to be given back.
The ideal time to close winning positions depends primarily on what type of technical setup caused the original trade entry. For any type of setup other than a breakout
to a new 52-week high, the general idea is to sell into the strength of a major area of
resistance before the ETF starts coming back down in price. Breakouts to new highs,
however, are completely devoid of technical price resistance. As such, I typically use
a trailing stop strategy on these positions: I continually move my protective stop-loss
price closer to the market price, preferring instead to allow the trade to hit its protective stop price when bullish momentum dries up (the opposite for short sales).

99
