
II

even. After all, I didn't have much to unlearn; only to grasp
the one fact that there was more to the game of stock
speculation than I had considered before I went to
Fullerton's office to trade. I was like one of those puzzle
fans, doing the crossword puzzles in the Sunday
supplement. He isn't satisfied until he gets it. Well, I
certainly wanted to find the solution to my puzzle. I
thought I was done with trading in bucket shops. But I was
mistaken.
About a couple of months after I got back to New York
an old jigger came into Fullerton's office. He knew A. R.
Somebody said they'd once owned a string of race horses
together. It was plain he'd seen better days. I was
introduced to old McDevitt. He was telling the crowd
about a bunch of Western racetrack crooks who had just
pulled off some skin game out in St. Louis. The head devil,
he said, was a poolroom owner by the name of Teller.
"What Teller?" I asked him.
"Hi Teller; H. S. Teller."
"I know that bird," I said. "He's no good," said
McDevitt.
"He's worse than that," I said, "and I have a little matter
to settle with him." "Meaning how?"
"The only way I can hit any of these short sports is
through their pocketbook. I can't touch him in St. Louis
just now, but some day I will." And I told McDevitt my
grievance.
"Well," says old Mac, "he tried to connect here in New
York and couldn't make it, so he's opened a place in
Hoboken. The word's gone out that there is no limit to the
play and that the house roll has got the Rock of Gibraltar
faded to the shadow of a bantam flea."
"What sort of a place?" I thought he meant pool room.
"Bucket shop," said McDevitt. "Are you sure it's open?"
"Yes; I've seen several fellows who've told me about it."

33

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"That's only hearsay," I said. "Can you find out
positively if it's running, and also how heavy they'll really
let a man trade?"
"Sure, sonny," said McDevitt. "I'll go myself to-morrow
morning, and come back here and tell you."
He did. It seems Teller was already doing a big business
and would take all he could get. This was on a Friday. The
market had been going up all that week—this was twenty
years ago, remember—and it was a cinch the bank
statement on Saturday would show a big decrease in the
surplus reserve. That would give the conventional excuse
to the big room traders to jump on the market and try to
shake out some of the weak commission-house accounts.
There would be the usual reactions in the last half hour of
the trading, particularly in stocks in which the public had
been the most active. Those, of course, also would be the
very stocks that Teller's customers would be most heavily
long of, and the shop might be glad to see some short
selling in them. There is nothing so nice as catching the
suckers both ways; and nothing so easy with one-point
margins.
That Saturday morning I chased over to Hoboken to the
Teller place. They had fitted up a big customers' room with
a dandy quotation board and a full force of clerks and a
special policeman in gray. There were about twenty-five
customers.
I got talking to the manager. He asked me what he could
do for me and I told him nothing; that a fellow could make
much more money at the track on account of the odds and
the freedom to bet your whole roll and stand to win
thousands in minutes instead of piking for chicken feed in
stocks and having to wait days, perhaps. He began to tell
me how much safer the stock-market game was, and how
much some of their customers made—you'd have sworn it
was a regular broker who actually bought and sold your
stocks on the Exchange and how if a man only traded
heavy he could make enough to satisfy anybody. He must
34

II

have thought I was headed for some pool room and he
wanted a whack at my roll before the ponies nibbled it
away, for he said I ought to hurry up as the market closed
at twelve o'clock on Saturdays. That would leave me free to
devote the entire afternoon to other pursuits. I might have
a bigger roll to carry to the track with toe if—I picked the
right stocks.
I looked as if I didn't believe him, and he kept on
buzzing me. I was watching the clock. At 11:15 I said, "All
right," and I began to give him selling orders in various
stocks. I put up two thousand dollars in cash, and he was
very glad to get it. He told me he thought I'd make a lot of
money and hoped I'd come in often.
It happened just as I figured. The traders hammered the
stocks in which they figured they would uncover the most
stops, and, sure enough, prices slid off. I closed out my
trades just before the rally of the last five minutes on the
usual traders' covering.
There was fifty-one hundred dollars coming to me. I
went to cash in.
"I am glad I dropped in," I said to the manager, and
gave him my tickets.
"Say," he says to me, "I can't give you all of it. I wasn't
looking for such a run. I'll have it here for you Monday
morning, sure as blazes."
"All right. But first I'll take all you have in the house," I
said.
"You've got to let me pay off the little fellows," he said.
"I'll give you back what you put up, and anything that's
left. Wait till I cash the other tickets." So I waited while he
paid off the other winners. Oh, I knew my money was safe.
Teller wouldn't welsh with the office doing such a good
business. And if he did, what else could I do better than to
take all he had then and there? I got my own two thousand
dollars and about eight hundred dollars besides, which
was all he had in the office. I told him I'd be there Monday
morning. He swore the money would be waiting for me.
35

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I got to Hoboken a little before twelve on Monday. I saw
a fellow talking to the manager that I had seen in the St.
Louis office the day Teller told me to go back to Dolan. I
knew at once that the manager had telegraphed to the
home office and they'd sent up one of their men to
investigate the story. Crooks don't trust anybody.
"I came for the balance of my money," I said to the
manager.
"Is this the man?" asked the St. Louis chap.
"Yes," said the manager, and took a bunch of yellow
backs from his pocket.
"Hold on!" said the St. Louis fellow to him and then
turns to me, "Say, Livingston, didn't we tell you we didn't
want your business?"
"Give me my money first," I said to the manager, and he
forked over two thousands, four five-hundreds and three
hundreds.
"What did you say?" I said to St. Louis.
"We told you we didn't want you to trade in our place."
"Yes," I said; "that's why I came."
"Well, don't come any more. Keep away!" he snarled at
me. The private policeman in gray came over, casual-like.
St. Louis shook his fist at the manager and yelled: "You
ought to've known better, you poor boob, than to let this
guy get into you. He's Livingston. You had your orders."
"Listen, you," I said to the St. Louis man. "This isn't St.
Louis. You can't pull off any trick here, like your boss did
with Belfast Boy."
"You keep away from this office! You can't trade here!"
he yells.
"If I can't trade here nobody else is going to," I told him.
"You can't get away with that sort of stuff here."
Well, St. Louis changed his tune at once.
"Look here, old boy," he said, all fussed up, "do us a
favor. Be reasonable! You know we can't stand this every
day. The old man's going to hit the ceiling when he hears
who it was. Have a heart, Livingston!"
36

II

"I'll go easy," I promised.
"Listen to reason, won't you? For the love of Pete, keep
away! Give us a chance to get a good start. We're new here.
Will you?"
"I don't want any of this high-and-mighty business the
next time I come," I said, and left him talking to the
manager at the rate of a million a minute. I'd got some
money out of them for the way they treated me in St.
Louis. There wasn't any sense in my getting hot or trying
to close them up. I went back to Fullerton's office and told
McDevitt what had happened. Then I told him that if it
was agreeable to him I'd like to have him go to Teller's
place and begin trading in twenty or thirty share lots, to
get them used to him. Then, the moment I saw a good
chance to clean up big, I'd telephone him and he could
plunge.
I gave McDevitt a thousand dollars and he went to
Hoboken and did as I told him. He got to be one of the
regulars. Then one day when I thought I saw a break
impending I slipped Mac the word and he sold all they'd
let him. I cleared twenty-eight hundred dollars that day,
after giving Mac his rake-off and paying expenses, and I
suspect Mac put down a little bet of his own besides. Less
than a month after that, Teller closed his Hoboken branch.
The police got busy. And, anyhow, it didn't pay, though I
only traded there twice. We ran into a crazy bull market
when stocks didn't react enough to wipe out even the onepoint margins, and, of course, all the customers were bulls
and winning and pyramiding. No end of bucket shops
busted all over the country.
Their game has changed. Trading in the old-fashioned
bucket shop had some decided advantages over
speculating in a reputable broker's office. For one thing,
the automatic closing out of your trade when the margin
reached the exhaustion point was the best kind of stop-loss
order. You couldn't get stung for more than you had put
up, and there was no danger of rotten execution of orders,
37

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

and so on. In New York the shops never were as liberal
with their patrons as I've heard they were in the West.
Here they used to limit the possible profit on certain
stocks of the football order to two points. Sugar and
Tennessee Coal and Iron were among these. No matter if
they moved ten points in ten minutes you could only make
two on one ticket. They figured that otherwise the
customer was getting too big odds; he stood to lose one
dollar and to make ten. And then there were times when
all the shops, including the biggest, refused to take orders
on certain stocks. In 1900, on the day before Election Day,
when it was a foregone conclusion that McKinley would
win, not a shop in the land let its customers buy stocks.
The election odds were 3 to 1 on McKinley. By buying
stocks on Monday you stood to make from three to six
points or more. A man could bet on Bryan and buy stocks
and make sure money. The bucket shops refused orders
that day.
If it hadn't been for their refusing to take my business I
never would have stopped trading in them. And then I
never would have learned that there was much more to the
game of stock speculation than to play for fluctuations of a
few points.

38

III
It takes a man a long time to learn all the lessons of all his
mistakes. They say there are two sides to everything. But
there is only one side to the stock market; and it is not the
bull side or the bear side, but the right side. It took me
longer to get that general principle fixed firmly in my mind
than it did most of the more technical phases of the game
of stock speculation.
I have heard of people who amuse themselves
conducting imaginary operations in the stock market to
prove with imaginary dollars how right they are.
Sometimes these ghost gamblers make millions. It is very
easy to be a plunger that way. It is like the old story of the
man who was going to fight a duel the next day.
His second asked him, "Are you a good shot?"
"Well," said the duelist, "I can snap the stem of a
wineglass at twenty paces," and he looked modest.
39

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"That's all very well," said the unimpressed second. "But
can you snap the stem of the wineglass while the wineglass
is pointing a loaded pistol straight at your heart?"
With me I must back my opinions with my money. My
losses have taught me that I must not begin to advance
until I am sure I shall not have to retreat. But if I cannot
advance I do not move at all. I do not mean by this that a
man should not limit his losses when he is wrong. He
should. But that should not breed indecision. All my life I
have made mistakes, but in losing money I have gained
experience and accumulated a lot of valuable don'ts. I have
been flat broke several times, but my loss has never been a
total loss. Otherwise, I wouldn't be here now. I always
knew I would have another chance and that I would not
make the same mistake a second time. I believed in myself.
A man must believe in himself and his judgment if he
expects to make a living at this game. That is why I don't
believe in tips. If I buy stocks on Smith's tip I must sell
those same stocks on Smith's tip. I am depending on him.
Suppose Smith is away on a holiday when the selling time
comes around? No, sir, nobody can make big money on
what someone else tells him to do. I know from experience
that nobody can give me a tip or a series of tips that will
make more money for me than my own judgment. It took
me five years to learn to play the game intelligently enough
to make big money when I was right.
I didn't have as many interesting experiences as you
might imagine. I mean, the process of learning how to
speculate does not seem very dramatic at this distance. I
went broke several times, and that is never pleasant, but
the way I lost money is the way everybody loses money
who loses money in Wall Street. Speculation is a hard and
trying business, and a speculator must be on the job all the
time or he'll soon have no job to be on.
My task, as I should have known after my early reverses
at Fullerton's, was very simple: To look at speculation
from another angle. But I didn't know that there was much
40

III

more to the game than I could possibly learn in the bucket
shops. There I thought I was beating the game when in
reality I was only beating the shop. At the same time the
tape-reading ability that trading in bucket shops
developed in me and the training of my memory have been
extremely valuable. Both of these things came easy to me. I
owe my early success as a trader to them and not to brains
or knowledge, because my mind was untrained and my
ignorance was colossal. The game taught me the game.
And it didn't spare the rod while teaching.
I remember my very first day in New York. I told you
how the bucket shops, by refusing to take my business,
drove me to seek a reputable commission house. One of
the boys in the office where I got my first job was working
for Harding Brothers, members of the New York Stock
Exchange. I arrived in this city in the morning, and before
one o'clock that same day I had opened an account with
the firm and was ready to trade.
I didn't explain to you how natural it was for me to
trade there exactly as I had done in the bucket shops,
where all I did was to bet on fluctuations and catch small
but sure changes in prices. Nobody offered to point out the
essential differences or set me right. If somebody had told
me my method would not work I nevertheless would have
tried it out to make sure for myself, for when I am wrong
only one thing convinces me of it, and that is, to lose
money. And I am only right when I make money. That is
speculating.
They were having some pretty lively times those days
and the market was very active. That always cheers up a
fellow. I felt at home right away. There was the old familiar
quotation board in front of me, talking a language that I
had learned before I was fifteen years old. There was a boy
doing exactly the same thing I used to do in the first office
I ever worked in. There were the customers—same old
bunch—looking at the board or standing by the ticket
calling out the prices and talking about the market. The
41

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

machinery was to all appearances the same machinery that
I was used to. The atmosphere was the atmosphere I had
breathed since I had made my first stock-market money—
$3.12 in Burlington. The same kind of ticker and the same
kind of traders, therefore the same kind of game. And
remember, I was only twenty-two. I suppose I thought I
knew the game from A to Z. Why shouldn't I?
I watched the board and saw something that looked
good to me. It was behaving right. I bought a hundred at
$84. I got out at $85 in less than a half hour. Then I saw
something else I liked, and I did the same thing; took
three-quarters of a point net within a very short time. I
began well, didn't I?
Now mark this: On that, my first day as a customer of a
reputable Stock Exchange house, and only two hours of it
at that, I traded in eleven hundred shares of stock,
jumping in and out. And the net result of the day's
operations was that I lost exactly eleven hundred dollars.
That is to say, on my first attempt, nearly one-half of my
stake went up the flue. And remember, some of the trades
showed me a profit. But I quit eleven hundred dollars
minus for the day.
It didn't worry me, because I couldn't see where there
was anything wrong with me. My moves, also, were right
enough, and if I had been trading in the old Cosmopolitan
shop I'd have broken better than even. That the machine
wasn't as it ought to be, my eleven hundred vanished
dollars plainly told me. But as long as the machinist was
all right there was no need to stew. Ignorance at twentytwo isn't a structural defect.
After a few days I said to myself, "I can't trade this way
here. The ticker doesn't help as it should!" But I let it go at
that without getting down to bed rock. I kept it up, having
good days and bad days, until I was cleaned out. I went to
old Fullerton and got him to stake me to five hundred

42

III

dollars. And I came back from St. Louis, as I told you, with
money I took out of the bucket shops there—a game I
could always beat.
I played more carefully and did better for a while. As
soon as I was in easy circumstances I began to live pretty
well. I made friends and had a good time. I was not quite
twenty-three, remember; all alone in New York with easy
money in my pockets and the belief in my heart that I was
beginning to understand the new machine.
I was making allowances for the actual execution of my
orders on the floor of the Exchange, and moving more
cautiously. But I was still sticking to the tape—that is, I
was still ignoring general principles; and as long as I did
that I could not spot the exact trouble with my game.
We ran into the big boom of 1901 and I made a great
deal of money—that is, for a boy. You remember those
times? The prosperity of the country was unprecedented.
We not only ran into an era of industrial consolidations
and combinations of capital that beat anything we had had
up to that time, but the public went stock mad. In previous
flush times, I have heard, Wall Street used to brag of twohundred-and-fifty-thousand-share days, when securities
of a par value of twenty-five million dollars changed
hands. But in 1901 we had a three-million-share day.
Everybody was making money. The steel crowd came to
town, a horde of millionaires with no more regard for
money than drunken sailors. The only game that satisfied
them was the stock market. We had some of the biggest
high rollers the Street ever saw: John W. Gates, of "Betyou-a-million" fame, and his friends, like John A. Drake,
Loyal Smith, and the rest; the Reid-Leeds-Moore crowd,
who sold part of their Steel holdings and with the proceeds
bought in the open market the actual majority of the stock
of the great Rock Island system; and Schwab and Frick
and Phipps and the Pittsburgh coterie; to say nothing of
scores of men who were lost in the shuffle but would have
been called great plungers at any other time. A fellow
43

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

could buy and sell all the stock there was. Keene made a
market for the U. S. Steel shares. A broker sold one
hundred thousand shares in a few minutes. A wonderful
time! And there were some wonderful winnings. And no
taxes to pay on stock sales! And no day of reckoning in
sight.
Of course, after a while, I heard a lot of calamity
howling and the old stagers said everybody—except
themselves—had gone crazy. But everybody except
themselves was making money. I knew, of course, there
must be a limit to the advances and an end to the crazy
buying of A. O. T.— Any Old Thing and I got bearish. But
every time I sold I lost money, and if it hadn't been that I
ran darn quick I'd have lost a heap more. I looked for a
break, but I was playing safe—making money when I
bought and chipping it out when I sold short so that I
wasn't profiting by the boom as much as you'd think when
you consider how heavily I used to trade, even as a boy.
There was one stock that I wasn't short of, and that was
Northern Pacific. My tape reading came in handy. I
thought most stocks had been bought to a standstill, but
Little Nipper behaved as if it were going still higher. We
know now that both the common and the preferred were
being steadily absorbed by the Kuhn-Loeb-Harriman
combination. Well, I was long a thousand shares of
Northern Pacific common, and held it against the advice of
everybody in the office. When it got to about $110 I had
thirty points profit, and I grabbed it. It made my balance
at my brokers' nearly fifty thousand dollars, the greatest
amount of money I had been able to accumulate up to that
time. It wasn't so bad for a chap who had lost every cent
trading in that selfsame office a few months before.
If you remember, the Harriman crowd notified Morgan
and Hill of their intention to be represented in the
Burlington-Great Northern-Northern Pacific combination,
and then the Morgan people at first instructed Keene to
buy fifty thousand shares of N. P. to keep the control in
44

III

their possession. I have heard that Keene told Robert
Bacon to make the order one hundred and fifty thousand
shares and the bankers did. At all events, Keene sent one
of his brokers, Eddie Norton, into the N. P. crowd and he
bought one hundred thousand shares of the stock. This
was followed by another order, I think, of fifty thousand
shares additional, and the famous corner followed. After
the market closed on May 8, 1901, the whole world knew
that a battle of financial giants was on. No two such
combinations of capital had ever opposed each other in
this country. Harriman against Morgan; an irresistible
force meeting an immovable object.
There I was on the morning of May ninth with nearly
fifty thousand dollars in cash and no stocks. As I told you,
I had been very bearish for some days, and here was my
chance at last. I knew what would happen—an awful break
and then some wonderful bargains. There would be a
quick recovery and big profits for those who had picked up
the bargains. It didn't take a Sherlock Holmes to figure
this out. We were going to have an opportunity to catch
them coming and going, not only for big money but for
sure money.
Everything happened as I had foreseen. I was dead right
and I lost every cent I had! I was wiped out by something
that was unusual. If the unusual never happened there
would be no difference in people and then there wouldn't
be any fun in life. The game would become merely a
matter of addition and subtraction. It would make of us a
race of bookkeepers with plodding minds. It's the guessing
that develops a man's brain power. Just consider what you
have to do to guess right.
The market fairly boiled, as I had expected. The
transactions were enormous and the fluctuations
unprecedented in extent. I put in a lot of selling orders at
the market. When I saw the opening prices I had a fit, the
breaks were so awful. My brokers were on the job. They
were as competent and conscientious as any; but by the
45
