THE 10 ESSENTIALS
OF FOREX TRADING

This page intentionally left blank

THE 10 ESSENTIALS
OF FOREX TRADING
The Rules for Turning
Patterns into Profit

Jared F. Martinez

McGraw-Hill
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon
Madrid Mexico City Milan New Delhi
San Juan Seoul Singapore
Sydney Toronto

London

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the
United States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part
of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
0-07-150873-2
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-147688-1.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare,
Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of
the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with
these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR
RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free.
Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or
omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no
responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances
shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them
has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim
or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071476881

Professional

Want to learn more?
We hope you enjoy this
McGraw-Hill eBook! If
you’d like more information about this book,
its author, or related books and websites,
please click here.

Dedication

T IS WITH THE utmost respect and my sincere admiration that I

I

dedicate this book to my wife Susan; who has helped me watch my
thoughts as they became my words, helped me watch my words as
they became my actions, helped me watch my actions as they
became my habits, helped me watch my habits as they became my
character, and most importantly helped me build my character, which
ultimately protected our destiny. She is my partner for life!
I further dedicate it to our eight children and three grand children, who
have been a miracle in my life and forced me to stay humble. Thank you for
being the grinding stone in my life . . . some days you really ground me
down, but most days, you really polished me up allowing, me to shine.
May you all enjoy each day of your life—I love you all!

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

This page intentionally left blank

Acknowledgments

ITHOUT ANY WARNING to NASA, President Kennedy
announced to the world in 1961 that within the decade,
America would send a man to the moon and safely bring
him home. After his speech, the leaders of NASA frantically called the White House declaring his proclamation
to be impossible. A clear message was sent back to NASA from the White
House stating: “Nothing is impossible.”
The White House was right!
My wife Susan, has been my “White House” and our eight children;
Tania, Sonya, Jared, Jacob, Isaac, Rachael, Joshua and Jordan, and our
three grandchildren; Jeffery, Deanna and Nadia, have been her joint
“Chiefs of Staff ” supporting her as she delivered her consistant message to
me: “keep going—nothing is impossible!”
I further wish to thank adversity. Had it not been for the countless people
who mustered up the courage to face adversity, the world would have never
heard their “pearls of wisdom.” It is with my sincere gratitude that I bring tribute and give credit to all the authors from whom I have borrowed their “pearls
of wisdom.” Their pearls of wisdom, acquired from their personal moments of
adversity, became my strength as I fought my own adversities.
Next on my list, I wish to thank three key business people that
have heavily participated in my emotional and financial success: Isaac
Martinez, Jacob Martinez, and Riana ‘van den Berg’ Rawson. They are
MTI’s key strategic Vice Presidents and have been dedicated in putting
MTI on the worldwide map. It is their talent and capability that allowed me
the freedom to write this book.
I would like to give special thanks to Riana “Martinez” Rawson (who
truly belongs in my family) and whose unconditional support for me, my
wife, my family and business made this book possible. Her sheer genius
never ceases to amaze me.

W

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

viii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Next, I wish to thank all the MTI clients worldwide for having faith and
trust in me. Thank you for opening up your homes and your hearts to me
and my family. It has been through your perception of the world, the market and your countless challenging questions that have allowed me to widen
my perception of the world and the market.
In addition, I would like to thank all our staff and worldwide partners
at MTI for their dedication, support and belief in our vision. You are not
only great business partners, but have become some of my best friends. I
want to give special thanks to the founding members of our MTI team:
Jonathan Schneider, Pedro De Sousa, Jeff Todd, Mauricio Passaro, Rob
Rawson, Frank Josenhans, Sam Sego, Rick Purifoy, Nickie Hube, Rachael
Martinez, Ricard Mouton, Kevin McGowen, Dennis Du Plessis, Cassie
Van Wyk and Hector Ruiz.
I am deeply grateful to Jeanne Glasser and all the staff at McGraw-Hill
who have participated in bringing this book to market. Thank you for
believing in me.
I cannot finish my acknowledgements without recognizing my parents
who constantly grounded me in an attempt to harness my adventurous
spirit. A special thanks to my two moms: my real mom for constantly
telling me, “You always need to do what’s right because you were meant to
achieve great things in life,” and my mother-in-law “whom I call mom” for
being there during one of our most challenging times - thank you for your
support and positive attitude!
I give tribute to you all!

For more information about this title, click here

Contents
Dedication

v

Acknowledgments
Introduction

1

vii

xv

So You Want to Trade FOREX?
Two Wolves

1

Follow the Rules

4

Your Personal Litmus Test
Your Life’s Purpose
Conclusion

2

1

5

14

15

Introduction to the FOREX

17

History of the Forex Market: How It All Began
What Is the FOREX?
Types of Traders

21

22

How Do Traders Get Paid?
Bulls and Bears

25

Types of Orders

25

23

The Market Traders Institute Philosophy
The Three levels of Trading
The Reality of Trading

29

The 21-day, 3 Percent Rule
Conclusion

30

28

29

28

19

x

CONTENTS

3

Self-Empowerment via Trading Software
How to Determine Market Direction

35

Using Indicators to Determine an Entry Point

37

Using Indicators to Determine Exit Strategies

41

Using Multiple Time Frames to Trade
Conclusion

4

31

44

44

Trading Japanese Candlesticks

47

The History of Japanese Candlesticks

47

How to Read a Japanese Candlestick

49

Reading a Japanese Candlestick Chart

50

How to Find a High

50

Understanding the Different Japanese Candlesticks
Candlestick Formations

56

Bullish Candlestick Formations or Buy Signals

57

Bearish Candlestick Formation or Sell Signals

62

Trading Candlestick Patterns
Conclusion

5

52

68

70

The Financial Game of Support and Resistance
The Game

73

How do Bulls and Bears Score Points?
Identifying Highs and Lows
Resistance and Support

74

75

75

Learning to Short the Market

81

Past Resistance can Become Future Support

83

Past Support can Become Future Resistance

84

Visually Observing the Game
Conclusion

86

84

71

xi

CONTENTS

6

Trends and Trendlines
A Trend Is Your Friend

89
89

Trading a Trend Until it Bends
Spotting an Uptrend

91

96

Drawing Uptrend Lines

97

Finding and Drawing Inner, Outer, and Long-term Uptrend Lines
Incorrect Ways of Drawing Uptrend Lines
Finding and Drawing Downtrend Lines

100
105

Finding and Drawing Inner, Outer, and Long-term Downtrend Lines
Incorrect Ways of Drawing Downtrend Lines
Trends Inside of Trends
Trading Channels

Conclusion

7

110
111

111

Buy and Sell Zones
Trends

107

109

The Value of Trend Lines

113

115

Buy and Sell Zones
The Sell Zone

117

117

Shorting the Market When It Enters the Sell Zone
The Buy Zone

121

122

Going Long in the Market When It Enters the Buy Zone
Conclusion

8

126

The Fibonacci Secret

129

The History of Fibonacci

131

98

The Fibonacci Numerical Sequence

132

The Fibonacci Sequence in Nature

132

126

106

xii

CONTENTS

The Fibonacci Retracement and Extension Ratio Relationship

140

The Value of Adding the Fibonacci Numbers to your toolbox

146

Conclusion

9

147

The Reality of the Fibonacci Secret

151

Fibonacci Market Movement on September 11, 2001
Fibonacci Retracements Everywhere
Conclusion

10

151

155

158

Fundamental Analysis

161

Fundamental Announcements Analysis
Trading Days Versus Trending Days

161
167

Increased Risk with Trading Fundamental Announcements
World Economies

170

The Importance of Fundamental Announcements
Conclusion

11

171

174

Consolidating, Bracketing, Accumulation,
or Sideways Movement 175
Consolidation Factors
Strategy 1

178

Strategy 2

181

176

Not All Fundamental Announcements Move the Market
Strategy 3

183

Bull and Bear Traps
Conclusion

12

168

184

185

Learning the Rules of Equity Management
What Is Equity Management?

187

The Equity Management Formula

193

187

182

xiii

CONTENTS

Risk versus Reward

195

Percentages Mean Nothing When Trading
Conclusion

13

197

The Final Analysis
Education First

201

204

Our Habits Control Our Lives
Finding Your Pot of Gold
Glossary
Index

209
213

205

205

195

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction

AM THRILLED TO BE a part of your trader’s journey and I am excited

I

about your interest in Forex. Forex, or the foreign exchange market,
offers incredible financial opportunity for those who are ready for the
adventure, but it can be disastrous and financially devastating for
those who are unprepared. My focus as an author is to be a mentor to
those readers eager to enter the world of Forex trading. Some of the material
in this book took me years to discover, develop, and just plain figure out.
I hope you will realize that this book, although written primarily for
traders, is ultimately about self-improvement. I have discovered that no one
can become successful at trading, or for that matter at anything, without
first establishing their personal constitution. It is this aspect of yourself that
either destroys you or allows you to succeed in life, and that includes Forex.
To be successful in your financial journey, you will need to be prepared
for what the market demands the most—change and discipline! If you cannot find the courage to change and then remain disciplined to that change,
you will be unable to develop a trading strategy that aligns with your personality and your perception of life.
Every trader is looking for the “holy grail”; that little piece of truthful
and accurate information that works consistently! In my own trader’s journey, I discovered that the holy grail is knowing when to get in the market
and why and when to get out and why. If you can learn the when and the
why, you will be able to make market movements work for you allowing
you to capture the majority of potential profit from the move. When you do
this, you have discovered your personal holy grail in trading! I believe this
book can become your holy grail if you let it!
Trading needs to be fun, emotionally exciting, personally and financially fulfilling, and stress-free. If you are going to be successful at trading,
you will need to acquire a trading strategy that is easy to execute, easy to

Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

xvi

INTRODUCTION

understand, easy to obey, and that works for you consistently. You will also
need to master your emotions. Success lies in mastering four skills, three of
them technical. These technical skills include knowing:
1.
2.

3.

How to find market direction in any time frame, anytime, 24 hours
a day.
How to establish a successful entry strategy that works consistently.
Every trader wants the market to move in his or her direction
from entry.
How to create two solid exit strategies: one to protect yourself
financially should the market not go your way, and one to capture
profit if it does.

The remaining skill is more difficult; it is learning how to overcome the
battle that takes place in your mind. Believe it or not, our daily destructive
habits hold us back from achieving what is rightfully ours in this life.
Learning to become a successful currency trader is a dream highly sought
after by countless people around the world. I am here to tell you that it is a
worthy and attainable dream.
I have learned that achieving one’s goals and dreams is a matter of
mental discipline. Dreams are attainable! However, there is a set of steps that
needs to be mastered in order to make your dreams come true. This book
will help you to learn these steps and to acquire the courage and commitment to take them. Always remember that man was not created to just get
by—he was created to reach his highest potential!
“If another person can do it, YOU can do it!”
—My mom

C

H

A

1
P

T

E

R

SO YOU WANT TO
TRADE FOREX?
TWO WOLVES
One evening, a very wise, old Indian chief was speaking with his grand-son
about life, telling him about the internal battle that goes on inside all
people.
He said, “My son, inside all of us there exists a constant battle between
two wolves. One wolf is very evil. It forces you to deal with anger, envy,
jealousy, sorrow, regret, greed, arrogance, self-pity, guilt, resentment,
inferiority, lies, false pride, superiority, and a self-centered, destructive ego.
The other wolf is good. It helps you to experience joy, peace, love,
hope, serenity, humility, kindness, benevolence, empathy, generosity, truth,
compassion, faith, self-respect, and to develop a giving, constructive ego.”
The grandson thought about it for a minute and then asked his grandfather, “Which wolf wins?”
The wise, old Indian chief replied, “My son, the one you feed.”
*

*

*

Thousands of books on investing and wealth accumulation have been
written and hundreds of seminars created to help individuals reach their
financial goals. These materials are created by professionals whose guidance

1
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

2

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

enables individuals to improve their financial performance and who provide
productive techniques that can potentially create wealth. Regardless of all
the available material designed to improve one’s financial status, one fact
remains for certain: Successful people will do what unsuccessful people
won’t or can’t do!
There are successful people who have either been taught by a mentor,
acquired some special knowledge, or implemented disciplines that
enabled them to achieve their financial goals. The saddest part about this
process is that most people do not display the sufficient humility and
open-mindedness to acquire all this information and mentorship at an early
stage in their lives.
I am adamant about one thing: if you are on the hunt for success in any
field or any walk of life and have not yet acquired it, then perhaps you have
been looking in the wrong places. I have traveled the world and interacted with
many different cultures, and I’ve learned through this experience that there is
a clear reason why people are not successful at what they attempt to do. The
reason is universal: successful people focus on feeding the good wolf.
Individuals who manage their mediocrity or poverty in life are focused
on feeding the wrong wolf—the evil wolf. They carry around past emotional
baggage and, in time, it becomes so heavy that all they can think about is
survival. This mindset seriously affects their personality, performance, and
ability to maintain emotional control, which is essential for success in life
and success in trading.
I have noticed a pattern among people around the world, regardless of
country, race, or culture; they become what I call rainbow chasers. Every
few months they come up with a get-rich-quick plan, but these endeavors
are doomed to fail, and then comes the inevitable blaming. Very seldom do
those people accept responsibility for their outcome and look inside
themselves to discover why they have failed. They go from one business
opportunity to another, never achieving their end result, and are clearly
locked into self-destructive habits. They repeat their bad habits, continue to
chase rainbows, and fail at just about everything they do.
Life is not capricious; it will always provide the rich and poor alike
with new opportunities. Forex is such an opportunity. This book will help
you understand how to trade in Forex, or the foreign exchange market,
and reap the financial outcome you desire. Please embrace this information with excitement, because you will be given the exact education
and trading tools used by some of the best money managers in the world.
Whether you succeed or fail is solely determined by what is in your head
and your heart.

CHAPTER 1

SO YOU WANT TO TRADE FOREX?

3

Many traders who fail tend to blame the market or other external
factors. It is everyone else’s fault but theirs. Believe it or not, this is how
history repeats itself in their lives. If this describes you, then this book
can really help you make a change in your life. Not only does it teach the
technical side of trading, but also it will force you to address some of those
unproductive bad habits.
When trading Forex, your daily actions will be based on a clear
productive mindset of:
Reappointment versus disappointment
Resilience versus resentment
Better versus bitter
A winner not a whiner
A star not a scar
A victor not a victim
A conquerer not a crumbler
The reality in life is that the choice is yours. Bad things happen to everyone, and you won’t be spared as you learn to trade Forex. Your success will
be determined by how confident you feel, what you think, and how you
respond when bad things do happen. In any financial or business endeavor,
success starts in your head, is fueled by your heart, and the results are
driven by your actions. These will determine your Forex experience. In this
book, you will learn certain disciplines and habits that will help you
become a better trader.
There are three questions you have to ask yourself before you trade:
1.
2.
3.

Do I want to make a lot of money?
Do I want to make an average income?
Do I just want to get by and break even?

You need to understand these things about yourself because the market
tends to be self-fulfilling. Remember, you will always find what you are
looking for, whether it be good or bad.
Nothing in life is perfect, and if you set yourself up with an unrealistic
expectation that things should be perfect, you put yourself in a position to
focus only on negative events. If you bring this perspective to the trading
table, it will have a similarly destructive effect. Uncover who you are and
what you are looking for before you trade so that you can lay the proper
foundation on which to build your trading career.

4

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

FOLLOW THE RULES
The first step to successful trading is to analyze your character to ensure
you are not bringing your bad habits to the trading table. Your moral
constitution, work ethic, and personal beliefs will mirror your trading
habits. If you are a rule breaker, then there is no point in trying to learn a
new successful skill that requires rules to be followed. If it is in your
character to break rules, then learning a new successful skill that can
change your financial future is useless. You will simply break the rules and
self-destruct.
I know a person who is habitually late to work. Despite the fact that his
employer requires him to arrive on time, he doesn’t seem to believe that
showing up on time is that important, which is why he has had to change
jobs four times in the past year.
As a result of his tardiness, he is repeatedly terminated. Yet he refuses
to change his behavior. He is more willing to go through the trouble of
searching for a new job than he is to change a simple, yet critical, destructive personal habit. What I find with most unsuccessful people is that they
fail to see the importance of following rules that will lead to their success,
such as showing up on time. The truth is, changing little unproductive
habits makes a huge difference to one’s success.
People underestimate how important preparation is for success.
However, the reason they get locked into poverty and mediocrity—only
getting by—is that they show up to the battlefield totally unprepared and
unprotected. Their focus quickly turns from the cause they were fighting
for to survival and self-preservation. “I didn’t bring the proper armor to
fight this war, I didn’t think I’d be here this long, I don’t have enough food
to survive, I don’t have enough ammunition,” and so forth. With that
survival mentality, one’s attitude turns from that of a conquerer to that of a
crumbler.
To survive the coming learning curve and successfully transition to a
productive career trading on Forex, you will need to properly arm yourself.
Creating your personal constitution is like acquiring the best helmet possible to protect your most important asset—your mind. Your mind is the
epicenter of your body and the control tower of your destiny.
You first need to identify, and perhaps define, who you truly are. The
following exercise will help you discover your personal constitution. Once
you have completed this exercise, you will be able to see what you
need to change in your personal life to become a successful trader. This
exercise is what I call a litmus test. (A Litmus test commonly refers to a
