
12
The Unreasonable Man

G

eorge Bernard Shaw wrote, “The reasonable man adapts himself
to the world. The unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the
world to himself. Therefore all progress depends on the unreasonable man.”1
Shall we conclude that Buffett is “the unreasonable man”? To do so,
we must presume that his investment approach represents progress in the
financial world, an assumption I freely make. For when we look at the
recent achievements of the “reasonable” men, we see at best unevenness,
at worst disaster.
The 1980s are likely to be remembered as the Future Shock decade
of financial management. Program trading, leveraged buyouts, junk
bonds, derivative securities, and index futures frightened many investors. The distinctions between money managers faded. The grind of
fundamental research was replaced by the whirl of computers. Black
boxes replaced management interviews and investigation. Automation
replaced intuition.
The late 1990s were, if anything, worse. That frenzied, overvalued
marketplace phenomenon generally known as the dot-com boom went
disastrously bust. Warren Buffett called it “The Great Bubble.” And we
all know what happens to bubbles when they get too big—they burst,
dripping sticky residue on everyone within range.
Many investors have become disenchanted and estranged from the
financial marketplace. The residue of the three-year bear market of
2000 through 2002 left many with a particularly bitter taste in their
189

190

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

mouths. Even now, with so many money managers unable to add value
to client portfolios, it is easy to understand why passive investing has
gained popularity.
Throughout the past few decades, investors have f lirted with many
different investment approaches. Periodically, small capitalization, large
capitalization, growth, value, momentum, thematic, and sector rotation
have proven financially rewarding. At other times, these approaches have
stranded their followers in periods of mediocrity. Buffett, the exception,
has not suffered periods of mediocrity. His investment performance,
widely documented, has been consistently superior. As investors and
speculators alike have been distracted by esoteric approaches to investing,
Buffett has quietly amassed a multi-billion-dollar fortune. Throughout,
businesses have been his tools, common sense his philosophy.
How did he do it?
Given the documented success of Buffett’s performance coupled
with the simplicity of his methodology, the more appropriate question
is, why don’t other investors apply his approach? The answer may lie in
how people think about investing.
When Buffett invests, he sees a business. Most investors see only a
stock price. They spend far too much time and effort watching, predicting, and anticipating price changes and far too little time understanding
the business they are part owner of. Elementary as this may be, it is the
root that distinguishes Buffett.

Stocks are simple. All you do is buy shares in a great business
for less than the business is intrinsically worth, with management of the highest integrity and ability. Then you own those
shares forever.2
WARREN BUFFETT, 1990

While other professional investors are busy studying capital asset
pricing models, beta, and modern portfolio theory, Buffett studies
income statements, capital reinvestment requirements, and the cashgenerating capabilities of his companies. His hands-on experience with

The Unreasonable Man

191

a wide variety of businesses in many industries separates Buffett from
all other professional investors. “Can you really explain to a fish what
it’s like to walk on land?” Buffett asks. “One day on land is worth a
thousand years of talking about it and one day running a business has
exactly the same kind of value.”3
According to Buffett, the investor and the businessperson should
look at the company in the same way, because they both want essentially
the same thing. The businessperson wants to buy the entire company
and the investor wants to buy portions of the company. Theoretically,
the businessperson and the investor, to earn a profit, should be looking at
the same variables.
If adapting Buffett’s investment strategy required only changing
perspective, then probably more investors would become proponents.
However, applying Buffett’s approach requires changing not only perspective but also how performance is evaluated and communicated. The
traditional yardstick for measuring performance is price change: the
difference between what you originally paid for a stock and its market
price today.
In the long run, the market price of a stock should approximate the
change in value of the business. However, in the short run, prices can
swoop widely above and below a company’s value for any number of illogical reasons. The problem remains that most investors use these
short-term price changes to gauge the success or failure of their investment approach, even though the changes often have little to do with
the changing economic value of the business and much to do with anticipating the behavior of other investors.
To make matters worse, clients require professional money to report
performance in quarterly periods. Knowing that they must improve
short-term performance or risk losing clients, professional investors become obsessed with chasing stock prices.

The market is there only as a reference point to see if anybody
is offering to do anything foolish.4
WARREN BUFFETT, 1988

192

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Buffett believes it is foolish to use short-term prices to judge a company’s success. Instead, he lets his companies report their value to him
by their economic progress. Once a year, he checks several variables:
• Return on beginning shareholder’s equity
• Change in operating margins, debt levels, and capital expenditure needs
• The company’s cash-generating ability
If these economic measurements are improving, he knows the share
price, over the long term, should ref lect this. What happens to the stock
price in the short run is inconsequential.

I N V E S T I N G T H E WA R R E N B U F F E T T WAY
The major goal of this book is to help investors understand and employ
the investment strategies that have made Buffett successful. It is my
hope that, having learned from his past experiences, you will be able to
go forward and apply his methods. Perhaps in the future you may see
examples of “Buffett-like” purchases and will be in a position to profit
from his teachings.
For instance . . .
• When the stock market forces the price of a good business
downward, as it did to the Washington Post, or
• When a specific risk temporarily punishes a business, as it did
Wells Fargo, or
• When investor indifference allows a superior business such as
Coca-Cola to be priced at half of its intrinsic value
. . . investors who know how to think and act like Buffett will be
rewarded.
The Warren Buffett Way is deceptively simple. There are no computer programs to learn, no cumbersome investment banking manuals
to decipher. There is nothing scientific about valuing a business and
then paying a price that is below this business value. “What we do is not
beyond anybody else’s competence,” says Buffett. “It is just not necessary to do extraordinary things to get extraordinary results.”5

The Unreasonable Man

193

The irony is that Buffett’s success lies partly in the failure of others.
“It has been helpful to me,” he explains, “to have tens of thousands (students) turned out of business schools taught that it didn’t do any good to
think.”6 I do not mean to imply that Buffett is average, far from it. He
is unquestionably brilliant. But the gap between Buffett and other professional investors is widened by their own willingness to play a loser’s
game that Buffett chooses not to play. Readers of this book have the
same choice.
Whether you are financially able to purchase 10 percent of a company or merely one hundred shares, the Warren Buffett Way can help you
achieve profitable investment returns. But this approach will help only
those investors who are willing to help themselves. To be successful, you
must be willing to do some thinking on your own. If you need constant
affirmation, particularly from the stock market, that your investment decisions are correct, you will diminish your benefits. But if you can think
for yourself, apply relatively simple methods, and have the courage of
your convictions, you will greatly increase your chances for profit.
Whenever people try something new, there is initial apprehension.
Adopting a new and different investment strategy will naturally evoke
some uneasiness. In the Warren Buffett Way, the first step is the most
challenging. If you can master this first step, the rest of the way is easy.

Step One: Turn off the Stock Market
Remember that the stock market is manic-depressive. Sometimes it is
wildly excited about future prospects, and at other times it is unreasonably depressed. Of course, this behavior creates opportunities, particularly when shares of outstanding businesses are available at irrationally
low prices. But just as you would not take direction from an advisor who
exhibited manic-depressive tendencies, neither should you allow the
market to dictate your actions.
The stock market is not a preceptor; it exists merely to assist you
with the mechanics of buying or selling shares of stock. If you believe
that the stock market is smarter than you are, give it your money by investing in index funds. But if you have done your homework and understand your business and are confident that you know more about
your business than the stock market does, turn off the market.
Buffett does not have a stock quote machine in his office and he
seems to get by just fine without it. If you plan on owning shares in an

194

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

outstanding business for a number of years, what happens in the market
on a day-to-day basis is inconsequential. You do need to check in regularly, to see if something has happened that presents you with a nifty
opportunity, but you will find that your portfolio weathers nicely even
if you do not look constantly at the market.
“After we buy a stock, we would not be disturbed if markets closed
for a year or two,” says Buffett. “We don’t need a daily quote on our
100 percent position in See’s or H.H. Brown to validate our well being.
Why, then, should we need a quote on our 7 percent interest [today,
more than 8 percent] in Coke?”7
Buffett is telling us that he does not need the market’s prices to validate Berkshire’s common stock investments. The same holds true for individual investors. You know you have approached Buffett’s level when
your attention turns to the stock market and the only question on your
mind is: “Has anybody done anything foolish lately that will give me an
opportunity to buy a good business at a great price?”

Step Two: Don’t Worry about the Economy
Just as people spend fruitless hours worrying about the stock market
so, too, do they worry needlessly about the economy. If you find
yourself discussing and debating whether the economy is poised for
growth or tilting toward a recession, whether interest rates are moving up or down, or whether there is inf lation or disinf lation, STOP!
Give yourself a break.
Often investors begin with an economic assumption and then go
about selecting stocks that fit neatly within this grand design. Buffett
considers this thinking to be foolish. First, no one has economic predictive powers any more than they have stock market predictive powers.
Second, if you select stocks that will benefit by a particular economic environment, you inevitably invite turnover and speculation, as you continuously adjust your portfolio to benefit in the next economic scenario.
Buffett prefers to buy a business that has the opportunity to profit
in any economy. Macroeconomic forces may affect returns on the margin, but overall, Buffett’s businesses are able to profit nicely despite vagaries in the economy. Time is more wisely spent locating and owning
a business that can profit in all economic environments than by renting
a group of stocks that do well only if a guess about the economy happens to be correct.

The Unreasonable Man

195

Step Three: Buy a Business, Not a Stock
Let’s pretend that you have to make a very important decision. Tomorrow you will have an opportunity to pick one business to invest in. To
make it interesting, let’s also pretend that once you have made your decision, you can’t change it and, furthermore, you have to hold the investment for ten years. Ultimately, the wealth generated from this business
ownership will support you in your retirement. Now, what are you going
to think about?
Probably many questions will run through your mind, bringing a
great deal of confusion. But if Buffett were given the same test, he
would begin by methodically measuring the business against his basic
tenets, one by one:
• Is the business simple and understandable, with a consistent operating history and favorable long-term prospects?
• Is it run by honest and competent managers, who allocate capital
rationally, communicate candidly with shareholders, and resist the
institutional imperative?
• Are the company’s economics in good shape—with high
profit margins, owners’ earnings, and increased market value that
matches retained earnings?
• Finally, is it available at a discount to its intrinsic value? Take note:
Only at this final step does Buffett look at the stock market price.
Calculating the value of a business is not mathematically complex.
However, problems arise when we wrongly estimate a company’s future cash f low. Buffett deals with this problem in two ways. First, he
increases his chances of correctly predicting future cash f lows by sticking with businesses that are simple and stable in character. Second, he
insists on a margin of safety between the company’s purchase price and
its determined value. This margin of safety helps create a cushion that
will protect him—and you—from companies whose future cash f lows
are changing.

Step Four: Manage a Portfolio of Businesses
Now that you are a business owner as opposed to a renter of stocks, the
composition of your portfolio will change. Because you are no longer

196

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

measuring your success solely by price change or comparing annual price
change to a common stock benchmark, you have the liberty to select the
best businesses available. There is no law that says you must include every
major industry within your portfolio, nor do you have to include 30, 40,
or 50 stocks in your portfolio to achieve adequate diversification.
Buffett believes that wide diversification is required only when investors do not understand what they are doing. If these “know-nothing”
investors want to own common stocks, they should simply put their
money in an index fund. But for the “know-something” investors, conventional diversification into dozens of stocks makes little sense. Buffett
asks you to consider: If the best business you own presents the least financial risk and has the most favorable long-term prospects, why would
you put money into your twentieth favorite business instead of adding
money to the top choice?
Now that you are managing a portfolio of businesses, many things
begin to change. First, you are less likely to sell your best businesses just
because they are returning a profit. Second, you will pick new businesses
for purchase with much greater care. You will resist the temptation to
purchase a marginal company just because you have cash reserves. If the
company does not pass your tenet screen, don’t purchase it. Be patient
and wait for the right business. It is wrong to assume that if you’re not
buying and selling, you’re not making progress. In Buffett’s mind, it is
too difficult to make hundreds of smart decisions in a lifetime. He would
rather position his portfolio so he only has to make a few smart decisions.

The Essence of Warren Buffett
The driving force of Warren Buffett’s investment strategy is the rational
allocation of capital. Determining how to allocate a company’s earnings
is the most important decision a manager will make. Rationality—displaying rational thinking when making that choice—is the quality Buffett most admires. Despite underlying vagaries, a line of reason permeates
the financial markets. Buffett’s success is the result of locating that line of
reason and never deviating from its path.
Buffett has had his share of failures and no doubt will have a few
more in the years ahead. But investment success is not synonymous with
infallibility, but it comes about by doing more things right than wrong.
The Warren Buffett Way is no different. Its success depends as much on

The Unreasonable Man

197

eliminating those things you can get wrong, which are many and perplexing (predicting markets, economies, and stock prices), as on getting
things right, which are few and simple (valuing a business).
When Buffett purchases stocks, he focuses on two simple variables:
the price of the business and its value. The price of a business can be
found by looking up its quote. Determining value requires some calculation, but it is not beyond the comprehension of those willing to do some
homework.

Investing is not that complicated. You need to know accounting, the language of business. You should read The Intelligent
Investor. You need the right mind-set, the right temperament.
You should be interested in the process and be in your circle of
competence. Read Ben Graham and Phil Fisher, read annual
reports and trade reports, but don’t do equations with Greek
letters in them.8
WARREN BUFFETT, 1993

Because you no longer worry about the stock market, the economy,
or predicting stock prices, you are now free to spend more time understanding your businesses. You can spend more productive time reading
annual reports and business and industry articles that will improve your
knowledge as an owner. In fact, the more willing you are to investigate
your own business, the less dependent you will be on others who make
a living advising people to take irrational action.
Ultimately, the best investment ideas will come from doing your
own homework. However, you should not feel intimidated. The Warren
Buffett Way is not beyond the comprehension of most serious investors.
You do not have to become an MBA-level authority on business valuation to use it successfully. Still, if you are uncomfortable applying these
tenets yourself, nothing prevents you from asking your financial advisor
these same questions. In fact, the more you enter into a dialogue on
price and value, the more you will begin to understand and appreciate
the Warren Buffett Way.

198

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

Buffett, over his lifetime, has tried different investment gambits. At a
young age he even tried his hand at stock charting. He has studied with
the brightest financial mind of the twentieth century, Benjamin Graham,
and managed and owned a host of businesses with his partner, Charlie
Munger. Over the past five decades, Buffett has experienced double-digit
interest rates, hyperinf lation, and stock market crashes. Through all the
distractions, he found his niche, that point where all things make sense:
where investment strategy cohabits with personality. “Our (investment)
attitude,” said Buffett, “fits our personalities and the way we want to live
our lives.”6
Buffett’s attitude easily ref lects this harmony. He is always upbeat
and supportive. He is genuinely excited about coming to work every day.
“I have in life all I want right here,” he says. “I love every day. I mean, I
tap dance in here and work with nothing but people I like.”7 “There is
no job in the world,” he says, “that is more fun than running Berkshire
and I count myself lucky to be where I am.”8

Afterword
Managing Money the
Warren Buffett Way

I

began my money management career at Legg Mason in the summer of
1984. It was a typical hot and humid day in Baltimore. Fourteen newly
minted investment brokers, including myself, walked into an openwindowed conference room to begin our training. Sitting down at our
desks, we all received a copy of The Intelligent Investor by Benjamin
Graham (a book I had never heard of ) and a photocopy of the 1983
Berkshire Hathaway annual report (a company I had never heard of )
written by Warren Buffett (a man I had never heard of ).
The first day of class included introductions and welcomes from top
management, including some of the firm’s most successful brokers. One
after another, they proudly explained that Legg Mason’s investment
philosophy was 100 percent value-based. Clutching The Intelligent Investor, each took a turn at reciting chapter and verse from this holy
text. Buy stocks with low price-to-earnings ratios (P/E), low price-tobook value, and high dividends, they said. Don’t pay attention to the
stock market’s daily gyrations, they said; its siren song would almost
certainly pull you in the wrong direction. Seek to become a contrarian,
they said. Buy stocks that are down in price and unpopular so you can
later sell them at higher prices when they again become popular.
199

200

AFTERWORD

The message we received throughout the first day was both consistent and logical. We spent the afternoon analyzing Value Line research
reports and learning to distinguish between stocks that were down in
price and appeared to be cheap and stocks that were up in price and appeared to be expensive. By the end of our first training session, we all believed we were in possession of the Holy Grail of investing. As we packed
up our belongings, our instructor reminded us to take the Berkshire
Hathaway annual report with us and read it before tomorrow’s class.
“Warren Buffett,” she cheerily reminded us, “was Benjamin Graham’s
most famous student, you know.”
Back in my hotel room that night, I was wrung out with exhaustion. My eyes were blurry and tired, and my head was swimming with
balance sheets, income statements, and accounting ratios. Quite honestly, the last thing I wanted to do was to spend another hour or so reading an annual report. I was sure if one more investing factoid reached my
inner skull, it would certainly explode. Reluctantly and very tiredly, I
picked up the Berkshire Hathaway report.
It began with a salutation To the Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Here Buffett outlined the company’s major business principles: “Our long-term economic goal is to maximize the average annual
rate of gain in intrinsic value on a per share basis,” he wrote. “Our preference would be to reach this goal by directly owning a diversified group
of businesses that generate cash and consistently earn above-average returns on capital.” He promised, “We will be candid in our reporting to
you, emphasizing the pluses and minuses important in appraising business
value. Our guideline is to tell you the business facts that we would want
to know if our positions were reversed.”
The next fourteen pages outlined Berkshire’s major business holdings
including Nebraska Furniture Mart, Buf falo Evening News, See’s Candy
Shops, and the Government Employees Insurance Company. And true to
his word, Buffett proceeded to tell me everything I would want to know
about the economics of these businesses, and more. He listed the common
stocks held in Berkshire’s insurance portfolio, including Affiliated Publications, General Foods, Ogilvy & Mather, R.J. Reynolds Industries, and
the Washington Post. I was immediately struck by how seamlessly
Buffett moved back and forth between describing the stocks in the portfolio and the business attributes of Berkshire’s major holdings. It was as if
the analyses of stocks and of businesses were one and the same.
