2. Risk management allows for more losses.
3. Risk management requires an understanding of technical
analysis.
4. Risk management starts with stock selection.
5. Risk management is non-negotiable.
1. Risk Management Moves You from Emotion to Discipline

Have you received the message by now that our emotions don’t treat
us well when it comes to managing our money? Left to our own

c12.indd 246

11/2/07 12:47:39 PM

Managing Risk

247

devices, we tend to do stupid things with our money. Granted, that’s
not the most technical presentation of the facts, but it is the truth.
For that reason, when we develop a plan to manage trading risk, it
is imperative that the plan be designed in such a way as to minimize
our interference in the execution of the plan. Simply, we need to
create a foolproof plan and recognize that it is ourselves that we’re
protecting against.
To illustrate this, we can look at a popular experimental economics game referred to as the “Ultimatum Game.” In the Ultimatum Game, two players are given the opportunity to divide a sum
of money, and there is no reciprocation. That is, each player only
has to make one decision and the game is over. To start, player A is told
to divide an amount, say $10, between player A and player B. The
split can be any ratio, with one exception: Player A cannot keep
the entire amount. The worst case split for player B is that player
A will choose to keep $9 and give $1 to player B. The next step is
for player B to decide whether to accept or reject player A’s offer.
If player B accepts the offer, then both players get the amount of
money set forth in the offer. If player B chooses to reject the offer,
then both players walk away empty-handed. Here’s the key question: When is it advantageous for player B to reject an offer? The
answer, of course, is never! In the worst-case scenario, if player B
accepts the offer, he will still receive $1 that he otherwise wouldn’t
have. However, experimental results show that offers of less than
20 percent ($2 in our example) are often rejected. Subsequent investigation reveals that there is an element of “fairness” that’s considered by player B, and if the offer is perceived as “unfair,” then the
offer is rejected. Player B would choose the defense of perceived
fairness rather than improve his financial condition if they appear to
be mutually exclusive choices.
Before you think that you’re the exceptional trader who can
overcome this propensity through sheer determination, consider
this: A research study scanned the brains of Ultimatum Game
players as they responded to fair and unfair proposals. The results
were published in a 2003 article in Science magazine entitled “The
Neural Basis of Economic Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game.”
It was shown that unfair offers elicited activity in brain areas related
to emotion, which suggests an important role for emotions in decision making. The conclusion for the trader is that we have to recognize that our emotions are an integral part of our financial decision
making and then take the necessary steps to ensure that we don’t

c12.indd 247

11/2/07 12:47:39 PM

248

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

harm ourselves in the process. Of all professions, the trader must
take care to address this point since financial decisions are made
every trading day.
2. Risk Management Allows for More Losses

It doesn’t make any difference how well you trade if you get kicked out
of the game. You may trade for profits for years, and one moment of
careless trading without proper risk management may wipe out your
accumulated profits. Managing risk in a systematic and disciplined way
will let you take more losses without a catastrophic loss. In the next section, we provide the steps for applying the 1% Rule to your trading. For
now, consider the trader who loses only 1 percent of his trading account
each time he has a losing trade. The sequence of losses and account balance would look like the one shown in Table 12.1.

Table 12.1

c12.indd 248

Sequence of 1 Percent Losses

Trade

Loss

Account
Balance

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

$1,000
$ 990
$ 980
$ 970
$ 961
$ 951
$ 941
$ 932
$ 923
$ 914
$ 904
$ 895
$ 886
$ 878
$ 869
$ 860
$ 851
$ 843
$ 835
$ 826

$100,000
$ 99,000
$ 98,010
$ 97,030
$ 96,060
$ 95,099
$ 94,148
$ 93,207
$ 92,274
$ 91,352
$ 90,438
$ 89,534
$ 88,638
$ 87,752
$ 86,875
$ 86,006
$ 85,146
$ 84,294
$ 83,451
$ 82,617
$ 81,791

11/2/07 12:47:40 PM

Managing Risk

249

Notice how this trader could start with a $100,000 account and
then have 20 losses in a row. After the twentieth loss, he would still
have almost $82,000 in his trading account. This highlights how a
good risk management plan allows you to take more losses and still
remain in the markets.
An analysis of how well we tend to accept losses was developed
by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, in their landmark research
into Prospect Theory. The short description of Prospect Theory is
that people are much more willing to gamble with losses than with
profits. This concept is actually quite familiar to traders because we
are quick to lock in a profit while allowing losses to continue, in the
hope that our patience will be rewarded by a rebound in the stock
price. Gambling with a loss is known as loss aversion: the tendency
for people to strongly prefer avoiding losses over acquiring gains.
Conversely, when we quickly lock in our profits, we’re exercising risk
aversion: we shun any risk when we have a profit in hand. Some studies suggest that losses are as much as twice as psychologically powerful as gains. This phenomenon serves to dramatically increase the
level of risk that a trader will accept with a losing position. We don’t
want to accept the negative emotions that come with a loss and will go
to great lengths to avoid a loss. However, many times, the losses are
not avoided but rather deferred. When we practice loss aversion and
watch the unrealized losses continue to grow, we’ll eventually reach
a point where even the unrealized loss becomes untenable and the
position is closed.
In the markets, the movement that occurs when masses of traders
finally realize a loss that has become unbearable is known as capitulation selling. The rapid downward drop in price with a corresponding spike in volume is often the result of emotional decision making
rather than a thoughtful, well-executed risk management plan.
3. Risk Management Requires an Understanding of Technical Analysis

If you buy a stock, you make money when the stock price goes up.
That sounds like we’re stating the obvious, but many traders will talk
about the company management, sales forecasts, and market caps
while ignoring the basic fact that their stock is falling. Technical analysis will tell you what’s happening with the stock price, regardless of
what may be transpiring within the company fundamentals. The market really does tend to price in the various news and information that

c12.indd 249

11/2/07 12:47:40 PM

250

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

circulates on a company. By focusing on the technical analysis, we
see what people are doing rather than just what they’re saying. We’ve
all seen the stock that fell after the analyst upgrade. Only through
the chart analysis will we see that the highs are falling on increasing
volume in spite of the good news that the financial shows may be
feeding us.
If you tend to resist the whole study of technical analysis, as
many skeptical first-time traders and investors do, then think about
it another way. You don’t need to discard your fundamental research
when you begin to use technical analysis. Think about fundamental
analysis as showing you what to buy or sell and technical analysis as
showing you when to buy or sell.
The alternative danger for the trader is in assigning too much
confidence in the predictive power of technical indicators. This is
often followed by a relaxing of the rules of risk management. The
logic used is expressed in such phrases as “I can afford to keep this
position open even though it is moving against me because the (fill
in your favorite technical indicator) indicates that the stock will
recover.” Many very well-intentioned traders spend countless hours
searching for the market equivalent of String Theory: the perfect
algorithm that will allow them to predict future price movement. The
well-known lesson of Long-Term Capital Management is that the best
minds and tools must still employ a rigorous risk management discipline. The economist John Maynard Keynes is said to have warned
investors that although markets do tend toward rational positions in
the long run, “the market can stay irrational longer than you can stay
solvent.” The power of technical tools is most fully realized when you
understand the inherent limitations of any technical analysis.
The rule of thumb for the trader is this: Use technical indicators in the same way that a drunk uses a lamppost—for support, not
illumination.
4. Risk Management Starts with Stock Selection

Within this book we’ve devoted an entire chapter to the techniques of
stock screening and selection. A key reason for spending so much time
on the subject is that it is a large factor in mitigating risk. You may be
familiar with the assertion that one could randomly pick stocks and
still make money with a proper money management plan. While we
agree that the position management is a crucial component, we also

c12.indd 250

11/2/07 12:47:40 PM

Managing Risk

251

recognize that it certainly helps to stack the odds in your favor. It’s a
simple fact of the markets that momentum will tend to continue until
forces create a reversal. This is a basic tenet of Dow Theory. With that
being the case, wouldn’t you rather buy a stock in an uptrend than a
downtrend?
Think about this concept another way. There are probably
more than a few of you who have looked at your trading history and
thought, “If I’d only bought when I sold and sold when I bought,
I’d be making loads of money by now!” We’ve observed that this
is often the result of the never-ending pursuit of the reversal. You
watch a stock drop and think that you’ll pick the bottom and profit
from the following bounce. Instead, the stock continues on its freefall because it is in a downtrend and money is moving out of the
stock. Stock selection is the discipline of choosing stocks based on
their adherence to your trading strategy, rather than a roll-of-the-dice
emotional guess.
5. Risk Management Is Non-negotiable

Do you have any non-negotiables in your life? We would certainly
hope that you do. The non-negotiables are those issues, beliefs, and
actions that are not subject to the whims of circumstance. You hold
those items inviolable regardless of what may happen around you.
Risk management should be one of the trader’s non-negotiables.
It’s just too easy to come up with creative reasons why this particular trade is different from the many trades you’ve done before. Just
about the time you negotiate with yourself and allow yourself a pass
on strictly managing the losses, you find that you’re in too deep. The
relaxing of the rules that started innocently enough now threatens
your ability to continue trading.

Chatter Box—Rick
I remember when I was a rookie pilot and I flew my private plane to
the west coast of Florida to pick up a friend who was visiting for the
week. It was a sunny day, as is usually the case in central Florida, and
the flying was terrific. Everything went smoothly as I passed south of
Tampa and followed the coastline down to my destination. In no time,
(Continued )

c12.indd 251

11/2/07 12:47:41 PM

252

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

I had reached the airport and was coming in on final approach. As I
descended toward the airfield, I trimmed the plane for landing. This
involves setting the control surfaces of the aileron so that the plane
angles downward without as much effort on the controls. I landed
the plane safely and taxied toward the office, where my friend was
waiting.
After a brief stop in the office, we loaded his bags and taxied back
out to the runway for take-off. I brought the plane around to the end
of the runway, applied power, and started my take-off roll. The runway faced directly toward the Gulf of Mexico to take advantage of
the headwinds, which assist in lifting the plane during take-off. Just as
I reached the speed at which I needed to lift off, I pulled back on the
controls and felt a heavy resistance. The plane was actually fighting
me as I attempted to lift it into the air and we were racing toward the
open water. In an instant, I realized that I still had the plane trimmed for
landing. Still pulling back on the controls, I reached down and spun the
trim back into the take-off position as we climbed out over the water
and started our trip home.
With flying, the take-off and landing checklists are considered
non-negotiables. Had I followed the procedures that I full well knew
I should have followed, there would not have been any problem.
Instead, I acted too quickly without making sure I was following my
risk management plan and I left myself open to trouble. The same
thing happens every day in the financial markets. Traders start
to think they know the routine by heart, and they ignore the rules that
brought them to where they are. Or a trader will think that somehow
this particular trade is unique and should be treated with a little more
flexibility. Folks, the bottom line is simple: Risk management is a nonnegotiable part of your trading plan.

Risk Management Action Steps
The best theory in the world is just theory until you can figure out
how to apply it to real life. This is where the rubber meets the road in
managing risk. Now that you’ve determined to limit your losses, what
do you do tomorrow when the next trade shows up on your screen?
This list of risk management action steps can be copied to a note
card and taped to the side of your trading monitor. The next time
you’re ready to trade, check off the steps in this list:

c12.indd 252

11/2/07 12:47:42 PM

Managing Risk

253

1. Identify the market and sector trends.
2. Identify stocks within the trends.
3. Identify your entry price.
4. Identify your stop price.
5. Calculate your position size using the 1% Rule.
6. Execute your opening trade and stop order.
1. Identify the Market and Sector Trends

The first step in managing risk is to be aware of the environment in
which you’re trading. You have to know what’s happening in the market and sector that you’re using as your candidate pool. We just mentioned in the previous section that a key point of risk management is
that it begins with stock selection. As part of the selection process, it’s
important to know what market or sector forces are at work.
If you’re trading the U.S. markets, your first course of action
should be to chart the Dow, the Nasdaq, and the S&P 500. These
will not always move in tandem, although they do often display
bullish and bearish sentiment together. The simplest way to get a
feel for the broad markets is to plot the ETFs on a simple line chart.
The Dow, Nasdaq, and S&P 500 exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are
DIA, QQQQ, and SPY, respectively. Don’t get too caught up in the
detailed technical indicators at this stage. If you start at this step
with a market chart covered with fast and slow stochastics, moving
average convergence divergence (MACD) and Fibonacci retracements, then you’re probably already overcomplicating the analysis.
The danger when you do that is you lose a sense for the market
direction and get lost in the market noise. Remember, we want
to see where the forest is here, not count how many oak trees the
forest contains.
After putting your finger on the pulse of the broad market, drill
down to individual sectors that you’re considering. If you don’t
have any specific sectors in mind, then you can screen for rising or
falling sectors. For example, if you search for sector ETFs that have
rising 20-day and 50-day moving averages, the result will include sectors that are in a short- to intermediate-term uptrend. Many basic
web sites include a top 10–style list of ETF performance. These lists
will often display the ETFs with the best returns for the year, for
example. It stands to reason that the ETFs on this list would be
trending upward.

c12.indd 253

11/2/07 12:47:43 PM

254

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Figure 12.1 Identifying the Broad Market Trends

Figure 12.1 shows the Dow Jones Industrial Average ETF (ticker
symbol: DIA) from September 2006 through May 2007. While the
chart is a simple candlestick chart with one intermediate-term moving average along with volume, it does a very good job of pointing
out the intermediate trends within this broad market. At a glance, we
can identify the three trends; the initial uptrend that carried forward
from early 2006, the channel from November through March and
then the uptrend into May. We don’t need some complicated analysis
that includes the inverted Christmas tree oscillator to tell us the general direction of the market here. (Please don’t spend too much time
trying to find out about the inverted Christmas tree oscillator!)
2. Identify Stocks within the Trends

Once you have determined the current direction of the market and
the sectors you wish to trade, now it is time to find specific stock
candidates. Pay attention to the fact that we state, “determined the
current direction.” This is a much different analysis than “determined where the market is going.” Remember that we don’t need
to predict the future or develop an opinion about where the market
might be in six months. Our responsibility lies in determining what
forces are at work in the market today.
At this point, you have several choices in finding trade candidates.
You could begin by trading the broad market directly through the

c12.indd 254

11/2/07 12:47:43 PM

Managing Risk

255

index ETF. You could also trade the sector ETF directly if you’ve found
a sector that is trending according to your strategy. For example, if you
charted the biotech sector (ticker symbol: BBH) and found that it was
in a steady uptrend with good support levels then you may decide to
trade BBH directly. Finally, you could select specific stocks within the
sector. To find these stocks, you need only find a list of the stocks that
make up the ETF in question. Some research sites list only the top
holdings within the ETF; others will include the entire list of stocks
within the ETF.
After obtaining a list of the stocks that comprise the ETF, the
next step is to scan the stock charts in the same way we scanned
the market charts in Step 1. The objective is to sort out the stocks
that are not following the trend we’re after. If the market is trending upward and the sector is trending upward, we naturally want to
identify those stocks that are also trending upward. There will almost
certainly be individual underperformers within the list and the chart
scan will reveal these to you.
3. Identify Your Entry Price

Now we’re ready to take aim at our stock and decide on our point of
entry. Figure 12.2 highlights three possible entry points in the DIA
if we had decided to trade the Dow Jones Industrial Average directly.
These points are not the only possible entry points; we’ve selected

Figure 12.2 Possible Entry Points

c12.indd 255

11/2/07 12:47:45 PM

256

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

them to illustrate some key considerations regarding position entry.
At point A, the stock is in an uptrend and settling on support. However, the reason we wouldn’t enter at point A is that the sellers are
in control as evidenced by the black candle. The following day saw
the stock move below the support line for the first time in the chart
window. That should give us pause since it tells us that the buyers are
not holding the support with the same strength as previously.
Point B is our next choice for entry. At first blush, this appears to
be showing strength since the sellers had pushed the stock below support only to be overcome by the buyers. At the end of the day, the stock
had rallied back above support on strong volume. However, the sell-off
occurred at a level that had been resistance just a few weeks before in
early January. When we see the sellers show that kind of strength at a
key resistance level, we should wait for confirmation before entering
a new trade. Our caution would have paid off as the next day saw a
continuation of the selling below the moving average support line.
Our third choice is point C, where we see a white candle resting on support. Notice that this occurs after the stock had rallied
above support and then pulled back to test the moving average
again. Furthermore, the stock closed very near its high for the day
on fairly strong volume. It appears that point C has several positive
factors that would let us buy this stock on the open of the following day. Based on the chart, our entry price would likely have been
around $44.50.
4. Identify Your Stop Price

Now we need to answer the key question, “Where am I going to get
out of this trade if I’m wrong?” If you don’t answer this question right
up front, you will find yourself in the middle of a mind game, coming up with creative excuses for continuing to hold a losing trade.
The simple rule that you should follow is this: Failure of the reason
you entered the trade should be the reason you exit the trade. In
our example, we bought the stock at point C because it was showing
strength above the support line. Therefore, we need to sell the stock
when it shows weakness below the support line.
If we look at the moving average support in Figure 12.2, it looks
like the line is near the $44 mark. But we don’t want to place our
stop on this line. Why not? By definition, support is the level at
which the buyers overcome the sellers and the stock rises again. If

c12.indd 256

11/2/07 12:47:46 PM

Managing Risk

257

we place the stop order on support, that doesn’t indicate anything
other than normal, expected movement in the stock. We really
won’t know that we’re wrong unless the stock drops below the
support line. At that point, we can see that the sellers are pushing
the buyers down to new lows and that’s when we need to exit.
A key question for many beginning traders is, “How far below
support should the stop be placed?” While there really isn’t a reliable way to quantify that distance, it’s encouraging to know that your
eye will do a pretty good job with estimating. When you look at how
the stock responds to the support line in the recent chart history, pay
attention to the list below:
• Does the stock drop right to support before bouncing?
• Does the stock penetrate the support during the day before
closing above support?
• Does the stock have a tendency to swing sharply below support
and rally above shortly afterward?
• Does volatility tend to increase (longer candle bodies) or decrease
(smaller candle bodies) as it approaches support?
• Has the support held for a long time, or is it newly established?
The answers to these questions will allow you to develop a sense
for the proper distance below support for your stop. More volatility
in a stock means that you have to give it more room below support.
Otherwise, you’ll find yourself constantly getting stopped out just as
the stock is ready to bounce.
The entry point C shows a candle that formed a lower shadow,
which touches right on the moving average support. A week earlier,
this support level was the resistance level, giving us a role reversal in
addition to a moving average support. We see also that the moving
average has started trending upward again, so we’ll place our stop
slightly below the moving average, assuming that the stock will follow this support line as it rises. In this case, let’s use $43.50 as our
stop level. This price is not too close to the moving average, yet it will
show us that the stock has clearly broken the support.
5. Calculate Your Position Size Using the 1% Rule
