
Reagan's Imperial Circle

111

validity hinged on its be,ing universally accepted; therefore, it was
an all or none proposition. In a democracy that functions by compromise, such propositions rarely prevail. In this case, the
chances of success were particularly poor because there was another major school of t+ught influencing government policy.
Monetarists believed that the primary objective was to bring
d that end the money supply must be
inflation under control ~ n to
strictly regulated. Instead of controlling short-term interest rates,
as it had done hitherto, the Federal Reserve fixed targets for
money supply and allowed the rate on federal funds to fluctuate
freely. The Federal Reserve's new policy was introduced in October 1979, and interest rates were already at record levels when
President Reagan took office. In his first budget, he cut taxes and
increased military spending simultaneously. Although a concerted effort was made to reduce domestic spending, the savings
were not large enough to offset the other two items. The path of
least resistance led to a ,largebudget deficit.
Since the budget deficit had to be financed within the limits of
strict money supply targets, interest rates rose to unprecedented
heights. Instead of economic expansion, the conflict between fiscal and monetary policy brought on a severe recession. Unexpectedly high interest rates combined with a recession to precipitate
the international debt 'crisis of 1982. Henry Kaufman had long
warned that government deficits would drive other borrowers out
of the market.' He proved to be right but it was theforeign governments that were driven out first, not the domestic users of
credit.
The Federal Reserve responded to the Mexican crisis of August
1982 by relaxing its grip on the money supply. The budget &licit
was just beginning to accelerate. With the brakes released, the
f and the recovery was as vigorous as the receseconomy took d
sion had been severe. It was aided by a spending spree by both
the private and the corporate sectors and it was abetted by the
banking system. Military spending was just gearing up; the private sector enjoyed rising real incomes; the corporate sector benefited from accelerated depreciation and other tax concessions.
Banks were eager to lend because practically any new lending
had the effect of improving the quality of their loan portfolios.
The demand emanating from all these sources was so strong
that interest rates, after an initial decline, stabilized at historically
high levels and eventually began to rise again. Banks bid for de-

112

*

I

-

Historical Perspective

posits aggressively and holders of financial assets could obtain
even higher returns from the banks that from holding government
obligations. Foreign capital was attracted, partly by the high return on financial assets and partly by the confidence inspired by
President Reagan. The dollar strengthened and a strengthening
currency combined with a positive interest rate differential made
the move into the dollar irresistible. The strong dollar attracted
imports, which helped to satisfy excess demand and to keep
down the price level. A self-reinforcing process was set into motion in which a strong economy, a strong currency, a large budget
deficit, and a large trade deficit mutually reinforced each other to
produce noninflationary growth. 1 have called this circular relationship Reagan's Imperial Circle because it finances a strong military posture by attracting both goods and capital from abroad.
This makes the circle benign at the center and vicious at the
periphery.
It can be seen that the Imperial Circle was built on an internal
contradiction between monetarism and supply-side economics.
The outcome was not intended or even anticipated. Many momentous historical developments occur without the participants
fully realizing what is happening. The tremendous transfer of
resources to less developed countries that occurred between 1974
and 1982 could not have taken place in a planned and organized
manner, and, as we have seen, the Collective system of lending
came into existence unintended and unannounced.
Most professional economists did not consider the emergence
or the survival of a benign circle possible, but President Reagan,
despite his intellectual limitations, seems to have had a better
understanding of what was possible than did his economic advisers. After all, the reflexive process of the Imperial Circle fitted
well with his concept of leadership-which is, of course, a reflexive concept par excellence. He was therefore content to pay lip
service to the desirability of balancing the budget, ignored and
eventually got rid of Martin Feldstein, and left the deficit well
enough alone. Europeans complained about the strong dollaralthough it is not quite clear why-but the U.S. administration
insisted on a policy of benign neglect.
A benign circle for the United States is a vicious circle for the
debtor nations. The trade deficit of the United States is mirrored
by trade surpluses in other countries. To the extent that a strong
export performance has enabled heavily indebted countries to

Reagan's Imperial Circle

113

become current on their interest payments, the effect may be
judged beneficial; but, even here, the benefit accrues to the lenders. For the rest, the debtor nations have been laboring under high
real interest rates and very unfavorable terms of trade. Dollars are
cheap when they are boyowed, but expensive when the interest
has to be paid. The scramble to export depresses the prices of the
commodities exported. qlthough the external performance of the
debtor countries has exceeded most expectations, the internal
performance is much less satisfactory. There are some that have
shown practically no recovery, and even among the more successful ones per capita income has been lagging; now that it has begun
to rise the trade surplus1is beginning to deteriorate. Somr: of tht?
weakest countries have endured a downward spiral in which both
their domestic economies and their abilities to service their debts
have deteriorated to the vanishing point. This group comprises a
large part of Africa and some Latin American and Caribbean
countries like Peru and the Dominican Republic.
As far as the more dgveloped countries are concerned, rising
exports to the United States have had a stimulating effect but the
response has been very subdued. Corporations have been reluctant to add to capacity because they are afraid, and justifiably so,
that the dollar will decline just when their capacity comes on
stream. By contrast, holding financial assets in dollars exerts an
almost irresistible attraction. The phenomenon is particularly noticeable in Britain, where currency swings have becpn especially
wild. The whole of Europe has been languishing with high unemployment and little growth, and it has become fashionable to
speak of "Eurosclerosis." The Far East has shown much greater
dynamism under the impetus of the newly industrialized cmrrtries and the opening up of China. Japan has been the greatest
beneficiary of the present state of affairs. Its position is almost the
mirror image of that of the United States, with a large export
surplus and strongdomestic savings counterbalanced by the export of capital.
Let us try to analyze Reagan's Imperial Circle with the help of
the analytical tools we have developed so far. We shall use the
notation adopted in Chapter 3. The four key elements are a strong
economy ( t v), a strong currency ( t e), a growing budget deficit
( 3. B), and a growing trade deficit ( 3. 7').At first sight, there are
some obvious contradictions between these four variables. Conventional economics tells us that a growing trade deficit ( 3. T)

114

Historical Perspective

tends to depress both the exchange rate ( J. e) and the level of
domestic activity ( J. v):

But the Imperial Circle managed to overcome these causal relationships with the help of two other variables: the budget deficit
and capital inflows.
The economy strengthened because the stimulus of the budget
deficit outweighed the drag of the trade deficit. Economic activity
is, of course, influenced by many other factors. To bring them all
into the picture would complicate the argument unduly. What
matters is the end result: a strong economy. To keep the picture
simple, we shall denote the net effect of all other factors with a
question mark (?), giving us the formula

Similarly, the dollar appreciated because capital inflowsJ. (N + S)-exceeded the trade deficit:

These two relationships are the mainstays of the Imperial Circle.
There are many other relationships at work, so many that it
would be onerous to list them all. Some reinforce the Imperial
Circle; others work against it; yet others reinforce it in the short
run but cannot be sustained in the long run. The most important
self-reinforcing connection is between the exchange rate and
speculative capital inflows:

We have already identified two connections that work against the
Imperial Circle (Equation I), and here we can mention two connections that are self-reinforcing in the short run, but unsustainable in the long run. First, while speculative capital inflows are

Reagan's Imperial Circle

115

self-reinforcing in the short run, they also generate interest and
repayment obligations that are cumulative and work in the opposite direction.

Eventually the growing debt service ( N) is bound to undermine
the relationship on which the Imperial Circle rests and the trend
of the exchange rate is going to be reversed:

At that time, debt service and the flight of speculative capital may
combine with the trade' deficit to generate a catastrophic collapse
of the dollar: central bank officials, Volcker foremost among them,
are aware of the danger and are publicly warning against it.2 To
put matters in perspective, it should be pointed out that it would
take many years for interest charges to accumulate to a point
where they would reverse the balance. The likelihood is that the
Imperial Circle will be reversed or at least brought to a halt long
before that. Volcker and other responsible government officials
are certainly working %o\vard&at end.
The crucial question confronting the world is whether the Imperial Circle can be arrested without precipitating a catastrophic
collapse of the dollar. The longer it lasts, and the higher the dollar
climbs, the greater the danger of a fall. The problem is that a clearcut reversal in the trend of the dollar could, even at this stage,
cause a shift not o q y in the ongoing flow of investment but also
in the accumulated stock of speculative capital. The stock is, of
course, many times larger than the ongoing flow. The problem is
widely recognized, making the holders of dollar assets very nervous. That is why foreign holdings of marketable assets are aptly
described as "hot money."
The second example is the budget deficit, which is stimulative

+.

116
I

4

Historical Perspective

in the short run but may be counterproductive in the long run
because it diverts resources from more productive uses through
the interest rate mechanism:

As long as high interest rates suck in capital from abroad, the
problem remains latent. With the help of foreign savings, the domestic economy can consume more than it produces. Only when
the capital inflow ceases to match the budget deficit does the
problem become acute. Interest rates must rise in order to generate
the domestic savings necessary to finance the budget deficit. The
consequent decline in consumption depresses the economy, making foreigners all the less willing to hold dollar assets. This may
give rise to a "disaster scenario" in which a weak economy and a
large budget deficit combine to produce high interest rates and a
weak dollar.
We can combine these relationships to create an integrated
model of the Imperial Circle:

Reagan's Imperial Circle

117

In this model, one of the mainstays of the Imperial Circle, Equation 2, is shown horizontally and the other, Equation 3, vertically.
It will be seen that the model is not stable: some connections
reinforce it while others undermine it. The factors best reinforced
are the speculative inflows and the trade deficit; the factor most
endangered is the level 'of economic activity. The main threats to
the stability of the Imperial Circle come from the trade deficit and
the budget deficit. The thin pillars of the arrangement are a strong
dollar and a strong economy; but a strong dollar leads to a rising
trade deficit that weakens the economy and the budget deficit
keeps interest rates higher than they would be otherwise, which
also weakens the ecacorny, These are the internal inconsistencies
that are likely to destroy the Imperial Circle long before the accumulation of debt service obligations would do so.
N dless to say, the model is incomplete. There are many connecTns that are not 'shown; the illustration is complicated
enough as it is. Perhaps some connection that has been ignored
here will come to the rescue of the Imperial Circle when the need
arises. We have already witnessed such occasions. For instance,
until the middle of 1984, banks were active in expanding credit
at home and attracting funds from abroad. When they stopped
functioning as the main conduit, for reasons that will be explained in Chapter 8, the Treasury took their place: the withholding tax was abolished, and a large portion of the government debt
was sold directly to foreigners.
4
It would be interesting to construct a more complete model and
endow the variables with numerical values. I believe it would be
possible to simulate the evolution of the U.S. economy since
1982, but I am not equipped to carry out wch an operation. I have
to confine myself to an impressionistic presentation.
We are dealing with a system that is not stable, but constantly
evolving. What will succeed the Imperial Circle? That is the question that needs to be answered. Before I attempt to do so, let me
complete the picture by taking a closer look at the banking system
and the corporate restructuring that is currently sweeping the
country.

i

8

EVOLUTION OF THE BANKING SYSTEM

It is generally recognized that the international debt crisis of 1982
constituted a dramatic point for the debtor countries. The direction of resource transfers was reversed and the magnitude of the
swing was limited only by the debtor countries' capacities to pay.
In our model of the Imperial Circle the swing shows up as a
nonspeculative inflow ( N) because it is guided by considerations other than total return. The amounts involved are significant: net resource transfers to heavily indebted countries swing
from $50.1 billion in 1982 to a reverse flow of $13.8 billion in
1983,' most of it in dollar form. Resource transfers from the heavily indebted countries have provided one of the major underpinnings for the Imperial Circle.
It is less well recognized that the crisis of 1982 did not bring a
similar turning point for the banking system. The largest banks
were too deeply involved to allow them to reverse direction. Had
they stopped lending altogether, the heavily indebted countries
would have had to default. Had they tried to set up adequate
reserves, their capital position would have been impaired. It was
to preserve these banks that the Collectives were established. We
have dealt with the role of the Collectives in tiding over the debtor
countries; now we must examine what happened to the banking
system.
The Collective system of lending operates on the principle of
voluntary cooperation. The regulatory authorities had to exert
themselves to make it possible for the heavily involved banks to
extend new loans and to induce less involved banks to cooperate.

Evolution of the Banking System

119

The only way they could achieve these objectives was by maintaining the fiction tha't the outstanding loans were unimpaired
and no special reserves had to be set up against them. There was
some divergence of opinion among the various supervisory agencies but the Federal Reserve, as lender of last resort, maintained
the upper hand. The banking system was considered too weak to
be given any strong medicine. Accounting standards were modified and special effortd were made to enable banks to meet them.
The last-minute bridge loan to Argentina on March 1, 1984,
stands out as the most dramatic intervention by the Federal Reserve.
Eurcpean central banks took e different tesk. They encowaged
commercial banks to set up reserves and write down bad loans.
They could afford to do so. European banks were, on the whole,
less deeply involved, and their accounting system permitted the
accumulation of large hidden reserves. The United Kingdom occupied a halfway position between the Continent and the United
States. Some British banks were amongst those with the highest
loan exposure to less developed countries, but they had a much
sounder deposit base%intheir own branch system so that they
were never as susceptible to a crisis of confidence as their American counterparts.
It may be argued that the Federal Reserve went too far in supporting the money center banks. These banks were allowed to
treat as current income the rescheduling fees anbxceptionally
wide spreads they charged on paper but did not collect in cash.
As a result, they could report substantial earnings gains, and some
of them actually increased their dividends in 1983.
Ironically, the formation of the Collectives, and the permissilre
attitude of the regulatory authorities that accompanied it, delayed
and diverted the adjustment process in the U.S. banking industry.
Debtor countries had to face harsh reality, but banks were left
with a large load of doubtful debt whose doubtful quality they
y they could collect the interest was by
had to hide. The ~ n l way
making additional loans. Thus the problem was not only unacknowledged but also growing, The banks responded by trying
to grow even fast&. The most desirable way to grow was to provide services without tying up assets. Money center banks developed a host of new services and marketed them aggressively.
But they were not averse to expanding their balance sheets,
either. Almost any loan was of better quality than their portfolio

120

I

Historical Perspective

of loans to the less developed countries. This was the heyday of
leveraged buyouts; banks were willing to grant very generous
terms. Banks were also aggressive bidders for deposits abroad
and used the funds to build up their domestic asset base. Thus
they became the primary vehicle for attracting capital to the
United States.
Unfortunately, banks were unable to use their remarkably good
reported earnings to raise equity capital, because the stock market
saw through the charade and bank shares were valued at substantial discounts from stated asset values. Chemical Bank managed
to seize a propitious moment and sell some shares; Manufacturers
Hansver alss placed shares in connection wi4& its acquisition ui
CIT Corp.-but these were exceptions. On the whole, banks had
to rely on retained earnings, which could not keep pace with the
growth in assets.
Nevertheless, there was a race to expand and diversify. Manufacturers Hanover acquired CIT Corp. at a hefty price and the
artifice of the "nonbank bank" was invented in order to circumvent existing restrictions on geographical diversification. The
money center banks were pressing for permission to expand
across state lines, but they ran into stiff opposition from regional
banks who wanted protection. The protracted battle has only recently been resolved, giving the regional banks a breathing space
before the money center banks are allowed to buy up banks outside state limits.
The Federal Reserve did not wish to put any constraints on the
banking system that would have a negative effect on the economy.
The first priority was to prevent a collapse and to that end they
wanted to engineer a strong recovery. Only when the recovery
was well under way did they rein in the money supply, allowing
interest rates to rise. They could have also tried to rein in the
banks, but that is not what happened. Bad loans continued to
accumulate and capital ratios continued to deteriorate. Confidence i n the banking system remained precarious.
Eventually troubles surfaced in the domestic loan portfolios.
Large segments of the economy, notably agriculture and the oil
industry, did not participate in the recovery. In contrast to the
international debt, it was impractical to keep the domestic borrowers afloat by lending them the money to pay the interest because there were just too many of them. Continental Illinois Bank
was particularly badly hit because it had followed loose lending

Evolution of the Banking System

121

practices. Specifically, it had purchased a large amount of unsound energy loans from Penn Square Bank, which had gone
bankrupt. Having no branches, it was in the unfortunate position
of being heavily dependent on borrowed funds. Thus it became
the focal point of concern.
There was also troubte brewing in the savings and loan industry. The equity of many institutions had been wiped out by the
rise in interest rates pridr to 1982.To prevent wholesale collapse,
a large number of institutions had to be merged or otherwise salvaged during 1982.The Reagan administration was looking to the
market mechanism for a solution. In one of the most remarkable
episodes in financial history many of the mgnlatory constraints
were removed just at a time when the capital of the industry
was seriously impaired. The range of activities in which savings
and loan companies could engage and the range of assets they
could invest in were greatly extended. Since the savings and
loans had gotten into trouble in a regulated environment it
was assumed that the, removal of constraints would help to
get them out of trouble. Private enterprise did in fact devise
ingenious ways to salvage bankrupt savings and loan companies. Most of the new money invested was immediately recouped as a tax loss and sawy investors gained control of
institutions licensed to gather government-insured deposits
with very little cash investment. Some of these institutions
fell into the hands of operators who could use su& deposits in
support of other activities from which they profited. They had
much to gain but little to lose from expanding aggressively.
This was a formula for disaster. It is surprising that it was not
recognized as such.
The company that exploited the opportunity presented by the
regulators most aggressively was Financial Corporation of America under the dynamic leadership of its president, Charles Knapp.
Having acquired First Charter Financial, an old established institution whose deposits were insured by the Federal Savings and
Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), it went on a borrowing
spree, using brokgrs as well as a high-powered in-house sales
force. It then invested heavily in rather risky real estate loans as
well as fixed-rate mbrtgages. If any of the loans went sour, another
developer was found who would take it over in exchange for a
much larger loan on his own development. As interest rates began
to rise, the company averaged up its fixed-rate mortgage portfolio
