
you just have to notice that it exists. When this flow is broken (the market
trading above or below a significant trend line), it is a good indication the
balance of the market forces has shifted. Then ask yourself, what is the
likelihood the shift will gain hold and continue trending in the direction of
the break?
You don't even have to know the answer to that question. Put in an order
at a spot that would confirm the highest probability of a change in the
balance. Then wait for the market to define itself. If your order is filled,
put a stop where the market shouldn't be to confirm that your trade is still
valid. "What is a valid trade?" you ask. One where the highest probabilities
for price movement are in the direction of the prevailing force.
High à Retrace à Rally to a Lower High
I will give you an example. No matter how simple a trade this is, it has very
sound psychological reasons for working. In this example, the market made
new highs and sold off. The sell-off could be the result of new sellers
corning into the market in force, or old buyers selling to take their profits,
or a combination of both. Prices will continue to drop until enough traders
believe the price is cheap and are willing to take the initiative and bid the
price back up. As the price approaches the last previous high, buyers will
begin to anticipate whether or not prices can penetrate, and sellers will be
looking for another top.
In either case expectations by both will be raised. If some buyers are willing
to bid the price past the previous highs to some significant level, it will make
believers out of others who were on the sidelines. If they do come in, it will
add to the momentum.
Some old sellers will admit to being wrong and will have to buy to get out
of their trades, thus adding to the upward momentum.
However, what if the market approaches the highs the second time, and
sellers come back into the market again with enough force to keep the price
from exceeding or equaling the previous high? Buyers will start to become
disappointed. Where will they really be disappointed?—if enough buyers
don't come into the market to support the price at the previous low. If prices
penetrate that low, watch for buyers to bail out en masse. For them to get out
of their position, who is going to buy it from them? If everybody is trying to
sell and no one is available to buy, what are prices going to do? Fall like a
rock.
The reason why a bull market is ready to turn into a bear market when the
general public gets involved is because the general public has the least
tolerance for risk and consequently needs the most reassurance and
confirmation that what they are doing is a sure thing. As a result, they will
be the last to be convinced that the rising market represents an opportunity.
If a bull market has lasted for any length of time, the general public will feel
compelled to jump on the bandwagon so to speak, because of their
164

perception that everyone else is doing it and making money. They will pick
up on any reason that sounds the most rational to justify their participation,
when in reality, they will know very little about what they are doing, but
since everyone else is doing it, how can they go wrong.
A continuing bull market requires the continual infusion of new traders
who are willing to pay higher and higher prices. The longer a bull market
lasts, the greater the number of people who are already participating as
buyers, leaving fewer and fewer traders who haven't already bought and
fewer and fewer traders who are willing to bid the price up. These older
buyers obviously want to see the market keep on going up, but they also
don't want to get caught holding the bag, if the market stops going up. As
their profits accumulate from the higher prices, they start to get nervous
about taking their profits.
By the time the general public starts buying en masse, the professional
traders knows the end is near. How does the professional know this?
Because the professional knows that there is a practical limit to the number
of people who will participate to bid the price up. There will come a point
where everyone who is likely to be a buyer will have already bought, quite
literally leaving no one else to buy. The professional trader would like the
market to continue to go up indefinitely just like all the other buyers.
However, he also understands the impracticality of that happening, so he
starts taking his profits while there are still some buyers available to sell to.
When the last buyer has bought, the market has no place to go but down.
The public gets stuck because they weren't willing to take the risk when
there was still potential for the market to move. For the market to sustain
itself, it needs to attract more and more people. As big as this country is or
the world for that matter, there are only so many people who will buy.
Eventually the supply of buyers runs out, and when it does the market falls
like a rock.
The professionals have been selling out their positions before this
happens, but once the supply of buyers runs out, the professionals start to
compete among one another for the available supply of buyers which is
dwindling fast, so they offer lower and lower prices to attract someone into
the market so they can get out. At some point, instead of the lower prices
being attractive to people, it panics them. The public didn't anticipate
losing. Their expectations are very high with very little toleration for
disappointment. The only reason they got in was because it was a sure
thing. When the public starts to sell, it starts a stampede.
Again, people will ascribe their actions to some rational reason because
nobody wants to be thought of as irrational and panic-stricken. The real
reason why people panicked and the prices fell is simply because prices
didn't keep on going up.

165

CHAPTER 16

The Steps to Success

Self-discipline is simply a mental technique to stay focused on what you
need to learn, or do, to accomplish your goals. There will be times when
you won't have the resources to function effectively relative to the external
conditions. Other times the resources you do have will be in conflict with
both the conditions and your goals. So to accomplish your goals, you will
need to adapt. In other words, you will need to change the way you interact
with the environment. To change your behavior and how you experience
the environment (feelings and emotions), you will have to change your
perspective. To change your perspective, you will have to change the mental
components that effect your perception of environmental information.
Keep in mind that you can't physically control what the markets do; you can
only learn to control your perception of the markets to share the highest
degree of reality (the least amount of distortion) with everyone else who is
participating or has the potential to participate. The more sophisticated you
become as a trader, the more you will realize that trading is completely
mental. It isn't you against the markets, it's just you. All the other traders
participating to make the market provide you with an opportunity to make
money from their divergent beliefs about the future. If people didn't
disagree about the future value of any particular commodity or stock, then
there would be nothing to compel them to either bid a price higher or offer
it lower, and the opportunity to profit from these changes would cease to
exist. So the markets just offer the individual trader opportunity. They don't
choose the data on which you focus your attention, and they certainly don't
166

interpret the data you perceive. Nor are the markets responsible for what
you can't perceive because of the distinctions you haven't learned to make
yet. They also don't choose when you put on a trade, how long you stay in,
when you get out, or how many contracts you buy or sell.
Each individual trader creates his own experience of the markets based
on this picking and choosing process and the decisions that result. If you
accept this concept as valid, then the implications are that you will never
have a valid reason to blame the markets for your unsatisfying results. The
markets don't owe you anything (regardless of how hard you work to be
successful) because every other trader participating is doing so to take your
money away. You and you alone are completely responsible for whatever
you end up with. The sooner you accept that responsibility (if you haven't
already), the easier it will be to identify what skills you need to learn to
interact with the markets more successfully. Even if you can't identify the
mental components responsible for what you ended up with, at least by
assuming that you are responsible, you will be opening yourself up to find
out.
To be a successful trader you need to trade without fear. As you have
already learned when you use fear as a resource to limit yourself, you will
create the very conditions you are trying to avoid. Or to say this another
way, you will experience your fears. You also can't learn anything new
because fear will force you to perceive the environmental "now" from your
individual past. You will experience that past regardless of the
opportunities the environment may have to offer in that same moment.
Your individual history will repeat itself until you change your history,
which will then allow you to learn and experience something new. Evolving
beyond your fears is also the best way to learn how to predict market
behavior. The more fearful traders are, the fewer the choices they perceive as
available to themselves and the easier it is to predict their behavior. You will
be able to recognize this clearly in others when you recognize it yourself and
work your way out of the condition where you trade with fear.
However, you will need some resource to limit yourself so that you don't
get reckless. Getting reckless is exactly what people have a tendency to do if
they don't feel any fear, especially if there is a potential for thrilling results,
as there is in trading. The resource you need to limit yourself is self-trust.
You will gain that self-trust when you establish a set of rules and guidelines
to trade by and know that you will always follow those rules without
hesitation, regardless of the temptations to do otherwise.
Once you trust yourself to always do what needs to be done, there will be
nothing to fear because the markets won't be able to do anything to you, as
a result of your inability to respond appropriately. Consequently, with
nothing to fear, you are then free to observe the markets free of
distortions. There won't be any need to avoid certain categories of
information because of how that information will make you feel. The less
reason you have to avoid or distort information, the more you make yourself
167

available to learn about the nature of the markets. The more you learn, the
easier it will be to anticipate what the market will do next. If you can
accurately anticipate what will happen next, the easier it will be to give
yourself more and more money (notwithstanding any mental components
that would argue against giving yourself more money).
It is very important for you to understand that these new insights about
the market's behavior will come in stages as you learn to trust yourself more
and more. There is no "get rich quick" scheme being offered here. There are
enough rags to riches to rags stories to attest to the fact that get rich quick
doesn't work anyway. Getting rich quick can only lead to a great deal of
anxiety and frustration if you don't have the skills to keep it. There isn't
much point to making a lot of money if you are a susceptible to making that
one trading error that can give it all back plus more. Once you have made a
fortune and lost it, the psychological work that you will need to do to get it
back is enormous compared to work that is necessary to keep yourself from
losing it in the first place. As a trader it is more important to know that you
will always follow your rules than it is to make money, because whatever
money you make, you will inevitably lose back to the market if you can't follow
your rules.
You also need to understand that your rules will change as your
understanding and insights evolve. Many people don't like to establish
trading rules because they believe that once made, they can't be changed.
Any exercise that I offer you or rule that you select to guide your trading
behavior is only transitory. They are methods and techniques to get you
beyond certain fundamental stages of development so that you can recognize
for yourself their value and what you need to do next to be more successful.
In fact, a good rule of thumb to use to determine your readiness to move
beyond a certain rule or exercise and to the next challenge is the recognition
that you can do what you set out to learn so well that it becomes second
nature. Otherwise, keep working at it until you don't have to think about it
any longer.
STEP ONE: STAYING FOCUSED ON
WHAT YOU NEED TO LEARN
First and foremost, you may need to change your perspective or the focus of
your trading. Until now your focus may have been to make money. If this is
so, you will need to change your perspective to "What do I need to learn
or how will I have to adapt myself to interact more successfully?" You
need to stay focused on mastering the steps to achieving your goal and not
the end result, knowing that the end result, money, will be a by-product of
what you know and how well you can act on what you know.
There is a tremendous difference between focusing on money and
focusing on using your trading as an exercise to identify what you need to
learn. The first will cause you to focus on what the markets are giving you
168

or are taking away from you. The second perspective causes you to focus
your attention on your ability to to give yourself money. With the first
perspective, you are placing some of the responsibility onto the markets to
do something for you. With the second perspective, you assume all the
responsibility.
Always keep in mind that each moment is a perfect reflection of your
level of development. If you look at each moment that things don't turn out
as you want or expect as a mistake, then you will usually cut yourself off
from the insight about yourself contained within each moment. The reason
why we will cut ourselves off from this information is because we typically
associate mistakes with pain. We will instinctively avoid pain and in doing
so also avoid what we need to know about ourselves to interact more
effectively in similar circumstances in the future.
To evolve beyond pain and our fear of mistakes, our mistakes have to be
resolved. This could be a big task and you may not want to tackle it at this
time. So what you will need to do is build a corollary framework to place all
of your trading experiences. This framework needs to be defined in such a
way that all experiences are valid and have meaning, and, as such,
mistakes don't exist—they just point the way.
As part of this framework you may also need to change your definition
of a missed opportunity. Except for the inability to accept a loss, there isn't
anything that has the potential to cause more psychological damage than a
belief in missed opportunities. Missed opportunities are trades that would
have always turned out perfectly because they only occurred in our minds,
where we can make anything be as we want it to be. Of course, we would
have responded exactly as the conditions warranted without flaw. The
problem is we didn't do it, and the resulting sense of loss we feel is difficult
to reconcile. Therefore, these missed opportunity trades have the potential
to cause more anxiety and stress than the trades we actually do take that
turn out to be losers.
Nothing's worse than missing a "perfect" opportunity. However, if you
could have, you would have; it's that simple. The sooner you accept this, the
sooner you will be able to take advantage of these missed opportunities
instead of beating yourself up over them. Besides there really isn't anything
to miss because the markets are in perpetual motion and will continue to be
until everyone agrees on value. As long as the price keeps changing, there
will always be another opportunity.
When you start trading from the perspective that mistakes don't exist,
you will be amazed at the sense of freedom you will feel to grow by
accepting your results as a reflection of who you are in that moment, which
then allows you to determine what you need to learn to do better. When
you release the energy out of the belief that it is possible to miss anything,
you will no longer feel compelled to do something, like getting into trades
too early or too late. In other words, you will be giving yourself
additional choices (not doing something is often the most appropriate
169

choice) where only one choice existed.
You need to constantly keep in mind that the professional traders from
whom you are trying to extract money already know and are using many
of the principles put forth in this book. They understand the concept of
objectivity, have learned how to trade without fear, and know how to
execute their trades properly. Before you can begin to take money out of the
markets consistently instead of the markets taking yours, you will also have
to learn these skills.
So, I would suggest that you set aside a certain amount of trading capital
as tuition for your education. How much you set aside will be a function of
how many skills you need to learn. What is most important is that you
make a firm commitment to your education as a trader. Even if you have
been trading for years and you are successful, but not as successful as you
would like to be, setting aside money that you will trade with as an exercise
to learn some needed skill is a very powerful symbol of your commitment
to learning that skill. The stronger your commitment, the faster you will
learn.
STEP TWO:

DEALING WITH LOSSES
Trading Rule 1

Predefine what a loss is in every potential trade. By "predefine," I mean
determine what the market has to look like or do, to tell you that the trade
no longer represents an opportunity, at least not an opportunity in the time
frame in which you trade.
When your beliefs about losses are restructured, the possibility of a
losing trade will not create any threat of pain. Most successful traders
restructured their beliefs about losses after they lost one or more fortunes.
They experienced their worst fears about losing and then came to the
realization that they didn't have anything to fear if they just did what needs
to be done. What needs to be done? Confront the possibility of being
wrong and consequently not avoid the inevitability of taking a loss. So
confronting and accepting the inevitability of a loss is a trading skill,
certainly a skill learned the hard way for most, but nevertheless an essential
component at the foundation of virtually everything you need to learn to
become a successful trader.
The relatively few successful traders in the market today did it the hard
way. You, on the other hand, have the opportunity to do it much more
easily. There will be two mental components at work to help you acquire
this skill. First is your understanding of why it is so essential to confront the
possibility of a loss. If you don't, you will generate fear and end up creating
the very experience that you are trying to avoid. When you really
understand this concept, it will become unacceptable to you to trade from
the old perspective of loss avoidance.
170

The second is your willingness to change your definitions of what it
means to lose. By using some of the mental exercises in Chapter 14 you can
change these definitions by using your thoughts instead of having to lose
everything or practically everything you own to get to the same place. That
place is "losses do not diminish me (you) as a person." The sooner you
believe it, the easier it will be to identify and execute a losing trade. By
making the execution of a losing trade an automatic function of your trading
strategy, you make yourself psychologically available to take advantage of
the next opportunity, even if that opportunity is in the same direction of the
losing trade you just got out of.
Trading Rule 2
Execute your losing trades immediately upon perception that they exist.
When losses are predefined and executed without hesitation, there is
nothing to consider, weigh, or judge and consequently nothing to tempt
yourself with. There will be no threat of allowing yourself the possibility
of ultimate disaster. If you find yourself considering, weighing, or judging,
then you are either not predefining what a loss is or you are not executing
them immediately upon perception, in which case, if you don't and it turns
out to be profitable, you are reinforcing an inappropriate behavior that will
inevitably lead to disaster. Or if you don't and the loss worsens, you will
create a negative cycle of pain, that once started will be difficult to stop. The
next error after letting a loss get out of hand is usually not taking the next
opportunity, which invariably is always a winning trade. After which, we
get so angry at ourselves for passing up that opportunity that we make
ourselves susceptible to any number of other trading errors, like taking a
trade that was a tip from another trader, which invariably is always a loser.
It is important for you to note that once you completely trust yourself
to cut your losses, you will eventually get to the point where you may not
have to predefine what a loss is. There are traders who have reached such a
high degree of objectivity and trust that they can get into a trade and know
when it is a loser without having to predefine it for themselves. They let
the market define it for them based on their comprehensive knowledge of
the various participants involved and their knowledge of the various
relationships between price movement and time. However, the reason why
they were able to learn what they know about the nature of the markets is
because their focus of attention widened to include more undistorted
information leading to greater insights, once they learned, first, however, to
trust themselves. Keep in mind, that fear is really the only thing that keeps
us from learning anything new. You can't learn anything new about the
nature of the market's behavior if you are afraid of what you may do or
can't do that is not in your best interests. By predefining and cutting your
losses short, you are making yourself available to learn the best possible way
to let your profits grow.
171

STEP THREE: BECOMING AN EXPERT AT
JUST ONE MARKET BEHAVIOR
