
benevolently upon by middle-aged executives because they represented
the future of the organization. Salomon trainees were freeloaders, guilty
until proven innocent. With this rap on your head, you were not
particularly eager to meet the boss. Sadly you had no choice. The boss
was everywhere. He saw you in your red suspenders with gold dollar signs
and knew instantly who you were. A cost center.
Even if you shed your red suspenders and adopted protective coloration,
you were easily identifiable as a trainee. Trainees were impossibly out of
step with the rhythm of the place. The movements of the trading floor
respond to the movements of the markets as if roped together. The
American bond market, for example, lurches whenever important
economic data are released by the U. S. Department of Commerce. The
bond trading floor lurches with it. The markets decide what are
important data and what are not. One month it is the U.S. trade deficit,
the next month the consumer price index. The point is that the traders
know what economic number is the flavor of the month and the trainees
don't. The entire Salomon Brothers trading floor might be poised for a
number at 8:30 A.M., gripped by suspense and a great deal of hope, ready
to leap and shout, to buy or sell billions of dollars' worth of bonds, to
make or lose millions of dollars for the firm, when a trainee arrives,
suspecting nothing, and says, "Excuse me, I'm going to the cafeteria,
does anybody want anything?" Trainees, in short, were idiots.
One lucky trainee was spared the rite of passage. His name was Myron
Samuels, and he had cut such a deal with the head of municipal bond
trading that by the time I arrived at Salomon Brothers, he was
carpooling to work with two managing directors and a senior trader. He
was rumored to have family connections in the higher reaches of the
firm; the alternative explanation is that he was a genius. Anyway, he did
not fail to exploit his exalted status. He walked around the trading floor
with a confidence seen in few of the people who were actually working.
Since Samuels didn't work, he could enjoy himself, like a kid who had
been let into Daddy's office. He would make his way to the municipal
bond desk, take a seat, call for the shoeshine man, phone a friend long
distance, light up a cigar, and put the shoe that wasn't being shined up on
the desk. He'd holler at passing managing directors like old friends. No
one but no one dreamed of doing this—except Samuels.
In general, the more senior the figure, the more amusing he found

Samuels; I think this was because the more senior people were more
aware of Samuels's connections. Nevertheless, a few were furious. But
on the municipal trading desk Samuels could not be touched. I walked by
once and overheard two vice-presidents whispering about him. "I can't
stand that fuckin' guy," said one to the other. "Yeah," said the other,
"but what are you going to do about it?"
To avoid being squashed on my visits to the floor, I tried to keep still,
preferably in some corner. Except for Gutfreund, whom I knew from
magazine pictures and thought of as more a celebrity than a
businessman, the faces were foreign to me. That made it hard to know
whom to avoid. Many of them looked the same, in that most were white,
most were male, and all wore the same all-cotton button-down shirts (one
of our Japanese told me he couldn't for the life of him tell them apart).
The forty-first floor of Salomon New York was Power Central, holding
not just the current senior management of the firm but its future
management as well. You had to go by their strut to distinguish between
who should be approached and who avoided.
Did I grow more comfortable on the trading floor over time? I suppose.
But even when I had established myself within the firm, I got the creepy
crawlies each time I walked out onto 41.1 could see certain developments
in myself, however. One day I was out playing the Invisible Man, feeling
the warmth of the whale shit and thinking that no one in life was lower
than I. Onto the floor rushed a member of the corporate finance
department wearing his jacket like a badge of dishonor. Nobody wore a
jacket on the floor. It must have been his first trip down from liis glass
box office, and he looked one way and then the other in the midst of the
bedlam. Someone bumped into him and sharply told him to watch his step.
Watch his step? But he was just standing there. You could see him
thinking that the gaze of the whole world was on him. And he started to
panic, like a stage actor who had forgotten his lines. He'd probably
forgotten why he'd come in the first place. And he left. Then I thought
a nasty thought. A terrible thought. A truly unforgivable thought. But it
showed I was coming along. What a wimp, I thought. He doesn't have a
fucking clue.
Chapter Four
Adult Education

FOUR WEEKS had passed. The class had acquired a serse of its rights.
The first inalienable right of a trainee was to dawdle and amuse himself
before he settled into his chair for the morning. Cafeteria bagels and
coffee were munched and swallowed throughout the room. People read
the New York Post and laid bets on whatever game was to be played that
evening. The New York Times crossword puzzle had been photocopied
126 times and distributed. Someone had telephoned one of New York's
sleazy porno recordings and linked the receiver to a loudspeaker on the
table in the front of the classroom. Sex talk filled the air. I was, as was
my habit at this hour, biting into a knish.
Wappow! Max Johnson, former U.S. Navy fighter pilot, nailed Leonard
Bublick, four-eyed M.B. A. from the University of Indiana, on the side of
the head with a paper wad. Bublick could not have been surprised since
this sort of thing happened often; nevertheless, he looked wounded and
sought to identify the offender. "Nice haircut, Bublick!" shouted a backrow person with his feet up on the chair next to Johnson. "Oooooo, grow
up, you guys!" said Bublick from his seat in the front.
Susan James walked in to interrupt The Revenge of the Nerds II. James
played a strange role. She was something between a baby-sitter and an
organizer of the program. Her reward for a job well done was,
perversely, to be admitted to a future training program. Like everyone
else, she wanted to work on the trading floor; only she was one step
farther removed than we were from realizing that ambition. Her distance
from the moneymaking machine reduced her credibility as a disciplinarian
to zero. She had only the power to tattle on us, and really not even
that. Because we were her future bosses, she wanted to be our friend.
Once we had moved to the trading floor and she to the training program,
she would be pleading with us for a job. Trainees knew she had about as
much clout as a substitute teacher, and so, when not abusing her, they
ignored her. Now, however, she had an important message to deliver.
"Quit fooling around, you guys," she pleaded, like a camp counselor
before parents' day. "Jim Massey is going to be in here in a minute. This
class already has a bad enough reputation," which was true A couple of
days before, a back-row person had beaned with a paper wad a managing
director from bond market research, who had turned the color of
raspberry sorbet and screamed for five minutes. He hadn't been able to
identify the culprit and, before leaving, had promised to have his revenge

on us all.
Susan James repeated for what must have been the tenth time that the
impression formed of us by Jim Massey during his half hour appearance
would affect our careers (paychecks!) until we retired or died. Massey,
we all thought, was John Gutfreund's hatchet man, an American
corporate Odd Job. It didn't require a triple jump of the imagination to
picture him decapitating insolent trainees with a razor-edged bowler hat.
He had what some people might consider an image problem. He never
smiled. His formal position was member of the Salomon Brothers
executive committee in charge of sales. He was also in charge of our
futures. He presided over the job placement blackboard beside the
trading floor. A flick of his wrist could send your name flying from New
York to Atlanta. Trainees feared Massey. He seemed to prefer it that
way.
Ostensibly Massey had come to answer questions we might h<rve about
the firm. We were only a few weeks into the program. Surely we must
have questions about the firm. Actually we weren't given much choice.
We had damn well better be curious, said Susan. "And you gujs had
better ask some good questions. Remember, opinions are being formed." ,
Thus the bugle was sounded before the chairman's keeper of the
corporate culture arrived to answer our questions. He had ajawline lean
and sharp enough to cut cake and short-cropped hair. He wore a gray suit
with, unlike other board members, no pocket hankie. He had an economy
of style and, like a gifted athlete, an economy of movement, as if he were
conserving his energy for a meaningful explosion.
He gave a short talk, the point of which was to stress how singular and
laudable was the culture of Salomon Brothers. Yes, we knew it was the
best trading firm in the world. Yes, we also knew that Salomon stressed
teamwork (who doesn't?). Yes, we realized that the quickest way to be
fired was to appear in the press boasting about how much money we
made (Salomon was modest and discreet). Perhaps we had heard the fate
of the Salomon man in Los Angeles who appeared in Newsweek lounging
beside a swimming pool and boasting about his good fortune? Yes, he had
been sacked. Yes, we knew Salomon's three billion dollars in capital made
it the most powerful force in the financial markets. Yes, we knew that no
matter what we had achieved in our small lives, we weren't fit to get a
cup of coffee for the men on the trading floor. Yes, we knew not to

concern ourselves too much but rather let the firm (Massey) decide
where on the trading floor we should be placed at the end of the training
program.
Like the other Salomon executives, Massey was flying high in 1985 on the
back of a series of record earning quarters. These were not merely
records for Salomon Brothers but records for all of Wall Street. He
could do no wrong. From his description the firm could do no wrong. Yet
when he called for questions, there was silence. We were too frightened
to talk.
I certainly wasn't going to say anything. No doubt he knew many things I
should like to have known, but I sensed that his call for questions was
not genuine. In this I wasn't alone. No one dared ask, for example, why,
at the same time everyone else at Salomon was being told not to talk to
the press, Gutfreund had his cherubic face plastered on the cover of
every business magazine in the country. Nor was anyone going to ask
what we really wanted to know: how much money we could make over the
next few years. And the most obvious question no one asked was why Jim
Massey, the man in charge of hiring trainees, the man directly
responsible for the explosive growth of the firm, was not worried that
the firm was expanding recklessly (yes, it was apparent even to trainees).
No, we were stumped for questions to ask. This, I made a note at the
time, is what distinguishes work from school. Curious minds were not
what Massey was after. Massey was looking for cult followers. But he
repulsed the most slobbering front-row people. Even they were reluctant
to cater to such an obvious desire.
Beside me in the front sat Susan James, looking like a frustrated babysitter. C'mon, you guys, ask questions! At last, to my right, the
hand of an egregious front-row person rose. I saw who it was and shut
my eyes, waiting to be embarrassed for him. He did not disappoint.
"Could you tell us," said the young fortune seeker, "whether the firm has
considered opening an office in an Eastern European city? You know, like
Prague."
Like Prague! Had the speaker been anyone beneath the level of executive
committee member the room would have erupted in spitballs, paper wads,
and howling. As it was, unnatural sounds came from the back row, as if a
dozen young men were choking back their ridicule. The thought of
Salomon Brothers in Prague had possibly never occurred to anyone in the

seventy-five-year history of the firm. Such is the spark of creativity
generated by the presence of a member of the executive committee
demanding to be asked questions.
Yet Massey took the question straight, like a State Department
spokesman. He plainly would have preferred to be asked, "To what do you
attribute your success at Salomon?" but today, he must have thought,
just wasn't his day.
After Massey left, it was a month before anyone of his level in the
company ventured into the training program. Perhaps he let them know
that we weren't very good at this game. But then suddenly, in rapid
succession, we enjoyed visits from another executive committee member,
Dale Horowitz, and then the chairman himself.
Horowitz was an old-world investment banker in his middle fifties, a
street-smart relationship man, a natural candidate to open and run the
Prague office when the time came. His head bobbed on top of his big
body and his face always reminded me of Yogi Bear. All I knew about him
when he arrived was that he, like Gutfreund, had made his name in
municipal bonds and that a few of my Jewish friends were devoted to
him. He was the original rabbi: kind and wise, with a taste for large
cigars. People called him Uncle Dale. He declined to stand at the podium
and instead sat down at the table in the front of the room and spread his
arms wide. He talked about how much more important it was to have a
family than to have a career, which I think impressed most people as the
strangest thing they had heard in the course of the training program.
Then he said, in his deep, warm voice, he would answer any questions we
cared to ask. Really, go on and ask. Anything.
Several hands rose. I thought this was going to be the long-awaited
Everything You Wanted to Know About Salomon but Were Afraid to Ask
session. From somewhere in the middle of the room came the first
good question all day. "Why," asked the trainee, "is Salomon blacklisted
by the Arabs?"
Uncle Dale's face wrinkled. "What do you want to know about that for?"
he snapped. He looked pissed off, like an angry Yogi. The Arab blacklist
was an unmentionable, although I can't imagine why. You didn't have to
be Dick Tracy to discover we were on it (although you had to be James
Bond to discover how to get off it. It apparently required a diplomatic
mission to Damascus). The Arabs had severed relations with Salomon

when it had merged with the commodity traders Phillips Brothers.
Phillips Brothers, I was told, had ties to Israel. I thought the blacklist
would have lost its sting with the collapse of the price of oil. The Arabs
were now spending more than they were earning. At twelve dollars a
barrel they were far less important as clients than they had once been.
No corporate secrets here. Still, you could almost see the black mark
being registered against the name of the man who had asked the
question.
The children had ceased to amuse Uncle. We had been lulled into a false
sense of security. We sensed this all at once. Hands vanished around the
room, yanked from the maws of a closing trap. But one poor guy was slow
to catch on. Horowitz called on him.
"Why," asked the trainee, "do we tolerate a South African company as
our largest shareholder? Does anyone in the firm consider the ethics of
our owners?"
Horowitz shot him this killer look that said, "You fucking trainees are too
impudent for words." By this time he was rolling a big fat cigar around in
his mouth, and his eyes had narrowed to pillbox slits. A South African
mining company called Minorco owned 12 percent of Salomon Inc. Uncle
Dale's answer was that yes, ethics were a consideration (can you imagine
an investment banker ever saying ethics were not a consideration?) but
that beyond that he wasn't going to discuss the issue.
So much for glasnost.
A few mornings later John Gutfreund arrived. By this time we had grown
weary of heart-to-heart chats with senior management. A few trainees
planned to sleep in on the morning of Gutfreund's talk. Susan James
worried she wouldn't produce enough of a crowd for the great man. She
had secretaries call us in our homes in the wee hours of the morning
before the event to threaten us with punishment if we didn't show up.
Her effort was wasted on me. I had no intention of missing it, just as if
Joan Collins had come to speak, I wouldn't miss her. I hardly
expected to hear anything new. But I thought I might learn something
indirectly. For here was a man who was said to have stamped his
personality onto an institution; his faults as well as his virtues were
those of Salomon Brothers.
Gutfreund is often accused of affecting a British accent, but at this
point in his career, he limited himself to calling other men fellows. As in

"Jim Massey is a very talented fellow." Even that, as far as I can
determine, is not a British affectation but a northeastern American one.
No, his only noticeable affectation was a statesmanlike calmness. He was
so intensely calm and deliberate that he made you nervous. And
suspicious. He paused interminably after each question we asked him. He
really seemed to want to know what we were thinking. When a trainee
asked him about Salomon Brothers' policy toward charity, Gutfreund
with furrowed brow, after standing silent for an uncomfortably long
time, said that charity was a very difficult issue, and he would appreciate
our input.
The statesman's veneer was a pleasant departure from the gruff
foulmouthed trader that people expected John Gutfreund to be. And he
not only sounded the part but looked the part. He was round like
Churchill, with the thinning white hair of Harry Truman, and the
grandeur, if not the height, of de Gaulle. But what had become of the
man who claimed to stand ready each morning "to bite the ass off a
bear"? Where was the man who was known around Wall Street for his
brutal power plays? The man whose very name struck terror in the
hearts of managing directors? We didn't know. And I'm not sure we
wanted to find out. The problem with his lofty sentiments and pregnant
pauses was that they were completely eclipsed by his reputation. Because
of what we had heard about him, it was impossible to imagine discussing
the United Way with him over tea in his office. Who knew where he had
picked up the wise statesman routine? But no one thought it was real.
Just dangerous—like the mesmeric gaze of a cobra.
After telling us nothing much, but showing us what a world-class financial
celebrity looked like up close, he left. And that was the end of our
exposure to the management of Salomon Brothers.
I assumed the strange behavior of our managers was simply a response
to having had a pile of loot dropped into their laps. They were still
enjoying the turkey stuffed by Paul Volcker and America's borrowing
spree. There they were, modest men, living off other people's scraps,
when all of a sudden the big fat stuffed bird was handed to them.
They were doing nothing more than what they had always done, yet
overnight glory was thrust upon them. Their incomes had changed, and
with it their lives. Imagine.
If you are a self-possessed man with a healthy sense of detachment

from your bank account and someone writes you a check for tens of
millions of dollars, you probably behave as if you have won a sweepstakes,
kicking your feet in the air and laughing yourself to sleep at night at the
miracle of your good fortune. But if your sense of self-worth is morbidly
wrapped up in your financial success, you probably believe you deserve
everything you get. You take it as a reflection of something grand inside
you. You acquire gravitas and project it like a cologne whenever you
discuss the singular and laudable Salomon Brothers culture.
Almost everyone on Wall Street took his money seriously, regardless of
its origins, and our bosses were no exception. But a few of the old hands
within Salomon Brothers suffered a more complicated response to their
money. Not that they ever doubted they were worth every penny they
got. But they were uneasy with the explosion of debt in America. (In
general, the better they recalled the Great Depression, the more
suspicious they were of the leveraging of America.) The head of bond
research at Salomon, Henry Kaufman, was, when I arrived, our most
acute case of cognitive dissonance. He was the guru of the bond market
and also the conscience of our firm. He told investors whether their
fast-moving bonds were going up or down. He was so often right that the
markets made him famous if not throughout the English-speaking world
then at least among the sort of people who read the Wall Street Journal.
Yet Kaufman was known as Dr. Gloom. The party had been thrown in his
honor, but he seemed to want it to end. As he wrote in the Institutional
Investor of July 1987:
One of the most remarkable things that happened in the 1980's was
[the] sharp explosion in debt, way beyond any historical benchmark. It
was way beyond anything you would have expected relative to GNP,
relative to monetary expansion that was taking place. But it came about,
I think, as a result of freeing the financial system, putting into being
financial entrepreneurship and not putting into being adequate disciplines
and safeguards. So that's where we are.
That is where we are: wild, reckless, and deeply in hock. We at Salomon
Brothers were among the leading financial entrepreneurs. What Kaufman
was saying is that we had helped create the problem.
While most of America imagined that Wall Street meant the stock
market, our bond market was setting the tone and the pace on Wall
Street in the 1980s. Salomon Brothers was at the crossroads of change,

gorging itself on the windfall from being at the right place at the right
time, priding itself, justifiably, on its superior bond-trading skills. But all
the time wearing a blindfold. It lacked an accurate vision of where this
explosion in the bond market would lead. There was no shortage of
opinions on what to do with the windfall gains. A trader always has a view.
But the opinions were both arbitrary and self-indulgent. And Salomon
Brothers, from 1980 onward, took what must be one of the most
expensive and fanciful commercial rides in the history of the American
corporation. For most of that ride it patted itself on the back.
With nearly eight weeks of education behind us the faces of speakers
were beginning to blend together. Yet another trader with a Brooklyn
accent and a hacking cough plunked down in front and lectured between
drags on a cancer stick. Still, something distinguished him from other
speakers. Exactly what it was eluded me at first. Then I realized:
wrinkles. This man was old. His attitude toward his job was, by our
standards, sentimental. He released his epigrams like pet doves: "When
I'm trading, you see, I don't stop to pat myself on the back. Because
when I pat myself on the back, the next sensation is usually a sharp kick
lower down. And it isn't so pleasant." When asked the key to his success,
he said, "In the land of the blind the one-eyed man is king." Best of all,
he gave us a rule of thumb about information in the markets that I later
found useful: "Those who say don't know, and those who know don't say."
He was speaking of the stock market. He belonged to the dreaded equity
department, the sleepy backwater in which lurked such career stoppers
as Equities in Dallas. The cheapest way to avoid being airmailed to Dallas
to peddle stocks was never to meet anyone in the equity department. It
first had to pick you out of a lineup before it could employ you. We sank
low in our seats during the week that the people from the equity
department spoke. We assumed we'd never have to see them again once
they had left the training program. That is not to say they were inept—
Salomon Brothers was the leading underwriter of new-stock issues on
Wall Street and one of the two or three top equity traders—but inside
Salomon Brothers the men from equities were second-class citizens. Equities, comparatively speaking, made no money.
The equity department wasn't on 41, the principal trading floor, but on
the floor below. The fortieth floor had low ceilings, no windows, and the
charm of an engine room. Besides the equity traders, it warehoused a
