PDFaid.com

FOREX
TRADING
SECRETS
TRADING STRATEGIES
FOR THE FOREX MARKET

JAMES DICKS

New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London
Madrid Mexico City Milan New Delhi San Juan
Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto

Copyright © 2010 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under
the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in
any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-174709-7
MHID: 0-07-174709-5
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-166422-6, MHID:
0-07-166422-X.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every
occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in
this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions,
or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative please e-mail us at
bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher is engaged in
rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
—From a Declaration of Principles jointly adopted by a Committee of the American Bar Association and
a Committee of Publishers.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under
the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s
prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the
work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these
terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR
RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the
functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy,
error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill
has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them
has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or
cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

To be successful you have to have a mentor. Someone who can inspire you,
someone that will listen to you, someone that will give you sound advice
whether you want to hear it or not. If you don’t have a mentor, that someone to help you get to the top, then keep looking. For me it’s My Uncle
Jack. I know there were many times that he felt I was not listening but
I always was. Thanks for everything you do, this book is dedicated you.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
Preface xi
Acknowledgments xiii
Disclaimer xv
Introduction xvii
Part 1
1

2

The Basics 1

What You Must Know to Get Started 3
Back to the Basics: A History of the FOREX
FOREX versus Stocks 7
FOREX versus Futures 9
Major Currencies and Pairs 11
The U.S. Dollar 11
The Euro 12
The Australian Dollar 12
The Canadian Dollar 13
The British Pound 13
The Swiss Franc 14
The Japanese Yen 14
The New Zealand Dollar 15
The Dollar Index 15
The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA)
Gold CFDs 16
Crude Oil 17
Cross-Rate Currency Pairs 17
Exotic Currency Pairs 18
Chinese Yuan or Renminbi 18
Swedish Krona 18
Norwegian Krone 19
The Iraqi Dinar 19

v

16

3

CONTENTS

vi

3

Anyone Can Learn the FOREX 21
FOREX 101 21
Opening a Position 21
Trading on Margin 23
Managing a Position 23
Closing a Position 24
Pips and Lots 24
The Lot 27
Order Types 27
Where Is the Market Going? 29
Stops and Targets 32
Spreads and Swaps 33
Technical versus Fundamental 34

4

Preparing Yourself Adequately before Jumping
into the Market 37
FOREX Trading Accounts 37
Choosing a Broker 38
Tools 47
Who Trades the FOREX? 49
What Kind of Trader Am I? 50
Trading Techniques 51
The Trader’s Levels of Ascension 55

Part 2
5

6

Money Management

59

The Secret to Making Money 61
Are You Really Fit to Trade in the FOREX Market?
Trading Plans 62
Rules and Discipline 67
How the Market Works 73
Rules for Working with the Market 74
Paper Trading 77
How to Keep Your Profits 81
Money Management 81
Managing Risk 86
Leverage and True Leverage 87
Overtrading and Overconfidence 89
Overleveraging 91
Trade Expectations 92

61

CONTENTS

Part 3
7

8

Trading Psychology

93

Mastering Emotions 95
Trading Psychology 95
Emotions of Trading 99
How to Get Out of a Bad Trade
Become a Pro 110

105

Mind over Matter for Huge Profits
Affirmations 113
Power of Networking 117

Part 4
9

vii

Fundamental Analysis

113

121

Economics 123
What Does Economic Release Mean? 123
Fundamental Analysis 123
Dow Theory 125
Fundamental Indicators 127
Japan’s Monetary Policy 137
FOREX Currency Carry Trade 139
Interventions 140
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 142
Trading the News 143
What Are Contrarian Indicators? 145

Part 5

Technical Analysis

147

10

Technical Indicators 149
Technical Analysis 149
Types of Charts Showing Price Action 150
Trend Indicators 162
Market and Volatility Indicators 168
Understanding Oscillators 173
A Unique Indicator: Ichimoku Kinko Hyo 176
Divergences 177

11

Technical Patterns 181
Candlesticks 181
Chartism Patterns 185
Reversal Patterns 186
Continuation Patterns 192

CONTENTS

viii

Elliott Waves 203
Harmonic Price Patterns 208
Fractals 214
Trading Naked (Only Price Action)

215

12

Support and Resistance 217
Support 217
Resistance 218
Trendlines 219
Moving Averages 219
Other Indicators 220
Entering Positions 221
Exiting Positions 222
Pivot Points: Do They Work? 222
Psychological Levels 226
Using Multiple Time Frames 228
Trend Is Your Friend 231

13

Automated Trading 233
Expert Advisors and Automatic Programming
Interfaces (APIs) 233
Advanced Robots: Neural Networks in the FOREX

Part 6
14

15

Building Your Portfolio

239

Secrets to FOREX Diversification 241
FOREX Options 241
Spot FOREX Options 246
FOREX Futures 247
FOREX Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs)
Contracts for Difference (CFDs) 249
Commodities 250
Indices (Securities) 251
My Favorite Ways to Trade 253
Breakouts 253
Channeling 258
Hedging 261
Basic Oscillator-Based Strategy 262
Basic Moving-Average Crosses 263
Trading Gaps 264
Daily High-Low 265

248

235

CONTENTS

CONCLUSION 269
APPENDIX 273
GLOSSARY 289
BIBLIOGRAPHY 299
INDEX 301

ix

This page intentionally left blank

Preface

There are many books on the market that cover the subject of FOREX trading. But I believe that until now, there has never been a book on this unique
topic that has so vividly described the subject of the FOREX—a universe
completely of its own. The FOREX market is an anonymous entity that
bears many faces, and each individual who participates in it leaves a footprint that just might change the course of their personal circumstances
based on their individual hopes and dreams for success.
This book was written with several purposes in mind. First of all, this
book is designed to inform and educate the potential FOREX trader about
a field that is growing exponentially around the world and is reaching millions of individuals from all walks of life. It is a market that was reserved
for a select few just a decade ago but now is in the hands of anyone, even
those without a formal financial education. For this reason, it is very
important to include a qualified point of view from a real trader’s perspective, a trader who has already traveled through all the steps and experienced
numerous pitfalls but now wants to share this information with you to help
you avoid or, at the very least, minimize any potential negative impact
through education and solid money management techniques.
This book also is intended to provide an overview of all the fundamentals involved in the FOREX and of the trading process so that any new
trader can easily obtain all the tools needed to ensure a quick start. It is also
aimed at the intermediate trader who has already started the process but
could use some guidance and additional tools, with an emphasis on the
importance of a solid money management program and the right mind-set
to develop a successful trading career.
Written from the insider’s perspective of an experienced FOREX trader
who has gone through every step until reaching a stable and consistent
success, this book is focused on pointing out the potential hazards that
every trader will encounter at some point. In the beginning, it will offer

xi

xii

PREFACE

solutions to help you understand how to mitigate many of the risks involved
by centering on dedicated attention to the preliminary preparation, education, and training needed to become a true professional in this field.
The overview includes a history of the FOREX and its basics, as well
as a thorough description of all the fundamental, technical, and psychological aspects and how they merge and interact in the market’s behavior.
Finally, some of the preferred trading systems are described in detail
and discussed as additional elements to help you practice and build your
trading toolbox.
I hope that you will enjoy this book and its concepts. May it bring you
a step closer to becoming a consistent winner and an educated and confident FOREX trader.

Acknowledgments

As you so often read on the acknowledgments page, the author takes a few
brief lines to say thanks. A page of appreciation is in nearly every book and
this one is no different; primarily because a project like this is just impossible to successfully complete without the combined effort of an entire
team. For me I must give thanks first.
I can do everything through Him who gives me strength. — Philippians 4:13

We cannot do it on our own. It is the strength that comes through Jesus
Christ that allows us to master the difficult situations of life and to succeed
where all human wisdom sees only failure.
I was reading through my first book’s acknowledgments (FOREX
Made Easy:Six Ways to Trade the Dollar) and noticed that some of my same
team is still with me and assisted on this project, so thanks to all. I also
noticed that my family is now even bigger; I would not have been able to
complete this book if it were not for my absolute significant other, my
beautiful wife of more than 10 years. Thanks, Deb, for all the trust and confidence you gave me each and every day. In my last book, I was able to get
my son James’ name in the book, so I better add my daughter Jacqueline to
this one; I love you both dearly.
I, of course, will simply not be able to thank everyone individually for
their help, but for the handful of constant contributors I will try.
When working to get a book such as this completed it takes lots of
reading by lots of people. Jack Lott has been there every step of the way.
Thanks Jack for being such a great friend and team member. I know you
have read through this book a few hundred times and everyone reading it
will appreciate your effort, as I do. I am already looking forward to the next

xiii

xiv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

project. Michael Thomas has done his fair share of reading of this book and
his specific attention to the FOREX strategies will have the reader’s appreciation and understanding. Thanks for all your help and friendship. I would
like to give a special thanks to Caroline for her help in getting this project
moving and off the ground.
Finally and certainly not least, thanks to my publisher McGraw-Hill and
the entire team for their dedication of getting this book to you.

Disclaimer

The information in this book is for educational purposes only. I am not giving advice or specific financial recommendations. You must seek guidance
from your personal advisors before acting on this information. Trading can
result in losses. I accept no responsibility for any losses you may incur.
Do not invest more than you can afford to lose.

NFA- AND CFTC-REQUIRED DISCLAIMERS
Trading in the Foreign Exchange (FOREX) market is a challenging opportunity where above-average returns are available for educated and experienced investors who are willing to take above-average risk. However, before
deciding to participate in FOREX trading, you should carefully consider
your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. Do not
invest money you cannot afford to lose.
FOREX futures and options trading have large potential rewards but
also large potential risk. You must be aware of the individual risks and be
willing to accept them to invest in FOREX futures and options markets.
Don’t trade with money you can’t afford to lose. This book is neither a solicitation nor an offer to buy/sell FOREX futures or options. No representation
is being made that any account will or is likely to achieve profits or losses
similar to those discussed in this book. The past performance of any trading
system or methodology is not necessarily indicative of future results.
There is considerable exposure to risk in any foreign exchange transaction. Any transaction involving currencies involves risks, including, but not
limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions
that may substantially affect the price or liquidity of a currency.
Moreover, the leveraged nature of foreign exchange trading means
that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on
your deposited funds. This may work against you as well as for you. The
xv

xvi

DISCLAIMER

possibility exists that you could sustain a total loss of your initial margin
funds and be required to deposit additional funds to maintain your position.
If you fail to meet any margin call within the time prescribed, your position
will be liquidated, and you will be responsible for any resulting losses.
Investors may lower their exposure to risk by employing risk-reducing
strategies such as stop-loss and limit orders.

CFTC RULE 4.41
Hypothetical or simulated performance results have certain limitations.
Unlike an actual performance record, simulated results do not represent
actual trading. Also, since the trades have not been executed, the results
may have under- or overcompensated for the impact, if any, of certain market factors, such as lack of liquidity. Simulated trading programs in general
are also subject to the fact that they are designed with the benefit of hindsight. No representation is being made that any account will or is likely to
achieve profit or losses similar to those shown.

Introduction

What is FOREX? FOREX (also known as FX) is the contracted name of
FOReign EXchange, an international trading market where banks, businesses, and public and private investors of all the countries in the world can
obtain and exchange their respective currencies so as to perform commercial transactions or simply speculate. This market functions in a different
way from the stock market; the stock exchange has a fixed daily schedule
for opening and closing, whereas the FOREX is open 24 hours a day, five
days a week nonstop. FOREX activities start on Sunday afternoon at 5 p.m.
Eastern Time (ET) and close on Friday at 4 p.m. ET. This continuous activity is possible because there are always open markets around the world, and
today there is no need for the traders to be physically present at the exchange
location because the funds can be traded electronically from any country.
The main markets involved in the FOREX are New Zealand, Sydney,
Tokyo, China, Frankfurt, London, Zurich, and New York. The FOREX
market is the largest in the world, where more than $3.2 trillion is being
transacted every day (traditional daily turnover was reported to be over
US $3.2 trillion in April 2007 by the Bank for International Settlements.
Source: Triennial Central Bank Survey, BIS, December 2007), which is
many times larger than the combined volume of all U.S. equities and
futures markets, and thus the FOREX is also the market that possesses the
greatest liquidity. Late in 2008, with all the uncertainty in the equities markets, the FOREX daily turnover surpassed US $6.5 trillion in a day. This
market will continue to attract more and more investors.
Currency trading used to be an exclusive activity reserved to government central banks and commercial and investment banks. In recent years,
the market has opened up and become available to smaller investors and
speculators, thanks to computers and the Internet.
There is a broad electronic network that allows central banks from all
over the world to share their quotes and actual currency rates. This is known

xvii

xviii

INTRODUCTION

as the Interbank. In this way, central banks are able to exchange and
convert their currencies one into another in real time. The currencies that
are traded most commonly are the U.S. dollar, the Japanese yen, the euro,
the British pound, the Swiss franc, the Canadian dollar, and the Australian
dollar. The Interbank’s activity being continuous, and thanks to decentralization from any physical location or exchange, access to real quotes and
the speed at which transactions can be performed are greatly increased.
When you are transacting on the FOREX market, you are simultaneously buying one currency and selling another. Currencies are always
traded in pairs, for example, pound sterling/U.S. dollar (GBP/USD) or U.S.
dollar/Canadian dollar (USD/CAD).
You would be executing a trade when there is an expectation that the
currency you are buying increases in respect to the one you are selling. If
the value of the currency you have bought effectively increases, you then
would sell the position and take a profit. Currency pairs are composed of
a base currency, which is the first on the quote, and a counter currency
(also called the quote or payment currency), which appears as second
on the quote. When the U.S. dollar is the base currency, quotes are given in
$1 USD per counter currency, for example USD/CAD or USD/JPY.
The role of the FOREX in the world economy is very important
because there is always an increasing need of currency exchange owing to
the development of technology, communications, and general international
commerce. Countries need the FOREX market to be able to sell their products to other countries and receive payment in their own currency or pay for
their imported goods to the foreign producer in its own currency.
In addition to commercial turnover, though, plenty of money is used
for speculation, and thus the great liquidity of the FOREX allows traders
to profit at any moment, provided they are using the right techniques and
strategies.
Over the last few years, the FOREX market has gained significant
ground in the U.S. retail marketplace. Through my many Web sites, such as
the James Dicks FOREX Network (www.JamesDicks.com), educational
tools and services, I have introduced millions of individual investors to the
retail FOREX marketplace.
The CNBC “Million-Dollar Portfolio Challenge” is well known among
retail investors. To see firsthand how exciting, how popular, and how big
the FOREX market is getting, just check out the results of the past challenges. The winner and top investors all dominated the challenge, trading
the FOREX.

P

1
A

R

T

THE BASICS

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

1

A

P

T

E

R

WHAT YOU MUST
KNOW TO GET
STARTED
BACK TO THE BASICS: A HISTORY OF THE FOREX
The FOREX (i.e., FOReign EXchange) market is an international market
where the money (currency) of every country is sold and bought freely. It
was launched in the 1970s at the moment of introduction of free exchange
rates, and the price of one currency against another that occurs from supply
and demand is determined only by market participants.
There is no external control, and competition is free because all the
participants can decide to transact or not. In this respect, the FOREX is a
perfect market because it can’t be controlled or monopolized by any of its
participants. The enormous number of transactions executed day after day
in a continuous activity make it the biggest liquid financial market.
According to various assessments, money masses in the market constitute
up to US $4.5 trillion a day.
This market has seen recent turnover as high as US $6 trillion in a day,
and the average most recently has been hovering at around US $3 trillion a
day. The exact figure can’t be determined because the transactions are not
centralized on a single exchange.
Trading is conducted all over the world through telecommunications
and electronic networks 24 hours a day, 5 days a week starting from 00:00
3

4

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) on Monday (some starting a little earlier)
to 10:00 p.m. GMT on Friday (some closing a little later). There are dealers quoting currencies in every time zone through the main central
markets: Frankfurt, London, New York, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Australia,
New Zealand, etc.
To get a better understanding of FOREX quotes, you just have to know
that one unit of the base currency is equivalent to the exchange rate in the
quote currency. For example, if EUR/USD is trading at 1.2762, the price of
1 euro (base currency) in dollars (quote currency) will be 1.2762 dollars.
