
It is then a relatively simple task to see whether any consistent time peri-
Ods separate these points. One method is to note the time differences
between all the cycle lows and highs in order to determine which ones come

” up most frequently. Since MAs smooth out all cycles within their time span,

it is important to experiment with several averages in order to identify as
many cycles as possible. The more reliable ones should then be used in the
analysis,



392

8

|
1
t
i

phe phe.
Gweeks | Gweeks "Gweeks ' 6 weeks

3 3
weeks

Figure 21-1 Cycle highs and lows.

6 weeks 6 weeks

cycle high that is “late” in arriving, that is, it arrives well after the halfway
period, usually indicates a strong cycle, with the implication that the cycle
low will be above the low of the previous cycle. A number of different cycles
can be observed for any market or stock, some long and some short in dura-
tion. The task of the technician is not to identify as many as possible, but
to isolate the most dominant and reliable.

Principles

* The longer the cycle, the greater the amplitude in price; for example, a
10-week cycle will have far greater trading significance than a 10-hour

cycle.

It follows from item 1 that the larger the cycle, the greater the significance

of the low.

The larger the number of cycles reaching a low at around the same time,

the stronger the ensuing price movement.

Ina rising trend, the cycle high has a tendency to “translate to the right,”

that is, to occur after the halfway point of the cycle. The same principle

holds in reverse for bear markets; that is, there is a tendency for the cycle

high to translate to the left.

It is possible to observe cyclic highs that occur at regular time intervals.

A projected cyclic high or low may develop in the opposite way to that

anticipated. In such cases, the cycle is said to be “inverted.”

Part I: Market Structure ;

Practical Identification of Cycles 393

Methods of Detection

Many mathematical techniques have been used to identify cycles. Fourier
analysis, for example, isolates the existence of various cycles by length, ampli-
tude, phases, and so on. Systematic reconnaissance is a technique that tests
for periods requested. The result is a periodgram that shows the most dom-
inant cycles. Although such techniques can be useful, they tend to make
technical analysis look as if it is an exact science, which it very definitely is
not. These approaches fall outside the scope of this book, but materials
listed in the Bibliography will give more information. This chapter will be
confined to three methods of cycle identification: deviation from trend,
-< momentum, and simple observation.

Deviation from Trend

This method takes a series of data and divides each item by a moving aver-

age (MA). The period under observation represents the deviation, and the

MA represents the trend.

Chapter 9 explained that since an MA is designed to reflect the underly-
ing price trend, ideally it should be plotted halfway along its span. This is
because the “average” price occurs halfway through the time span, such as

: in the seventh week for a 13-week MA. However, changes in the direction
“of the MA usually occur far too late to offer timely signals for the purpose
of identifying trend reversals. For this reason, technicians normally use an
MA crossover for generating signals. Since only historical data are used in
cycle identification, this disadvantage is not important. The MA deviation
is therefore calculated by dividing the period in question by the midpoint
of the MA. The price observation for February 27 is divided by a 13-week
MA, as calculated on April 18; that is, the MA is “moved” back 7 weeks. The
result is then plotted as an oscillator, which isolates the cyclical high and
low points.

It is then a relatively simple task to see whether any consistent time peri-
ods separate these points. One method is to note the time differences
between all the cycle lows and highs in order to determine which ones come

~ Up most frequently. Since MAs smooth out all cycles within their time span,
it is important to experiment with several averages in order to identify as
Many cycles as possible. The more reliable ones should then be used in the
analysis,



394 Part fl: Market Structure

Momentum

A simpler method is to calculate a momentum oscillator and smooth it by
an appropriate MA, as determined by trial and error. This approach will
bring out the underlying rhythm in the price movement, just as a deviation-
from-trend calculation does. It is doubtful whether the momentum
approach alone can be successfully used for cycle identification, but it can
prove to be an invaluable confirmation of cyclic reliability when used in con
junction with the technique of simple price observation discussed later.
The position of a momentum index can also be useful in warning of
potential cyclic inversions, that is, when a projected cyclic low might tum
out to be a cyclic high, and vice versa. For example, a cyclic inversion may
occur when the observed data project that a cyclic low is likely to develop
around a specific date, while the momentum indicator used in conjunction
with this study is at, or coming down from, an overbought level. A good
example is shown in Chart 20-8 of the S&P Composite. In 1987 the 9.2-year
cycle appeared to reach its peak, as measured by the 55-month rate of
change (ROC) at exactly the time when a low should have been recorded.

Simple Observation

Chart 21-1 shows the Philadelphia Gold and Silver Share Index. The solid
vertical line represents an 82-week cycle of lows and the dashed vertical line
a 126-week cycle of highs. The ROC has a time span of 41 weeks, half the
82-week cycle. Neither of these cycles is perfect, but they do, for the most
part, explain most of the turning points in the period under consideration.
These two cycles were isolated on a trial-and-error basis using the cycle line
tool in the MetaStock program.

If you do not have access to a package such as this and wish to accom
plish this task manually, the easiest method of identifying cycles is to start
by observing on a price chart two or three major lows that appear to be rel-
atively equidistant. The next step is to pencil in the projections for that pa
ticular cycle. Ifa substantial proportion of those projections result in either
highs or lows, it is a good idea to mark them with a colored pencil. If most
projections result in failure, the cycle should be abandoned and a new one
sought. A cycle high occurring at any of these points should be treated as
a successful projection, since the first objective of cycle analysis is to deter
mine potential turning points.

Once a reliable cycle has been established, the analyst should !ook at all
the important cycle lows that are unexplained by the first cycle and try 0
explain them by discovering another cycle. The chances are that the se
ond cycle will not only fit some of the unexplained lows, but also will occur

i 395
Practical Identification of Cycles

Chart 21-1 Philadelphia Gold and Silver Share Index and a 41-Week ROC, 1985-2001.

(From www. pring. com.)

Philadelphia Gold and silver Share index Ny ae i”
: Vi Te Bull market

Na
so Bear market \

1604

41-month Ros

i: ce es ore rs i
iz Cs aC

-. ator near some of the cycle lows previously established. This is very impor-

tant, because a basic principle of cycle analysis is that the greater the num-
ber of cycles making a Jow around a certain time, the stronger the ensuing

~~” move is likely to be. Such knowledge must be used in conjunction with other

technical evidence, but if that too offers a green light, the odds that a ae
nificant upwave will occur are increased. The next step in the method is dis-
* cussed in the following section.

Combining Cycle Highs and Lows

The vertical lines in Chart 21-1 point out a fairly reliable pattern for both

«+, §de highs and lows. One of the most important principles coming out of

this exercise is that the various turning points derive their significance from
the direction of the main or primary trend. In this respect, the arrows on
the chart flag the various bull and bear market environments. Note how sa
cle tops tend to have greater magnitude in a bear market, such as the 198
8nd 1990 tops. Conversely, the 1986 and late 1992 lows developed at the start

fa bull market and experienced far greater magnitude than the 1997 and
1999 signals, which developed in a bear market.


396

One of the advantages of combining high and low cycles is that this
approach makes it possible to obtain some idea of how long a rally or reac.
tion might last. This arises from the proximity of the high and low. For exam.
ple, the late 1992 low developed just after the high. The ensuing decline
was quite brief. The reverse was true at the end of 1989, where the low was

very close to the early 1990 high. The rally in this instance was short. The

position of the ROC can often provide a clue as to whether a particular cycli-
cal turning point will work. For example, the strong peaks in 1987, 1990,
and late 1999 all developed when the ROC was at or close to an overbought
condition. Similarly, the 1986 and 1988 lows were associated when moder-
ately oversold conditions failed to materialize.

Not all examples work out quite as accurately as that shown in Chart 21-
1, Readers are cautioned not to try to make a cycle work. If it does not fit
naturally and easily, chances are that it either does not exist or is likely to
be highly unreliable, and therefore should not be used. In any event, such
analysis should always be used in conjunction with other indicators.

Summary

* Recurring cycles, both of low points and high points, can be observed
from charts of financial markets.

*¢ A cycle turning point is significant both for the time interval between
cycles and for the number of cycles that are turning at the same time.

* Cyclic analysis should always be used in conjunction with other indicators.

* Suspected cycles that do not easily fall into a consistently recurring pat
tern should not be made to work and should be discarded.

Part I: Market Structure

22

Volume: General
Principles

Advantages of Volume Analysis

Pretty much all of the indicators covered so far, with the notable exception

. of cycles, have been concerned with price or a statistical manipulation of it.

This means that each of these indicators represents a variation on a theme.

Asa result, the study of volume patterns gives greater depth to the weight
of the evidence approach described earlier. In this chapter we will explore
some basic volume principles, and in Chapter 23 we will expand the dis-
cussion to include volume indicators that are suitable for analyzing indi-

-, Vidual securities and the stock market.

There are three principal benefits from monitoring volume. First, when

© we look at indicators that measure both price and volume momentum, it is

Possible to see if they are in agreement. If so, the probabilities favor an

. extension of the prevailing trend. Second, if they disagree, it tells us that

the underlying trend is not as strong as it might appear on the surface.
Finally, volume often throws up characteristics of its own that literally shout

the message of an impending trend reversal.

Major Technical Principle. Volume not only measures the enthu-
sm of buyers and sellers, but it is also a totally independent variable
from price. :

397



398 Pith ine

Volume is usually featured in a chart in histogram format under the price
series, as in Fig. 22-1. This arrangement is usually acceptable since it high-
lights significant expansions and contractions in trading activity. These, in
turn, confirm or question the sustainability of the price trend itself. Volume
may also be expressed in a momentum format, which has the effect of accen-
tuating fluctuations in activity in a more graphic way.

Principles of Volume
Interpretation

1. The most important principle is that volume typically goes with the trend.
It is normal for activity to expand in a rising market and contract in a
declining one. In this sense volume is always interpreted in relation to
the recent past. It’s no good comparing current 1 billion plus share days
on the NYSE with 5 or 6 million 70 years ago. This expansion is a result
of institutional changes, a larger market, derivatives, and so forth.
However, a 2-billion share day compared to a recent 1.5-billion share
day is relevant. Prices move in trends, but do not generally rise and fall
in Straight lines, as reactions to the prevailing trend set in. The same
principle applies to volume. On the left side of Fig. 22-1, for instance,
the arrow shows that the volume trend is up. By the same token, it is
apparent that the level of activity does not expand every day. There are
quiet ones and active ones, but the general thrust is up. The right-hand
part of the diagram features a downtrend in volume, but it too is irreg-

AS
wlll il ili al

Figure 22-1 Volume histogram.

Volume: General Principles 399

ular. When we talk about volume rising or falling, then we are usually
referring to its trend. Volume trends, like price, can be intraday, short,
intermediate, or long, depending on the nature of the chart.

. One important aspect to consider is the fact that volume reflects an

exchange between buyers and sellers. By definition the amount of
money flowing into a security must always equal the amount flowing out.
This is true regardless of the level of volume.

. If buyers get greedy, they will push up the bid until they obtain as much

quantity as they want. If sellers react to bad news, they might panic, push-
ing prices down sharply, but at all times the amount of a security being
sold is always equal to that being purchased.

. Rising volume and rising prices are normal. This combination indicates

that the market is in “gear” and has no forecasting value. If this is the
case, it is reasonable to expect at least one more rally that reaches a new
price high when volume does not.

. Volume normally leads price during a bull move. A new high in price

that is not confirmed by volume should be regarded as a red flag,
warning that the prevailing trend may be about to reverse. In Fig. 22-2,
the price peaks at point C, yet volume reached its maximum at point A.
Such action is normal; the declining volume peaks warn of underlying
technical weakness. As with momentum divergences, there are no hard
and fast rules about how many divergences precede a peak. Generally
speaking, though, the greater the number of negative divergences, the
weaker the underlying technical picture. Also, the lower the peaks rel-
ative to each other, the less enthusiasm that is generated and the more
susceptible the technical position becomes once buying dries up or sell-
ing enthusiasm intensifies. A new high accompanied by virtually no vol-
ume is just as bearish as a new price high with virtually no upside
momentum.

. Rising prices and falling volume (see Fig. 22-3) are abnormal and indi-

cate a weak and suspect rally. This type of activity is also associated with
a primary bear market environment and can be used as an indicator in
this respect. Just remember, volume measures the relative enthusiasm

» Major Technical Principle It is the level of enthusiasm of buyers
or sellers that determines the course of prices.



400

iia

Figure 22-2 Volume leads Price.

/\

Bearish volume
configuration

Figure 22-3 Bearish volume configuration.

of buyers and sellers. A market that rallies on a trend of lower volume
indicates that Prices are rising because of a lack of sellers rather than
the enthusiasm of buyers. Sooner or later the market will reach a point
where sellers become more motivated. After that, prices will start to pick
up on the downside. One tip-off is to watch for volume to increase
noticeably as the price starts to decline. This is shown in Fig. 22-4.

- Sometimes both price and volume ing i
oth price expand slowly, gradually working into
an exponential rise with a final blowoff stage. Following this develop-

ment, both volume and price fall off e i
< ! qually sharply. This represents an
exhaustion move and is characteristic of a trend reversal. The signif-

Volume: General Principles an

Figure 22-4 Bearish volume configuration.

cance of the reversal will depend upon the extent of the previous
advance and the degree of volume expansion. Obviously, an exhaustion
move that takes 4-6 days will be nowhere near as significant as one that
develops over a matter of weeks. This phenomenon is termed a para-
bolic blowoff and is featured in Fig. 22-5. Unfortunately, exhaustion or
blowoff moves such as this are not easy to define in the sense that it is
possible to construct clearly definable trendlines, price patterns, and so
on. For this reason it is not usually possible to spot the terminal phase
until a day or so after volume and price have reached their crescendos.

8. The opposite of a parabolic blowoff is a selling climax. A selling climax
occurs when prices fall for a considerable time at an accelerating pace,
accompanied by expanding volume. Following a selling climax, prices
may be expected to rise, and the low established at the time of the cli-
max is unlikely to be violated for a considerable time. A price rise from
a selling climax is by definition accompanied by declining volume. This
is the only time when contracting volume and a rising price may be
regarded as normal. Even so, it is important to make sure that volume
expands on subsequent rallies, as indicated in Fig. 22-6. Termination of
a bear market is often, but not always, accompanied by a selling climax.

9. When prices advance following a long decline and then react to a level
at slightly above, or marginally below, the previous trough, it is a bull-
ish sign if the volume on the second trough is significantly lower than
the volume on the first. There is an old saying on Wall Street: “Never
short a dull market.” It applies very much to this type of situation in
which a previous low is being tested with very low volume. This indicates
a complete lack of selling pressure (see Fig. 22-7).



402
Part I: Market Structine

clini

Figure 22-5 Parabolic blowoff.

_—

DLT

. 4
Tl ln li dl

Figure 22-6 Selling climax.

10. A downside breakout from a price pattern, trendline, or moving aver-
age (MA) that occurs on heavy volume is abnormal and is a bearish sign,
confirming the reversal in trend (see Fig. 22-8). When prices decline,
it is usually because of a lack of bids, so volume contracts. This is nor-
mal activity and is not giving us much information. However, when vol-

11. When the market has been rising for many months, an anemic price

rise (see Fig. 22-9) accompanied high vol indi i
action and is a bearish factor. Si asieniaanaee

_ 403

Low volume
on test

Figure 22-7 Low volume on test.

WN

Rising volume and
falling prices are bearish

Pit a
Figure 22-8 Bearish volume configuration.

12. Following a decline, heavy volume with little price change is indicative
of accumulation and is normally a bullish factor (see Fig. 22-10).

13, Record volume coming off a major low is usually a very reliable signal
that a very significant bottom has been seen because it indicates that an
underlying change in psychology has taken place. Such reversals in sen-
timent are usually of a primary-trend magnitude. Examples in the U.S.
stock market developed in March 1978, August 1982 and 1984, and
October 1998. It also developed at the 1987 low in bonds and eurodol-
Jars. It is not an infallible indicator though, because record volume was
achieved in January 2001 for both the NYSE and NASDAQ, yet this did
not turn out to be the final low for the move.



404

Churning

luv

Figure 22-9 Churning.

Accumulation

ill

14. When volume and price expand at a sharp pace, short of a parabolic
blowoff, and then contract slightly, this usually indicates a change in
trend. Sometimes this is an actual reversal, and at other times, it is a con-
solidation. This phenomenon is featured in Fig. 22-11 and represents
a temporary exhaustion of buying power.

When price experiences a small rounding top and volume a rounding
bottom, this is a double abnormal situation since price is rising and vol
ume falling as the peak is reached. During the decline, price declines
and volume expands, which is also abnormal and bearish. An example
is shown in Fig. 22-12,

ull lull

Figure 22-10 Accumulation.

15.

Part Il: Market Structure

Volume: General Principles 405

Temporary exhaustion

| idl

Volume expands
on the decline

Figure 22-11 Temporary exhaustion.

/

Bearish volume
configuration

eo
lll ttl

Figure 22-12 Bearish top configuration.

Marketplace Examples

Chart 22-1 features RadioShack. The volume price configuration at A is
indicative of bull market activity, where price and volume are expanding
simultaneously. The character of the technical position changes quite dra-
Matically by the time we reach B. Here, the price is rallying, but volume is
declining. This is a tip-off that a bear market has begun, because such a rela-

tionship is abnormal. Note how volume picks up again in early February as



406 Part Il: Market Structure

Chart 22-1 RadioShack, 2000-2001. (From www.pring.com.)

70+ rot
cof ee I, ny

fl ~
604 ia aaa hte br
tal

40+ rae

Bear market

304

A | Rising volume B Cc
10004 and price

a | M

Ht i q
yt full Ht | i
& ugust __|September [November 2001 February April May

Chart 22-2 Coors, 2000-2001, volume divergence. (From www.pring.com.)

the price begins its decline. This again is abnormal behavior and is bearish. _ :
As the price bottoms at C, this could be construed as a selling climax. If that. 4

had been the case, then the declining volume associated with the subsequent

rally could be construed as normal. However, this was clearly not the cas¢ “4
as volume started to pick up again at D. This was the tip-off that the bea 3 |

s04 oe Confirmation
64 -flees if . a
704 t fl
| | prot " li
ey piel That "Yoong |
604 v Volume ‘|
4 divergence
2000 {
1600 |
1000
o] dl, atjulll mT sll | Ly lh li uth ult ‘wily {nuit Lil
November [December [2001 February | [March | lapel

Volume: General Principles 407

market was still intact. A confirmation developed at E, because volume and
price once again diverged negatively.
