
FA BASICS: EASY TO UNDERSTAND AND HARD TO
APPLY
As with technical analysis, take rules for fundamental analysis to be guidelines and not absolutes.
Because all of the preceding and other factors are endlessly exerting influence in the markets to
varying degrees, basing trades on fundamentals is not recommended except for those planning long
holding periods who aren't concerned with buying as low as they can or selling at near-term highs.
The price of a given currency pair is the product of numerous forces acting on it at any one time.
For example, though news that raises expectations about rate increases for the EUR should mean the
EURUSD rises, enough bad news for the EUR can overwhelm the good news. How much bad news is
enough to override rising rate expectations? No one one can easily say; it's a matter of watching how
markets respond.
We saw such a thing happen in the spring and summer of 2011 with the EURUSD. As noted
previously, from March 3 to September 8, 2011, the ECB was believed to be raising interest rates
faster than the Fed, and until early May, this advantage in rate expectations kept the EURUSD rising.
Yet as we see from the EURUSD weekly chart (shown in Figure 6.10) from the start of May 2011, the
EURUSD entered a multimonth downtrend despite the rate advantage.
FIGURE 6.10 EURUSD Weekly Chart, March 6 to September 8, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Why? One reason is that the EUR was being undermined by a new phase in the EU sovereign debt
and banking crisis. Another reason was that this crisis, combined with evidence of slowing growth in
nearly every major economy was causing traders and investors to take profits in risk assets like the
EUR and flee into safe havens like the USD.
In other words, though differences in interest rates and expectation about them are arguably the
primary fundamental driver of currency prices in general, there will be times when this and other
principles of analysis won't apply. Also, overall risk sentiment can easily override considerations
about interest rate increases.
In sum, fundamental analysis is valuable for getting a big picture long-term strategic view, but when
deciding whether to enter a trade, we prefer technical tools for our final screening of the lowest risk,
highest reward trades and their entry and exit points (as discussed in depth in Chapter 7).

THEREFORE, GET THEE TO AN ANALYST
Though some will enjoy doing their own analysis, most of us will find it more efficient to locate some
analysts we trust and follow them, for their views on the technical and fundamental picture. This
speeds up the learning process. The better ones will read the most important reports and summarize
the key points, saving you the time and trouble. See Appendix A for some suggestions to consider.

COMBINING FA AND TA: AN EXAMPLE
Though we must introduce fundamental analysis and TA separately, everyone except day traders (who
ignore fundamentals beyond near-term news events) needs to consider fundamental and technical

evidence together. Here's an example and quiz to give you an experience of this.
Any good analysis for multiday or longer positions must include fundamental as well as TA. Indeed,
over the long term the technical picture is driven by underlying fundamental forces, so good
fundamental analysis is key to predicting longer-term trends.

Analyze This!
To illustrate this point, try the following quiz, which refers to Figure 6.11 originally
introduced in the Fibonacci retracement (Fib) section of Chapter 4.
FIGURE 6.11 EURUSD Daily Chart, September 2, 2010, to August 5, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Question: Imagine you were back at August 4, 2011. Do you think the above price support
level at ∼1.3880 will hold and make a good entry point for a long EURUSD position? It's
comprised of two strong support indicators:
The 61.8 percent Fib level of the EURUSD uptrend of July 2010 to May 2011.
The lower line of the descending channel.
Before you answer, consider the fundamental background. The sovereign debt and banking
crisis in the EU was steadily worsening. Over the past months, Greece had been granted its
second bailout within about a year. The new rescue plan for Greece contained what was
appearing to be a fatal flaw in that it imposed losses on private bondholders. Though this may
have seemed fair to various EU electorates, it was scaring off the bond buyers the EU was
depending on to keep demand up for these bonds from the weak EU economies and keep their
yields down so these nations could continue to borrow at affordable rates.
Until this new imposition of haircuts (losses) on bond holders (mostly the big EU banks), it
was assumed that the EU would protect private bond buyers from losses, but no more. Not
surprisingly, borrowing costs for these nations began soaring to compensate buyers for the
greater risk of loss. Italian and Spanish bond yields were soaring and their stock markets were

crashing on fears that their governments and banks could be sliding towards bankruptcy. These
nations were too big to bail out, yet scared credit markets, fearing losses would be imposed on
holders of these bonds, were demanding yields these nations couldn't afford. The risk of an
eventual wave of sovereign and bank defaults leading to a banking and economic crisis was
much higher.
Growth was slowing in nearly every major economy. The United States had defaulted on a
bond payment for the first time ever due to a political stalemate, casting doubt on its ability to
deal with its own debt problems.
The broader technical picture for risk assets like major stocks was breaking down. The
bellwether S&P 500 had fallen in 9 out of 10 sessions, and on August 4, it fell 5 percent, its
worst one-day drop since the October 2008, as deterioration in the EU and United States, and
the belief that the United States would no longer attempt major stimulus plans due to political
opposition combined to create a dark mood in financial markets.
Answer: Given the fundamental background, I'm not at all that sure the 1.3900/61.8 percent
Fib levels or other price supports would hold. We'd need further confirmation from technical
indicators of a coming bounce higher, which would almost certainly be preceded by some
easing in the fundamental tensions described above.
Therefore, if there is no improvement in the fundamentals, I might be watching for a break
below the 1.3880 level, in which case I'd consider opening a short position. Based on the
indicators used here (in reality, we'd want to check some others like the major moving
averages, etc.), there appears to be no major resistance for this short until the 50 percent Fib
level. Whether we open a short would depend on:
Whether the fundamental situation continues to deteriorate.
What other resistance may be offered from other types of support and resistance (s/r)
mentioned earlier.
How far we need place our stop loss from our entry point and so can tell if we have a 1:3
rrr. Were the fundamental situation bad, we might feel so good about shorting the EURUSD
that we'd consider accepting a 1:2 rrr.
Post Mortem: Was I right?
Yes. As shown in Figure 6.12 below, by the end of August 2011 the bearish fundamentals,
particularly the EU crisis, began exerting their influence, and drove the EURUSD sharply
lower for the rest of the year and beyond, from nearly 1.4000 to well below 1.3000.
FIGURE 6.12 EURUSD Daily Chart, July 20, 2011, to January 6 2012,
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

The Lesson: Your trading decisions need to consider both technical and fundamental analysis.
TA is great for timing lower-risk entries and exits, but fundamentals give you critical insights
about what's behind the price moves and the future reliability of the trends, s/r points, and
other indicators.

Notes
1. In times of crisis, however, the usual fundamental considerations become secondary to
speculation about government policy or geopolitical events. For example, from late 2010 to mid2011, risk assets rose largely because the U.S. Federal Reserve was engaged in its second round of
easing (aka QE 2), which markets believed would boost risk asset prices. The darkening prospects
for virtually every major economy were ignored.
2. John Maynard Keynes, “Keynes the Speculator,” www.maynardkeynes.org/keynes-thespeculator.html.
3. Cliff Wachtel, “The Must Know Truth About Gold” (May 2010),
http://seekingalpha.com/article/206487-the-must-know-truth-about-gold.
4. Christian Vits and Jana Randow, “Trichet Says Interest-Rate Increase by the ECB Next Month Is
a Possibility” (March 2011), www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-03-03/trichet-says-europeancentral-bank-needs-strong-vigilance-on-inflation.html.
5. Kathy Lien, “EUR/USD Sinks on U.S. Trade and Trichet” (September 2011),
www.fx360.com/commentary/kathy/6099/eurusd-sinks-on-us-trade-and-trichet.aspx?
num=1315487768562.
6. Just going by memory: The Latin America debt crisis of the early 1980s, the Savings and Loan
crisis of the early 90s, the dot-com bubble of early 2000s, the subprime lending bubble of 2007 and
subsequent Great Recession, and the EU Sovereign Debt and Banking crisis that began in 2010,
exacerbated but not caused by the subprime mess in the United States.

CHAPTER 7
Pulling It All Together with Trade Examples
Congratulations; at this stage you've already seen the basics.
Now it's time to pull together some of what we've covered thus far and apply it in real-life trades.
In this chapter we'll:
Review the steps to identifying and executing low-risk, high potential yield trades.
Introduce some of the common types or styles of trades.
Apply these ideas in a few real-life trades from my personal trading journal.

IDENTIFYING AND EXECUTING LOW-RISK, HIGH
POTENTIAL YIELD TRADES
You should be trading from daily, weekly, or monthly charts for all the reasons we mentioned earlier
in Chapter 3, particularly because indicators and trends are more reliable and stable in these time
frames. That means your likely holding period will be days, weeks, or months.

Begin Your Search On Longer Time Frame Charts, Then Zoom In
Here's the basic idea behind how we locate simple, low-risk, high potential trades. Start your search
for low-risk trades by scanning charts with time frames that are 4 to 5 times longer than the time frame
from which you intend to trade. The first goal is to find low-risk entry points by identifying the long
established, and therefore most reliable, s/r areas, because they're where the risk of opening a
position is lowest. Here's why.
If price breaches long-term strong support, that's a clear signal that price is moving decisively
against you. By entering close to strong support, you can also set your stop loss order relatively close
to that support, using the methods discussed in Chapter 5, so that you escape with only a small,
affordable loss, ideally one that is ever less than your maximum allowed loss of 1 to 3 percent of your
account.
Like a bird of prey, you begin your hunt where you can view of lots of territory. The longer time
frame chart allows you to view key s/r points over months or years. Then, if you see something
interesting (a pair approaching one of those levels) you swoop in for a closer look on the shorter,
time frame chart from which you actually trade, in order to make your final trading decisions. That's
where you'll see if you've got a situation that combines a low-risk entry near strong support, with a
likely resistance area far enough away from your entry point so that you've a good chance of earning
three times as much as what you'll lose if your stop loss is hit, for a 3:1 reward/risk ratio.
This process will be clearer in the following examples.

Consider the Fundamental Context
Note that the longer you think the trade will need to play out, the more important it is that the trade fits
with your fundamental analysis for your planned holding period. This is less important if you think the
trade will last less than a week or so, unless you're trading based on a specific news item that's due
out during that time. However, trades that may take weeks or months are typically based at least in
part on some theory you have about how certain fundamentals are likely to play out.
For example, you go long the AUDJPY because you believe markets will be optimistic over the
coming weeks or months (favoring risk over safety currencies), or you believe Australia's economic
data will be much better than Japan's. You'll see examples of this kind of thinking in the following
trade examples. Now let's look at the concepts just covered in greater detail.

Initial Screening on Longer Time Frame Charts
The purpose of your first screening is to find a currency pair that meets the following four criterias:
1. Risk Management Criterion #1: The currency pair is approaching a strong support area that
provides a low-risk entry point. For example, by definition, strong s/r levels on a weekly chart
will be even stronger on a daily chart, because they're more established than the s/r levels you
see on daily charts. You then set your stop loss just far enough beyond this area so that it doesn't
get hit by random price movements, but rather only when price has turned far enough against you
that you know you were probably wrong about the trade and it's best to escape with a small loss.
Thus the stronger the s/r area where you enter, the lower your risk of a losing trade (barring any
unforeseen change in fundamentals and sentiment). Once you know your likely entry and stop loss
points, you can check if the trade may meet your second criteria
2. Risk Management Criterion #2: Find the nearest major resistance area, because that's where
you'd expect to exit and take profits. If the distance from entry (at support) to exit (at resistance)
is 2 to 3 times farther than the distance from entry to stop loss, then you may have a 2:1 to 3:1
reward/risk ratio (rrr). We'll know for sure only when we do the second screening.
3. Risk Management Criteria #3-Stop Loss Placement: The stop loss should be far enough away
from your entry point so that it does not get hit by normal random price movements, but only by
larger moves against you that suggest price may be making a sustained move against you.
4. Money Management Criterion #1: The stop loss should be close enough to your entry point so
that you don't lose more than 1-3 percent of your account on the trade.
These are the first criteria for low-risk, high-reward trades. Remember that definitions of support
and resistance are the opposite for short and long positions, as discussed in Chapter 3.
Again, we scan for situations that look like they might fulfill the preceding criteria on charts with a
time frame approximately four to five times longer than the time frame on which we trade. For the
examples that follow, we trade off daily charts, so we scan weekly charts in the first screening.
This first screening doesn't take long because we generally prefer to trade only the most liquid
pairs. There are only about eight really liquid pairs, and maybe about 20 liquid enough for most of
your trading.1
In short, we're scanning the weekly charts of these pairs for an entry near strong support, with any
likely resistance far enough away so that there's a chance of getting a 1:3 or 1:2 risk-to-reward ratio

(rrr).
As we'll see, the deciding factor in whether you take the trade is if the second screening on the
daily charts shows you can get a combination of stop loss, entry, and exit points that allows the
desired rrr yet does not cost you more than 1 to 3 percent of your account if the stop loss is hit.
For the purpose of illustration, assume just one entry and exit, and mostly avoid consideration of
variations like trailing stop losses and partial or staged entries and exits.
When we talk about strong support or resistance, that means we want to see at least one well-tested
kind of support, ideally as many kinds as we can get, all converging on a narrow price range. Just to
remind you, these include:
Prices that have clearly been support or resistance in the past; often these are some kind of round
number, because traders tend to think in round numbers.
Trend lines and/or their variations like channels, moving averages, and Bollinger Bands.
Fibonacci retracements.
Chart patterns, besides being useful in their own right, also provide additional evidence of s/r
points. For example, if a head-and-shoulders pattern is about to complete its second shoulder or
if price is about to hit the neckline of that pattern, that price level takes on added significance as
a possible s/r point.
Again, there are many more indicators you could use, and we haven't even covered momentum
indicators yet. But these give us enough for some trading examples from my trading journal.

Second Screening
Once you've found some situations that meet these criteria on the weekly charts, the next step is to see
if the same criteria for low-risk, high potential reward trades are present in your chosen time frame,
in this case, daily charts.
Why bother with the first screening? As noted previously, the longer time frame chart shows you
stronger s/r levels. We're hoping to find an entry point on the daily charts that is near the stronger s/r
areas found on the longer time frame, in this case the weekly charts. If we find that a pair nears its
weekly s/r, we'll know it's worth doing a second screening on the daily chart.
Again, the deciding factor in whether you take the trade will be if the daily chart (or whatever
timeframe from which you trade) shows the combination of stop loss, entry, and exit points that allow
the desired rrr, yet will not cost you more than 1 to 3 percent of your account if the stop loss is hit. To
reiterate:
The stop loss is far enough past strong support so that it would get hit only by strong price moves
that signal your trade idea was mistaken, and close enough so you're out with a small but
affordable loss that doesn't exceed 1 to 3 percent of your trading capital, so you can afford lots of
mistakes, recover your losses, and be profitable
It's two to three times closer to your entry point than is your profit-taking point, so you have a 1:3
or at worst 1:2 rrr.
Regarding stop loss placement, remember that there are different methods. These include:
The Intuitive Approach: Study the chart for the relevant period and define the price range for the
normal up and down oscillation of price. You want your stop loss to be no closer to your entry

point than that distance, ideally a bit more than that, while still not causing a loss greater than
your 1–3 percent limit. This is a very simple approach and hence the one we choose to use in the
example that follows. This method involves a heavy dose of personal judgment.
The Somewhat More Objective Approach: Set distance from entry point to stop loss based on
fixed percentages (also a judgment call) of the Average True Range (ATR), as mentioned in
Chapter 5, or other formula or statistically based methods to ensure you don't get shaken out of
your trade due to normal price fluctuations.
Regarding rrr, if the trade is in the direction of a very strong trend, it's safer to be more aggressive,
so we're more likely to accept a 1:2 rrr.
In the end, you're always trying to strike a balance between the size of the loss if hit versus the risk
of being stopped out. In other words, the farther away your stop loss is from your entry point, the
bigger the loss if hit but the lower the chance of being hit by random price fluctuations rather than a
real move against you.
If the second screening shows that you can get the desired rrr without risking more than 1 to 3
percent of your capital, you take the trade near strong support. The precise entry level you choose is a
judgment call. You're trying to strike a balance between entering at the best price and not being so
greedy that price never hits your order and you miss the trade altogether.

Third Screening to Monitor Trade Progress
This screening occurs on a chart time frame four to five times shorter than your trading time frame.
For example, if you're trading on daily charts, then use two- to four-hour candles. This one usually
doesn't determine whether you take the trade. Instead, it's mostly just to identify short-term s/r points
that are likely to be temporary, so you're not surprised if the trend halts or reverses around these
zones. Rather than getting worried, you expect a progressing trade to temporarily halt or even reverse.
These areas can also serve as points where you augment or reduce your position if you're using staged
entries and exits.
At times, this screening may alter your strategy. For example, if price repeatedly struggles to break
through the resistance you see on the four hour chart, that might indicate that the longer-term trend may
be failing, especially if important new information just came out. Similarly, if there's too much quality
short-term resistance too close to your entry, you might elect to enter in stages, saving most of your
planned position until price clears that resistance area. Alternatively, if there are better opportunities
or if breaking news casts doubts on your conclusions from the second screening, you might change
your mind about the trade and just get out.
For the sake of brevity and simplicity, the following trade examples omit the third screening.

TYPES OF TRADES
While any good trader should be using most of the techniques we cover, within these guidelines there
are different types or styles of trading for any given time frame. Here's a brief listing of the most
popular styles. The idea is just to acquaint you with these terms. There are whole books written about
each of these trading styles, so use this listing as both an introduction to the vocabulary of trading
styles and as a starting point for further research into the styles that interest you. Just take these as

general labels, because trades often combine elements of more than one style. The most popular types
of trades include:
Position trading—taking a longer-term position to ride a trend: Trading a longer-term trend
(multiple days, weeks, or months) typically involves entering on some kind of pullback to strong
support, waiting to see if that support holds, and then going long soon after longer-term trend
bounces back up from support and resumes (and vice versa for short positions). This style is
associated with longer-term trends (so pay attention to the relevant long-term fundamentals).
Trend trading: This type is essentially the same as position trading but is associated with shorterterm trends, and is thus mostly based on technical analysis of trend strength. Again, the goal is
usually to enter after some kind of support, and to ride the trend as it resumes. Also, when
shorting in order to ride a downtrend, a pullback means a brief move up to a near-term high that
serves as support.
Swing trading: This type involves entering just after a trend reverses briefly, then resumes. You
enter just as price is pushing or “swinging” past its former resistance, which indicates that the
trend has found new strength. Your technical analysis will need to focus not only on s/r points but
also on:
Momentum indicators (Chapter 8) that either telegraph a possible coming trend reversal or
confirm it.
Timing or wave indicators like Elliott Wave, Fibonacci, or Gann style analysis (Chapter 9).
Range trading: This is when you identify a pair that is locked in a sideways (or nearly so) trading
range or channel and you attempt to go long at the lows and short at the highs. As mentioned
earlier, when doing this with strongly trending channels. This kind of trading works when you
have both flat or weak trends, and wide channels.
Momentum trading: This involves locating pairs showing signs of accelerating trends via
momentum indicators covered in the next chapter.
Like swing traders, momentum traders are less focused on entering on a bounce off support. Instead,
they want to enter just after price as broken through key resistance, which suggests a new stage in the
trend.
In sum, position, trend, range, and swing traders seek to buy low and sell high. Momentum traders
seek to buy high on breakouts past resistance because these suggest price is making its next run higher.
Again, with all of these styles, the longer you think you'll be holding the position, the more you need
to consider longer-term fundamentals because they'll have more time to influence the pair.
