2. Using that information to help formulate a trading idea.
3. Planning the actions to be taken.

The gathering of information involves collecting past data and then applying it to a specific means of market analysis, such as what I have covered
in this book using pivot point analysis. In formulating ideas, you may look
at the pivot point moving averages to help determine a market’s ability to
make a certain price range. This step helps you to predict where the market
might head and then gives you information so that you can decide where it
should be going. Planning action involves thinking creatively about alternative courses of action, evaluating their feasibility, and making decisions
on implementation of the plans. This step involves helping you decide if you
should be in multiple contracts or if you should scale back on your normal
position size. If the risk is not worth the reward, then trade with fewer positions. In other words, scale back your normal position size.

STEPS TO SUCCESS
The steps outlined here are a review of the overall purpose of the trading
methods discussed in this book. Pivot point analysis helps give me a “heads
up” on the potential range of a session. The moving average of the pivot
point helps give me a truer reflection of the market’s value, and that helps
me define the market’s condition and possibly the correct direction. Candlestick charts help illustrate and define the trigger, which enables me to
carry out a systematic process of arriving at optimum plans and strategies
for my trades. With that, I am now aware of the full range of issues to be

Projecting Entry and Exit Points

271

considered in a systematic thinking process before entering a trade. By examining a set of relevant questions, such as how low the market can go,
what the next support target is, how high the market can go, and what the
next resistance level is, I can formulate a trading plan with a clear, concise
strategic idea. Exiting the positions and taking money off the table should
be the easy part. However, as it turns out, that is the hardest part for most
traders.
Let’s take a trade example as shown in Figure 10.1. The hammer forms;
I buy on the close, as the market closed above the moving averages; and I
have immediate results. I entered at 10765; and the bullish momentum carried the market higher, as indicated by higher highs, higher lows, and higher
closing highs. The market has lost the bullish momentum, as I see a lowerclose-than-open pattern develop on two time periods followed by a doji.
That is the definition of price action demonstrating a loss in bullish momentum. Therefore, that dictates for me to liquidate half of my position,
which is at 10780. Hardly a profit to speak of, considering the mini-Dow is
$5 per point, which is only a $75 profit. But it is a profit.

FIGURE 10.1
Used with permission of esignal.com.

272

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Now what about the balance of my positions, and where do I place my
stops? In this example, I would suggest either moving stops up to my
break-even point or, as just discussed, placing the stop on a close below
the low of the most recent conditional change candle (a higher closing
high), which occurs at the 6:15 time period. At this point, I do not know if
the market will move higher or lower, but I definitely have a loss of momentum. In this situation, prices established a pause, or consolidation; and
then the market did break out and continued the uptrend. With scaling out
of half of the position, I have a profit and am continuously participating in
a tremendous trending condition, as the market ends up more than 10870.
That equates to more than a 110-point gain, or $550 per contract, on the balance of positions. As a day trader, did I do wrong in liquidating half of my
position? Not if you follow rules. In this situation, I did not have a classic
sell signal, just an indication of a loss in momentum. Therefore, it was a
prudent measure to get paid on partial positions and let the balance ride.
So in this example, there was a reason or a call to action, but not a signal
for a reversal of the long.

FIGURE 10.2
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Projecting Entry and Exit Points

273

Ever heard of the saying “Character in great and little things means carrying through what you feel able to do”? Covering half of your positions
when markets signal a loss in momentum is carrying through what you are
able to do. You made money and stayed with the trade.
In Figure 10.2, we have a low close doji trigger, a classic crossover of
the moving averages, and prices closing below both moving averages. A
trigger to sell short was generated at 10523. We see a beautiful event unfold—immediate results with lower highs, lower lows, and lower closing
lows—until the 11:50 time period; and the market moves sideways in a consolidation pattern. It does take on the form of a bearish descending triangle;
however, we do not know what the outcome will be. As the market is at
10490,. we are staring at a 30-point mini-Dow move, which translates into a
$150 profit per contract. At this time, it is prudent to cover half of the position and put the stop in at breakeven. The market in fact happens to move
in the direction of the original trend as the bearish triangle indicated. By following the market flow, we finally see a specific reason to cover the balance of the position with the high close doji signal at 10483. Here we have
a 40-point gain on the second half of the trade for a $200 gain. We have, in
essence, captured the majority of the trend and kept disciplined in our trading approach while scaling out of half of the position.

DO SOMETHING GREAT
I am sure you have read or heard this expression sometime in your life: “I’d
rather attempt to do something great and fail than to attempt to do nothing
and succeed.” By scaling out, you have a profit in your trading account
while letting the trade mature. You have accomplished a great thing, a true
sense of following a business plan—and you made money.
Scaling out of positions is the most apropriate method when the market gives you a clue that the trend momentum is slowing. It allows you to
capture a profit while participating in a potential market move. As a day
trader, you are not so much concerned with long-term macroeconomic situations as you are with riding a momentum wave. Granted, it helps to have
a good understanding of fundamental conditions; but for the most part, you
are looking to ride a move and profit from it. That is your job. In short-term
trading, conditions change; and you need to capture opportunities as they
become present stocks. Foreign exchange (forex) and futures markets are
ideal for momentum trades. Traders need assistance with capturing the
profits while letting the balance of the position ride or, better stated, with
an execution plan. The foreign currency markets also tend to trend well
over the course of 7 to 10 days, allowing swing traders opportunities to capture larger price swings over a given period of time. One of the greatest ben-

274

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

efits here is that you have access to the markets on a 24-hour basis, unlike
the equity markets.

SCALE AND TRAIL
The euro currency chart in Figure 10.3 demonstrates a nice swing trading
opportunity and how scaling out of half of your positions is a great mechanism to capture profits while staying with a potentially longer-term trend.
As you can see, the sell signal triggers at 124.80. Immediately we see the sequence of events develop: lower closes than opens, lower highs, lower
lows, and lower closing lows. This is what we want to see each time we
place a short position in the market. As the price declines, a hammer forms;
and as you know, that generally gives a clue that a market reversal is developing. The market does make a higher closing high, which would give
you reason to scale out of half of your positions at 122.65. Not a bad trade,
which took place over 11 trading sessions.

FIGURE 10.3
Used with permission of esignal.com.

Projecting Entry and Exit Points

275

The market has not given any confirmation of a trend change; therefore, you would want to move a stop down on the balance of the positions
to just above the high of the candle that made the last major conditional
change of a lower closing low. Trading with scaling out of the balance of
half of your positions combined with the trailing stop method we went over
in Chapter 9 will help you capture profits while participating in the majority of a trending market condition.

INTEGRATE PIVOT POINTS TO HELP
TIME OUR EXITS?
We have gone over how to move the stops and why it is good to scale out
of positions. We can integrate pivot points to help us trigger our entries and
use the pivot point support or resistance levels to help us target our exits.
As shown in Figure 10.4, we have a 15-minute candle chart showing a classic sell signal with a low close doji at pivot resistance, and we see how the

FIGURE 10.4
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

276

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

moving averages have crossed and the market is trading below both values.
We have a call to action to sell on the close or on the next open. This chart
is the e-mini–Standard & Poor’s (S&P), and we would be filled at 1264.25.
The market declines in the perfect order—lower highs, lower lows, and
lower closing lows—right until we see the market trade down to the pivot
support target. This is a perfect opportunity to scale out of half of your positions. Remember that in Chapter 2 we went over the fact that once a market goes into trend mode, it will then go into a consolidation phase. We do
not know if the trend will continue or reverse; so at this point, it makes
sense to trail a stop on the balance of positions.
I use the point just above the last conditional change, which is the candle that made the last lower closing low. We cover half of the positions at
1260.75 for a 3.5-point gain, or $175 per contract. We would lower our stops
on the balance to 1262.25 to lock in profits on the balance of positions.
Using the pivot point target levels will help you identify when and where to
scale out of positions.

BUY SUPPORT, SELL RESISTANCE
Throughout this book, I have made many references to why I look for buy
signals at the predetermined pivot point support levels and take sell signals
at predetermined resistance levels. This also falls along the lines of not
knowing the outcome of the trading signal and market trend conditions,
which can and do change. As a day trader looking to capture a portion of a
day’s potential trading range, you have to use a plan. Scaling out of positions is such a plan of action. Take a look at Figure 10.5. We have a spot
forex euro currency versus the U.S. dollar. Notice that the market breaks
below the targeted pivot point support several times; however, prices do
not seem to decline very far or carry any momentum. In fact, a low close
doji pattern develops, which means, if you follow my rules, you do not take
sell signals at support. This helps filter out the false trading signals. Once
we have a high close doji trigger to go long at 119.83, we now can place our
stop and follow the developments as the trade matures. We see higher
highs, higher lows, and higher closing highs. The market closes closer to
the highs of each successive candle, and the closes of each candle are
above the opens. These are all very bullish signs, and the market blasts beyond the first resistance (R-1) point. So far, we do not have a reason to liquidate the position or scale out of the trade. Then as the market trades at
the R-2 level, we see a doji form; and that will be the clue to scale out of
half of the position near 120.20. At this point, we trail our stop on the bal-

Projecting Entry and Exit Points

277

FIGURE 10.5
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, LTD.

ance of positions to the low of the last conditional change candle, which is
the one that made the last higher closing high. We do get knocked out of
the trade, as the market develops into a consolidation phase. This trade resulted in capturing a nice chunk of the middle of a beautiful intraday trending market condition. Scaling out of the first half of the position would
have generated a 40-point profit, or $400 per $100,000 contract lot value;
and the balance would have made nearly 30 points, or $300. There was little to no pressure once the trade was initiated. Pivot points helped you target the entry and scale out of the exit. As an interesting note, remember the
statistic that stated that dojis form close to the highs and/or pivot point resistance levels. Figure 10.5 is just another chart to help visually validate
that claim.
Most people use scale trading as a means to stagger positions to enter
as well as exit a market. There are many variations and specific techniques.
It can be argued that rather than scaling out of half of the positions, you

278

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

should actually add on to trades to really pyramid profits. I personally do
not use this style of trading. I encourage you to explore any and all methods, but I like to stick to the methods that work for me. When I have a projected entry price based on pivot point analysis, I never have a “guaranteed”
profit until I liquidate the trade. By scaling out, it is the finest method I
know of that puts cash in my account while allowing me to further participate in gains on the balance of positions.

CHAPTER 11

The Sample
Analysis
The Proof Is in the Back-Testing

hort-term system traders make their money, leave the game, and wait
to execute the next setup; they don’t have to worry about being an
economist. They get in when the signals indicate and get out when the
signals dictate. It has been stated many times and proven by history that
traders who consistently make money are those who follow a program or a
set of predefined rules. These rules have been tested, and they correspond
in a variety of time periods and with diversified or noncorrelated markets.
You may have made observations on changes in the market, such as
when the stock index futures are trending up by 10:30 A.M. (CT) on a Friday,
the market has a tendency to trade higher through the end of the day. Actually, that was a casual observation of mine as described on page 212 of
my first book, A Complete Guide to Technical Trading Tactics (Wiley,
2004). With that said, once you have a trading idea about the way a market
moves, through your own observation, you can apply it to computer code
and have a computer generate an alert to inform you when a signal is generated.
Through the proficiency of computers, we can take historical data and
back-test the results to see how reliable and accurate the theories are. Not
all systems work well. Some are good in trending market conditions, and
others will work well in nontrending market environments. Therefore, it is
important to back-test a methodology for various time periods and in various noncorrelated markets to see if the principles are sound and stand the
test of time. So far, with what we have gone over, you can develop your
own rules based on pivot point and candlestick patterns.

S

279

280

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

One such example is if we assign a positive (+) value to a candle with
a higher close than open, if you have a sequence of three positive values
after a succession of, say, five negative (–) values, and if the low of a given
candle is within two ticks, or 5 percent of, the average daily range on a 10day average, then a buy signal is triggered. Another way of stating this is:
• For a positive assigned candle:
Close (C) is greater than open (O) ( C > O)
• For a negative assigned candle:
Close is less than open (C < O)
• For a doji candle, with a neutral (=) assigned value:
Close is equal to open (C = O)
• You can program your own system to generate an exit strategy based
on an average holding period of, say, seven or eight periods or until the
market forms a lower close than open (C < O) or a negative assigned
value and if that time period closes below the prior time period’s low.
Another methodology or system that is a simpler program would be to
combine a three-period pivot point moving average with a five-period pivot
point moving average. After a series of lower closing lows, once the threeperiod moving average crosses above the five-period moving average and if
the market was within five points above or below a pivot point first support
level (S-1) target number, then a buy signal would be generated. For added
optimization, you could add a filter that if the stochastics indicator was
below the 20 percent line, once %K and %D crossed and closed back above
the 20 percent level, a buy signal would trigger.
Using the value of the pivot point resistance target of R-1 while combining the three-period pivot point moving average with the five-period
pivot point moving average, once the three-period crossed and closed
below the five-period pivot point moving average, within five points either
above or below the R-1, a sell signal would be generated. For added fine
tuning, you could add another element, such as a stochastics reading, so if
both moving averages were above the 80 percent level and once %K and %D
both closed back below the 80 percent level, a sell signal would be triggered.
The hard part in coding is comprehending or understanding the software language and then thinking like a computer. You can’t just state “sell”
when stochastics gives a sell signal. The software or computer program
does not know what your interpretation of a sell signal is.
If you recall, in Chapter 1, I suggested that traders need to ask more
questions. That is what a system trader does. In order to develop a trading
plan or a mechanical system, you need to search for answers to question
such as:

The Sample Analysis

281

• Will this be for day or position trading?
• Will volume studies be used and, if so, how?
• What will be the average holding period?
• What methods do we want to use and what parameter will we choose?
A trader needs to use various tools to get the job done, so to speak.
That is why I have several trading platforms and quote services. Genesis
Software allows me to develop my own “black box” of algorithms and indicators and to back-test the program. In order to develop a good system, you
need to decide if the trading concepts are valid. Once you have come up
with your set of rules or criteria, then you can start to optimize the program. You have heard of the “Keep It Simple” rule? Leonardo da Vinci is
credited with saying “Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.” If Leonardo
liked things simple, well then, it is good enough for me, too!
A trading system should be designed from simple yet effective rules
that blend key concepts of momentum changes and trending conditions.
A well-defined trading strategy can be developed to generate buy and sell
signals in most markets in various time periods. Believe it or not, designing a trading system is easy to do once you have an idea of what the call
to action, or the trigger, will be to enter a position. In this book, we have
gone over several good techniques with which you can start, such as when
indicators correspond near pivot points like the stochastics 80 percent/20
percent close line technique or the moving average convergence/divergence (MACD) zero-line cross signal. You can develop a system based on
these two indicators and then determine how many time periods, or the
length of time, a position should be in the market. Now all you need to determine is how many holding periods (such as 4 or 8 periods) are needed
before an exit strategy is triggered. You can develop a trigger on moving
average crossover to initiate a signal, just like the pivot point moving average we went over in Chapter 6 or a simple moving average using 5-period
versus 10-period parameters. You will want to test the system over a
lengthy time frame and with various noncorrelated markets. If there is any
validity to the rules or methods, then you should see positive performance
across the board.
Not all systems that show results of extremely high profit levels are
best. A system also depends on drawdowns, or periods of equity loss. Also,
it is important to have software that will show you a trading system’s weakness or will help point out specific time periods or time frames in which you
should not trade. Being able to closely follow your drawdown patterns is a
huge benefit to the computer-friendly active systems trader, finding answers to such questions as: What is the recovery period to gain back losses?
What is the depth or magnitude of the losses? These are very important
questions because if a system has great returns but absurd equity draw-

282

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

downs for long periods, then it is most likely a poor system for an average
investor to trade. When you are designing your system, ask yourself what
you want this system to do. The obvious answer is to make money; but you
also want to know how long and how deep the drawdown periods are or
whether there are consistently more winners than losers. As a trader you
need to evaluate new techniques, especially ones that increase your profitability while reducing your risk and exposure in the market. Systems need
to be developed with the idea of triggering a turning point in the market earlier than other indicators and other traders do. Considering that most indicators are lagging, you need a signal that identifies turning points as they
occur, and you need to use indicators to confirm that the position is valid.
Pivot point analysis does just that, especially when combining support and
resistance levels and by implementing a moving average approach
One of the best features or benefits to using mechanical trading systems is that they alert a trader to initiate a trade or to act on a signal as it occurs, rather than on a hunch or on the two main destructive emotional
elements, fear and greed. Based on a system that is tested, you have statistical evidence to validate the entry; and that should help eliminate trading
on a hunch, a rumor, or a feeling, which is what drives most trading decisions from inexperienced traders. As this book has demonstrated, it is not
my intention to portray the ability to buy the exact low or sell the exact
high. In most cases, I am looking for a definitive trend or price reversal to
occur; and then I act on that signal and carry a position until the market
demonstrates a loss in momentum, the time to exit the trade. The keys to
winning are the ability to practice patience and wait for the setup to develop and the discipline to act on the trigger. Mostly, it is the ability to exit
a losing trade as the signals dictate, not to hang onto the loser. So when
using a system, you will know and understand that the mechanics are never
100 percent right and that you will have a certain number of trades that do
