
book_c08.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 67

Charlie Flank Goes to U.S. National Bank

67

drawn and the office was lit mostly by floor and table lamps. This looked
more like an expensive steakhouse than a trading operation.
Perhaps I’d come to the wrong place. Apparently I had walked into a
gathering of men (no women in sight) who didn’t care what might happen
in the markets that day. I’d soon find out I was right.
I suspected that the average age of the traders here was at least 45
years. Some of them appeared older than that, maybe as old as 60 or 70.
Not one of them wore anything but a blue or grey suit, with the coat still
on. At Ernest Wellington, I’d seen a trader wearing Bermuda shorts and a
Hawaiian shirt. That person would seem very out of place on this floor.
Each of these men had a spacious work area that was separated from
the others; they were sitting at their own wooden desks and some of them
even had visitor’s chairs in front of them. Some of them had small televisions on a side table. Only a few of them were tuned on, all of them showing CNBC. Melissa Francis was reporting from her luxury box above the
New York Mercantile Exchange.
If anyone here traded for a living, he would have a hard time proving it
to me. Surely I had stopped at the wrong floor, for retired traders. These
were the stables where they put out the old men to pasture and told them
to watch some news, visit with old friends, make a few phone calls, and
have a cup of coffee. Perhaps the Federal Reserve was about to make another interest rate announcement. That would explain the hush-hush environment and the focus on the few television monitors.
I also decided that since I had gone to the trouble of sneaking onto the
trading floor, I deserved to know why in the world no one here seemed to
be trading. But I didn’t know who to ask. At Ernest Wellington, with everyone screaming, it seemed natural to talk with the first person I saw. But
here I was intimidated. No one seemed alive, let alone happy to see a visitor. Since the receptionist had left me alone, I didn’t have a tour guide. I
considered walking out and moving on to the next firm.
Thank goodness, someone spoke to me first.
“Son, you look a mite lost. Who ya lookin for?”
The wrinkled face of a man at least 80 years of age smiled broadly at
me. “Not too many of us here, I’m sure I can give you a hand.”
“What’s everyone waiting for?” I asked him. “It’s quiet in here.”
He just looked back at me like my head was on fire. “Well, boy, it’s
quiet in here every day. This ain’t no two-bit operation up in Midtown.
You’re standing where John Pierpont Morgan himself used to stand, or at
least nearby.”
John Pierpont Morgan? Was that long for J. P. Morgan, the famous
banker from 10 million years ago?
“Wow,” I replied, hoping to appear as impressed as he obviously
wished I would be.

book_c08.qxd

68

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 68

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

“Well, then, if you’re waiting for someone, come on over here and you
can sit down.”
He guided me to a desk where a man not much younger—but much
bigger—than he was sitting. He towered over the desk in his chair; he was
probably six and a half feet tall and had massive hands that made the mechanical pencil in his hand look like a toothpick. He was playing solitaire
with a worn deck of cards with the other hand, in between using the pencil
to write notes on large sheets of graph paper in front of him. The desks on
either side were empty. It was clear this guy was a loner. I gathered up
some courage and sat myself down in one of the guest chairs in front of
him. The other old man waddled off so weakly I wondered if he could find
his desk.
“Good morning,” he offered without looking up. “I don’t recognize you.
Come here to gamble this morning? You new around here?”
I shook my head, but he wasn’t looking at me. I replied: “Gambling’s
not really my thing. I’m just here to drop off some documents.”
He looked up. “Not dropping anything off on me, I hope.”
“Of course not.” I held out my hand to him. “Harry Banes.”
He grunted. “Looks like today you’re Charlie Flank.”
I looked down at my name tag. “Oh, that,” I replied. “That’s who I was
when I checked in at the front desk.”
He furrowed his brow and looked at me oddly.
“I sneaked in here because I want to be a trader. That’s the honest
truth. But I feel like I just took a trip to another planet.”
Ah, the truth. Telling it gave me the feeling of seeing an old friend. Well,
at least an old friend that I had sold up the river.
He laughed, grinned, and stretched back in his chair and put the pencil
behind his ear. He spoke to me, but he spoke so loudly I suddenly felt very
conspicuous. Not wanting to draw attention to myself, I sunk a bit deeper
into the chair. He boomed: “Sounds like something I would have done forty
years ago,” he told me. And then he pointed across to the television a few
desks away. Melissa Francis was gone, replaced by a group of talking
heads who were saying things I couldn’t understand. The old man continued: “You picked the right day to come in here. NFP [Non-Farm Payroll report] is out in two minutes. You’re gonna to see this place blow up like a
rock concert.”
“Really?”
He chortled and the pencil fell out of his ear. I stood up to get it for him
but his arms were so long he could reach down for it on his own. He offered his hand to me and we shook, my hand disappearing into his. With a
closer look at him, I realized that although he appeared old, he had a spark
and energy that told me there were a lot of years left in him.
“Is this place really going to blow up?” I asked again.

book_c08.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 69

Charlie Flank Goes to U.S. National Bank

69

“No, Charlie,” he answered. “It’s not. It’s not going to hardly blow air.”
He looked around him. “Half these guys don’t even know what day of the
week it is.”
“Oh, my name is Harry. Sorry for the confusion.” I tore off the name tag
sticker, then said, “You mentioned that the NFP was coming out in a few
minutes.”
“Yep.”
I didn’t know what that meant. Was this a report like the FOMC minutes? I wished that I could be sitting next to Craig Simpson right now, to
see what he would be doing. This guy wasn’t paying any attention to the
television any longer. He had returned to marking up his charts, continually breaking the lead in the pencil. This frustrated him and finally he threw
the pencil in the trash can next to his desk.
“Gotta pen?”
I gave him mine.
“You don’t seem to be too concerned about the NFP,” I observed.
This impressed him. He wanted to be noticed for not paying attention.
“I’m working on my charts this morning, like I do every first Friday. Listen,
I’ll give you a tip: You don’t trade the day of the report—you make longer
term bets after it’s out. Most of the young guys in this city are going to trade
their brains out for the first hour after the report is out. They would sell
their own mothers to get this number before it’s released. But they don’t
have to sit on the edge of their seats like they do. They can just wait to see
what the number is, then make a rational plan.”
“From the other trading floor I’ve seen, rational behavior is in short
supply. It was chaotic.”
He smiled. He was pleased that I understood him.
I stood up and looked down at his charts. There were X’s and O’s all
across his graph paper. It looked like a financial chart that I would see on
TV, only instead of lines going up or down, there were X’s and O’s. He could
see that I was interested.
“Point and figure charts, my friend. No one pays any attention anymore. But I still plot them by hand. Wait, here comes the number.”
The gentleman with the television closest to us turned up the volume
on his set and for a brief moment, most of the heads in the room turned to
look. The shot moved to some massive trading floor somewhere, with a reporter smack dab in the middle of the room:
RICK SANTELLI: Three-hundred-eight thousand!
It was as if Zeus has called down to his people. And he had told them
that he was coming to kill the trader who acted the most like a human
being. And that sent everyone on the television screen into a frenzy. The

book_c08.qxd

70

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 70

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

sound turned back down on the television, but all around the reporter, the
place blew up. Traders screamed at each other, throwing hand signals to
each other so quickly it was totally impossible to decipher anything. This is
probably what it looked like over at Ernest Wellington. How I wished I
could be there right then!
It was obvious to the old man in front of me that I had no idea what
was going on. From the reaction in this room, I decided that no one here
really traded, but that they were all retired. We had lawyers like that back
at Wakeman—old men who would shuffle around, tell dirty jokes, and go
home at 2:00 P.M. every day.
While Craig at Ernest Wellington was furiously trading, along with all
the people around him, this man and his associates appeared not to belong
on a trading floor at all. I got the feeling they had seen a lot of these reports, and they no longer held the same interest. He said: “Charlie, what
just came out is the March jobs number. It tracks how many new jobs were
created in the United States.”
“Okay. It looks like the people on television really care about it.”
“Right. Just like I said. Guys on Wall Street would chop off their feet to
get just one of these numbers early. Today we got a good number. A great
number for short-term traders. Way off expectations. You can bet that a lot
of guys and gals on the street are buying U.S. dollars right now. They’re betting that today the dollar will go way up because of the number. But what
really matters isn’t what happens in the next five minutes. What matters is
what happens by the end of the day and then next week.”
“But you aren’t going to trade today?”
“Hello no.”
“When will you trade?”
He enjoyed this question. “I’ll answer you without giving you the information you want. Do you have access to charts?”
“Currency charts?”
“Sure. Currency charts.”
I nodded. “Yes, at home.”
“Learn how to use them. But don’t look at the short-term charts. That’s
what the hooligans are focused on right now. You need to watch the longer
term charts.”
He had just called Craig Taylor a hooligan, just because he liked to
short-term trade. He seemed wise and friendly but totally ignorant of how
much money could be made from the short-term trading that Craig did.
Maybe I could ask a few more questions and then bail out of here.
“What’s the difference between short-term and long-term?” I asked.
“The young guys are all looking at the five-minute charts, or God help
them, the one-minute charts, or lower. The tick charts even. Maniacs. I am
looking at the daily and weekly charts here.”

book_c08.qxd

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 71

Charlie Flank Goes to U.S. National Bank

71

“Should I look at those, too?”
“Sure. Do that. And add in the four-hour charts. Can you do that?”
“Absolutely,” I answered.
Even though everyone here seemed out of touch with the high-tech
form of trading, I was at least happy that he was talking to me, and also
aware that if I had studied some before I had met him, I could be asking
him lots of intelligent questions about the market. Right now, I was positively unable to comprehend anything more advanced than his instructions
to look at the long-term charts. Other than that, he was speaking a foreign
language. I knew that everyone on Wall Street (except the men at the Rest
Home for Old Guy Traders) was making trades. I knew that we had just
gotten a March Jobs Number, or “NFP.”
“You said that everyone who trades in the short term would be buying
dollars, trading currency. What about stocks?”
“Stocks aren’t traded here on the same floor as currencies, usually.
Here we can trade whatever we want. The equities floor would be separate
from the currency floor in most places. But to answer your question,
stocks could make a nice move upward today. Stock market likes a strong
economy.”
I was confused on so many levels. For sure, my brain had melted and
was now draining out my ears.
He could tell I did not understand much of this and that I was totally
captivated by the chaos on the television. He smiled. “You are a total
rookie, aren’t you?”
I nodded. “With a capital R,” I answered.
He looked down at his charts and looked up at me. Then he looked
down and up again, trying to decide what he was going to spend his time on.
“I’d love to help you kid,” he said, “but I’ve gotta get myself ready for
Monday. It’s nine A.M. and I’m leaving at noon, and I got twenty-five other
charts to work on. It’s not like I was expecting you. Was I expecting you?”
“No.”
“Right. You need to read a book about this stuff.”
I was willing to read War and Peace backward if it meant I could better
understand what was happening around me.
“What book?”
He shook his head. I guessed that I had asked just a few too many
questions in too short of a time. “I don’t know,” he told me. “I started in the
mailroom a thousand years ago and learned this stuff by sitting at a desk
and asking a guy questions, like you’re trying to do with me. Come back on
Monday and you can bother me some more. My name’s Samuel Wilson.” He
stood up, shook my hand again, and that was the sign that it was time for
me to go.
“Thank you, Mr. Wilson. I will do that. I really appreciate this.”

book_c08.qxd

72

12/20/06

2:15 PM

Page 72

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

He grinned and now looked happy that he had helped me.
Although he couldn’t answer any more questions, I didn’t see why I
couldn’t stick around and watch what happened next. He didn’t mind, and
he even said that he’d make sure no one bothered me. I sneaked over to a
nearby desk that was closer to the CBNC television, and settled in for a little while. This made me really, really happy. Even if I couldn’t learn much
about the new methods of trading from this old man, he at least would
cover for me while I watched some television to see more of the reaction in
the market.
And I wasn’t going to leave here empty-handed.
From just a few moments on this trading floor, I knew about one more
economic event that needed my attention: the NFP. I had a lot of studying
to do. It occurred to me, as I saw everyone working furiously on television,
that all those people knew what they were doing. They saw that jobs report
come out, and then they were ready to react. Like tigers pouncing on their
prey. Or bullies on a playground trying to get a piece of a fight. They had
been waiting for someone to announce the number, and then they knew
what trades to take.
Even the man next to me, who was plotting away on his charts, had a
system that he was working on. He wasn’t reacting immediately to the
news, but he had said that he was going to base some of his trading decisions on this report—just not immediately after it was released.
With so much happening at that moment, I decided not to bother any
other traders, but instead make some observations.
Even though I was sure these old men had been successful at some
point in their lives, I decided that the real trading life for me would resemble
the life of an Ernest Wellington trader. I could see myself with a computer at
home, several monitors, the sports section open next to me, television
tuned into CNBC in the background. That was more like it, and much more
like my personality. The computer was going to be the most difficult part.
I couldn’t believe how long I had lasted at the law firm with barely
enough skill to answer my e-mail, pecking on the keyboard one letter at a
time. They probably should have fired me long before they did, on the basis
of my technological incompetence alone. It was positively going to be the
case that when I started trading for a living, I would receive some kind of
formal training on computers. In the meantime, I could get my wife and
kids to help me a bit. Maybe I could pay Scott, or at least offer to pay him,
to tutor me.
But first, I was going to have to get a whole lot smarter than I was now
about the basics: the language of trading. I would have to read enough so
that I could at least ask basic questions that could help me start learning
the advanced stuff that everyone I was watching on television—and
Craig—knew already.

book_c09.qxd

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 73

CHAPTER 9

Mapping Out a
New Career

showed up at the Barnes & Noble in Rockefeller Center an hour later.
Just around the corner I’d also find Teuschers, the Swiss Chocolatier. If
I arrived home with chocolates in one hand and 1,000 new books in the
other, Gini would focus on the chocolates and not on how much I’d spent.
And I planned on spending a lot of money on books that day—I was going
to stock myself with books about trading, then hole myself up at home during the day and study my brains out.
It wasn’t hard to find a clerk who was interested in talking to someone about something other than travel guides to New York City, and he
walked me through the investing section one book at a time. I found
books on economics, on options, on forex, on day-trading stocks—you
name it, I found it. The clerk also recommended a few books that were
just stories about traders. Although these books were less relevant, I
bought them anyway. As far as I can remember, that day I bought books
on day-trading stocks and futures and commodities, books on economic
indicators, books on technical analysis (reading charts), and books that
taught me about the currency market specifically. Then there were some
books on the psychology of trading, or stories about traders. While they
seemed interesting, I knew that I’d be just passing the time by reading
them and that they would be a waste of time. Those would be my reward
for making profitable trades. I could only read those after I’d studied all
the other books at least twice.
I am sure that I bought at least 20 books. I had so many of them that I
could not carry them by myself and had to arrange for them to be delivered

I

73

book_c09.qxd

12/20/06

74

2:16 PM

Page 74

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

to my house. They were more than happy to oblige, so I grabbed just one of
the books—the book about day-trading forex—and I left the store, hopped
on the subway, and headed home.
By the time the subway reached my stop in Queens, I was so wrapped
up in the book that I never got off. I stayed on all the way to the end of the
line, and although by then I realized what was happening, I stayed on anyway. From what I could tell, the currency market was the most liquid market on the planet, and trillions of dollars a day changed hands (or
computer screens) in trading. The book was written for the guy trading
currency at home, which was perfect for me—and it had systems, it had
tools, it even had advice about how to keep a log of my trades. I had placed
a total of three trades in my entire life but I was determined that it wasn’t
going to be long before I was trading on a daily basis.
When I arrived home, I had two things waiting for me: a frustrated wife
and a box full of books sitting on the porch so heavy that we could hardly
move it. Gini was wondering how on earth I could justify buying all those
books when I had just lost my job. It was funny, because I hadn’t thought
about my lost job all day long.
Once I ate dinner with my family and put the kids to bed, I rushed to
the computer and fired up the charting program. That was the first thing I
wanted to see: the charts. Mr. Wilson had told me to look at the longer term
charts. So that is what I did (see Figure 9.1).
The daily chart told me nearly everything that I cared to know about
Craig’s trade. Just the day before, on the first day of April, his trade had

FIGURE 9.1

Harry looks at a long-term chart.

book_c09.qxd

12/20/06

2:16 PM

Page 75

Mapping Out a New Career

75

closed at his profit target of 1.8600. But I needed to see a chart closer up
that would show what had happened today. So, against the wishes of old
man Wilson, I switched over to a 15-minute chart.
From my book on technical analysis, I learned that each of the candles
I looked at represented the movement of price in a designated period of
time. On a 15-minute chart, each candle showed how far the price moved
in, well, 15 minutes. Dark candles meant that price had gone down. Light
candles meant that price had gone up. Easy enough (see Figure 9.2).
Looking at the chart, I realized that the GBP/USD had moved its entire
distance for the day—200 pips—in the first 15 minutes after the report was
released. Then it rose back up 100 pips, and then it fell back down 100 pips.
What a wild ride! Surely a lot of money could be made in a very short period of time. That’s where the money was! In the short-term trading, just
like Craig Taylor was doing. If I could react fast enough, I realized, I could
get in on the first move of a currency pair after the Non-Farm Payroll report (ah, the NFP!), or the FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee) interest rate decision, and then ride it for a quick profit. And what if I traded
more than just one currency pair?
While I knew I had made a mistake when I traded after the FOMC interest rate decision, I now understood that it was more a mistake of how long
it took me to enter the trade and for long how I stayed in. It had nothing to
do with whether I bought or sold. There were fast profits—even easy profits—to be made when these two reports were released. How many more reports were there? When did they come out? Would Craig show me how to
trade them? I felt badly for Mr. Wilson. That old man was sitting around

FIGURE 9.2

A wild ride.

book_c09.qxd

12/20/06

76

2:16 PM

Page 76

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

waiting for days to trade, while Craig was enjoying freshly baked pips after
just a few minutes of trading! How on earth was Mr. Wilson going to make
money by sitting around and not even reacting at all to the economic report?
I dove back into the books. I finished the first book that evening, and
then spent the rest of the evening wading through the others. I had four or
five open at a time, and I was sucking in as much information as possible.
Although I was learning a lot from them, and the terminology was coming
quickly, I couldn’t get the idea about trading after the economic reports out
of my head. From the books, I was learning lists of important economic reports. Here are the ones that seemed to cause the most movement:
• Non-Farm Payroll
• Consumer Price Index
• Trade Balance
• FOMC Interest Rate Decision and Minutes
There were other economic reports listed, but these were supposedly
some of the most important ones.
Together with my new-found understanding of economic reports, I had
the Amazing Forex software, and I was sure that I could make that expensive tool work for me in this system. It seemed perfectly designed to help
me make a decision about what trade to take after an economic report.
By scouting around online, I also taught myself about leverage, or
margin. I learned that forex dealers were willing to offer 1001, or even
2001 margin. This meant with an initial investment of $1,000, I could
command a $100,000 position, or even more, in the currency markets.
What got my juices flowing about this was that, apparently, I could keep
my small trading account, and once I started learning to trade like Craig,
I could still make a lot of money on a daily basis. Trading for a living from
home was now making sense to me. The only reason I had lost so much
so fast was that I had left my trades open while I was doing other things.
If I had been paying attention and trading in the short term, I could have
cleaned up.
The math I was doing in my head was shocking. My forex dealer offered 4001 margin. That meant that I could put up $100 in margin, and
command a $400,000 position. That would be worth $40 per pip! I’d have
$400 in margin left over still. Just like the woman from the forex dealer had
told me on the phone—every time the price moved against me by 1 pip, or
$40, that would be deducted from my available leftover margin. So, I could
allow an economic report trade to move against me 10 pips before I needed
to get out. That was fine, I realized—the market only moved in one direc-
