Traders really benefit from this technology, as it allows them to do more things at once without having wait for their computer to catch up. Intel currently dominates
the high-performance market with its flagship i7 2600k processor. This is the first chip to ship “unlocked,” meaning that users can turbocharge their PC to speeds that
were just dreamt about five years ago.
A trader’s computer should be set up specifically for trading and have a minimum of other stuff going on. If there are kids in the house, make sure they have their
own computer for Internet surfing and computer games. Believe me, gaming manufacturers fully understand that kids know how to click buttons, and many of those
buttons automatically start downloading a variety of crap and spyware right onto your computer. When you’re on your PC, follow the Golden Rule—if you don’t
know who it’s from or what it is, don’t open it. Or if it seems like an odd request, don’t follow it. Assume it is a trick (because it probably is). If it’s real and
important, the person will get back to you. Let me put it this way: every time I’ve shown Henry a link I didn’t click, he said, “Thank you for not clicking that and
destroying your computer.” When in doubt, think it out.

What About Monitors, Graphics Cards, and Other Gizmos?
One question I receive a lot from traders is, “How many monitors do I need?” This really depends on what you are trading. I personally utilize six monitors for
viewing charts and two additional monitors for other tasks such as e-mail, instant messaging, and Internet surfing. These are set up on two different computers, using
software called Input Director to share a mouse and keyboard across both computers. This means I don’t need a separate keyboard and mouse for each computer,
which is really awesome. The mouse arrow just glides along from one computer to the next and makes it seem like the setup is all part of one giant monster computer,

42

instead of two separate ones. (Note: I also like to sit on a balance ball for about half the day. This keeps your core strong and helps prevent backaches.) I used to trade
out of my house, and then we had … three children. I now trade out of an apartment a few miles away from my house. It was quiet for a while, and then I started
hiring people to help with the website, so that I could actually keep trading. That got too noisy (like having … three kids), so I got another apartment for them to work
out of. I guess right now if we keep growing, we will keep adding more apartments.
M ost traders do not need six or eight monitors, and I know traders who make a great living with just two. There’s a real danger in having too many monitors, as a
trader can quickly find himself with information overload. I visited one trader who had 25 monitors shooting data at him from all directions. Shockingly, he could never
decide when to pull the trigger to get into a trade. It is important to remember that traders don’t need to know everything that is going on in the markets. They just
need enough information to be able to decide whether or not to take their setup, to understand their small corner of the trading universe. All of the successful traders I
know focus on just a handful of setups. They don’t need a confirming move in crude oil in order to take their buy signal on the S&Ps. If traders have found one or two
setups that really work for them, then they can, and should, ignore a lot of the data out there. Laserlike focus on a small part of the markets brings expertise and a
better understanding of when to take a trade. Remember, the goal is to make money, not to “know it all.”
As the cost of LCD displays continues to drop, setting up your desired number of monitors becomes feasible on almost any budget. For traders, several of the highend features available in monitors today are not necessary. One feature that you will want to be sure you have is that the display complies with the VESA standard.
The VESA standard is what is used for mounting displays and ensures that your monitor can be removed from its factory stand and secured to a third-party mounting
device. The other key feature you need to focus on is the monitor’s native resolution. Native resolution tells you how many pixels wide by how many pixels tall your
display is. The number of pixels can be adjusted, but in order to get the best picture possible, you’ll want to run the display at its native resolution. The higher the
resolution, the more content you’ll be able to fit on your screen. If you and a trading partner have the exact same monitor, but one of you is able to fit more onto a
chart than the other, resolution is the likely culprit.
The monitors we use and recommend are Dell UltraSharp U2410s. These 24-inch monitors have accurate color reproduction, a native resolution of 1,920 × 1,200,
and six different inputs, meaning that you could run your TV’s cable box into one of the monitors via an HDM I cable and use it as your television if you like. How
you connect these displays to your PC can vary depending on the video card you choose, but DisplayPort is quickly becoming the standard for digital video
connections. The adoption of DisplayPort technology is exciting because it is a royalty-free standard. This means that companies won’t have to pay to include
DisplayPort technology with their devices the way they did with Sony’s M emoryStick format (currently JPY 500,000, or roughly $6,500 U.S. as of this writing).
Anytime a standard like this is adopted, it’s great for the consumer, as more devices will include the technology and there’s a better chance of the standard’s sticking
around.
Another area of interest for traders is setting up multiple monitors in such a way that they fit comfortably on a desk, don’t take up a lot of space, and are easy to
access. One site I like for this is www.lcdarms.com. Here traders can get different wall- and desk-mounting solutions for their monitors. In terms of desks and chairs,
this is really wide open. A door across two file cabinets works really well as a desk. There are desks available from medical supply companies that are interesting in
terms of how they are set up. The desk isn’t that big a deal, however. Traders just need a place to put their computer equipment. For chairs, I switch between what
might considered Porsche and Pinto setups, using a Herman M iller Aeron chair and a 75-cm aerobic balance ball. Both are good for posture, and I find that switching
throughout the day keeps me more alert. The balance ball is awesome because it strengthens your lower back and core muscles as your body works to keep you “in
balance” while you are sitting on the ball.
Now that you’ve got your displays lined up and mounted, what are you going to use to push them? M ost desktop PCs ship with support for dual monitors. Once
you step outside that realm, things can get a little exotic. The Nvidia NVS line of graphics cards provides some of the best I’ve come across and offers a reliable
solution at an affordable price. This line of cards is geared toward traders and features slim video cards that push high-resolution displays. It also features Nvidia’s
M osaic multidisplay technology. M osaic allows you to span any application across multiple displays or projectors from a single workstation without sacrificing
performance or power. You can learn more about this technology at http://www.tradethemarkets.com/technology.

Why Are SSDs Important to Traders?
The typical progression for technology is to grow incrementally up to a plateau, then leap to the next level. One example would be the processor scenario I mentioned
at the beginning of the chapter. Speeds get faster and faster until a physical barrier is reached, then we leap over it by introducing several cores to replace one. The same
is true for hard drives. A hard drive is the physical disk that your data are stored on. Every document that you create and every cookie that attaches itself to your
browser is stored on your hard drive. Hard drives have grown in capacity for years, but they continue to use the exact same technology of storing your data on
spinning magnetic disks. We’ve gradually drifted into the 3-terabyte range, where the limits of data storage are being pushed. This spurred the next leap in technology
for consumer hard drives, and once you try a solid-state drive in your PC, you won’t go back.
Solid-state drives (SSDs) have revolutionized the hard drive market. Rather than using spinning disks to store your data, they use flash memory. The key difference
between the hard disk drives that traders are used to and SSDs is that SSDs have no moving parts. This means that when you pull up your favorite trading platform,
your drive doesn’t have to spin up, seek the location of the software on the drive, and then, finally, launch. It just launches. Boom.
SSDs are also much more durable. For the traveling executive who is prone to dropping laptops, an SSD is crucial. Since these drives have no moving parts, not only
are they much faster, but they are able to withstand things such as falling from a desk. Then there’s PCIe SSDs. While this is still bleeding-edge technology, it makes
even SSDs look slow. These drives use the same flash memory as a normal SSD, but then stripe the disks for faster read and write times and connect to the PC through
a different connection. The current price for a 220-GB PCIe SSD is $480, so they’re not giving them away just yet, but if you demand the fastest performance from
your PC, this is the only way to go.

Have Apple Computers Arrived in the Trading World?
Apple computers were once thought of as PCs for musicians and artists, with no real place in the business world. This belief is quickly losing ground as the company
continues to make some of the most reliable computers money can buy. As far as hardware goes, the part of the machine you can actually touch, Apple excels. Its
most recent line of M acBook Pros has a solid aluminum body and touchpads that are easy to use. I don’t leave home without mine, and I highly recommend them. This
recommendation doesn’t come without a few caveats, however. Despite Apple’s increase in popularity, 98 percent of trading software still requires M icrosoft
Windows to run. For a long time, this kept most traders from even considering the purchase of a M ac. Then two pivotal events changed all that. The first of these came
43

in 2005, when Steve Jobs announced that Apple would make the transition from PowerPC processors to Intel x86 processors. With the integration of these highperformance Intel chips, the door was opened for major advances in virtualization. Virtualization is the creation of a virtual (rather than an actual) version of something,
in this case an operating system. What this meant for traders was that they could have the benefits of Apple hardware and stability, and still run their trading
applications on Windows.
There are several ways to do this, with the most popular being Apple’s Boot Camp software or Parallels Desktop. The key difference between the two is that Boot
Camp runs Windows on “bare metal,” so to speak, and has direct access to the processing power of your machine. Parallels runs Windows inside an application,
similar to opening a workspace inside your trading platform. This method will have some overhead, but this is usually negligible provided you have a powerful enough
machine. If this is something you’re interested in, the Intel i7 line of processors with plenty of RAM is a clear-cut choice. For users of the thinkorswim platform, the
developers programmed it to work equally well on Windows or a M ac.

Taming the Technological Beast: What Dangers Should I Be Aware of When It Comes to My Computer?
Once traders have their hardware in place, it is time for them to turn their attention to the software. There are a lot of software choices available for traders, but what
this boils down to for most people is a charting program and an execution package. While these are important, there is another category of software that is vital to the
trader, and this is software aimed at keeping a computer in top working order. This is by far the most neglected area for traders. Let’s take a look at this first, and then
we will dive into the trading software.
Trading in and of itself can be one of the most stressful occupations on the planet. One day’s worth of market activity can determine whether a trader drives a new
Shelby M ustang or takes the bus to work. Technological problems or disruptions increase the stress factor and cause drains of both real and mental capital. Traders
who are stuck behind the technology curve are at more of a disadvantage than those who are up to speed. From software that is outdated to those Windows Updates
that sit idle in your system tray for months (or years), traders who choose technological ignorance are setting themselves up for disaster. Having a trade go wrong
because of technological issues is inexcusable for the serious trader who is trying to make a living at this profession.
The bottom line is that traders who want to maintain a competitive edge in this business must first be aware of the technological dangers facing them in today’s
world. Once they are aware of the hurdles, determined traders must then take a proactive approach and take the time to attack these issues head on. The three main
technological problems for traders today are as follows:
• PC invaders. Where the trend used to be attacking users’ PCs for group recognition or to maim your data, the biggest threat now is intruders that infect your PC and
then sit idle. Once this type of software is on your PC, it waits for commands from its creator, then uses your PC’s resources and Internet bandwidth to attack
other PCs or networks. One of the more recent examples was Koobface, an anagram of “Facebook” that spread through the social networking site. The authors of
these viruses are paid per machine infected by “bot masters,” who are looking to use their newly assembled army for everything from extortion to DDoS attacks.
A study by the Information Warfare M onitor, a joint collaboration between SecDev Group and the Citizen Lab in the M unk School of Global Affairs at the
University of Toronto, has revealed that the operators of this scheme have generated more than $2 million in revenue from June 2009 to June 2010. In other
words, if you are online, your computer is open for attack.
• Badware. Badware is software that fundamentally disregards a user’s choice about how her computer or network connection will be used. Like most jargon in a field,
terms such as spyware, malware, and scareware just confuse the consumer and should all be grouped under the badware umbrella. This gamut of software can
cause a slew of PC problems, from slow performance to false blue screens of death and identity theft. Keeping this software off your computer is a must.
• General technology problems. This category includes power failure, data loss, and hardware failure, and a trader should have a plan for each.
Ignoring these preventable issues is like trading without a stop loss. Take the time to take care of this right now and get on the path to smooth trading.

What Is the Best and Easiest Way to Build a Strong Defense for Your Trading Computer?
Traders can have the best software available for trading, but if their computer isn’t properly cared for, protected, and maintained, then the greatest trading software in
the world becomes worthless. For the trader who is serious about making this business a full-time job, neglecting these next steps is the same as a professional football
player drinking a 12-pack of beer the night before he is supposed to play in the Super Bowl. In other words, it ain’t gonna help.
The first step in avoiding these pitfalls is connecting a router to your network. A router is a simple device that most users know as the hub for their wireless Internet
access. Routers not only direct the user’s traffic, but, more important, provide a hardware firewall. Hardware firewalls are superior to software solutions because they
take up zero PC resources and can’t be modified by an infection that might make its way onto your PC. Even if you have only one hardwired PC, you should have a
router.
The next step is choosing your security software. Antivirus software is one of the easiest forms of computer security to manage and is often overlooked. It’s fairly
common to find traders using the expired trial version of a security package that came with their computer or a “free” version of enterprise security software that a
friend installed for them. This is risky not only because you don’t know the origin of the software, but also because you can’t guarantee that the software will operate
as expected.
I prefer a basic antivirus program rather than a full-fledged “Internet security solution.” Security solutions often try to do too many things within a single program
and end up doing none of them well. Norton 360 5.0 offers PC tune-up, data backup, parental controls, a “safe web” social media scanner—the list goes on and on and
on. When programs have this many things running inside a single application, not only do they tend to be subpar, but they also take up a large amount of resources.
The more resources that are consumed by security software, the less that are available for your trading applications.
There are two antivirus solutions I recommend, M icrosoft Security Essentials and NOD32. Security Essentials is a totally free solution provided directly from
M icrosoft. This program sports a clean user interface that’s easy to understand and provides automatic updates. The other solution is NOD32. NOD32 is what I
recommend for users who like to have more hands-on control of their security. This program offers a good range of features without being a burden and can be
purchased at www.eset.com for $60.
Another way to keep your PC free of badware is to stop using Internet Explorer, or at least make sure you’re running the latest version. All spyware programs are
written for this browser, since this is what comes with Windows. In 1997, Internet Explorer made up more than 50 percent of the browsers used on the web. This
number has dropped significantly and now is about 25 percent of browsers used, as Firefox and Chrome have snuck into the market, taking 42 percent and 30 percent
44

of traffic, respectively. There are a few other browsers that make up the remaining percentage, but most users should stick to the big three. I personally use Chrome
first, Firefox second, and, if I truly have no other choice, I’ll use Internet Explorer. It’s now the clunky old dinosaur.

What’s the Best Way to Keep a Machine Running Like New?
Once traders have their antivirus software configured and happily scanning, they need to make sure the everyday junk is cleared out of their PC. Just like a car, PCs
need to have basic maintenance if they’re expected to perform. This used to be as simple as making a quick trip over to Internet Explorer’s preferences and clearing out
your cache and cookies. Now traders can have two or three browsers storing these files, not to mention temporary files that Windows creates through normal use.
Fortunately there’s a program called CCleaner that handles all this in one fell swoop. This program is 100 percent free with an option to donate and does a good job of
cleaning out cookies, temporary files, and all the other miscellaneous junk that sits on a trader’s PC.
Defragmenting is quickly becoming a thing of the past as SSD drives enter the market (where defragmenting is not needed), and for users running hard disk drives,
Windows 7 schedules this task automatically. By the way, Windows 7 is the best choice for traders. Vista is horrible, and XP is old and outdated.

Why Are Cookies and Spam Bad News for Trading Computers, and How Can I Prevent Them?
Another device that companies use to track information on the trader’s PC is called a cookie. This is a small text file that can be good or bad. It’s good when you’re
visiting a favorite website, such as Amazon.com. With a cookie installed, Amazon will remember who the users are, so they don’t have to always log in when they
visit the site. However, there are also bad cookies placed by companies such as Double-Click that track site usage, coordinate pop-up ads, and generally invade the
trader’s privacy. The best thing to do here is to start from scratch and delete all the cookies on your computer. This can be accomplished by using the previously
mentioned CCleaner or by going to Start, Settings, Control Panel, Internet Options. Under Temporary Internet Files, there is a button that says, “Delete Cookies.”
Click this. After the cookies are deleted, go to Privacy, Advanced. Once you are there, check the box that says “Override automatic cookie handling.” Below that I
check “Prompt” for First-Party Cookies and “Block” for Third-Party Cookies. This way, when the trader goes to Amazon, a message pops up asking whether the
trader wants to accept the cookie. I say yes because that is a site I visit often. Any third-party cookies like DoubleClick will automatically be blocked. This will
prevent pop-up ads and keep the trader’s computer running in top form. If I am asked to accept a cookie from a site I rarely visit, I will say no (only because “hell, no”
isn’t an option), and the cookie will not be planted on my computer.
Spam is a big problem for everyone, and I owe my eternal gratitude to Gmail (Google’s e-mail service) for solving this problem. Gmail has the most powerful spam
filters on the planet. I’ve been using the service since it was in its invite only stage, and I’m still a diehard fan. Gmail is a web-based e-mail solution, meaning that you
don’t have to have any software installed on your PC to receive e-mail like you do with Outlook. Gmail supports POP3 and SM TP, so you can still use a Gmail
address in conjunction with your personal domain. It also supports Google Labs, a user community that creates plug-ins for your e-mail and enables a wealth of
features. Gmail also supports IM AP, a standard that allows users to read a message on their phone, reply to it, and have these changes immediately reflected anywhere
they log on to the account. If you’re still struggling with syncing your e-mail between multiple devices or find yourself buried under a pile of spam, it’s time to give
Gmail a try. Yahoo! and Hotmail are old school. Gmail is new school. Speaking of old school, I was a diehard M icrosoft Outlook fan for about 10 years. Henry showed
me the light in terms of making the transition to Gmail and Google Calendar. It took me a few months to get used to it, but once I embraced it, I never looked back.
With Outlook, I was tied to one computer, and it was clunky. With Google Calendar and Gmail, I can easily access my information from any computer, sync
everything automatically with my phone, and easily share my calendar and key documents with other people via Google Documents. No more e-mailing documents
back and forth, wondering which one is the current version. Welcome to the future.
