282 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Uncovering the Dangers of Not
Using Fundamental Analysis
It might seem like a cheap marketing gimmick in a book about fundamental
analysis to claim that not using fundamental analysis might be dangerous.
Maybe the word dangerous is a bit strong. After all, you probably won’t die if
you don’t read a company’s income statement or balance sheet before
investing in it.
But, if you’re assuming the risk of picking and investing in individual companies, not having a knowledge of fundamental analysis can expose your
portfolio to some trouble. Buying individual stocks because you believe the
company’s prospects are strong may prompt you to pay sky-high valuations
for untested companies with shaky fundamentals. And that’s a recipe for
poor returns, as you will see by reading this chapter.

Why investing in individual
companies is risky business
By investing in individual companies, you’re exposing yourself to specific risk,
or unique business challenges faced by companies. Specific risk is very different than systematic risk, or risk faced by all stocks.
For instance, if there’s a credit crisis, as there was in 2008, that’s a systematic
risk that will (and did) hurt just about every stock. However, if you own a
company that makes widgets, and it’s found that those widgets cause cancer,
that’s a specific risk to that one company.
By using fundamental analysis to choose individual companies to invest in,
depending on what else is in your portfolio, you may be exposed to specific
risk. In other words, if a company you’re invested in makes a misstep, you
will suffer a loss other investors won’t. Table 18-1 shows you how investment
risk, measured by a statistical measure called standard deviation, is much
higher when investing in individual stocks rather than a broad index such as
the Standard & Poor’s 500.
By investing in a broad mutual fund or exchange-traded fund, which owns hundreds of different companies, you can reduce or diversify away your exposure
to specific risk. If fundamental analysis seems like too much trouble, you’re
probably best off investing in a diversified mutual fund with low expenses.
Most investors get the best results investing in diversified index funds, or
funds that own all the stocks in popular stock market indexes.

25 506455-ch18.indd 282

9/24/09 10:41:06 PM

Chapter 18: Avoiding Investment Blow-Ups with Fundamental Analysis

Table 18-1

283

Individual Stocks Are Riskier by Nature

Stock

Average Annual
Return

Annualized risk
(standard deviation)

Disney

10.4%

25.8

Hewlett-Packard

12.1%

36.3

Pfizer

15.0%

24.4

AT&T

11.5%

24.2

S&P 500

11.6%

13.5

Source: Index Funds Advisors (www.ifa.com)

Standard deviation is a statistical method used to measure how risky a stock
is by measuring how much it tends to rise and fall. The higher the standard
deviation, the riskier the stock is. You want to make sure you’re getting the
highest amount of return for the amount of risk you’re taking.

Ignore the fundamentals at your own risk
It’s easy to get enamored with a stock. You might buy a pair of shoes, like them,
and decide to invest in the company that makes them. Some fundamental
investors believe it’s a good idea to invest in companies that make things
they like or understand, for that reason. And there’s no question that having
an in-depth understanding of an industry, as discussed in Chapter 16, can be
a vital part of fundamental analysis.
Just because you invest in a company that makes products you understand
or even use, doesn’t mean you will make money. One of the great examples of
the danger of buying what you know is Crocs, a maker of plastic clog shoes.
During 2006 and 2007, these shoes, typically used by gardeners to keep their
feet relatively clean, caught on with fashionistas. You’d see Hollywood celebrities and their kids wearing Crocs around, and soon they became popular,
especially with little kids.
Investors, betting Crocs might be the next Nike, snapped up shares of the company when they were first offered to the public in an initial public offering in
2006. Shares closed on their first day of trading in February 2006 for about $14.
And for a while, the investment looked like a real winner, and investors chased
the stock all the way up to nearly $75 a share by October 2007.
But investors who ignored the fundamental signs showing Crocs’ earnings growth
wasn’t going to last suffered greatly. The stock began to falter in late 2007 and
crashed to less than $1 a share in March 2009. The company’s auditing firm,

25 506455-ch18.indd 283

9/24/09 10:41:06 PM

284 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Deloitte & Touche, warned in March 2009 it had “substantial doubt” about the
company’s ability to stay in business. The importance of auditor warnings is
covered in Chapter 12.
Curious what the fundamental warning signs of Crocs were? I’ll consider Crocs,
and ten other real-life examples in Chapter 20, where I discuss how fundamental analysis could have helped you avoid big blow-ups.

Why digging out of a hole is so difficult
One of the top reasons why you want to use fundamental analysis is that
investment mistakes are incredibly difficult to recover from. Many times
when companies start to stumble, they have a tough time regaining control.
When you invest in an individual stock, you’re betting that the company’s
corporate governance, covered in Chapter 9, will be strong enough to kick out
the failing management team before things get out of hand. But you also need
to have faith the board of directors will bring in a qualified replacement to fix
the company.
And that’s just the business risk of making an investment mistake. Don’t forget
the mathematical cruelty when it comes to digging out of an investment hole.
Table 18-2 shows just how hard it is to make up for drastic losses.

Table 18-2

Digging Out of a Hole Is Hard to Do

If your loss on a stock is . . .

. . . to break even you need
a return of . . .

10%

11.1%

20%

25%

30%

43%

50%

100%

90%

900%

Since large losses can be difficult, if not impossible, to recover from, some
fundamental analysts borrow techniques from technical analysis and cut their
losses. Technical analysis, covered in more detail in Chapter 19, often calls
for investors to sell a stock if it falls 10% or more from their purchase price to
avoid devastating losses.

25 506455-ch18.indd 284

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

Chapter 18: Avoiding Investment Blow-Ups with Fundamental Analysis

285

The dangers of initial public offerings
If there’s a time when investors often turn off
their reasoning and fundamental analysis skills,
it’s with IPOs. With an IPO, a company that had
been private offers its shares to the public
for the first time. There’s often a great deal
of hoopla and excitement when a company’s
shares are in the public’s grasp.
Some investors love to buy IPOs, practically
sight unseen. And it’s not because there’s a lack
of information on IPO. Companies going public
for the first time must provide everyone interested in investing with a regulatory filing called
the prospectus. A prospectus is a gigantic file
of regulatory disclosures that are kind of like
the 10-K, 10-Q and proxy statement all rolled
into one. Prospectuses contain all the financial
statements you could ever want.
But often, new companies coming public have
such a positive story, investors can’t seem to
help themselves. Here’s a startling fact: A huge
number of companies aren’t even profitable
when they’re launching their IPOs. In 2008, for
instance, 43% of all companies launching an
IPO lost money, says Jay Ritter, professor of
finance at the University of Florida. And get this:
Back in 2000, 80% of the companies that sold

stock to the public weren’t profitable. Investors,
though, ignored the fundamentals and bought
these IPOs anyway.
As you’re probably guessing already, investors
who buy IPOs with no understanding of the
fundamentals are usually sorely disappointed.
Investors who bought IPOs between 1980 and
2005, and held the stocks for three years, wound
up lagging the rest of the stock market by 20.3%,
Ritter says.
Some IPO wipeouts are especially stunning.
One that comes to mind is Blackstone Group, a
private-equity firm that sold shares to the public
for the first time in June 2007. Private-equity
firms were the hot thing on Wall Street in the
mid-2000s, as they bought companies with borrowed money and sold them for a profit. Since
private-equity firms had a cachet to them, many
common investors couldn’t wait to get a piece
of Blackstone’s stock. Blackstone closed its
first day at $35.06. But, again, investors doomed
themselves by paying top dollar for a risky business. The credit crunch hit, and Blackstone
shares sank to $6.53 at the end of 2008 for a
crushing 81% loss for investors.

Avoiding bubbles and manias
From time to time, stock investors lose sight of the fundamentals. Bubbles, or
periods of time when prices of investments get disconnected from their fundamental value, are a reality in a market economy. When the public is allowed
to set the prices on assets in a free-for-all auction, it’s inevitable that sometimes prices in the short term are pushed to levels that are difficult to justify
with reason.
When you start hearing other people who don’t know how to study a company’s
earnings and revenue telling you what stocks to buy, the market may very well
be in a bubble. Caveat emptor.

25 506455-ch18.indd 285

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

286 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Sometimes the entire stock market enters a bubble. Sometimes a particular
part of the stock market gets bubbly. And sometimes, just a few stocks or
types of stocks see their prices shoot up to the stratosphere. Having the selfcontrol to avoid these investments with inflated prices is extremely difficult,
since everyone around you who is buying them keeps making money. But
fundamental analysis can provide a few things to watch out for as a warning
prices might be getting ahead of themselves.

Price-to-earnings ratios getting inflated
When investors start to lose their discipline and begin chasing stocks, you
might start to notice P-E ratios are getting inflated. The long-term average
for P-Es is generally 15, so when you notice a company’s P-E get dramatically
higher than that you’ll want to take notice. You’ll want to analyze a stock’s
valuation, including its P-E and PEG ratios, to get an understanding of how
rich the price is.
If you’re interested in trying to figure out when an individual stock’s P-E is
starting to get lofty, one approach is suggested by BetterInvesting, a large
group for investment clubs. BetterInvesting provides electronic software and
forms that help you measure how lofty a stock’s P-E is relative to earnings
forecasts and its historical P-E. A stock is considered to be a “buy” when its
P-E falls into the lower one-third of its historical range. Stocks are considered
a “sell” when the P-E lands in the upper one-third of the historical range. The
methodology gives you a way to evaluate P-Es using a company’s historical
valuation.

Dividend yields sagging
A stock’s dividend yield, or annual dividend divided by the stock’s price, can
give you a heads-up on a stock that may be part of a bubble. When a stock’s
dividend yield drops well below the average in its industry, or what’s paid by
other companies, you might start to wonder whether investors are paying up
too much for promises. Similarly, you might be suspicious if one company is
the only one in an industry not to pay a dividend.
The more investors pay up for a stock, the more the dividend yield drops,
making the dividend yield a decent indicator to pay attention to. You can look
up dividend yields paid by other companies to see what the norm is.
Dividend yields often get very low when investors get too bubbly about the
prospects of the stock market, as they did in both 2007 and 2000, as shown in
Table 18-3. Don’t assume, though, when a stock’s dividend yield gets unusually high that it’s a screaming buy. When a stock’s dividend yield gets very
high, that may be a signal the company is about to cut the dividend or run into
some serious financial difficulties.

25 506455-ch18.indd 286

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

Chapter 18: Avoiding Investment Blow-Ups with Fundamental Analysis

Table 18-3

287

When Dividend Yields Sag, Watch Out

Year

S&P 500 dividend yield

2008

3.1%

2007

1.9%

2000

1.2%

1990

3.7%

1980

4.5%

Source: Standard & Poor’s

Price-to-book ratios skyrocketing
If you ask an investor and an accountant how much a company is worth,
they’d approach the question very differently. The accountant might start
counting up all the assets, or things the company owns, and subtract all its
liabilities, or things it owes. By subtracting the liabilities from the assets, the
accountant would come up with the book value of the company. That, the
accountant would attest, is the company’s value.
Investors, though, approach the valuation question very differently than
accountants. Investors might try to figure out how much someone else would
be willing to pay for the company. The price at which a company would sell,
the investor might say, is how much the company is worth.
What happens when the accountants and investors disagree? You’ll see it in
the price-to-book ratio, which is covered in more detail in Chapter 8. If investors
and accountants agree on the value of a firm, the stock’s price-to-book ratio
will be 1. If investors think the company is worth more than what the accountants are saying, the price-to-book will be greater than 1. And if investors
think the value of the company is less than what the accountants claim, the
price-to-book ratio will be less than 1.
When you see a company’s price-to-book soar, sometimes it can be a tip-off
its stock is in a mini-bubble. Google, for instance, was a stock that could do
no wrong in 2006 and 2007. Investors drove the company’s price-to-book ratio
to about 10, as shown in Table 18-4, in 2007. Investors, though, found out the
hard way that buying pricey stocks can be dangerous.

25 506455-ch18.indd 287

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

288 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Table 18-4

Google’s Price-to-Book Told the Story

Year

Price-to-book (based on
year-end book values)

Stock price

2008

3.5

$307.65

2007

10.3

$691.48

2006

9.7

$460.48

2005

13.7

$414.9

2004

19.7

$192.79

Source: Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ

Here’s one of the biggest problems with using fundamental analysis to avoid big
stock declines: timing. Stocks’ valuations can remain inflated for some time and
correct with little warning. Consider Google. In 2004, the Internet search company’s price-to-book ratio was nearly 20, but the stock still proceeded to nearly
quadruple over the next three years. This is another reason why no single fundamental indictor can be completely relied on. And it’s another reason why for
many investors, stymied by the timing needed to pick stocks, might be best off
simply buying and holding a diversified basket of many stocks.

Profitability becomes meaningless
When you start noticing companies that lose money hand-over-fist posting
huge stock-price gains, it’s time to be on bubble watch. A company’s fundamental value is based on its earnings and cash flow, as you discovered
in Chapter 11. Using that logic, if a company doesn’t have any earnings, it
doesn’t have any fundamental value. Unless by performing industry and
trend analysis, you can be confident the company can generate profits, you
should steer clear.
We’ll likely find out in a few years or so whether or not Buffett was right and
Treasuries were actually in a bubble. But the lesson still applies: Bubbles can
inflate in any corner of the financial markets, not just the places where the
fast-money crowd hangs out.

Finding and Avoiding
Financial Red Flags
It’s a sad reality that despite all the protections provided to investors, buying
stock is still largely a buyer-beware endeavor. That’s especially the case when
buying a large stake in a single individual company. If the company’s

25 506455-ch18.indd 288

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

Chapter 18: Avoiding Investment Blow-Ups with Fundamental Analysis

289

management makes a mistake, whether honestly or dishonestly, shareholders
may end up paying the price.
I cannot stress this enough. When you buy common stock in a company, you’re
last in line for any assets that might be left over if the company is sold off.
Employees and bondholders are paid first, often leaving the stock investors in
the failed company with nothing.

Bubbles can come from unlikely places
There’s certainly a “type” of stock that ends
up being caught in a bubble. Most of the time,
bubble stocks come from an industry that
seems boundless with possibilities that captures the imagination of the uninformed public.
The Internet stock bubble of the late 1990s was
the classic example of the type of stock with
the potential to become a bubble. Investors
had endless optimism for what the Internet,
and companies taking advantage of it, could
accomplish. There’s no question the Internet
itself proved to be a giant innovation and has
completely changed global business. But most
of the Internet companies investors bet on
either suffered massive stock crashes or vanished completely.
Some investors, though, incorrectly figure they
can avoid bubbles if they just steer clear of the
overhyped stocks that are on the front pages
of the newspapers or the favorite playthings of
day traders. But that’s simply not the case. It’s
not the type of investment itself that determines
whether it’s in a dangerous bubble. Any stock,
bond, collectible or commodity can find itself
in a bubble. It’s the valuation, or price you’re
paying, that determines whether or not you’re
one of the investors helping to inflate an investment bubble.
One of the best examples of an unlikely bubble
occurred in 2008. Investors got so worried
about the health of the banking system during
the financial crisis they piled into debt sold
by the U.S. government, called Treasuries. To

25 506455-ch18.indd 289

show you just now strange this situation was,
Treasuries are just about the least exciting
investment you can buy. It’s odd to even have
the words Treasuries and bubble in the same
sentence. Treasuries usually pay relatively
low rates of interest and watching their prices
change is akin to getting front row seats for a
turtle race. The lure of Treasuries is that they’re
backed by the U.S. government, and therefore,
are considered a super-safe place to stash
money.
But you have to remember the level of panic in
2008. Investors were practically stuffing cash
under their mattresses, Treasuries became all
the rage since they were seen as the last safe
place to put money. Investors bought Treasuries
with such ferocity they arguably pushed their
prices to bubble-like levels. At one point in 2008,
the prices on Treasuries were at such nosebleed levels investors were getting negative
returns. In other words, investors were willing
to buy Treasuries and lend the government $1,
just so they could be sure they’d get 99 cents
back in a few years.
The bubble prices of Treasuries even caught
the attention of famous investor Warren Buffett.
In his 2008 letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders, he wrote: “When the financial history
of this decade is written, it will surely speak
of the Internet bubble of the late 1990s and
the housing bubble of the early 2000s. But the
U.S. Treasury bond bubble of late 2008 may be
regarded as almost equally extraordinary.”

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

290 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
A real-life pattern for suit-worthy
shenanigans
All sorts of shenanigans, both those that are pushing the limits and those that
are outright fraudulent, often leave investors feeling cheated and caught off
guard. Many investors, feeling there’s no other recourse, may band together
to sue a company or its management team in a securities class-action lawsuit.
Table 18-5 shows how the number of federal securities class-action suits
tends to spike amid a bear market for stocks, such as in 2001 and 2008.

Table 18-5

Shareholder Ire Follows the Stock Market

Year

Number of Securities Fraud
Class-Action Lawsuits

2008

227

2007

176

2006

119

2005

182

2004

238

2003

227

2002

266

2001

498

Source: Stanford Securities Class Action Clearinghouse

The rationale behind shenanigans
The temptation to cook the books, or make financial statements look better
than reality, is very big. Management teams running companies have a tremendous amount at stake when it comes to the financial results. One disappointing quarter could erode investors’ confidence in the company’s plan
and knock the stock price down. And since executives and members of the
board of directors often own big chunks of company stock, they don’t want
to see the value of their holdings fall. A vast majority of executives’ pay is
often tied to their company’s stock price. If the stock falls, they just took a
massive pay cut.
Flexibility in the accounting system may give executives the leeway they need
to legally add a penny or two a share to earnings, helping them to make sure
they meet Wall Street’s ever-increasing demands. Some executives figure just a
few pennies here or there won’t hurt anyone.

25 506455-ch18.indd 290

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

Chapter 18: Avoiding Investment Blow-Ups with Fundamental Analysis

291

Financial smoke-and-mirrors used by management teams can be very difficult for investors to detect, unless they get tipped off and know exactly what
to look for in the financial statements. And the ability for management to
manage earnings, or tweak financial statements to make them look more positive, is a huge issue fundamental analysts must contend with.

Red flags that signal shenanigans
In Part II, you’ll find all sorts of troubling things that might show up in the
individual financial statements. In this section of the book, though, I spotlight
a few of the more common warning signs you need to be particularly vigilant
to watch for.
Some of the red flags discussed below aren’t illegal. But they all can cause
financial results to be manipulated to the point that your fundamental analysis
might be compromised.

Swelling accounts receivable
If you start seeing the accounts receivable item on the balance sheet skyrocket to the point where it’s outpacing revenue growth, that can be a bad
thing. The accounts receivable line item grows when a company sells product
to a customer, and accepts an IOU in exchange. If you see accounts receivable growth outpacing revenue growth, you might wonder if the company
is pushing product onto customers to boost revenue. The way a company
decides when to book revenue, called revenue recognition, may have a profound influence on its results.
For instance, Internet software company PurchasePro in late 2000 reported
a $13.2 million quarterly jump in accounts receivable to $23.4 million. That
should have caught fundamental analysts’ attention, since the company’s revenue was just $17.3 million for the period. The company a year later restated
results, and the Securities and Exchange Commission ultimately accused
company executives of committing fraud.
