
8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 97

THE COTTON KING

• 97 •

“ ‘What if I lose it?’ I asked.
“ ‘I’ll give you more. You will win, and I will back you until
you win,’ he told me.
“ ‘I still don’t get it,’ I said.
“ ‘Well, I knew you wouldn’t. I’m not talking to you and backing you because you are dumb. You are a secretive and silent kind
of trader, my kind of trader, so nobody knows how much money
you have left, or who your backers are,’ he said.
“ ‘You want a share of the profits for the stake?’ I asked.
“ ‘No, I’ll tell you exactly what I want. I have several large
investors who really carry the firm’s business, and I don’t want
people to know what they are doing. If you are in the house they
will not know who is making the trades. You are famous for trading in large lots, and for trading on the bear side, for your short
selling.’
“I was suspicious. ‘So I’ll be the cover story for any large transactions that come out of this house, particularly on the selling
side.’
“ ‘Yes, exactly,’ he said.
“ ‘It would also be a way for your customers to sell large blocks
of stock into the market without it being noticed,’ I said.
“ ‘Yes, but that’s not going to interfere with what you are doing,
and it’s perfectly legal. Let them think what they want,’ he countered.
“I was desperate to get back in the action, so I banked the check
and started trading. I did well. It was a strong bull market, and in
three weeks the twenty-five thousand had grown to a hundred and
fifty thousand. Then I made my first big mistake. I went to
Charles, the owner of the brokerage house, and said, ‘Here’s the
twenty-five thousand I borrowed from you.’
“ ‘Keep it Livermore, wait until you have some real money in
that account, then you can pay me back,’ was his answer.

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 98

• 98 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“This made sense to me. He was getting good commissions. I
carried on for a few more weeks. I liked Charles, my benefactor,
who was ready to back me when no one else would. I felt a moral
obligation to the man, a loyalty. More important, my malaise of
the spirit, my depression was lifting. My spirit was returning. I was
starting to be my old self again, and I was making money.
“Then I turned bearish on the market and sold ten thousand
shares of the Chesapeake and Atlantic railroad short. I was startled
the next day to be called into Charles’s office, and he told me, ‘J.L.,
I cancelled that ten-thousand-share sell order of yours yesterday,
and went long for you.’
“ ‘But I feel we are entering a downward-trending market,’ I
said.
“ ‘No, my boy, the president of that railroad is my brother-inlaw, married to my favorite sister. I know things that I can’t tell
you. The stock’s going up,’ he said.
“The stock fell, just as I had predicted, and my profits were
wiped out. Charles came to me: ‘Don’t worry, J.L., I’ll help you
get that back. It may take a little time, but it’s bound to make a
recovery.’
“And just as he had told me, a little while later he returned with
a fistful of credit slips that brought my balance back to a credit. He
told me, ‘By the way, I’ve just bought you ten thousand shares of
Southern Atlantic, and put them into your account.’
“ ‘Isn’t that another railroad controlled by your brother-in-law?’
I asked.
“ ‘Yes it is, with great prospects for growth,’ he answered.
“The Southern Atlantic shares fell, and I was sold out in the
next few days, another loss. Again I heard, ‘Don’t worry, J.L.,
everything is going to be all right.’
“I made enough to stay alive, but not to pay off my substantial
prior indebtedness of over a million dollars.

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 99

THE COTTON KING

• 99 •

“I finally figured out what was going on. My benefactor,
Charles, the owner of the brokerage house, was liquidating his
brother-in-law’s estate. His brother-in-law was one of the wealthiest men in America. It was common knowledge that the brotherin-law was sick, incurable, and now after years of sickness, close to
death.
“I decided to talk to Fred, the man who had sent me the
telegram in Chicago, the office manager of the firm. I had a drink
with him one night and told him what I had figured out. I said, ‘I
believe I’ve been used as a foil, a red herring, a cover story by
Charles to liquidate his brother-in-law’s estate. So no one on the
Street would know or suspect what was going on while this big
estate was liquidated and there would be no deep loss in the price
of the estate stocks, particularly railroad stocks.’
“The office manager looked at me and said, ‘Yes, I guess that’s
true, and now that the estate is practically in cash I can tell you
about it.’
“ ‘So the money I received and the losses I incurred in my
account were chicken feed compared to what we are dealing with
here?’ I asked.
“ ‘Yes,’ he said.
“ ‘So I’m right. I was the firm’s decoy, the patsy, that kept
everybody on the Street from triggering to what was really going
on,’ I said.
“ ‘That was a small part of it,’ he said.
“ ‘What do you mean a small part, what else could it have
been?’ I asked.
“ ‘The boss knew we would be entering a bear market, sooner
or later. He knew you were a great trader. He saw what you did
here, in the first three weeks, before he started trading your
account for you. Yes, it was true it was good for him to have you
here as a smoke screen for what was really going on. That part is

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 100

• 100 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

true, but the main reason was he wanted you under the roof here
while he was liquidating,’ he explained to me.
“ ‘What do you mean? I still don’t understand,’ I said.
“ ‘Listen, J.L., when you were really back on your feet—and
you would be, sooner or later—nobody doubted that you would
be swinging a line of at least two or three hundred thousand shares.
You would have picked up on the fact that there was a huge
amount of stock being distributed in those railroad stocks that
came from Charles’s brother-in-law’s estate. You would have triggered to it and raided the hell out of those stocks, driving the
stocks down, and down, with one of those classic bear raids you’re
famous for, and Charles knew it,’ he said.
“I was flabbergasted. Because I had lost my confidence, I was
not looking for deeper motivations, darker motivations, more
intelligent motivations, like I would have normally. I had only seen
the surface behavior, not what was behind it. I had never considered the fact that by keeping me chained up in a cage I would not
be a factor in upsetting one of the largest stock distributions in history. Charles’s sister’s estate, when the trading was over, was valued
at over two hundred and fifty million dollars.
“I was shaken. I had acted out of gratitude to a man I thought
was backing me, helping me, and once again, like with the Cotton
King, I had unwittingly done another man’s bidding. A smart
man, a brilliant man, a man who could find the Achilles’ heel of
people and could use that weakness to his own benefit.
“What a shock! My benefactor had more confidence in my
trading ability than I had in myself!
“But I was not angry with Charles. He had operated for reasons of his own. His sister was the ultimate beneficiary of the
estate, and he felt obliged to get the most money for her. I was just
a pawn in a more devious man’s game. What really disturbed and

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 101

THE COTTON KING

• 101 •

upset me was that I had missed the action in a good market climate where I could have made up all my losses. Instead, I was still
deeply in debt. I had been used, but I had let myself be used by
not following one of my own rules—trade alone, and only for my
own account.
“I cleared out my desk that night and then walked into Charles’s
office and said, in my calmest voice, ‘I will no longer be trading in
this office.’
“Charles looked me in the eye and nodded, no expression on
his face. He knew that I had figured out his game. As I turned and
headed for the door, Charles said ‘We’ll miss you around here, J.L.’
“ ‘I’ll bet you will, Charles. I’ll bet you will,’ I said, closing the
door behind me.
“First Percy, the Cotton King, and then Charles, my alleged
benefactor. Was I ever going to learn my lesson?”
Livermore finished his old-fashioned and ordered another one.
He looked Ed Bradley, one of the most famous gamblers who ever
lived, in the eye and smiled. “It’s your turn, Ed. You heard my sad
story. Tell me one of yours.”
Both of these men were famous for their silent and secret lives,
but each felt easy with the other.
“All right, J.L., I’ll tell you one of mine.
“You know that I love horses, J.L. They are my real passion. I
don’t know why. I fell in love with horses when I went out west
to cure a mild case of tuberculosis. I got involved with those wild
and wooly characters that roamed the West in those days and
became a scout for the U.S. Army. I used to bet heavily on the
Indian pony races whenever I could find them, and later I actually
got involved in owning racetracks in New Orleans and Florida.
But it was the horses I loved. In fact, I prefer the company of
horses to people, present company excluded, J.L. I get my biggest

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 102

• 102 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

thrill from my farm in Kentucky: watching the colts being born
and seeing how they live out their bloodlines.
“One of my early great Kentucky Derby contenders was Blue
Larkspur. You know I’m superstitious, J.L., I guess all gamblers are.
All my horses’ names begin with a B because of my first great
horse—Bad News, because bad news travels fast! Anyway, Blue
Larkspur had won six of his seven races as a two-year-old and was
the even-money favorite for the derby. I bet a hundred and twentyfive thousand on him to win. Then, before the race, the rains came
down at Churchill Downs. It poured for hours. I talked to the
trainer, and we decided to change Blue Larkspur into mud shoes.
“The race began. The gate slammed open, and Blue Larkspur
lost his footing right from the get-go. He slip-slid all over that
track, almost fell, coulda broke his leg. He finally got his footing
back and finished fourth out of twenty-one in the field.
“After the race, I went down to look at the horse and found that
his shoes had not been changed. The blacksmith had something
against the trainer, something about a woman they shared. Said he
was gonna change ’em to mud shoes when the trainer told him,
but instead he skipped right out the back door of Churchill
Downs. Could have killed Blue Larkspur.
“You just never know what the hell is going on in people’s
heads!”
Livermore pondered the story Bradley had told him. He finally
asked the old Indian Scout, “Ed, what happened to the blacksmith?”
“Now J.L., there’s a limit to what I’m willing to tell, and that’s
a story that nobody’s ever gonna hear.”
By 1910, Livermore was back in New York with a very small
stake. The power had left the long-running bull market, and there

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 103

THE COTTON KING

• 103 •

was a general apathy on the Street. The action stagnated as the
market wandered in a sideways pattern, hard to read.
Livermore went from brokerage house to brokerage house over
the next four years. He was able to get lines of credit in various
houses, but he continued to trade badly. Still angry and resentful,
he was not able to trade with a clear mind, and he suffered badly
from his ever-present depression. He simply could not get his
emotional balance back.
He also wore the oppressive cloak of a person in debt. He was
at heart a New Englander. He had been taught as a boy: “Neither
a borrower nor a lender be.” He hated being in debt. The guilt lay
heavily on his shoulders. He believed people should pay off their
debts, and he was in deep debt to his friends—friends he saw every
day on the Street. Suicide even began to cross his mind as he sank
deeper into a seemingly bottomless depression.
He finally realized that he could give up and end it all, or he
could analyze his problem. He chose the latter.
The problem, as far as he could tell, was simply money—or the
lack thereof.
Livermore had built up a multimillion-dollar fortune from the
few dollars his mother had given him. What was keeping him from
doing it again? Charles had thought Livermore could do it—that
was why he had corralled Livermore while he disposed of his
brother-in-law’s fortune. Livermore concluded that he was not the
trader he once had been. His mind was not functioning properly,
could not function properly with all these constant dark thoughts
of debt and failure.
It was not the market’s fault. No matter what the market was
doing, he knew there were always situations to be found where
money could be made. It was the nature of the market never to be
still. There were always opportunities.

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 104

• 104 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

So what was his real problem? Why was his judgment bad? He
was depressed all the time. Why? He was depressed because he
owed money, mostly to his friends. He knew he could never trade
well again unless he lifted the black oppressive mantle of debt off
his shoulders.
He decided to go bankrupt. He had to free his mind of the
black thoughts that followed debt. He had to be clear minded to
trade and get back in business. He needed a new start.
He paid visits to each of his creditors before he went to see his
lawyer to file for bankruptcy. He promised to pay them back.
They smiled and shook his hand. “We know you’ll make it
square with us, J.L.,” they said to him. They, like Charles, had
more confidence in him than he had in himself. “We have no
doubt you will be back on your feet again. You’re not the first,
nor will you be the last, to be leveled by Wall Street. You get
yourself together. We’ll be waiting for you to trade again out of
our office.”
“I’ll pay you back what I owe you, every cent.”
“We know you will.”
“Yes sir, I will.”
“All right, now there is one thing,” many of them told him.
“What’s that?” Livermore asked.
“We will not be listing our debt in your bankruptcy. No sense,
Jesse, in making public what’s just between us, is there?”
With the exception of a few brokerage firms, most of his creditors refused to file their debtor claims with the bankruptcy court.
It was still a horrific experience for Livermore. It was 1914, and
the Great War had just begun in Europe. The stock market was
closed from July 31 to December 15, 1914. Livermore was broke
and living in a second-rate hotel, the Bretton Hall at Broadway
and Eighty-sixth Street.

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 105

THE COTTON KING

• 105 •

He visited his lawyer, who filed his bankruptcy petition.
Ashamed, he kept to himself and waited. On February 18, 1915,
he read a summary of the last five years of his life in the New York
Times:
Jesse L. Livermore, whose spectacular rise to fortune during
the panic of 1907, and his equally startling losses in cotton a
few months later, made him one of the well-known characters
in Wall Street. Yesterday he filed a voluntary petition for bankruptcy in the Federal District Court. He gave Bretton Hall,
Broadway and Eighty-sixth Street, as his residence, and said he
owed $102,474. The value of his assets were unknown.
Mr. Livermore is only 38 years old, and from the age of 16
he has been a speculator. His chance came in 1906, when he
came to the conclusion that the market was on the down
grade. He began to sell short in Union Pacific, Reading,
Copper and Smelters, and in 1907 when the crest came he
covered his short contracts and made a comfortable fortune.
In the following August he was attracted by the high price
of cotton in Liverpool and scented another slump. He made
another big killing and by 1908 was credited with being
worth from $2,000,000 to $3,000,000.
In August 1908, however, the luck began to turn against
him. He was caught on the long side with 600,000 bales of
October cotton, and as the price broke 67 points, he was supposed to have lost his fortune.
Livermore folded the newspaper, laid it on his dresser, rose from
his threadbare chair, and entered the small bathroom. He took his
time and dressed in his usual dapper manner. He walked down to
Wall Street, one of the longest walks of his life. He entered the

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 106

• 106 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

brokerage offices of Charles, his old benefactor, whom he had not
seen or spoken to in four years.
He had removed the cloak of debt; now he had to find out if he
could still trade. For Livermore there was only one way to determine if he had lost his touch—he had to lay his money on the line
and let the tape tell him if he was right or not. His chances were
running out, and he knew it.

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 107

*

chapter six

*

Back on His Game

There’s a fine line between eccentrics and geniuses. If you’re a
little ahead of your time you’re an eccentric, and if you’re a little too late, you’re a failure, but if you hit it right on the head,
you’re a genius. Thomas J. Watson Jr., founder of IBM

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 108

• 108 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

LIVERMORE TOOK A FINAL DEEP BREATH AND WALKED

into the offices of his former benefactor. He was received immediately and was seated facing Charles. The New York Times lay on
Charles’s desk; neither of them spoke of its contents.
“I need a line,” Livermore said, without any preamble.
Charles sat in silence, studying Livermore, keeping his thoughts
and emotions to himself. Both of them knew there was no need to
talk of the past.
“How much?” Charles asked.
“You decide.”
Charles stood and walked to his office window. It was 1915,
with a tricky wartime stock market in which a person could make
a fortune or lose one in a few minutes of speculation.
“All right, J.L., I’ll give you a line of five hundred shares. I’ll
authorize it today, to be put in your account. We kept your
account open, you know.”
“You thought I’d be back?”
“Maybe.”
“Thank you,” Livermore said. The two shook hands, and Livermore walked out of the office. It was a small line for a trader like
Livermore, but there was no restriction on the price of the shares.
With a $150 stock, he could put out a line of $75,000. It was a
start.
Now he had to decide what to do. He had only limited capital.
He could afford no losses. He was determined to stick to his old
trading rules, but it would be difficult to put out probes and buy
small positions to test his judgment. He had no room for mistakes;
this might be his last chance. His first trade must be profitable, yet
he could not let the pressure of his limited capital force him into
bad decisions. He concluded that the market was in a strong
upward trend, so he would trade on the upside, buy long. He also

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 109

BACK ON HIS GAME

• 109 •

knew that stocks tended to react positively when they crossed par
at 100, 200, or 300.
His failings, his frailties, were clearer to him; his limitations were
known, but they must not upset his confidence. He was anxious to
trade in this active wartime market. For this reason, he did not go
back to Charles’s brokerage firm. Instead, for six long weeks,
broke and living on a tiny amount of money, he studied the tape,
analyzing every trade as it crossed through the ticker. He knew that
if he went to the offices of his benefactor, where he had credit, he
might make a play and execute a trade in the heat of the action. He
did not want to do this. He wanted everything to be in his favor
for this first key trade, so he stayed out of temptation’s way, studying the tape. He knew now that his biggest enemy was his own
emotions. Every trader had to face this sooner or later.
He needed every factor in his favor.
He finally chose Bethlehem Steel, an obvious choice in wartime years, and a choice known to the trading public. Livermore
sat and watched the stock climb to 98, only 2 points from par—
100—and he felt that if the stock passed through 100, it would
skyrocket. He ran over to the brokerage house and bought 500
shares of Bethlehem Steel at $98. When the stock hit $114, he
bought a second 500 shares on margin, giving him 1,000 shares on
the long side.
The next day the stock hit $145. Livermore closed out his Bethlehem Steel trade a few days later with over $50,000 of profit. This
meant he could exercise a line of $500,000, on 10 percent margin.
He was back in the game.
In the aftermath of his bankruptcy, he had no creditors to think
about, and now he had a decent line to trade with. His confidence
began to return. He could start to trade in his old manner, and he
did so with good success for the rest of the year. Putting together

8467_Smitten_06_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:36 PM Page 110

• 110 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

a string of profitable trades, he brought his equity up close to
$500,000.
His only setback was the sinking of the Lusitania on May 7,
1915. Everyone believed the United States would enter the Great
War. The market plummeted on the news, and Livermore suffered
badly. He covered his positions quickly and finished out 1915 with
only $150,000 in equity in his account—not bad, considering. He
was definitely back in business, but more important, he had found
his trading form. He was now following his own rules and working hard to avoid his emotional flaws.
His ex-wife Nettie appeared in his life again after he started to
recover from his bankruptcy. He had seen very little of her since
their separation. He gave her a stipend of $1,000 a week to cover
her expenses, “To make up for the lean years,” he told her. He also
set her up with a good-sized home on Long Island and gave her
money to fill it with furniture and a car for the garage.
The United States did not enter the war after the sinking of the
Lusitania, as so many had predicted. The American people were
strong isolationists, who wanted nothing to do with a foreign war.
It did not take long for the market to recover. Livermore was now
trading in a full wartime economy bull market.
The United States was operating at full industrial capacity, shipping out all the products the war-torn world needed, while gold
was being shipped to the United States by foreign nations to pay
for goods. Things were booming. All through 1916 Livermore
remained bullish, actively trading. But like bear markets, bull markets do not last forever, and Livermore started fishing for the top.
He kept his eyes on the market leaders, as he had done in 1906
and 1907, because he knew that when those leaders started to top
out and roll over, that would be the first signal to start preparing
for a bear market. He also knew that markets did not suddenly
