
FOREX TRADING SECRETS

26

Currency Pairs with USD as the Quote Currency
EUR/USD, GBP/USD, AUD/USD, NZD/USD
Example:
EUR/USD
Currency value ⫽ 1.2658
Pip value in euros ⫽ 0.0001/1.2658 ⫽ 0.000079
Additional formula rate to USD:
Pip value ⫽ 0.000079 ⫻ 1.2658 ⫽ 0.0001
On one standard lot, the pip value would be
0.0001 ⫻ 100,000 ⫽ $10
The same calculations apply to any other currency pairs with USD as
the quote currency: pound sterling, Australian dollar, New Zealand dollar—
where the final pip value will consistently be $10.
Crosses (Currency Pairs Where USD Is Not Present as Either the Base
or the Quote Currency)
EUR/GBP
Currency value ⫽ 0.8913
Pip value in euros ⫽ 0.0001/1.2658 ⫽ 0.000112196
Additional formula rate to USD:
Pip value ⫽ 0.000079 ⫻ 1.4194 (GBP/USD rate) ⫽ 0.000159251
On one standard lot, the pip value would be
0.000159251 ⫻ 100,000 ⫽ $15.93
The same calculations will apply to any of the other cross-currency
pairs: GBP/JPY, EUR/JPY, EUR/CHF, etc.
The pip values in these examples are calculated to show a result in
U.S. dollars because this is the main currency used in most trading
accounts. However, many brokers permit traders to open and retain their
accounts in local and foreign principal currencies, such as euros, pounds
sterling, Japanese yen, Swiss francs, etc. In these cases, the calculations
must be made taking the different rates into account with respect to the
deposit currency.

CHAPTER 3

ANYONE CAN LEARN THE FOREX

27

The following table of equivalences illustrates the pip value for each
type of contract, from standard lot to nanolot, based on the preceding
examples and rates.
Currency Pair

Standard

Mini

Micro

Nano

Units
EUR/USD
USD/CHF
USD/JPY
EUR/GBP

100,000
$10.00
$8.53
$10.83
$15.93

10,000
$1.00
$0.85
$1.083
$1.59

1000
$0.10
$0.085
$0.108
$0.159

100
$0.01
$0.0085
$0.0108
$0.0159

THE LOT
The contract amount that a bank or brokerage firm allows a currency to be
traded in is called a lot. Usually, brokerages recommend two different kinds
of accounts: standard and mini. A standard lot size is $100,000, and a mini
account lot size is $10,000. There are also smaller retail institutions than
offer micro account and nano account lots, equivalent to $1000 and $100,
respectively.

ORDER TYPES
BUY/SELL MARKET ORDERS
A market order is an order to buy or sell at the current market price and can
be used to enter or exit a trade. Market orders should be used carefully
because in fast-moving markets there may be a difference between the price
seen at the time a market order is given and the actual price of the transaction. This is due to slippage—the amount the market moves in the few seconds between issuing an order and having it executed. Slippage potentially
could result in the loss or gain of several pips.
Online trading platforms may differ a little in the manner in which they
initiate a trade, but a trade normally is accomplished through a form that
shows the current bid and ask prices. Some platforms ask for a confirmation of the order; others have a direct one-click order capability. Usually
execution of the order is instantaneous or, at the very most, it takes just a
few seconds to appear as executed.

28

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Sometimes market orders also can be placed over the telephone at the
broker’s dealing desk. The etiquette to follow this procedure should be
verified with your broker.

BUY/SELL LIMIT ORDERS
A limit order is an order to buy or sell at a certain limit. It can be used to
buy a currency below the market price or sell a currency above the market
price. When buying, your order is executed when the market falls to your
set limit-order price. When selling, your order is executed when the market
rises to your set limit-order price. Normally, there is no slippage with limit
orders. The order essentially contains two variables, price and duration. The
trader identifies the price to buy/sell a certain currency pair and also specifies the amount of time the order should remain active.
A common use of limit orders is when a trader anticipates the price to
bounce back from a given resistance or support area after a rally or fall.
This is especially true when the currency pair has been trending.

BUY/SELL STOP-LOSS ORDERS
A stop-loss order is an order to buy above the market value or to sell below
the market value. This type order is used most commonly as stop-loss
orders to limit losses if the market moves opposite that which the trader
expected. A stop-loss order will sell the currency if the market falls below
the point set by the trader. The order contains the same two variables, price
and duration. The main difference between a limit order and a stop-loss
order is that stop-loss orders are used frequently to limit loss potential on a
transaction, whereas limit orders are used to enter the market, add to a preexisting position, and/or engage in profit taking.
A trader uses a stop-loss order when he or she expects a price breakout
to happen and wants to seize the opportunity to “ride” the breakout on any
side if it develops.

OCO (ONE CANCELS THE OTHER) ORDERS
This type of order is used when placing a limit order and a stop-loss order
simultaneously. If either order is executed, the other is canceled, which
allows the trader to make a transaction without monitoring the market. If
the market falls, the stop-loss order will be executed, but if the market
increases to the level of the limit order, the currency is sold at a profit. This
is used in a straddle when trading news, a type of trading strategy used. An
OCO order is a mixture of two limit and/or stop-loss orders. Two orders

CHAPTER 3

ANYONE CAN LEARN THE FOREX

29

with price and duration variables are placed above and below the current
price. When one of the orders is executed, the other order is canceled.

IFD (IF DONE) ORDERS
Using an IFD order allows a trader to program particular strategies in
which there can be a sequence of trades. These trades will not be executed
until the first one is accomplished.

TIMED ORDERS
GTC (Good Till Canceled) Orders
A GTC order will remain active in the market until the trader decides to
cancel it. It will not be terminated by the dealer. For this reason, it is very
important to remember open pending orders after a strategy is executed
because any of them can become a market order at any moment when the
market price matches the order price.
GFD (Good for the Day) Orders
A GFD order remains active in the market until the end of the trading
day. This will have some deviations depending on the server time of your
broker.
Good until Date/Time Orders
This is another timed order in which the trader can specify the exact time of
the day and the date on which he or she desires to keep the order active.

WHERE IS THE MARKET GOING?
This depends on a number of factors. The market is always in a perfect
equilibrium, which it succeeds in holding thanks to the periodic variations related to interactions between the elements of which it is composed
(currencies, people, events, traders, etc.).
If you monitor using a very big time frame, you will notice something
very interesting: In almost all cases, the currency pairs move upwards or, at
least, relatively sideways.
Many long-term operators, namely, hedge funds and large capital
investors, don’t constantly open and close positions, but they use a strategy
with several elements that allows them to achieve a constant growth, slow
but safe, and almost as important, with nominal risk. However, if you look
at intraday or intraweek trading, a very diverse and opposing scenario is

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

30

seen. If you fail to match them up and understand them from their individual perspectives, they will bring you to a tremendous amount of confusion
because it will seem to you that the market isn’t going up or down. When
you see the market rising and you decide to open a position, that could be
the precise moment the market goes against you, and you end up dazed and
frustrated.
It has been said that it is appropriate to use at least two time frames.
However, to combine them is not the same as mixing them. You should use
one longer time frame and one shorter time frame. This is the safest way to
work because you will find more precise entry and exit points for every
trade you make. In this way, you can better assure yourself of entering a
trade on time and exiting it without leaving too much on the table.
You might object that this method of combining two or more time
frames. Many people believe that this can distract the trader’s focus on what
is being done because at a certain point during the trade the shorter period
will go in an opposite direction from the longer time frame. However, when
applying this approach in real time, you may observe that the shorter period
doesn’t impede the longer one when the trade is in progress; instead, the
smaller time frame allows you to better pinpoint a suitable exit. You should
use a combination with which you feel comfortable, but there are particular combinations that I find more harmonic:
Two time frames (the longer one for watching the trend and following
the position, the smaller one for entries and exits):
●
●
●
●

5 minutes and 1 hour
15 minutes and 4 hours
1 hour and daily
4 hours and weekly
Three time frames (trading the intermediate time frame and using the
longer one for the trend and the smaller for entries and exits)

●

●
●
●

1 minute, 5 minutes, and 30 minutes (for extreme scalping; not
recommended for starters)
15 minutes, 1 hour, and 4 hours (intraday operation)
1 hour, 4 hours, and daily (intraweek or swing trading)
4 hours, daily, and weekly (longer term or position trading)

Something that increases the confusion when you are analyzing and
observing market movements is the overcrowding of charts with trendlines

CHAPTER 3

ANYONE CAN LEARN THE FOREX

31

and indicators that later overlap each other if you change the time frame. It
would be more efficient to use a single chart for each time frame and then
choose one that will be used only to perform the actual analysis.
Another confusion arises when you try to trade in a shorter time frame
(5 or 15 minutes) but you pretend with this to make a 100- or even 200-piplong run (and in a few hours, too). This is not impossible, but this is what
usually happens: The risk management is proportional. Let’s say that, on
average, the relationship is 2:1 (reward to risk) or, ideally, 3:1. More often
than not, it is 1:1 (or less) if the entries haven’t been studied with precision.
There is an average time/trade relationship that is about four or five
times greater than the time frame incrementally. For example, a position
opened on a five-minute chart, if it has potential, shouldn’t last much more
than half an hour or up to an hour if there is not much volatility. For a position opened on the 15-minute chart, one or two hours is a maximum. If,
after the time has elapsed, there are no results, it would be better to close the
position and wait for the next breakout. On the other hand, a position
opened on a four-hour chart can last for the entire day or even two days, and
a position opened on a daily chart can last up to a week.
Another very important issue to take into account when switching time
frames is the size of the stops. You can use a fairly dependable tool, the
average true range (ATR), to measure the actual volatility and potential
scope in that time frame. Features of the ATR will be discussed in detail
under “Technical versus Fundamental” below.
You can’t afford to open a medium-term position with targets that call
for the trade to “breathe,” that is, perform its logical wave fluctuation inside
the particular range of each pair, with a 7- or 10-pip stop loss that will close
the position much earlier than desired; maybe after half an hour or a few
hours later, unless you get extremely lucky and are able to pick the top or
bottom of the price.
The ATR offers the exact measure for an adequate stop loss (you
should add the spread and, if your risk level allows it, some additional pips
to achieve increased safety). Based on this, you could expect double or
triple the ATR value as a target profit if the position is successful and more
so if it happens to be the bottom or top of a longer run and is followed up
with trailing stops, especially if you are trading in the same direction as the
higher-time-frame trend.
For a 15-pip stop loss, a target profit of 45 pips is fine (risk-reward
ratio 1:3). It’s not wise to place a stop loss much higher than the target you
expect unless your strategy will give you a 90 percent record of winning
trades, which is possible but probably won’t last for very long because the

32

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

markets change and change quite a bit. The best option is not to go lower
than 1:2 or at a minimum 1:1.5 (stop loss: 15 pips; target profit: 22 pips, or
30/45, etc.). A 1:1 ratio also works if the performance of the strategy is
above 50 percent.

STOPS AND TARGETS
HOW TO SET A STOP LOSS
I have already mentioned ATR-based stop-loss sizing. There are other ways
to define the level at which keeping a specific position open is no longer
useful.
Support/Resistance-Based Stops
These are stops that are usually set at the most recent swing high or low or
at a specific price that the market has bounced off of repeatedly. It is recommended to set the stops a couple of pips higher or lower than the area to
allow for more safety.
The parabolic stop and reverse (SAR) is another technical indicator
that can help you set and trail a relatively safe stop loss, especially when the
currency pair is trending. Be advised that this is not recommended in
choppy or sideways markets.
Trailing Stops
There are two kinds of trailing stops. One is set automatically at a given distance from the price and is initiated at a set level, increasing thereafter
every time the price advances in the direction set. The other way of using a
trailing stop loss is manually, changing its price level as the trade develops.
Automatic trailing stops can be set on the server side of the platform, which
is the better option in case of a connection failure, or on the client side.
A stop loss order is always used to exit a trade while at the same time
limiting the eventual amount of loss. Some traders use them all the time as
a regular exit strategy, whereas others will have “emergency stops” only, to
be used in the event that something unpredictable occurs. A normal or regular stop usually is close to the price, depending on the time frame, and represents the maximum amount of loss the trader will allow himself or herself
to lose on a single trade just in case it goes the wrong way.
Backup and emergency stops are set up much farther out because the
trader doesn’t expect them to be filled. They are set only to mitigate that
unplanned power outage or connection issue that could harm the account
financially and are seen as a last resort.

CHAPTER 3

ANYONE CAN LEARN THE FOREX

33

A stop-loss order always should be used because it allows a quick and
automatic exit on bad trades, even if it the trader is not actively watching
the trade. Some traders do not use stops because they fear that if their
orders are visible in the market, they are more prone to be swept away by
“stop hunting” or that they might get caught by unusual price spikes in
moments of high volatility before the trade continues in the appropriate
direction.
Scalpers often trade without stop-loss orders because trades might be
held for only a few seconds. However, there is still potential for trouble,
and at least an emergency stop should be set up to avoid ending up with a
margin call.

TARGETS
Targets (or take-profit levels) are represented by the number of points or
pips a trader believes a currency pair will rise or fall depending on his or
her strategy and time frame. Calculations can be made using several tools,
supports and resistance, or the ATR and depend heavily on the time frame
being traded. A higher time frame will allow the setting of wider targets,
but this also will require a wider stop loss.

SPREADS AND SWAPS
SPREAD
The spread is the difference between the bid and ask prices and typically
constitutes the broker’s or financial institution’s profit on a transaction. The
size of the spread is normally a measure of the volatility of a given market,
but some brokers also offer fixed spreads. Most often spreads are widened
at the moment of a news release, when higher volatility is expected.
For example, if you want to exchange euros into dollars (selling euros
and buying dollars), you will receive $1.2825 for each euro sold. Inversely,
when you buy euros, you will have to pay $1.2827 each, assuming that the
value of the spread at that moment is 2 points.

SWAP
The swap, also called the overnight or rollover interest, is the fee that is
charged by the banks at the end of a 24-hour trading day on open positions
and is calculated according to the respective interest rates of the currencies
involved. In the FOREX, banks have determined that all trades must be settled within two business days. Traders who desire to keep their positions

34

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

open must “close” the positions before 5 p.m. Eastern Time (ET) on the
settlement day and reopen them at the start of the next trading day. This
rolls over the settlement by another two trading days. This strategy is
created through a swap agreement, and depending on the position’s direction and the interest rates of the currencies; it will generate a positive or
negative amount.
The trader is in fact borrowing money to sell one currency and purchasing the other, so the trader pays interest on the borrowed currency and
earns on the purchased currency, the rollover interest being the net result of
the different rate calculations.
Although the interest rate for each currency is identical, swap rates
may vary from broker to broker. Some have fixed rates on long and short
positions until a rate change issued by the central banks, whereas others
may vary the rates every day depending on the liquidity and volume of
transactions.
To be able to calculate a swap for a given currency pair, you need the
short-term interest rates of both currencies, the actual price or exchange rate
of the currency pair, and the amount of lots purchased. For example, let’s
assume that a trader has an open position of 10,000 units long of EUR/USD.
This is the number of euro units that he or she owns. The actual exchange rate
is 1.2825 bid/1.2827 ask, the short-term interest rate paid on the euro purchase (base currency) is 2.35 percent, and the interest rate on the U.S. dollar
short (the quoted currency) is 0.15 percent. In this case, the rollover interest
earned would be [10,000 ⫻ (2.35% ⫺ 0.15%)]/(365 ⫻ 1.2825) ⫽ $0.47.
On an inverse position (i.e., short EUR/USD), the interest paid with a
short-term interest rate on short EUR of 1.85 percent and a short-term
interest rate on long USD of 1.25 percent would be [10,000 ⫻ (1.25% ⫺
1.85%)]/(365 ⫻ 1.2827) ⫽ ⫺$0.13.
The interest is earned on the currency that is owned (long side) and
paid on the currency that is being borrowed (short side).

TECHNICAL VERSUS FUNDAMENTAL
There are two types of analysis that can be applied to FOREX trading—
fundamental and technical—and traditionally they are thought of as
“opposed” views. There has always been a controversy about which one is
better or which one is the “truest” one. The truth is that both are an important gauge and a reflection of the markets. Each one has its own methodology and rules.

CHAPTER 3

ANYONE CAN LEARN THE FOREX

35

I will be discussing each one in detail in Parts 4 and 5 of this book, but
I want to give you a summary here that will help you to integrate both views
into your basic trading skills.

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
Fundamental analysis helps you to understand the macroeconomic indicators and political decisions of every government. It provides you with
an indication of the economic situation in a given country that results
from political decisions that quite possibly have an effect on currency
value. When a trader studies the global economic environment and the
political situation of the day, he or she will be able to develop a perception of the world situation and its influence on the various markets
involved. Unlike technical analysis, fundamental analysis focuses on the
cause and not the effect.

TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Technical analysis is used to interpret price charts. You can see what is happening in real time and react instantly. You also can study past prices and
volumes and, based on that information, make projections of the probable
levels to be attained.
With several technical analysis tools, you can identify trends and patterns that reflect the buy and sell operations being made by all market
participants at any given moment. Those trends and patterns can be seen
on short, medium, and longer time frames, allowing the study of recurring patterns or particular conditions that are related to specific economic
situations.
You must be able to understand and apply both types of analysis because
the best-studied technical strategy based on past action can go horribly
wrong if fundamental events are not part of the equation.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

4

A

P

T

E

R

PREPARING YOURSELF
ADEQUATELY BEFORE
JUMPING INTO
THE MARKET
FOREX TRADING ACCOUNTS
Most brokers offer a wide array of trading accounts and different platforms.
In almost every one of them, you will find a demo or practice account that
will allow you to get acquainted with their platform’s particular characteristics and implement your strategies in a safe environment without the risk
of losing any of your funds until you are totally confident about the
mechanics involved.
Real-money accounts are diversified to allow traders of any skill level
and capitalization to start their trading career in the measure of their capabilities. The smallest trading accounts you can find are the micro- or mini
accounts, where the starting capital required is usually very small (ranging
from $25 to $500) and where there are certain limitations as to the number
of lots traded. Almost all brokers offer a very high leverage on those starter
accounts, which ranges from 100:1 to as much as 500:1.

37

38

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

In mini- or micro accounts, you can trade mini lots, which represent as
little as 1/10 of a standard lot ($10,000) or 0.1 lot, with a small margin
requirement, yielding $1 per pip. Some brokers even allow trading of
microlots, which are 1/100 of a standard lot or 0.01 lot, at a value of 10
cents per pip or nanolots ($100), which represent a value of approximately
1 cent per pip.
