
Indicator time summation falls into three general categories:
•
•
•

Moving averages such as price or volume
Relationships between the open, close, and high and/or low of individual bars
Repeating cycles of price or volume behavior

Indicator time frame falls into three general categories:
•
•
•

Short term
Intermediate term
Long term

Time frame denotes relative market periods rather than absolute length. Short term to an intraday
trader represents a different amount of time than the same segment for a mutual fund holder. In fact,
each market strategy requires different short, intermediate, and long-term considerations. This goes
back to the Triple Screen logic. Effective preparation requires time frame study just above and
below the chart on which the setup appears. For example, the intraday trader may watch a triangle
on the 5-minute chart but examine double-top S/R on the 60-minute chart and look for a low-risk
pullback on the 1-minute chart.
Technical analysis studies a fractal market. View individual time units as periods instead of daily,
weekly, or monthly lengths. Because no two participants trade exactly the same way, both patterns
and indicators must serve a broad range of uses. Indicators make valid predictions whether they
arise from 5-minute bars or monthly ones. But exercise caution. Prediction applies only to the time
frame for the tools being used to study that market.

THE MARKET CLOCK
Very short-term cycles drive daily market momentum. Each of these small time segments contains
predictable crowd, price, and volatility characteristics. The strength or absence of expected
behaviors during these phases generates feedback loops that drive subsequent market activity.
Intermarket relationships generate many primary cycles. The continuous battle of wills between
Chicago futures and New York equities spins endless arbitrage events. The 10:00 a.m. release of
government economic statistics generates volatility throughout the world markets, and 3:00 p.m.
credit market settlement triggers active positioning for the last open hour of the American stock
markets.
Natural rhythms guide other cycles. The composition of the trading crowd changes dramatically as
the day progresses. Mornings belong to smaller retail participants who exercise impatient strategies
right near the market open. As their impact winds down, professionals move in to work the balance
of the day. Their influence peaks in the last hour and especially during the furious final minutes of
the session.
Extended trading hours bend the market clock but rarely impact broad cycles. This may change in
upcoming years as stocks move to a 24-hour worldwide exchange. Most participants now use these
quieter times to complete strategies that began during the regular session. They may exit an
overnight gap into an early morning crowd or dump a loser that missed the regular close. After-hour
shock events occur frequently but remain the exception to the rule. Preopen trading continues to
expand, but larger forces still drive most overnight action. And insider manipulation guarantees that
most swing traders will still wait for the opening bell.

The little-known S&P alternation cycle drives intraday price swings. Ninety minutes of strength
often follow an equal period of weakness. This cyclic tendency naturally generates five distinct
phases during each trading day: three in the direction of the current trend and two countertrend
reactions. While the stock market shifts time somewhat through arbitrage-driven tug and pull,
dividing the day into five unique time zones presents an effective means to identify short-term
market cycles.
9:00 a.m.–10:30 a.m.: The market OPENs with a first impulse that resolves and completes the last
CLOSE phase.
10:30 a.m.–12:00 p.m.: MID-MORNING reacts to the OPEN phase but does not resolve any price
action.
12:00 p.m.–1:30 p.m.: LUNCH triggers a second impulse that resolves and completes the OPEN
phase.
1:30 p.m.–3:00 p.m.: MID-AFTERNOON reacts to the LUNCH phase but does not resolve any
price action.
3:00 p.m.–4:30 p.m.: The market CLOSEs with a third impulse that resolves and completes both the
OPEN and LUNCH phases.
Each 90-minute phase triggers a new action or a reaction to the last impulse. Each impulse digests
the prior market action but raises new conflict that affects price development. This triggers a
reaction phase that tests the themes and boundaries of the prior impulse. Finally, this action-reaction
axis ignites a subsequent impulse that resolves the conflict of the last one. Also note that the
reaction phase for the CLOSE impulse occurs through the overnight markets rather than equities
themselves.
Markets oscillate through intraday sessions within this complex structure. Swing traders try to
uncover these sentiment shifts and align positions with them. Keep in mind that short-term cycles
can generate considerable noise or not appear at all. Watch for these general time tendencies with
the 5-minute TICK and intraday stochastics. Follow them when they generate strong signal and
directional response but avoid them when cross currents build negative feedback. Cycle interfaces
may not show up on schedule. Negative feedback periods tend to overshoot their time allotment,
while sharp trends often complete more quickly than 90 minutes. Avoid narrow rules and try to
recognize this important time swing wherever it occurs.
The market clock prints three distinct thrust phases and two counterreactions. Each thrust completes
and resolves market activity initiated during the prior impulse. For example, the first 90 minutes
align with preopen positioning, the actual market open, and the first hour of trading. This important
period resolves imbalances that originate during the closing hour of the prior market day as well as
the overnight session.
A testing and reaction phase follows each impulse. This counterforce measures the thrust’s strength
and durability. Major reversals are less likely to occur during these reactions but can show
tremendous power when they appear. This phenomenon results from testing that dramatically fails
and traps one side of the market that had been in control during the prior phase.
The CLOSE impulse offers no simple reaction phase. The overnight and world markets handle this
chore as they digest the U.S. exchange results as well as new impulses that their own participation
creates. The Globex-based 24-hour S&P futures markets supply the primary outlet for this off-hour
reaction. Post-CLOSE mechanics may change substantially in upcoming years as extended trading
hours expand liquidity.

Reaction phases (MID-MORNING and MID-AFTERNOON) do not resolve prior market impulses.
Price action must pass through a complete action-reaction cycle before it can successfully digest the
new imbalance. The reaction phase often determines the strength or weakness of the underlying
impulse and how price change can resolve it. The completion of this testing phase allows
participants to initiate appropriate decisions and fuel the next impulse.
Separate impulses generate positive feedback when well aligned and negative feedback when in
conflict. For example, a strong OPEN impulse followed by a supportive LUNCH impulse (with
weak countermovement through their reactions) sets up a high probability for a strong CLOSE
impulse. Alternatively, a weak second move that follows a strong opening tends to resolve itself
into a directionless or reversal CLOSE.

POSITION TIMING
Profitable intraday trading requires execution in harmony with daily time cycles. Momentum
strategies generally correspond with impulse phases, while swing tactics characterize reaction
periods. Time these positions to large-scale trend-range conditions whenever possible. For example,
enter momentum positions in active markets during the impulses rather than reactions, but trade
pullbacks during reactions rather than impulses.
Avoid execution during noisy cycle periods. Markets trend only 10–20% of the time even at the
intraday level. Impulse phases can display little directional movement or conviction by the crowd.
Reaction zones may exhibit few themes or boundaries. This restless market action induces many
discordant phases without clear signals or opportunity. Never force a position when the TICK chart
doesn’t identify the current phase clearly.
Specific tactics avoid entry during certain times of day. Many experienced participants stand aside
during the OPEN period. They use this phase to exit overnight positions and gather feedback to
make informed decisions later in the day. Others aggressively trade the morning but take off at
lunch hour and never come back. Some prefer to scalp the quiet middle of the day, when lower
volume equals less risk. And at the last hour many morning players return to feed on late-day
volatility.
Intraday chart-based tactics favor certain execution times. Overnight gap strategies encourage
positions during the opening minutes of the market session. A first-hour breakout system must wait
60 minutes or longer for the new range to develop. Simple charts that rely on 5-minute bars may not
print enough data to predict price change until the late morning or early afternoon. And many
complex intraday patterns wait until the last hour to complete breakouts or breakdowns.
Specific holding periods focus awareness on different aspects of this short-term tug and pull.
Intraday traders seek profit through single momentum thrusts. Positions that align to cyclical
interfaces enhance reward and minimize risk. Swing traders find particular value in the cycle’s
similarity to classic wave motion, that is, thrust-reaction followed by thrust-reaction. This promotes
a natural rhythm that allows them to buy weakness and sell strength. Position traders watch these
cycles to improve portfolio results as they avoid market-at-open orders with a few simple
observations.
The market clock offers a powerful method to improve timing regardless of individual holding
period. However, intraday cycles don’t always evolve neatly from one phase to the next in real life.
Time zones often demand a skilled eye to see when one cycle ends and another begins, even in the
best of conditions. So how can less-experienced vision develop this important talent?

Each zone displays unique characteristics that set it apart from all other time phases. Start with their
tendency to correspond with specific phases of the trend-range axis. Then examine common
observations associated with certain times of day. For example, what occurs at the open and close
that make those periods so volatile? How does the lunch hour affect the natural trading flow? How
long do dull midday conditions tend to last once they begin?
Experienced participants sense intraday swing cycles with very little objective confirmation. But
everyone else should ask important questions that identify the market’s location in this endless
action-reaction cycle:
What is the current time zone?
Don’t rely on the real clock to identify the current market phase. Look instead at the price action
and see what it represents to the trading day. Classic first-hour volatility may last only 30 minutes
or take the whole morning to wind down. New highs and lows signal an impulse phase in progress.
Sharp testing of recent levels or dull, sideways movement points to a reaction phase.
What themes will the current action complete?
Markets unwind short-term imbalance through price movement. In turn, each subsequent impulse
generates new imbalance that must face testing and resolution. Examine both price and short-term
sentiment to capture the current theme. Communicate its message through a single sentence and
then predict the price action that will likely resolve it.
Does the impulse converge with or diverge from a specific trend?
Convergence predicts synergistic price change through subsequent impulses. Divergence predicts
choppy range movement and volatility. Consider the broad market activity level. Convergence
won’t matter without a strong trend and dynamic market environment. Watch for those times when
all the ducks line up in a row. This can induce the CLOSE impulse to run quickly higher or lower.
Should the position execute on the next impulse or the next reaction or stay on the sidelines?
The market clock optimizes entry and exit decisions after all the other questions have been
answered. Use intraday time cycles in conjunction with cross-verification to locate an appropriate
execution target. The best positions arise when price thrusts cleanly through an impulse, pulls back
through the reaction, and thrusts again on the next impulse.

FIRST HOUR
The first and last market hours favor strong directional price movement. This positive feedback
often dries up through the middle of the day as negative feedback takes over. These two pivotal
hours capture the majority of significant price movement over many sessions. The shares traded
during this time may exceed 60% of the total volume for the entire 6 ½-hour session.
Price extremes that print during these hours may represent the high and/or low bars for the entire
day. The 4 ½ hours between 10:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. New York time frequently reflect narrow
range movement bound by first hour price action. Spreads and volume contract through this middle
phase as market movers position themselves into the expected closing impulse.
Look backward to understand the first hour’s message. Market players naturally study preopen
sentiment, spreads, and the latest news for clues to the new session’s supply-demand. Important

themes really begin during the prior session’s final hour. The last impulse often triggers unexpected
price development that builds instability into the close. This late action provides insight into the
next day’s first impulse. But remember that supply-demand must first pass through the filter of
overnight world markets before reaching the new day.

OPENING IMBALANCE
Participants watch the opening action to identify key short-term price levels for the new session.
Early swings define the first-hour range, while gaps provide immediate signposts for reversals and
breakouts. Penetration through either end of the first hour’s range may signal sharp bar expansion.
Gaps that hold through this testing period also favor expansion through their initial highs or lows.
Alternatively, failure to exceed these levels invites fading strategies as orders build against the
short-term extremes.
Closing momentum influences the next morning’s opening trades. Simple physics describes this
common price mechanism: an object in motion will tend to remain in motion unless met by an
intervening force. While inertia slowly pulls market movement toward center, a major trend that
persists into the close should try to reassert itself the following morning.
Many forces can modify the CLOSE impulse before the next session. Late news and extended hours
allow trading well into the evening. The Globex world session takes over for index futures and
smaller contracts. The Nikkei and Hang Seng respond to American market action and contribute
their own issues. Europe awakens and its bourses add new twists to the changing environment.
Finally, western markets reassume dominance as market makers post early spreads and ECNs open
for business.
Overnight world market influence illustrates how sharply sentiment can swing between one session
close and the beginning of the next one. But overnight shocks move markets less frequently than
most swing traders realize. Because trends persist only 10–20% of the time, American exchanges
often generate price action that doesn’t impact world sentiment. Only new activity on those local
exchanges can finally resolve their internal imbalance.
Intraday traders avoid overnight risk by going flat into the close. Many use the open to determine
which trend direction should prevail as they prepare strategies for the day. These short-term tactics
force them to miss overnight price movement. Unfortunately, stocks can gap in the direction of a
rally or selloff for days in a row during strongly trending markets. This is no coincidence. Insiders
use these price shocks to take short-term traders out of the profit game for as long as they can.
Swing traders use intersession volatility to execute two types of strategies. The first tactic expects
flat conditions as positions are held overnight. A quiet close favors a quiet open. Stocks in welldefined trends should resume price movement through adjacent sessions unless other forces
intervene. While risk increases overnight, positions play the odds and seek greater rewards. But this
strategy backfires if overnight shocks or insider manipulation twist the opening.
The other method relies on overnight volatility as swing traders hold positions in expectation of a
morning gap. This highly popular strategy carries great risk through most market conditions.
Although odds favor a continuation of the prior day’s trend, an immediate reversal may trigger if
the shock does not materialize. And morning gaps now print frequently in the opposite direction of
the close as insiders fade the crowd’s well-known intentions.
Overnight strategies rely on an estimated 80–90% continuation bias. A trending stock that moves to
a new high or low near closing should surge in that direction the next morning. The first hour

provides an excellent opportunity to unload short-term positions that capitalize on the closing trend.
But this strategy always presents greater risks than intraday or broader position-based trades. Use it
in runaway markets, but avoid it the rest of the time.

THE GAUNTLET
The close marks a standoff between supply and demand that reflects equilibrium or imbalance.
Overnight activities may release tension on this spring or pull it to the breaking point. Western
markets seek stability through price discovery as the sun rises in New York. On listed exchanges,
specialists estimate retail demand through their order book. Nasdaq market makers communicate
with ECNs before the open and represent prices that test boundaries until the most aggressive
participants win the inside bid-ask spread.
The S&P futures contract impacts the preopen through fair value arbitrage. But rather than offer
leadership, this frantic market often paints the opening tape to invite trade execution and then fades
immediately. These whipsaws have grown in lockstep with the introduction of small-sized mini
contracts and electronic execution. The Nasdaq 100 futures present a popular new indicator for
opening demand. But equities traders should realize that the stock markets themselves provide the
best leading information about the eventual opening tick.
Changing spreads seek the moving target of opening momentum. But no one really knows how the
public or institutions will impact price when the broad markets open. The opening surge may or
may not ignite a subsequent trend. The first hour searches for direction as it forces action through a
testing gauntlet in order to gauge demand. This price discovery builds a road map to guide both the
trading floor and retail public in setting balanced prices for securities.
Look for a third-bar reversal about 11 or 12 minutes into the new day. This frequent test refers to
the third bar or candle of the 5-minute S&P futures contract or equity indices, as measured from the
9:30 a.m. opening of the U.S. stock markets. This time zone corresponds with the 15-minute market
quote delay built into most retail access until recent years. In past times, painting the tape for this
crowd ensured some additional volume for the market makers and specialists. Because retail traders
were often the last paper in the door, other market forces could then take over and trigger a reversal
or sideways action. Although real-time access to the markets has grown substantially, the third-bar
reversal still shows its face in many morning sessions.
A second time zone right after 10:00 a.m. tries to reverse any trend established at the open. The
origin of this fade could be the frequent release of government economic data at this time. But even
on days with no news, a strong expectation for this 35-minute test often turns into a self-fulfilling
event. This specific time zone has tremendous importance for swing traders. Many professionals
will not enter positions until the gauntlet ensures that the trend they want to trade will remain intact.
They rely upon the outcome of this 35-minute test more than any other for making their early
decisions.
Trends that survive first-hour testing may continue throughout the day. These early mechanics
trigger another unique behavior of the market open. The last 15 minutes or so of the first hour often
reflect capitulation by the gauntlet’s losing side. Price movement shifts to the winning trend for the
day and can escalate as many swing traders fill their first executions.
Watch for this 10:20 a.m. impulse very closely. An opening trend should resume right at this time if
the gauntlet shows little countertrend strength. But if the expected move does not appear, an
immediate reaction can trigger a major reversal. Examine the 10 minutes that lead into this time

zone to determine the likely outcome. For example, weak countertrend rallies that fade into 10:20
a.m. will often ignite strong selling right at this interval.
This 50-minute move originates through several internal forces. First, many swing traders rely on
first-hour breakout systems. Although this method requires that they wait through a full 60 minutes
for the daily trend to exert itself, many jump the gun and enter positions early. Second, other
participants wait for opening volatility to dissipate, and this time promotes their first daily
executions.
The first hour sets themes that repeat themselves throughout the trading day. Market participants
reveal their strengths and weaknesses during this testing gauntlet. Volume then drops sharply,
constricting price movement and setting range resistance difficult to penetrate until one side gathers
new momentum. This often provides clear boundaries for the action that follows.
FIGURE 6.1
The third-bar reversal prints right on schedule during two consecutive Nasdaq sessions. The NYSE TICK and
S&P futures often signal this early morning shift better than indices that suffer from reporting delays due to
opening volume bursts. The third-bar reversal may shift forward or backward in time, depending on market
conditions. If it fails to appear at all, the void signals a strong bias in the opening direction.
