
CHAPTER 10

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

163

have on a company’s share price. The same effect that unemployment at an
all-time high or housing starts at an all-time low have on currency values is
similar to what happens if the prime minister resigns or if the married
president is caught cheating on his wife with an intern. Bad news like this
drives down the value of the currency. People get nervous and feel the leadership is in disarray and may move their money out of the country and into
another country in hopes of preserving the value of their estate.
When investors get nervous, for whatever reason, and want to move
their money from one country to another, it is called fleeing to safety. They
move their money from one country to another, creating a buying frenzy
around the currency they are acquiring, driving the value up, and creating a
selling frenzy around the currency they are selling, which drives the value
of that currency down. If the masses start selling more than buying—stock
or currency—it will drive prices down. Selling U.S. dollars and converting
them to Japanese yen will drive the value of the U.S. dollar down and the
Japanese yen up.
America declares war on Iraq. Investors know a war will create
hardship for the country, its leadership, and its people. Employment may go
down due to a weakened economy during wartime. If the country gets into
trouble fighting the war and needs to borrow money to continue, other
countries may be hesitant to lend it money because the enemy might win,
take over the country, and make it more difficult for the borrower to pay the
loan back. That being the case, the country becomes a high-risk borrower
and must pay a higher interest rate, which increases its debt, to acquire the
funds it needs.
If leadership, the economy, and the war start to get out of hand,
investors may get nervous about leaving their money in, for example,
America and want to move it to perhaps a country like Great Britain. If a lot
of investors feel that way, they will flee to safety and start selling their
U.S. dollars and buying British pounds. As a result, this will drive the U.S.
dollar down in value and the British pound up.
Just as every public corporation has a set of announcements that inform
investors about the overall health and well-being of the company, so do
countries have similar announcements. In both cases, the announcements
allow investors to either buy more stock or currency, sell what they have, or
stay neutral. These announcements are fundamental announcements.
In the currency market or on the Forex, each country around the world
has approximately 20 major fundamental announcements annually for
investors to monitor. The importance of the announcements shifts as the

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

164

economy shifts. Governments report the health and overall economic
well-being of a country to investors via fundamental announcements,
which are the economic indicators of the country.
Even though most economic reports are created monthly, quarterly,
and yearly, some are created weekly. Some economic indicators or reports
carry more weight than others. Some examples of such economic
reports are the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Employment and Nonfarm Payroll. Investors should watch the monthly, quarterly, and yearly
economic reports, but the weekly versions of the same report are of less
importance. All economic reports are posted on a governmental calendar,
giving the date, time, and the forecast or expectation of change, as well as
the previous percentage change (see Figure 10-2).
You can keep up with all major government reports that affect the
Forex at www.markettraders.com or www.forextips.com, under the heading “Economic Reports”, or in leading newspapers, such as the Wall Street
Journal, the Financial Times, or the New York Times. Although newspapers
are great resources for information on fundamental announcements, the
Internet is now the number one source for investors.

FIGURE 10-2

Fundamental Announcements

Time (New Location Description
York Time)
12/23 10:00
US
Nov New Home Sales

Forecast Previously
1.2 mln 1.226 mln

12/23 09:45

US

Dec Univ. of Michigan Sent. Survey – final 95.7

95.7

12/23 08:30

US

Nov Personal Spending

0.2%

0.7%

12/23 08:30

US

Nov Core PCE Price Index

1.4%

1.5%

12/23 08:30

US

Nov Personal Income

0.3%

0.6%

12/23 08:30

CAN Oct Real GDP

0.2%

0.0%

12/23 08:30

US

Weekly Jobless Claims

335K

317K

12/23 08:30

US

Nov Durable Goods Orders

0.5%

-0.4%

12/23 08:30

US

Nov Durable Goods Orders ex transport.

0.8%

-0.7%

CHAPTER 10

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

165

When a fundamental announcement is about to occur, investors usually
stop buying or selling right before the announcement. If the news is good,
prices may go up, and if it is bad, prices may go down. Either way, to play
it safe, they usually wait until the announcement is read before they take a
position in the market. Within seconds after the announcement is read, a
frenzy of buying or selling starts to take place, potentially creating a dramatic
price change in only a couple of seconds.
Let us say you are trading and waiting for Mr. Ben Bernanke, chairman
of the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States, to announce a potential
U.S. interest rate change at 2:30 p.m. EST, approximately 10 hours from
now. The current interest rate is at 4.5 percent. There are three possible
scenarios that could result from the announcement: the interest rate could
go up, it could go down, or it could remain unchanged. Let us look at
possible cause and effect scenarios:
Cause: Interest rates go up, and as a result the cost to borrow money
increases. When the cost of borrowing money goes up,
fewer people will be interested in borrowing money.
Effect: The demand for U.S. dollars will go down, and fewer people
will buy the U.S. dollar, creating a weaker dollar.
Cause: Interest rates go down, meaning the cost to borrow money
will decline. When the cost of borrowing money goes down,
more people will be interested in borrowing money.
Effect: The demand for U.S. dollars rises, and more people buy the
U.S. dollar, creating a stronger dollar.
Cause: Interest rates go unchanged.
Effect: The value of the U.S. dollar should not change and remains
the same.
If interest rates increase or decrease, currency values increase or
decrease. If you watch the economic indicators of the world and try to trade
making money off the rate of change, you are considered a fundamentalist
trader. If you trade or take positions based on reading a chart, which I have
been teaching you, you are called a technical trader. (Technical analysis is
the study of chart reading.) To be a good trader, you need to create a
balance between the technicals and the fundamentals. However, the most
successful traders of the world are predominately technical traders rather
than fundamentals traders.
I will never forget back in the early 2000s, a neighbor of mine gave me
a call one morning to say, “Jared, I really need your help.”
I said, “I will try my best. What is your situation?”

166

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

He said, “I own about $300,000 in Microsoft stock. It had a value at one
time of about $500,000 and is down to about $300,000, and I don’t want it
to fall any further.”
I said, “I don’t blame you! Now let me ask you this, are you calling
because you think I can increase its value for you? I am the FXCHIEF, not
the STOCKCHIEF, you know,” I told him, laughing.
Then, with a serious voice, he said, “As you know, the U.S. government
sued Microsoft for violating monopoly laws and the judge is going to rule
Monday morning on the issue.” He continued, “Can I get you to look at a
Microsoft chart ASAP and help me out here?”
I asked, “What do you want to know?
He said, “Can you tell me whether I should sell all my stock today or
hold onto to it?”
I said, “Are you kidding me? This is a no-win situation. If I advise you
incorrectly, you will burn my house down. And if I’m correct, you will
ignore me as you drive by my house on your way to dinner in your new
Mercedes.”
We both laughed again, and I said, “Give me a minute and I will pull up
a chart on Microsoft.” Now, as I was pulling up the chart, I was thinking to
myself, here is a person investing $300,000 to $500,000 in one stock, who
knows what all his holdings are, yet he won’t even take the time to educate
to himself on how the markets work technically. After all, he openly admitted he was down $200,000 from $500,000. I thought, a simple little lesson
on trend lines, trend line breaks, and buy and sell zones could have saved
him $200,000.
After looking at the chart, I said, “Here is what I think. The judge is
going to rule in favor of Microsoft on Monday morning.”
He said, “You’re kidding, right?”
I said, “Maybe yes, maybe no.”
He said, “Come on! Get serious here and help me out. You know what
you are doing and I don’t.”
I said, “Look here, Ken, this is my analysis. The reason I said the judge
is going to rule in favor of Microsoft is, technically, the Microsoft chart has
been in a downtrend, it has broken the downtrend line, entered into the buy
zone, returned to resistance, and is now forming up A, B, C, D’s and is at an
0.618 Fibonacci retracement level/up C and a beautiful morning star has
just formed.”
He said, “All-righty then,” with a hint of sarcasm. “Look Jared, that is
all Greek to me. But what I think you are saying is that you want me to hold
my position?”

CHAPTER 10

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

167

I said, “No, that is not what I am saying.”
“So you want me to dump everything today?” He asked in a voice of
frustration.
I quickly responded, “No, that is not what I said either.”
He then yelled at me, screaming, “What should I do, I can’t afford to
lose any more money!”
Eventually, I calmly said, “The reason I am so adamant that the judge
will rule in favor of Microsoft is that I believe, in situations like this, nature
knows ahead of time what needs to happen to keep everything in balance.
The charts predominately tell the trader ahead of time what is going to
happen next in the market.”
He interrupted me, saying, “Really?” as if I was smoking dope.
I went on, “Be that as it may, tornadoes can come out of nowhere.”
I went on, saying, “Here is what I would do. As I said, it is my analysis
that Microsoft is going to rally after the judge announces his verdict. So I
would stay in my position today, but tell your broker you want to put in a
stop order at around $2.00 a share lower than where it is trading today. I
would then dump half of the shares there and keep the other half as a
long-term investment, as we both know Microsoft is not going out of
business anytime soon.”
Well, to his surprise, but not mine, the charts were right. The judge
ruled in favor of Microsoft and the stock rallied like a rocket. He went
to dinner in his new Mercedes while I stayed home. I haven’t heard from
him since.

TRADING DAYS VERSUS TRENDING DAYS
Trading days are when there are no fundamental announcements. Currency
charts move typically 60 to 90 pips, and sometimes 120 pips, depending on
the currency. Trending days are fundamental announcement days, when the
market will generally take off in a direction after the announcement and
move 120 to 240 pips within the first five hours, incurring a major price
change. It then often stays at that new price for the remainder of the day.
Novice traders prefer trading days as the market is typically more
predictable. Expert traders, however, prefer trending days over trading days
because you can make more money in less time.
If there is a major change, or a major projected change, anticipated in
the economy, with the impact of an economic fundamental announcement,
the prices will move (see Figure 10-3).

168

FIGURE 10-3

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

Before the announcement, traders stop trading, and the chart begins to
consolidate. Consolidation, or bracketing, in a chart is a potential sign that a
fundamental announcement is about to take place; traders are waiting for the
announcement before taking any new positions. Trading appears to be thin,
or what is also referred to as light. After the announcement, if there is a percentage change from the previous report, there will be a breakout from that
consolidation, as you see in Figure 10-3. After the announcement, traders
aggressively start buying or selling, which creates a breakout. In this
particular chart, a buying frenzy ensued and prices broke out to the north.
In the event of no change after the announcement, the chart will usually
continue in the direction of the previous trend.

INCREASED RISK WITH TRADING FUNDAMENTAL
ANNOUNCEMENTS
Traders must be very careful if they want to trade during fundamental
announcements. Years back, Forex brokers allowed traders to straddle the

CHAPTER 10

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

169

consolidation, which means you place a buy above the consolidation and a
sell below the consolidation, right before the announcement. When the
market broke out, it would automatically take you with it, in the direction
of the breakout. Brokers ended up losing a lot of money to traders through
this process, due to their inability to offset the trades fast enough in the
interbank market. They have now pretty much eliminated the practice of
straddling.
Today, if you want to trade a fundamental announcement, you either
need to be in the market before the announcement or try to get a fill right
after the announcement. When trying to get a fill right after the announcement, you risk the danger of being slipped perhaps 30 to 100 pips, as the
market rapidly moves in a direction. There have been times, and will
continue to be times, when the market moves 200 pips inside of 20 seconds
after an announcement. Fundamental announcements can be very volatile
and create whiplashes, as seen in Figures 10-4 and 10-5, resulting in heavy
losses.

FIGURE 10-4

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

170

FIGURE 10-5

GBP/USD (One-Hour Chart)

WORLD ECONOMIES
There are three major world economies and time zones that traders monitor:
1.
2.
3.

The Asian market
The European market (which consists mainly of Great Britain)
The U.S. market

The majority of Forex trading transactions are done in Great Britain.
More than 75 percent of all Forex transactions are done during the trading
session of the European market. The majority of the $1.5 trillion U.S. dollars
of transactions daily are done within the seven major world currencies.
Small retail traders trade the six major world currencies—EUR, GBP,
CHF, JPY, CAD, and AUD against the U.S. dollar—however, most are paid
in U.S. dollars.
The sun doesn’t set on the financial markets of the world. As a matter
of fact, the sun never sets—the world continually turns. As the world turns,
the financial markets of the world open and close. Somewhere in this
world, a financial market is open during any given 24-hour period.

CHAPTER 10

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

171

At 7 p.m. EST, the Asian markets open (8 a.m. local Asian time) and
continue for approximately 8 hours.
At 3 a.m. EST, the European markets open (8 a.m. local British time)
and continue for approximately 8 hours.
At 8 a.m. EST, the American markets open and continue for 8 hours.
You can see that the three markets overlap each other, although the
majority of volume is traded during the European and U.S. sessions. That is
where you will find the majority of price movement during any given
24-hour period.
If you have an interest in trading what are called off-currencies, or
currencies other than the majors, you may want to monitor the particular
country’s economic calendar. For example, if you want to trade the Australian dollar against the New Zealand dollar, you may want to do some
research on the major announcements that could affect those two currencies. Keep in mind that the importance of the announcements may change
from time to time. If the economy of the country is really suffering, retail
sales will play an important roll and may be an indicator of potential major
change. That specific announcement may create a very volatile currency
market during their struggling economic times. However, if the economy is
good, retail sales may not have much of an effect at all on price change,
regardless of the percentage change in the report.

THE IMPORTANCE OF FUNDAMENTAL ANNOUNCEMENTS
Fundamental announcements have an effect on every country’s currency in
some way, either immediately or soon after. The reserve bank of every country monitors the inflation of the country by using economic indicators.
When these reflect inflationary pressure, the bank will generally increase
interest rates. When signs of deflation are present, interest rates are
generally lowered. Interest rates are important for the economy because they
influence the willingness of individuals and households to borrow money
and make investments. An increase in interest rates will cause a downturn in
the economy, whereas a decrease will stimulate the economic growth.

THE 13 MOST IMPORTANT U.S. FUNDAMENTAL ANNOUNCEMENTS
The following are fundamentals announced in the United States:
Purchasing Managers Index (Chicago PMI): This announcement is
based on surveys of more than 200 purchasing managers in the manufacturing industry who are based in the Chicago area. This distribution of

172

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

manufacturing firms mirrors the national distribution in the United States.
Readings above 50 percent indicate an expanding factory sector, whereas
values below 50 percent are indicative of contraction. This announcement
is made on the last business day of every month at 10 a.m. EST.
Consumer Confidence Index (CCI): This is a survey of 5,000
consumers monitoring their attitudes toward the current situation and
expectations regarding economic conditions. This report can occasionally
be helpful in predicting sudden shifts in the economy. It can also give a
trader an idea about the direction of the U.S. economy. Only index changes
of at least five points should be considered significant. The announcement
is made on the last Tuesday of every month at 10 a.m. EST.
Consumer Price Index (CPI): CPI measures the change in price of a
representative basket of goods and services, such as food, energy, housing,
clothing, transportation, medical care, entertainment, and education. It is
also known as the cost-of-living index. It is important because it excludes
food and energy prices for it’s monthly stability, referred to as the core CPI,
and gives a clearer picture of the underlying inflation trend. This announcement is made around the 13th of every month at 8:30 a.m. EST.
Durable Goods Orders: The official name of this announcement is the
“Advance Report on Durable Goods Manufacturers, Shipments and Orders.”
It is a government index that reflects the dollar volume of orders, shipments,
and unfilled orders of durable goods. Durable goods are new or used items
with a normal life expectancy of three years or more. This generally excludes
defense and transportation orders because of their volatility. This report gives
the trader information on the strength of demand for U.S. manufactured
durable goods—from both domestic and foreign sources. An increase in the
index suggests that demand is strengthening, which may result in rising production and employment. A falling index obviously indicates the opposite.
The data is released around the 26th of every month at 8:30 a.m. EST.
Employment Situation: This report lists the number of payroll jobs at
all non-farm business establishments and government agencies. The unemployment rate, average hourly and weekly earnings, and the length of the
average workweek are all listed in this report. This release is the single
most closely watched economic statistic because of its timelines, accuracy,
and its importance as an indicator of economic activity. It plays a big role
in influencing financial market psychology during the month.
Non-farm Payroll Indicator: This fundamental is a co-incident indicator of economic growth. The greater the increase in employment figures,
the faster the total economy will grow. An increasing unemployment rate is
associated with a contracting economy and declining interest rates. A

CHAPTER 10

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS

173

decreasing unemployment rate is associated with an expanding economy
and potentially increasing interest rates. The fear is that wages will rise if
the unemployment rate becomes too low and workers are hard to find. The
economy is considered to be at full employment when unemployment is
between 5.5 and 6 percent. The data is released on the first Friday of every
month at 8:30 a.m. EST.
Existing Home Sales: This report measures the selling rate of preowned
houses and is considered a decent indicator of activity in the housing sector.
It provides a gauge of not only the demand for housing but also the economic
momentum. People have to be financially confident in order to buy a house.
The data is announced on the 25th of every month at 10 a.m. EST.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP): GDP measures the dollar value of
goods and services produced within the borders of the United States,
regardless of who owns the assets or the nationality of the labor used in
producing that output. This is the most comprehensive measure of the
performance of the U.S. economy. Healthy GDP growth is between 2.0 and
2.5 percent (when the unemployment rate is between 5.5 and 6 percent). A
higher GDP growth leads to accelerating inflation, and lower growth indicates a weak economy. This data is released in the third or fourth week of
every month at 8:30 a.m. EST.
New Home Sales: This report is based on interviews with approximately 10,000 builders, or owners of about 15,000 selected building
projects. It measures the number of newly constructed homes with a committed sale during the month. It is considered an indication of near-term
spending for housing-related items and of consumer spending in general.
However, investors prefer the existing home sales report, which accounts
for around 84 percent of all houses sold earlier in the month.
Philadelphia Fed: This is a regional manufacturing index that covers
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware, which represents a reasonable
cross section of national manufacturing activities. Readings above 50 percent indicate an expanding factory sector, whereas values below 50 percent
indicate contraction. The data is released on the third Thursday of every
month at 10 a.m. EST.
Producer Price Index (PPI): The PPI measures the average price of a
fixed basket of capital and consumer goods at the wholesale level, which
gives a clearer indication of the underlying inflation trend. There are three
primary publication structures for the PPI: industry, commodity, and stageof-processing. It’s important to monitor the PPI excluding food and energy
prices for its monthly stability. This announcement is made around the 11th
of every month at 8:30 a.m. EST.
