
c13.indd 268

11/2/07 12:48:21 PM

Trading Hall of Shame

269

• Join a local gym and hire a personal trainer who will push
you to your limits. Exercise is a not only a stress reliever (see
Chapter 7), but you will find that it will help you sleep better
at night. Keeping your mind and body strong and rested will
help you make better business decisions.
• Take a self-defense class. You will be amazed to see how well this
builds self-confidence. After you break your first board, you will
feel invincible, and this feeling will eliminate any fears you have
about the world around you.
• Make new friends. Go out there and try to find people who
have qualities you admire. Those who are optimistic, confident, friendly, and helpful to those around them will most
likely influence the way you evaluate risk. If you surround
yourself with successful people, then your chances of success
become much greater.
• Pray. We are not ashamed to talk about the power of prayer.
It’s positive, it’s relaxing, it’s exciting if you do it right, and,
above all, you will truly be inspired to make good choices not
just in your investments but in your personal life as well. Start
by going to a comfortable, quiet corner in your home or lock
yourself in your car if you have to and just close your eyes and
be still. Be thankful for what you have and relax. Spend time
with your creator and believe in miracles.
• Go out and help someone who really needs your help. Giving
back to the community is a great way to build up your confidence and sense of self-worth. Not only is this rewarding, but
you will be amazed to see just how many people will return
those kind gestures. What goes around comes around.

Larry the Lemming: Follows the Crowd,
Not the Money
This is the guy who believes what he sees on television is true and will
actually buy on an analyst upgrade. His favorite game as a kid was
Simon Says, but he never aspired to be Simon.
Larry just loves driving down one-way streets because he doesn’t
have to make a decision, and he always seems to have a hard time
when he gets to the forks in the road. When he eats out with friends,
he always orders “what he’s having.” Larry books his travel with a
group even if he doesn’t know them. One of his favorite activities is
to go to football games just to participate in the wave.

c13.indd 269

11/2/07 12:48:21 PM

270

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

As a career employee of the consensus bureau, he loves his job
but will often catch himself reminiscing of the days when he knocked
on doors to ask people’s opinions. When he was a child, his mother
asked him, “If all of your friends jumped off a bridge, would you
jump, too?” He meekly replied, “ Yes.”
These days, you will often find Larry putting long hard hours
into his stock research. Although this is done through the late night
chat rooms while on his computer, he does manage to find time for
his closest friends, who happen to be avatars. He tried trading by
himself for a while by going long Coca-Cola, but that position just
fizzled out. Then he tried buying into the mining equipment sector,
and that idea hit rock before he tried again to trade International
Paper, and that position just stayed stationary for years. Then, on his
final attempt, he tried trading pencils, but after he lost a few points
he just decided to give up trying to make decisions for himself.
Prescription

We know this is corny, but what we have just described to you in
Larry characterizes many thousands of people who trade the market
each year. If you find yourself always asking for a second opinion
about a stock you are about to trade, then chances are you are not
willing to take the risk on your own.
Do you take stock tips from your neighbor? Are you always checking the analyst reports to see if they are in line with your positions? If
you wait for everyone else to get into a stock before you get into the
stock, chances are you are on the wrong side of the trade because by
the time you get in, the people who bought first are already thinking
about getting out to take their profits. When they sell, who do you
think they will be selling to? Yes, you.
Here is one way you can solve this problem. Instead of following
the crowd, follow the money trail. Get good at reading simple line
charts, and as soon as you see the pivot point that we described in
Point III (Chapter 9), buy your stock and soon others will be following you instead of the other way around.
Larry is a close cousin to Frozen Margarita, because he trades
with fear, too. That’s why he always needs to find the consensus. The
big difference between Larry and Margarita is that Larry is at least
willing to place the trade. If you find that you are like Larry, we would
suggest you follow the suggestions we gave Margarita. If you need to

c13.indd 270

11/2/07 12:48:22 PM

Trading Hall of Shame

271

run with the crowd, at least make sure you are running with a group
of success-minded individuals. Think like a winner, act like a winner,
believe you are a winner, and then be a winner.

Norman Is an Island: Trades in Seclusion, to His
Theme Song, “All by Myself”
As an only child, Norman’s favorite game was solitaire. You would
often find him riding across town on his unicycle. A skeptic at heart,
he’s often wondered why psychics have to ask you for your name and
doesn’t allow anyone to influence his own opinion.
He lives in a one-room house at the end of a cul-de-sac, and
when he eats out he makes sure to only use the drive-through window. Norman is an investor whom the brokerage firms would label
“self-directed,” and his biggest challenge is knowing when to get out
of a stock.
Norman has never been strong on accountability. He assumes
that any association with other traders would simply be a ticket to
passage on a ship of fools. His trading software is direct access, but
Level 1 suits him just fine. He has yet to return his broker’s phone
message asking him if she can help in any way.
Prescription

One of the reasons we see so many people like Norman is the
advancement in technology. It’s easy to sit at home or in your office
all by yourself at the computer to trade in and out of the markets.
With the click of the mouse you can buy and sell stocks just like the
professionals. But the big difference between your sitting there all
by yourself and the professional is that the professional trader is
not sitting there all by himself. He has many other traders around
him, with a head trader who is keeping a very careful watch on the
risk levels.
If you are like Norman, alone at your computer, who is there to
help you manage the risk? Chances are, nobody is helping you manage risk. Norman avoids accountability. This is why we suggest you
try to partner with either your spouse or a friend. Their role is not to
give you a second opinion about the stocks you pick; they are there
to help hold you accountable to the exit points. In other words, if
you buy a stock at $25 and you have calculated your stop loss point

c13.indd 271

11/2/07 12:48:22 PM

272

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

to be $23, let your partner know that you are getting out at $23.
Then ask them to help you track the progress of the stock over time.
If the stock drops to $23 or lower, hopefully your friend will let you
know about it. This will be a “backup” plan to the stop loss order
you should already have in place.
Please reward your partner every time they help you get out of a
bad position. This will reinforce this behavior pattern, and over time
you may even have trained a good trading buddy, who may one day
be the next great portfolio manager. What you need to do is find
a place that brings you somewhere between Norman and our next
character, who is quite the opposite.

Urgent Carl: He’s Trading, but He’s Not Weaned
Carl is willing to make any trade but will not make the trade by
himself. If there were a trader’s 9-1-1 line, they would know Carl
by name. Carl needs validation on every stock before he enters the
position, and he has an endless list of questions. Furthermore, when
he gets a trade idea in his mind, the best time to place the trade was
an hour ago. Every minute that passes without the trade is surely
sucking every last penny out of his potential profits. Carl lives for the
next market emergency.
Some of the things we noticed about Urgent Carl are:
• He’s only read part of I’m OK, You’re OK because he is not
really sure he is okay.
• He is so unsure of his own abilities that he refuses to give himself discretionary trading authority in his own account.
• He carries with him a hyperventilation bag for those times
when he can’t reach his trading coach.
• Armed with the latest and greatest technology, he is a wiz on
the Bluetooth and can spit out a text message in a flash for
instant, quick-response backup support.
• He is actually a very nice guy but is having a hard time fighting
the stalking charges filed by his last trading coach.
• On his account application he listed his personal trading
coach as a codependent.
• By himself he wouldn’t trade a dollar for a five-dollar bill,
but with the right validation would trade a complex forex
spread.

c13.indd 272

11/2/07 12:48:22 PM

Trading Hall of Shame

273

Prescription

There is some overlap here with Carl’s behavior and that of Larry
the Lemming in that they are both validators, but Carl is at least able
to make his own trade decisions. His only problem is that he is quite
unsure of the decisions he is making. To accommodate his lack of
confidence, he gathers one or more trading coaches around him.
These coaches may be other traders, technical analysts, or financial
advisers. Whoever they are, they become Carl’s lifeline when his
insecurities rise to a boiling point.

Chatter Box—AJ
There was a time when I was handling a trader who lived in Annapolis,
Maryland. A dentist who loved to trade IBM, he would call me during
the trading day to see how the stock was looking on the technical
charts. I would give a quote to him, he would ask if the stock was still
holding support, and then he would hang up and go back to work.
Five minutes later, my phone would ring again and I would once again
pull up IBM to talk about price support and any news that would come
up on the stock. If you’ve ever tracked IBM, you know that there are
hundreds of press releases that go out on this company each and
every week, and at times it can be pretty tedious going through all of
those stories to analyze what affect this news will have on the stock.
Well, I had to end our relationship after the day when the number of
inbound calls topped 37 and that was all during the six-and-a-halfhour trading day. This worked out to be about one call every 11 minutes.
After I ended that relationship, I found out his calls were coming in
between each patient who came to visit him at his office. Needless to
say, this individual was quite unsure of his own ability to manage risk
and needed me to reinforce the risk management plan.

Here are some solutions that will help build confidence in your
ability to trade the markets without your crutches:
• Start off by trading with a small amount of money in your
trading account. Remember Margarita? This will relieve some

c13.indd 273

11/2/07 12:48:22 PM

274

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

of the stress and get you in a rhythm that will help build a
profitable trading account. Then, once you are in the groove,
you can increase the number of shares according to your comfort level and risk tolerance.
• Make sure you are using stop loss orders and accept the fact
that you will be wrong once in a while (maybe even more than
once in a while). Setting your expectations in this way will
eliminate any surprises that will contribute to financial stress.
• Back up your stop loss orders with e-mail alert services that
notify you when a stock drops below key support levels.
• Trade within your education and expertise level. Don’t trade
options if you don’t know the difference between a call and
a put.
• Turn off the television. Financial news programs play on the
emotions of investors and will only result in your reacting in a
“knee jerk” fashion.
• Don’t stare at your trading platform every minute of every
trading day. Go out and get a massage and relax. The market
will be there when you get back. Looking at the markets too
much will result in a condition we call “tickeritis,” which is a
compulsive disorder causing one to crave stock quotes every
11 minutes.
• Switch to decaf.
By now, you may have picked up on a common trend seen in
several of our characters. Lack of confidence, low sense of self-worth,
fearfulness, and uncertainty are all factors that will contribute to
making poor financial decisions. Moving on to our last couple, you
will see that this theme continues.

Oz and Trish: The Couple that Vows to
Ignore Any Losing Position
As head-in-the-sand traders, Oz and Trish still believe WorldCom will
come back. They find it curious that most of the stock ticker symbols in their portfolio end with a “Q.” They didn’t actually prepare
for Y2K—they just set their clocks back. Oz was once overheard telling Trish that stop orders are issued by police for speeding, and he
believes the best way to handle a losing position is to turn off the
computer and go on vacation.

c13.indd 274

11/2/07 12:48:24 PM

Trading Hall of Shame

275

Many people are motivated by various inspirational posters, books,
and tapes. Oz and Trish have a placard hanging above their computer that reads, “It Isn’t a Loss until You Sell It.” They never made
any trades on margin, so they have the luxury of riding their losing
positions to the bitter end. Neither knew the meaning of the word
asymptotic until a friend once used it to describe the line chart of their
favorite stock.
Oz and Trish are living proof that misery loves company, yet
they have come to a place where they are actually comfortable with
their losing positions. They have always been traders, but somewhere
along the way they morphed into long-term investors as their losing trades accumulated. A common practice of theirs is to sell other
stocks that allow them to take a profit in order to finance the stocks
that are losing money.
Prescription

Oz and Trish live among us more frequently than you might guess.
When we have the opportunity to explain to them what they are
doing wrong, they understand everything we tell them. They are at
the seminars taking copious notes; they hear what we say and know
that it makes complete sense. But when we talk to them days after our
advice was given, to check on what they did to get out of their downtrending stocks, we see no action taken. It’s almost as if someone put
a spell on them that causes them to ignore all losses whatsoever.
Whatever you do, don’t become an Oz and Trish couple. This is
not a strategy to manage risk, and it will never work as a strategy to
profit in the markets. Imagine if money managers all over the world
ignored risk management ideas. This would be the same as a captain
sailing off toward the open seas knowing that there were holes in the
bottom of his boat and not doing anything to plug the holes.
This type of a mind-set is a very tough one for us to overcome
because it is based on a strong belief that says out of sight, out of
mind and eventually things will get better. Remember that it takes
only one bad investment to blow up your whole portfolio. The following points are things you should think about to avoid getting
your head stuck in this ostrich approach to trading:
• Create a lot of pain in your mind in “not taking action.” Think
of what could happen if this stock does not turn around. What
will this do to your finances?

c13.indd 275

11/2/07 12:48:24 PM

276

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

• Print charts of stocks you own and draw red lines where
support levels are and keep them in an obvious place near
your computer so you can’t run and hide from the truth.
• If on your last try to manage your risk, you still fail to face the
truth and get out of a losing trade, we have no other advice
than to seek professional help in managing your portfolio. It
would be better to pay one or two percentage points to have a
licensed financial adviser do the job than for you to risk your
retirement dollars hiding your head in the sand.

It’s Funny Until It Hurts
We had a lot of fun writing this chapter because humor sometimes
helps us to remember key points of interest. Poking fun at ourselves
every now and then is okay as long as we are not offending anyone in
the process. However, if you did take offense to any of the comments
we’ve made regarding our characters, you should take a serious look
at yourself, as it may suggest you have a “nonprofit profile.”
Although we did base our stories on real people, we were sure
not to use their real names. If you happen to have the same name as
one of our characters, we assure you this was purely a coincidence.
In our next chapter we are going to talk about how to find a good
broker. Once you have found a broker that can help you, be sure to
build a relationship with the people you speak with from that firm.
After you get to know some of the active trader representatives who
handle your account, be sure to ask them if they have ever run into
Barry, Betty, or Sal. If they haven’t, there is a good chance they’ve
spoken with Margarita, Larry, or Norman. Carl will be blocked from
calling them anymore, and Oz and Trish would never call them for
help because they will be on vacation. It would be interesting to get
their views on the types of traders they speak with each and every day
while the markets are open for trading. Chances are they will have
crazier stories than we do.

c13.indd 276

11/2/07 12:48:24 PM

14

C H A P T E R

Going to the Dance
F IN DIN G Y OUR B R OKER

Single Trader Seeks Broker for LT Relationship
I’m new to trading so I need someone to hold my hand. Enjoy all types of
orders but limits are my favorite! Willing to try trailing stops – I’m crazy that
way. Most days find me staring wistfully at the screen – would you leave me
for that??? Looking for the broker who will share my dreams without being
pushy or demanding. Might even consider options with the right broker. I’ve
only been with banks and they’re just too stuffy for my personality. Are you
the one? Please don’t break my chart! Email only please – spam turns me off.
Signed BATR8R in Birmingham

s

o what does your broker personal ad look like? Have you considered what features and characteristics your broker should have to
meet your needs? Or do you think that all brokers are created equal
and finding the right one is not much more than a crap shoot? In
this chapter, we’ll give you some guidelines on finding a broker who
can help you execute your trading plan. The following top ten list
will help you find the perfect broker mate!

1. Accounts
When we talk about account types and considerations, we recognize
that the rules and choices vary by location and changes in laws. A retirement account in the United States will have different contribution and
277

c14.indd 277

11/2/07 1:43:28 PM

278

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

distribution restrictions than a similar Canada account. Nevertheless,
we want to at least provide some framework for what to look for in your
accounts. We will introduce accounts with a review of the following:
• Brokerage
• Retirement
• Custodial
• Ownership considerations

Brokerage

You need to ensure that the broker you choose can service the types
of accounts that you need for your trading and investing plan. The
most basic brokerage account will allow you to buy and sell stocks,
bonds and mutual funds. Generally, there is a minimum deposit
required which varies between brokers. A typical minimum for many
firms is $5,000, although some require less for the initial deposit.
One of the reasons that brokers require the minimum balance is
to provide a buffer in the event that you buy a stock and it drops in
price. The broker needs a cushion to absorb the losses; otherwise,
the firm is on the hook for the losses.
Adding margin to the account requires a separate application, which
must be completed by all account owners. Margin gives you the flexibility to buy stocks with borrowed funds and is also necessary for short selling. You cannot sell short in an account that does not have the margin
feature. It’s important to note that the margin agreement that you sign
gives the broker the right to sell any of your holdings in the account
in the event that you experience a maintenance call. The maintenance call is issued when you purchase a stock on margin (borrowed
funds) and the stock price drops to a certain level, known as the house
maintenance requirement. In this instance, the firm will require the
deposit of additional funds to increase the buffer. If they cannot reach
you, they have the right to liquidate any of your positions in order to
increase the cash balance of the account. We’ve known traders who
thought they could escape this action by ignoring their broker’s calls.
Retirement

Retirement accounts are special accounts that are available in the
United States and many other countries which provide advantages for

c14.indd 278

11/2/07 1:43:29 PM

Going to the Dance

279

retirement savings. There are many various structures and regulations
regarding these accounts so we won’t discuss account-specific details.
However, most of the retirement accounts have some common characteristics.
Retirement accounts are generally structured to lean toward
conservative strategies and investments. For that reason, short selling is forbidden because the potential for unlimited risk is considered unacceptable for a long-term account. Also, most brokerage
firms restrict the types of option trades that may be executed within
a retirement account. Selling uncovered calls that could place the
seller into a short position is a type of trade that would be prohibited. Some types of retirement accounts restrict the choice of investment products, providing only a limited menu of mutual funds from
which to choose. Others, such as self-directed accounts, allow you
to choose from most available investment products, including individual stocks and options.
Retirement accounts are designed to encourage saving for the
long-term and so they generally provide a tax advantage to the account
owner. Since tax laws can change at any time, our recommendation is
to meet with your broker or tax advisor to determine which specific
retirement account best matches your objectives.
Custodial
