
c15.indd 301

11/2/07 1:44:15 PM

302

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Mommy and Daddy clapping for them in the audience while they’re
singing their song. If these examples are hitting home, then chances
are you are a doer who has sampled some of these dividends yourself.
It truly is the sweetness of life, and as we get older we see that the
examples we set become the standard others will follow.
As parents, we have seen the returns from investing in our kids.
They are mirrors who reflect our beliefs and behavior patterns,
which is why parents should be careful about how they handle their
finances. If we’re not careful, we could pass on a legacy of financial
disaster to our children and grandchildren. What do you want your
legacy to be with your friends and family? What financial legacy will
you leave to improve the world around you? These are the same
questions we’ve asked ourselves, and it’s the reason why we have written this book.

Changing the World One Person at a Time
Of course, we show people how to make money in the market, but
it’s what we do with this money that makes all the difference. If you
think you are a doer now, just imagine what kind of a doer you will
be once you have accumulated significant wealth in your life. If you
were that little boy on the football field who ran a little harder to
help your team win the game then chances are you are the man who
will go the extra mile to help a homeless person. If you were that
middle-school girl who studied to make the grade then there is a
good possibility you are the teacher who stays back in class to help
that struggling student of yours. If you were one of those parents
who took off from work to see your child perform in the school play,
then you may be the one who winds up with grandchildren who are
leaders of the free world. We teach our children about greatness, but
it’s our demonstration of faith that convinces them that they, too,
can go out and make the world a better place. If you have been to
any of our live seminars, you will always hear us talk about the reasons why we do, and it’s all about touching greatness.
We were in Stockholm when this idea hit us the hardest. Before
we enter any new country we make it a point to study the culture in
order to get a better understanding of the people there so we can
have an easier time relating to our audience. One of the things we
were glad to know is that most Swedes do not buy into the loud
infomercials that make promises of millions made overnight, nor do
they appreciate anyone making a scene in public, especially when it

c15.indd 302

11/2/07 1:44:15 PM

The Trade and Beyond

303

comes to money. We have never been the ones who make false promises of instant riches. We were in Sweden to talk about how to create
wealth in the stock market, and we were doing it on a public stage
in the heart of Stockholm. We weren’t sure how we were going to
be received. Right before we went on stage, back in the dressing
room, we made a decision to simply do what we have always done on
stage. We spoke for two days teaching charts, trends, risk management, and options. At the end of the two-day seminar, we stood up
and told everyone in the theater why we do what we do. What happened next was nothing less than amazing.
One by one, people came to us. Annette spoke of the work she
was doing in the business community to help raise money for charity.
Maria, our emcee, introduced us to Nordine, a former professional
hockey player who retired from the sport to sells bricks. His story was
so fascinating that we had to learn more. Nordine was neither a bricklayer nor a construction worker but, in fact, was one of those great
people who believe they are here to make a difference. Yes, he sold
bricks all right, but not in a way you might expect. He would search
for people who lived in small villages that were so poor they didn’t
even have clean water to drink. Then, once he found these people,
he would go back home and sell bricks for them. Every brick he sold
carried with it the name of the person who purchased the brick. Once
he sold enough bricks, he would go back to those villages and build
wells for the people who needed water. Each well cost about $12,000,
but the most amazing thing about these wells is that it brought growth
to the local economies. Once a well was dug, people would travel to
it in order to get drinking water. Once there, they would spend what
little money they had on items found in shops scattered around the
well. As these small economies grew, roads were eventually built, allowing more people to come. Some of the brick buyers would even come
to see the fruit of their generosity, and eventually there would be so
many people coming to these towns that it would attract the tourists.
Imagine for a moment what would happen if we bought one brick
from Nordine with every profitable trade. How many wells could we
build? Would that be important to the people in the village?

What’s Your Story?
One at a time they came, one story after the other. Marie talked
about a nonprofit organization called Students in Free Enterprise
(SIFE), telling stories of students who are aspiring to be the CEOs

c15.indd 303

11/2/07 1:44:16 PM

304

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

of their own companies. With business plans in hand, they’d partake
in competitions all over the world in order to showcase their talents
and ideas. The judges who vote in these competitions are CEOs of
major corporations who listen to the candidates present their business plans and hear their dreams of changing the world for good.
Imagine how many young minds we could sponsor if we all took only
one week of our profits each year and put it toward an organization
like SIFE.
Then there was Charlie—a truly amazing man, 26 years young
with the wisdom of a 90 year old, who spoke about things he was
doing with students to encourage them as young entrepreneurs. For
years, these students have heard from the MBAs and lecturers who
had all of the degrees and accolades, but Charlie was special. When
Charlie spoke, people listened, because they knew he was the real
deal. His wisdom came through in every word, and you could see in
his eyes the passion for the work he was doing. You see, Charlie considered himself underprivileged as a child. With divorced parents
who were unemployed and a father who at one time was homeless,
Charlie refers to himself as “The Ghetto Kid.” He and his cousin
are the only two in his immediate family to have graduated from
high school. Today, he speaks to college students to help guide them
through the initial stages of setting up a business. Keep in mind
that Swedish students are only obligated to go through nine years
of primary and secondary school, unlike U.S. students who are obligated to 12 years before going to college. To look at him, you would
never know that he is a multimillionaire, yet that was the thing that
impressed us most about him. He is a humble man who knows where
he has come from but, interestingly enough, he now thinks of himself as being overprivileged. So he spends his days sharing his knowledge and wealth with people he cares about, including his family,
and gives back to the world in thanksgiving.
It’s overwhelming to see the outpouring of success stories. There
are so many stories that there are times when we are up on stage feeling beside ourselves, it’s that surreal. Through our travels around
the world, we are touching people and people are touching us. If
you are one of those people who have it in your heart to give back to
the world, then welcome to our club. The energy that keeps us going
comes from knowing that in our audience there will be one person
who will achieve a level of success that will earn him or her a place
in history. Is that person you? Are you the person who is going to go

c15.indd 304

11/2/07 1:44:16 PM

The Trade and Beyond

305

out in the world with the wealth you have created for yourself and
make a difference?
If you understand what we have written in this book with regard
to profiting in the markets, then you are now armed with a tool that
can change the world. It all starts with one person, one story, and
one trade. So, as you can see, the Market Guys represent a lot more
than showing people how to trade the markets. There is a much
bigger picture here. If you want to be a member of the most amazing network in the world, you must first have faith that the plan will
work and be willing to act on that plan. Without the action plan,
everything just sits there. Everyone swims in a sea of ideas and opportunities but, without action, you never gain ground. One of the most
frustrating experiences of all is when you start wondering, “what if.”
What if I had just acted on that idea years ago and followed through
on it? What if I had listened to myself and made that trade? What if
that trade allowed me to give back to those who have given to me?

Chatter Box—AJ
I would much rather regret something I have done than to regret
something I have not done.

Take Action
After you have followed the four points that we spoke about in the
previous chapters, you will see that it brings you to the last point,
which is to take action. This is the final step in the “how-to” category,
and it’s where we get to the place were we are entering the trade.
Many people get stuck on this part because it’s the point in time
where they are actually taking the risk and not just thinking about
it. This is also the point where the fear emotion will appear. If this
is happening to you, then rest assured—you are in good company.
This is why we say, over and over again, expect to lose money from
time to time, but make sure you are protecting yourself when a stock
moves against you. If you are the person who is going to change the
world with your wealth, then you have a lot more riding on the line
than the person who is just looking to make a profit in the market.

c15.indd 305

11/2/07 1:44:16 PM

306

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

We are now holding you accountable for your losses. If you do not
protect your profits, then how are you going to be able to build that
orphanage? If you allow your losses to run, how are you going to
help Nordine build those wells? If you are calculated in your strategies, then this step-by-step plan of action will increase your probability of profiting, and you are on your way to success. Remember,
enter the trade, and then protect with a stop loss. This is your plan
for taking action.
He who knows not and knows not that he knows not is a fool.
Avoid him.
He who knows not and knows that he knows not is a student.
Teach him.
He who knows and knows not that he knows is asleep.
Awaken him.
He who knows and knows that he knows is wise.
Follow him.
(Anonymous proverb)

May God bless you,
Rick and AJ
The Market Guys

c15.indd 306

11/2/07 1:44:17 PM

Glossary

ask price

The price at which a market maker is willing to sell a stock.

assignment A notice that is received by an option writer stating that the
option they have sold has been exercised by the purchaser or owner of
the option.
at-the-market Describes the action of one who enters an order to buy or sell
a stock immediately at the best available current price. A market order
guarantees execution but not a price, so be wary of using “market orders”
in stocks with low average volume or liquidity. If the bid/ask spread is
wide, you may wind up paying a lot more for that stock or option than
you originally anticipated.
at-the-money When an option has a strike price that equals the market
price of the underlying security. Example: If IBM were trading $95 per
share, the $95 call and put would be at-the-money.
bid and ask (also known as the National Best Bid and Offer, or NBBO) The
highest and lowest offers for a security in all exchanges and all market
makers.
bid price

The price at which a market maker is willing to buy a stock.

breakout A price move over an established resistance level or below an
established support level that is generally supported by an increase in
volume.
call option Gives the owner the right, not the obligation, to buy stock at a
specific price over a given period of time.
cash-secured put selling The selling of a put option using cash in the
account to cover the purchase of the stock should the put seller be
assigned a long position. Selling a put obligates the seller to buy stock
from the buyer of the put option. The owner of the put option would
exercise the put, which requires the seller of the put to buy stock with
the cash that has been held aside in the account for this purpose.

307

bgloss.indd 307

11/2/07 1:44:42 PM

308

Glossary

cost averaging down A popular strategy based on a corrupt form of dollar
cost averaging. This is where traders buy more of a stock that is trending down in order to lower the cost basis of a losing position.
derivative In finance, a security whose price is dependent on or derived
from one or more underlying assets. The derivative itself is merely a
contract between two or more parties. Its value is determined by fluctuations in the underlying asset. The most common underlying assets
include stocks, bonds, commodities, currencies, interest rates, and market indexes. Most derivatives are characterized by high leverage.
dollar cost averaging This is where investors deposit small amounts of
money each month into an account that has been set up to automatically purchase shares in a mutual fund equal to the amount deposited.
The goal is to accumulate shares in a retirement portfolio without having to suffer the pain of having to endure extreme price swings brought
on by market volatility.
downtrend A time when successive drops in a security price close at levels
lower than those achieved in previous moves and when highs occur at
levels lower than previous highs.
exchange-traded fund (ET F) A basket of securities that is designed to
generally track an index—broad stock or bond market, stock industry
sector, or international stock—yet trades like a single stock.
expiration date The day in which the option contract expires. Technically,
most option contracts expire on the third Saturday of the expiration
month, but what most traders are focused on is the third Friday of the
expiration month, with that being the last day the option contracts can
be traded.
Expiration Friday The third Friday of the month, representing the last
trading day for the options in that calendar month. Example: Options
that carry the January expiration date will be traded up until the close
of the market on the third Friday of the month in January.
in-the-money For a call option, it’s when the option’s strike price is below
the market price of the underlying security. For a put option, it’s when the
option’s strike price is above the market price of the underlying stock.
In other words, it’s when an option has intrinsic value.
intrinsic value For call options, this is the difference between the underlying stock’s price and the strike price of the option. For put options,
it’s the difference between the strike price and the underlying stock’s
price. Keep in mind that if the difference is negative, the option has no

bgloss.indd 308

11/2/07 1:44:43 PM

Glossary

309

intrinsic value. Example: If IBM is trading at $95 and you are looking
at a call with a strike price of $90, the call will have intrinsic value equal
to $5. Compare that to a call with a strike price of $100; the $100 call
would have no intrinsic value.
Long-term equity anticipation securities (L E A P S) Publicly traded options
contracts with expiration dates that are longer than one year. Structurally, LEAPS are no different than short-term options, but the later
expiration dates offer the opportunity for long-term investors or traders to gain exposure to prolonged price changes without needing to
use a combination of shorter-term option contracts. The premiums for
LEAPS are higher than for standard options in the same stock because
the increased expiration date gives the underlying asset more time to
make a substantial move and for the investor to make a healthy profit.
option chain A list of option quotes highlighting information such as
expiration month, strike prices, trading volume, and so on. The layout
is similar to what you might see in a typical spreadsheet.
out-of-the-money For a call, it’s when an option’s strike price is higher
than the market price of the underlying security. For a put, it’s when
the option strike price is below the market price of the underlying
security.
pending order file The place where limit buy and sell orders are held
until they are due for a fill. Market makers are very much aware of their
pending order file and many times will trade against the order flow
brought on by account holders of the broker they trade for.
premium This is the total cost of the option contract, which is nothing
more than the sum of the option’s intrinsic value and time value. It’s
important to know that volatility also affects the premium of an option.
Higher-volatility stocks have a tendency to trade with higher option premiums because there is a great chance that these option contracts can
increase in value over a given period of time. This volatility premium is
reflected in the time premium and has no effect on intrinsic value.
profit taking The result of short-term traders placing sell orders in a stock
to realize a profit for the trader. This wave of selling results in the stock’s
moving to lower price levels.
put options Gives the owner the right, not the obligation, to sell stock at a
specific price over a given period of time.
resistance The price level at which the selling pressure is strong enough to
prevent the stock from rising further. You can think of this as a ceiling

bgloss.indd 309

11/2/07 1:44:43 PM

310

Glossary

where the sellers have convinced the buyers that they are outnumbered,
and the buyers move to the sidelines. Like support, this is not an exact
price level, and it’s best to think of resistance as a price area where supply in the stock has overcome the demand.
short covering The act of purchasing securities in order to close an open
short position. This is done by buying the same type and number of
securities that were sold short. Most often, traders cover their shorts
whenever they speculate that the securities will rise. In order to make
a profit, a short seller must cover the shorts by purchasing the security
below the original selling price.
short selling or “shorting” A way to profit from the decline in price of a
security, such as stock or a bond. To profit from the stock price going
down, a short seller can borrow a security and sell it, expecting that it
will decrease in value so that they can buy it back at a lower price and
keep the difference. Short sellers assume that they will be able to buy
the stock at a lower amount than the price at which they sold short. The
opposite of going long.
short squeeze A situation in which a lack of supply and an excess demand
for a traded stock forces the price upward. This, in turn, forces short
sellers into a position where they want out. As short sellers liquidate
and buy to cover their positions, the demand increases in the stock and
the price rally intensifies.
sideways trend A period of time when prices lay flat or move within a
relatively tight range. Also known as a trading range or consolidation
pattern, buyers and sellers establish boundaries that represent support
and resistance, yet supply and demand are balanced. Investors would
see this as a trend less stock.
simple moving average (SM A) The unweighted mean of the previous n
data points. For example, a 10-day simple moving average of closing
price is the mean of the previous 10 days’ closing prices.
stepping up A term used to describe the actions of a person who is moving
up his or her limit bid on a buy order. This is a common practice demonstrated by the general public and one that market makers count on
after they have taken a long position in their own trading accounts.
strike price or exercise price The stated price per share, for which underlying stock may be purchased (for a call) or sold (for a put) by the option
holder upon exercise of the option contract. When you exercise your

bgloss.indd 310

11/2/07 1:44:43 PM

Glossary

311

option, this is the value that you get the shares for. Option strike prices
are usually in increments of $2.50 or $5.00.
support Support is the level at which demand for the stock is strong
enough to keep the stock from dropping any further. Support levels
are usually identified somewhere below where the stock is actually trading and, although it is not an exact price point, we look at support as a
general area.
time value or time premium The portion of the option premium that is
attributable to the amount of time remaining until the expiration of
the option contract. Basically, time value is the value the option has in
addition to its intrinsic value.
trough

A low point in a business cycle or on a statistical graph.

