
8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 84

• 84 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

This became a Livermore trademark: When good luck came his
way—an unpredictable windfall—he would take it and run, not
wait for more good luck. This, of course, was especially true with
big illiquid positions. They could sometimes be hard to sell without driving the market down.
Livermore claimed he had nothing to do with the newspaper
article. Whatever the case, he seized the opportunity when it presented itself.
The next day he met a friend, one of the biggest players in the
cotton market, who stopped him in the street. “I was waiting for
you to try and market that big line of cotton you had. It would
have been a hard sell. That was one of the neatest moves I ever saw,
J.L. Congratulations.”
“I had nothing to do with that story. Nothing at all,” Livermore
said.
“I don’t know how you got the paper to print it. All I can say is
I tip my hat to you. I figured that you were manipulating the London market, but compounding it with the newspaper article—
now that was a very smart play.”
“I told you, I . . .”
“J.L., I would never expect you to admit it. Now, would I?” He
winked, “It would be dumb to admit it to me, and you’re not
dumb, are you?”
He left Livermore standing on the street as he strolled off.
Livermore’s reputation continued to grow—some of it true,
some of it embellished as it bounced along from lips to ears, to lips,
to other ears, all up and down Wall Street. Livermore just shook
his head, smiled to himself, and moved on in secrecy and silence.
He felt good, proud of his accomplishments. He had no inkling
that disaster lay waiting just around the corner, a disaster of monumental proportions.

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 85

*

chapter five

*

The Cotton King

The only time I really ever lost money was when I broke my
own rules.
Jesse Livermore, to his son

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 86

• 86 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

JESSE LIVERMORE WAS NOW RICH AND SUCCESSFUL, ABLE

to indulge his every passion. And Livermore loved beautiful
women. The newspapers went so far as to claim he had fallen for
the famous Lillian Russell, girlfriend of “Diamond Jim” Brady.
Russell was known as the “American Beauty.” A woman of
classic looks, she was born in 1861 in Clinton, Iowa. Her real
name was Helen Louise Leonard. She moved with her family to
New York after the Civil War. She was taking singing lessons
when Tony Pastor heard her and signed her up to appear at his
casino. She later appeared with the McCaull Opera Company at
Weber and Field’s Music Hall, before forming her own company.
She was the toast of New York at the turn of the century. She had
a great love for jewelry and an outgoing, dazzling personality. It
was no surprise when she fell for Diamond Jim.
Diamond Jim was as flamboyant and colorful as Russell. He
started as a baggage handler on the railroads, then became a salesman, and finally a supplier of equipment to every railroad in the
United States. The first line of equipment he sold, the equipment
that made his first fortune, was barbed wire. A man of giant
appetites, some people believed he had eaten himself to death
when he died in 1917. He adorned his body with diamonds: stick
pins, cufflinks, and rings. Diamonds were even sewn into his pants,
as buttons to hold up his substantial suspenders. And he loved to
give away diamonds, especially to the American Beauty, Russell.
Diamond Jim was a legend as a gourmand as well, reported to
have gone to incredible extremes to satisfy his appetites for pleasure. He supposedly sent a spy to the Cafe Marguery in Paris to
steal the recipe for its famous sole de Marguery. When his successful spy returned to New York, Brady gave a dinner for Victor Herbert, the composer, and Marshall Field, the department store king,
to introduce them to the dish. While they were eating, Diamond

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 87

THE COTTON KING

• 87 •

Jim exclaimed, “Put this sauce on a goddamn Turkish towel and
you could eat it!”
Livermore was said to have started courting Russell in 1907, just
after he made his first million in the panic. He supposedly wined
her and dined her all over New York and stole her away from
Diamond Jim. The rumors became official when he was reported
to have cruised down to Palm Beach with her aboard the Anita
Venetian.
But it was not Livermore who was courting Russell—it was his
good friend Alexander P. Moore, who was married at the time.
Moore would later become ambassador to Spain, and he would
remain a lifelong friend of Livermore’s. Rich and privileged from
birth, Moore admired and respected Livermore, the self-made
trader.
Livermore smiled to himself when he read about his affair in the
Police Gazette. The Gazette accused him of being the reason behind
the breakup of the most famous couple in New York. Livermore
loved his little secrets. He, Moore, and Russell knew what was
really going on, and that was enough.
Livermore had it all. He was in his 30s and was a legend on Wall
Street. J. P. Morgan himself had even once asked him to stop selling short, stop driving the market down. Heady stuff for a young,
self-made trader who had had no formal education or bloodline to
provide him with social standing or a stake to get established.
He carried on in Palm Beach at the Breakers Hotel in the company of Russell and his elegant friend Moore. He had $3 million
in the bank. Life was beautiful. What could go wrong?
The three of them enjoyed a marvelous meal at the Breakers and
took two pedicabs, the famous white wicker three-wheeled Palm
Beach cabs pedaled by well-dressed black drivers, to Bradley’s
Beach Club for a little gambling. Russell and Moore headed

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 88

• 88 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

straight for the roulette wheel, and Livermore sat down for some
chemin de fer. After a while he left the table and joined Edward
Bradley, the owner, for a drink in the bar.
Percy Thomas, the Cotton King, was also in the bar, sitting by
himself at another table. “Shame about the Cotton King,” Livermore said.
“Yes. He was one of our best customers.” Bradley added, “I like
him and we have an understanding that he doesn’t gamble until he
gets back on his feet. But he’s always welcome for dinner and
drinks.”
The conversation drifted on to other things. Bradley finished his
drink of soda water—the only thing he ever drank—and left the
table. Thomas came over to Livermore and asked, “May I join you,
Mr. Livermore?”
“Sure, call me J.L.,” Livermore answered, pointing to an empty
chair.
Thomas was smooth, cultured, erudite, and magnetic. He was a
powerful force of nature, able to converse on any subject. They
talked of music. Livermore loved classical music and light opera. It
was one of the reasons he liked Russell so much. He and Moore
attended many of her performances.
Thomas finally came out with the reason for the visit. “J.L., I
have something on my mind, and I would like to come to the
point.”
“By all means,” Livermore said.
“Let’s be partners in the cotton market.”
“I’m flattered. If I was going to be partners with anyone it
would probably be you. But I’m sure you know I play a lone hand.
I always have and I always will. I know you are considered a world
expert on the cotton market, and I have admired your plays in the
market for a long time. But I play alone. It’s one of my rules.”

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 89

THE COTTON KING

• 89 •

“Listen, young man, I have never seen a trader like you. How
you got out of the trap that Cutten set for you in that corn market
corner was amazing. Cutten was sure he had you. And how you
knew the boys in Chicago would go for that play in oats that
looked like the Armours were buyers? A master play, masterful!”
“It was a stroke of luck and good timing, that’s all.”
“A stroke of inspiration is more like it, and planting that article
in the World—Livermore corners the cotton market. Sheer brilliance my boy, sheer brilliance.”
“I didn’t plant that article. I was as surprised as anybody else
was. That’s why I like to play alone. I don’t like explaining my
moves to anyone, and I don’t take the time to complain if I’m
wrong. I simply don’t want to have anyone with me to whom I
have to explain my actions.”
“I understand and respect what you’re saying, J.L.” He paused.
“You know I got wiped out in March cotton, kicked right in the
ass, so I’m coming to you at a point of weakness in my life.”
“I have been down to rock bottom several times myself and
always risen again. You will too.” Livermore had brought along his
checkbook. He reached in his pocket and took it out, along with
a pen. “I would consider it an honor to help you out financially.
Just name the amount.”
“No sir, I thank you, but that’s not my aim. I lost because I don’t
have your trading savvy, your feel for the market, your timing. And
that is what I want, and why I want you to be my partner.”
“My position remains steadfast. I trade alone.”
There was a long pause as the Cotton King studied the young
Jesse Livermore in his black silk tuxedo. He smiled at the young
man. “No reason we can’t be friends, is there?”
“None at all. In fact, let’s have dinner tomorrow at the Breakers. I’ll introduce you to my friends.”

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 90

• 90 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

They had dinner the next night. They enjoyed each other’s
company at the Breakers bar, on the beach, and in the ballroom listening to the orchestra. Eventually they became inseparable
friends. The Cotton King and the Boy Plunger made quite a pair.
With the addition of Russell and Moore to the mix, the whispers
would cross the room like a soft tropical breeze whenever they
entered.
Thomas took special care to tutor Livermore on the cotton
markets—the entire history of cotton in America, including the
origin of worldwide demand for cotton and where the cotton
would come from to fill that ever-increasing demand. He
informed Livermore of the newly planted Egyptian cotton fields
and considered whether they would work and what effect they
would have on the overall world trade. It was a complete and thorough advanced university-level education in cotton, taught by the
smartest, most acclaimed expert in the field.
Livermore listened, his brilliant mind absorbing every detail, but
there was a problem. He did not always agree with his learned
friend because he approached the subject differently. He looked
only at market action—the facts of the marketplace—not the fundamentals of the cotton industry. He did not care why things happened in the market, he cared only what happened every day
when the market opened. He was interested only in what the tape
told him—the current facts, the price.
Livermore also believed that the market did not operate on current information—it already knew the present and was operating
on the future, on factors unknown at the time even to the experts.
The market was blending the future into the present. And he did
not believe the market operated on a fundamentally reasonable
basis. He believed it operated most often on an emotional basis;
reason did not prevail.

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 91

THE COTTON KING

• 91 •

Livermore wrestled with a simple thought: The Cotton King
went broke. How could he go broke if he knew so much? Livermore also had gone broke; the difference was that he did not think
he knew everything. He observed that the market always did what
it wanted to do, not what it was expected to do. And the market
did it with no immediate explanations. But Livermore still listened
attentively, hoping he would learn something.
Livermore had always operated by himself in secrecy and
silence. He had developed rules of trading that had cost him dearly,
the Livermore laws for market trading. But no person is a robot,
always able to control all emotions, innermost drives, and fears and
hopes.
Despite his reservations, it was not long before Livermore was
under the Cotton King’s spell. Thomas believed everything that he
said, and he spoke with passion about his favorite subjects. He had
convinced Livermore of his honesty and sincerity when he refused
Livermore’s offer of money to get back on his feet.
The facts he gave about the cotton market were indisputable,
and they were logical. Livermore, on the other hand, had little
logic to offer on the behavior of the commodity markets. Livermore was a speculator who had been doing his job for 16 years. He
did not know cotton any better than he knew steel, coal, corn,
oats, wheat, or any other commodity. But he knew how the market acted and reacted.
When Livermore checked some of the facts that Thomas
offered against actual market movements, he found that the King
often was correct in his predictions. He began to think: “Maybe
there’s something I’m missing in my trading. Maybe there is a better way to analyze the movements of the markets.”
In addition, Thomas had proprietary ways of obtaining information. He had thousands of spies throughout the South who

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 92

• 92 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

reported to him on crop conditions. These facts were shown to
Livermore. The conclusions seemed obvious: It was clear which
way to trade the futures market, up or down, based on this secret
information associated with expected supply and demand. Every
good lawyer, philosopher, salesperson, or liar knows that the way
to convince someone is to get them to accept the basic facts, the
premises—then they will have no choice but to agree with the undeniable conclusions. Once Livermore accepted the truth of the
secret facts Thomas fed him from his secret reports, he had to
believe in the same conclusions as Thomas.
This episode became one of the biggest lessons in Livermore’s
life. It explains why he later would speak to no one, ever, about
what he was doing, and why he would ask people to keep their
trades and tips to themselves.
During this time he was also very friendly with Bernard
Baruch, who had experienced something similar. Baruch commented, “If you know something about the stock I’m trading in,
something really, really important, please keep it to yourself. Don’t
tell me.” He added this quote to his boys’ market lessons.
When Livermore first met with Thomas, he was bearish on cotton and he had a small short position. After talking to Thomas for
about a month, he reversed himself. Of course, Livermore often
reversed himself on his stock positions, using deductive reasoning:
“If I’m wrong in thinking a stock is going up and long that stock,
well then, I must be right if I go short because history has taught
me that if it doesn’t go up it will most probably go down.”
He plunged. He went for a line of 60,000 bales. Since he had
broken one of his primary rules about taking tips, playing another
person’s game, he then proceeded to break a few more.
Cotton moved against him, so, against his own rules, he bought
more, dollar averaging down, instead of selling out and perhaps
reversing his position. He also had a heavy line of wheat in which

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 93

THE COTTON KING

• 93 •

he had a profit. He continued to buy cotton until he had accumulated 150,000 bales.
Then he broke yet another rule. He was overextended on his
margin, so he sold the profitable wheat position and kept the losing cotton position. Always sell the loser, keep the winner; he
knew the rule, but he did not act on it. As soon as he sold the position, wheat went up 20 cents—a potential profit of $8 million and
a fact that upset his judgment even more. With his judgment
crumbling, his confidence soon followed. His erratic behavior
increased.
He bought even more cotton, thinking it was at the bottom, but
it was not. He had 440,000 bales in his account when the dawn
broke and he saw what a fool he was. He sold out his position. He
had lost his millions. He was left with less than $300,000 out of $3
million, a staggering loss of $2.7 million.
He had been seduced by the Cotton King and his logic, and he
had paid the price.
Livermore understood that Thomas did not benefit from this
personally. His magnetic personality was so persuasive that he had
mentally overpowered Livermore when he explained his interpretation of the cotton market. Thomas had been the catalyst for Jesse
Livermore’s ruin this time.
But Livermore held no animosity for Thomas. He considered it
one more lesson learned. He had engaged in another form of taking tips, a lesson apparently not learned well enough the first time.
Thomas had presented what Livermore later thought of as slick
tips, because they were so well thought out, well presented, and
well intentioned; and Thomas did not personally benefit from his
information—very, very, seductive. Of course, the price tag was
basically $3 million a lesson.
Livermore had been a millionaire for less than a year. He was
forced to sell the Anita Venetian and the Riverside Drive apartment,

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 94

• 94 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

along with its beautiful furnishings. Why did he follow the lead of
Thomas, whom everyone knew had been busted in March cotton?
Was Livermore just a flash in the pan, like so many other Wall
Street boy wonders who made a killing and then got killed themselves? People who patrolled the canyons of Wall Street wondered
about the Boy Plunger: “What the hell happened to the Great
Trader?”
Livermore now needed money to rebuild his former position,
and he needed it fast. The emotions he felt over this loss caused him
to make another mistake, break another rule. Illogically, he wanted
the market to pay him back for his losses. So he went back into the
market with a vengeance, but his trading ability was shot. He was
an emotional wreck. Instead of returning to the market, he should
have gone away to get his emotional balance back. But convinced
he was the great trader everybody thought he was, he plunged back
into the market, losing the last of his stake. He then operated on
credit and went into debt to the people who backed him.
He finally tallied it up, months later. He owed his brokers and
creditors well over $1 million. He had lost his $3 million and
another million to boot. “Some operator,” he thought to himself.
“Some bad operator.”
It was an emotionally crippled, despondent Livermore who
stood on the track waiting for the train to Chicago. He was again
down to rock bottom. He planned to go to Chicago in search of
bucket shops, or to see if he could perhaps make a living from the
grain pits. He was confused and disgusted with himself. The only
thing he could be sure of was that he had to get out of New York
City, and he did.
In Chicago, Livermore suffered a complete emotional breakdown, a deep depression. He studied his book of trades and fell
deeper and deeper into the black hole. His last trades after the cotton fiasco were erratic, almost like those of some other trader. He

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 95

THE COTTON KING

• 95 •

was trading like a wild gambler, not even as well as he had as a
youth. His confidence was gone; he could not recover his equilibrium. Only a year before he could easily trade a line of 100,000
shares or more at his brokerage firm, $10 million of equities. He
would be lucky to deal in hundreds of shares now. He had been
lured away from his own trading methods, influenced by other
traders, and become so upset by his battering losses that his judgment was now just no good. Worst of all, his cocky confidence was
gone, the confidence in himself that he needed to survive. He did
not have the old attitude: “I made money before, and I shall make
it again.”
After several months of despair, Livermore finally summoned up
the courage to analyze his behavior and try to isolate what he had
done wrong. He finally had to confront the human side of his personality, his emotions and his feelings, which he had denied all his
life. He knew the technical side of the market, but he did not
know his emotions. Why had he thrown his market principles, his
trading theories, his hard-earned laws to the wind? His wild
behavior had crushed him financially and spiritually. Why had he
done it?
He finally realized it was his vanity, his ego. That day when he
had held the fate of the market in his hands, when the great J. P.
Morgan had asked him to stop shorting the market, had been too
much for him. This outstanding success, making more than $1
million in one day, had shaken him to his foundations. It was not
that he could not deal with failure—he had been dealing with failure all his life—what he could not deal with was success.
He had now learned that success is just as hard to deal with as
failure. Both can ruin a person. In Chicago he acquired a small
stake, borrowed from a friendly broker who knew Livermore’s
power to generate commissions and wealth.
His troubles were not over.

8467_Smitten_05_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 96

• 96 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Years later, Livermore would recount this story to Ed Bradley, late
one night in the bar at the Beach Club after Bradley asked him
what was the worst experience he had ever had in his early days on
Wall Street: he later repeated this to his son Paul.
“A short time after I arrived in Chicago, maybe three months, I
got a telegram to come back to New York. It was from a friend of
mine who I will call Fred, the office manager of a large brokerage
firm. I called Fred and was told, ‘J.L., it will be worth your while
to come to New York. There is someone here who wants to talk
to you.’
“I caught the next train back to New York and had the most
incredible experience of my life. One that I would regret all my
life. When I arrived in the brokerage office in New York I was
immediately taken by Fred to meet the owner, a prosperous and
well-known man who I will call Charles.
“After the introductions, Fred excused himself. The owner of
the firm got right down to business. ‘Livermore, I’m very sorry to
hear of the trouble you suffered in cotton. I know you listened to
the Cotton King and he got you off your game. Percy means well.
He could sell ice cubes to Eskimos. He’s convincing. He can’t help
himself. He would have been a great politician. You are not the
first or the only one who has followed the Cotton King down the
slide. I know your trading history. I know about the panic of 1907
and how you handled yourself when Morgan sent his message to
you. It was all over the Street. Well, to make a long story short I’m
willing to back you.’ He reached in his pocket and pulled out his
checkbook and wrote a check for twenty-five thousand dollars.
‘Here, take this. It will get you started.’
“I looked at the check and then back at the man who had
handed it to me and asked, ‘What’s the catch?’
“ ‘The catch is I want you to do all your trading here, nowhere
else,’ he said.
