
Trends, 45
Triple zero levels, 119
24-hour Market, 5–6
Two-day low method, 106
U.K. housing starts, 240
Understanding drawdown, 212–13
Understanding performance, 212
Unemployment, 271
Unique risks of Euro (EUR), 229–30
United Kingdom, 33
Euro adoption arguments, 235
five economic tests for the Euro,
234–5
politicians’ impact on Euro, 238–9
trading volumes of, 120
United Kingdom, important economic
indicators for:
British Pound (GBP), 239–41
employment situation, 239–40
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 240
industrial production (IP), 240
Purchasing Managers Index (PMI),
240
retail price index (RPI), 240
U.K. housing starts, 240
United Kingdom joins Exchange Rate
Mechanism, 27–8
United States:
consumer price index (CPI), 222
important economic indicators for,
222–4
Institute for Supply Management
(ISM) (Formerly NAPM), 223
tech bubble in, 41
trading volumes of, 120
U.S Dollar Index, 221
U.S. dollar strength, 216
U.S. Dollar (USD):
broad economic overview, 215–17
currency deal usage, 219
Dollar Index, 221
and emerging markets, 220
important characteristics of, 219–22
interest rate differentials, 220–221
leading export markets, 217

P1: JYS
ind
JWBK299-Lein

September 15, 2008

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

290
U.S. Dollar (USD) (cont.)
leading import markets, 217
market-moving indicators for,
61–2
monetary and fiscal policy makersThe Federal Reserve, 217–18
relationship with gold, 219
as safe haven, 219
stock and bond market impacts,
221–2
Treasuries and FX bonds, 221
U.S. Federal Reserve (FED), 10
U.S. non-farm payroll releases,
60
U.S. session (New York),
70–71
U.S. Treasury, 218
U.S. War in Iraq, 179–80

INDEX

U.S.-Asian overlap, 74
U.S.-European overlap, 74
Value of multiple time frame analysis,
113, 115
Variant perception, 43
Volatility tracking, 194–5
Volcker, Paul, 24
Waiting for real deal, 120–124
about, 120–121
examples of, 121–4
strategy rules, 121–4
Wars, 179–80
Weekend positions, 209–10
World Bank, 22
Yen example, 56–7

SECOND EDITION

(continued from front flap)

KATHY LIEN is the Director of
Currency Research at Global Forex
Trading, Division of Global Futures
& Forex, Ltd. She is responsible for
providing research and analysis, including technical and fundamental
research reports, market commentaries, and trading strategies. Prior
to joining GFT, Lien was the chief strategist of DailyFX.
com and an associate at JPMorgan Chase, where
she worked in cross-markets and foreign exchange
trading. She has vast experience within the interbank
market using both technical and fundamental analysis
to trade FX spot and options. She also has experience
trading a number of products outside of FX, including interest rate derivatives, bonds, equities, and futures. Lien has written for Active Trader, Futures, and
SFO magazines and is frequently quoted on CNBC,
Bloomberg, Fox Business, and Reuters. She is also
the author of the first edition of Day Trading the Currency Market as well as Millionaire Traders, both of
which are published by Wiley.
Jacket Design: Loretta Leiva
Jacket Photograph: © Getty Images

LIEN

Praise for the First Edition
“I thought this was one of the best books that I had read on FX. The book should
be required reading not only for traders new to the foreign exchange markets,
but also for seasoned professionals. I’ll definitely be keeping it on my desk for
reference. The book is very readable and very educational. In fact, I wish that
Kathy’s book had been around when I had first started out in FX. It would have
saved me from a lot of heartache from reading duller books, and would have
saved me a lot of time from having to learn things the hard way. I look forward to
reading other books from her in the future.”
—Farooq Muzammal, Head of Foreign Exchange, MAREX Capital
“Kathy’s book is an indispensable tool for Forex traders, whether you are a professional or novice. It not only lays the groundwork for an in-depth understanding
of Forex trading, it also contains numerous fundamental and technical strategies
. . . . I suspect that many traders will be keeping Kathy’s book within arm’s reach
for many years to come.”
—Eddie Kwong, Executive VP/Editor in Chief, Tradingmarkets.com
“In Day Trading the Currency Market, Kathy Lien provides traders with unique,
thoughtful, and profitable insight on trading this exciting market. This book
should be required reading for all traders, whether they are novices to Forex or
experienced professionals.”
—Cory Janssen, cofounder, Investopedia.com
“There are aspects to trading currencies that are different from trading equities,
options, or futures. In this book, Kathy Lien provides deep insight into all the
mechanisms that take place in the currency markets. Any currency trader will
gain more confidence in their trading after reading this book.”
—Jayanthi Gopalakrishnan, Editor,
Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities
“Kathy has done a brilliant job with this book. She speaks directly to traders
and gives them guidance to improve their performance as Forex traders. I took
some notes and ideas from the book myself that are going to be very useful for
my business.”
—Francesc Riverola, CEO and founder, FXstreet.com

DAY TRADING & SWING TRADING the CURRENCY MARKET

Filled with proven trading strategies as well as detailed
statistical analysis, the Second Edition of Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market will help
you achieve unparalleled success in the most actively
traded market in the world.

DAY TRADING & SWING TRADING the CURRENCY MARKET

Technical and Fundamental Strategies to Profit from Market Moves

goes far beyond what other currency trading books
cover. It delves into consistently critical questions such
as “What Are the Most Market-Moving Indicators for the
U.S. Dollar” and “What Are Currency Correlations and
How to Use Them,” while touching on topics like “How
to Trade like a Hedge Fund Manager” and “The Impact
of Seasonality in the Currency Market” that could give
you a distinct edge in this competitive arena.

$70.00 USA/$77.00 CAN

SE C O ND EDI T I O N

;8PKI8;@E>
JN@E>KI8;@E>
k_\:LII<E:P
D8IB<K

:fdgc\k\cp
I\m`j\[
Lg[Xk\[

K\Z_e`ZXcXe[=le[Xd\ekXcJkiXk\^`\j
kfGif]`k]ifdDXib\kDfm\j

B8K?PC@<E

Director of Currency Research at GFT

EAN: 9780470377369

ISBN 978-0-470-37736-9

I

n only a few short years, the currency/foreign exchange (FX) market has grown significantly. With
institutions and individuals driving daily average
volume past the $3 trillion mark, there are many profitable opportunities available in this arena—but only if
you understand how to operate within it.
That’s why Kathy Lien—Director of Currency Research for one of the most popular Forex providers in
the world—has created Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market, Second Edition. Written for
both the experienced and aspiring trader, this updated
guide outlines the essential elements of the FX market
and reveals the latest trends, data, and strategies that
all traders, particularly day and swing traders, need to
be aware of in order to excel in this fast-moving field.
After an engaging introduction to how the foreign exchange market has evolved over the last few years and
a look at some of its historical milestones, this book
quickly moves on to address the innovative trading
insights that will enhance your profitability within
today’s FX market. Page by page, you’ll become
familiar with:

• New technical trading strategies, which include how
to trade news, effectively time market turns, and
capture new shifts in momentum
• Proven fundamental trading strategies, which involve
trading off commodity prices, fixed income instruments, and option volatilities; as well as interventionbased trades and macro event-driven trades
• The unique characteristics of each major currency
pair—from when they are most active to what drives
their price action
• Trading through different market conditions, by first
profiling a trading environment and then applying
specific indicators for that environment
• And much more
Both informative and accessible, the Second Edition of
Day Trading and Swing Trading the Currency Market
(continued on back flap)

