
165

166

Fine-Tuning Your Strategy

ETFs that have a low ATR, but only because they are also trading at a low price.
Therefore, basing sizing positions on ATR alone is not sufﬁcient.
If you take the ATR position-sizing model a step further by also factoring in the
price of the ETF, you will not only know how volatile an ETF is, but how volatile it
is compared to its price. You can then use this information to know how much proﬁt
potential any ETF is likely to yield, relative to the amount of capital required. Those
ETFs with a higher ratio are going to automatically make better use of your buying
power than those with a low ratio. The following is the position-sizing formula:
Average closing price of last 10 days ÷ 50-day ATR = Size Ratio
Before I explain the above formula further, you ﬁrst need to understand why I use
a 10-day average close instead of just the last closing price.
Instead of comparing the ATR of an ETF to its market price on just a single day,
I look at the average closing price of the past 10 days, which helps smooth out any
price anomaly that may have arisen from a large gap on a particular day. The average
closing price of the past 10 days is exactly the same value as the current 10-day simple
MA of an ETF.
As for the ATR portion of the equation, notice that I calculate the average true
range over a period of 50 days. Although many technical analysts might use a shorter
period, your goal is once again to smooth out any irregularities in the volatility that
could occur as a result of a news event on any given day. ATR is an indicator that is
easily calculated by most direct access trading platforms.
Here is an actual example of this formula in use. On July 23, 2007, the
Semiconductor HOLDR (SMH) closed at a price of $38.32. Its average closing price
in the preceding 10 days (10-day MA) was $38.14. Its 50-day ATR was 0.78. Using
the position-sizing formula, you get the following result:
$38.14 ÷ 0.78 = 48.9
The result of 48.9 is typical, as the formula usually yields a number between 30
and 100. The lower the number, the more volatile the ETF will be in relation to its
price. The higher the number, the less volatile it is in relation to its price. If several
ETF families within the same sector index have similar chart patterns, you would opt
for the one with the lowest Size Ratio, since a greater amount of potential proﬁts can
be achieved with the same amount of buying power.
Because a lower number translates to more volatility in relation to price, you
must also control risk by adjusting your share size based on the volatility of each ETF.
While you study the guidelines below, you may want to tweak them to meet your
personal risk comfort level. If one of your main priorities is steady monthly returns
with minimal monthly drawdowns in the losing months, you may want to err on the
conservative side.
If the Size Ratio falls in the range of 50 to 75, you make no special adjustments
for share size. If, for example, your normal capital exposure per trade is set at 5 percent

Tailoring Your Approach

167

of total capital (which is conservative), you can buy or sell short the appropriate number of shares to match that capital exposure. With a $100,000 trading account, that
would translate to a $5,000 ETF position. ETFs such as the S&P 500 SPDR (SPY)
and the Nasdaq 100 Index Tracking Stock (QQQQ) usually fall into this range.
If the Size Ratio is lower than 50, reduce your total position size by 25 percent,
and also increase the protective stop distance by the same percentage. If, for example,
you want a normal capital exposure of 5 percent per trade, an ETF with a Size Ratio
of 40 would require you to reduce your share size to just 3.75 percent of the account’s
capital. A lower share size keeps risk due to higher volatility in line, which also gives
the stop more room. If your normal stop level is 4 percent beyond the price at time
of entry, you would allow for a 5 percent stop. The net result is the same overall risk
exposure as a less volatile position. ETFs such as the iShares FTSE/Xinhua China 25
Index (FXI) and the Oil Services HOLDR (OIH) usually fall into this category. Also,
most of the leveraged ETFs in the ProShares family are in this range.
If the Size Ratio is greater than 75, you increase your share size by 25 percent to
make up for the low volatility. With a baseline 5 percent capital exposure per position, you would allow up to 6.25 percent exposure. Failure to do so would result in a
winning trade not yielding a substantial enough proﬁt. Because the ETF has a lower
volatility, you would typically reduce your protective stop distance by 25 percent as
well. Slow movers such as most of the ﬁxed-income (bond) ETFs usually fall into this
category. Nevertheless, they are not to be disregarded because the large amount of
dividend distributions makes up for the decreased volatility.
Note that the guidelines above are exactly that—guidelines. They were not derived
from any high-tech mathematical algorithm. They were, however, derived from years
of experience in trading all types of ETFs. These are just the ranges that I’ve found
work best for maintaining a similar risk for each position, regardless of the price or
volatility of the ETF.
ECNs

In the old days of calling in all your trade orders to a broker, the only way for them to
be executed was through a specialist (for NYSE stocks) or market maker (for Nasdaq
issues). The basic auction system worked in such a way that specialists or market makers took your buy or sell order and matched it up with another order on the other side
of the trade. In the process, the specialist matching up the trades took a big chunk out of
the middle, known as the “bid/ask spread.” While this system was moderately efﬁcient, the problem was that the specialist could easily take advantage of the situation
by taking his precious time ﬁlling the market order in fast-moving markets, as well as
opening the spread wider in order to maximize his proﬁts. Fortunately, the invention
of the electronic communications network (ECN) immediately began to solve these
problems for the average retail trader.
You can thank Instinet, invented in the 1970s by an aerospace analyst with a dream
of eliminating stock market middlemen, for creating the technological framework

168

Fine-Tuning Your Strategy

that made ECNs possible. Since then, numerous ECNs have spawned, leveling the
playing ﬁeld for the average investor or trader.
The basic task of an ECN is to electronically match buy and sell orders as quickly and
inexpensively as possible. Unlike the ﬁrst ECN, Instinet, which matched only the orders
of institutional investors, the ECNs of today automatically match all orders, including
those of retail and institutional investors, without any human interaction. It is an equitable ﬁrst-come, ﬁrst-served system that gives no preference to the size of the trade.
All modern ECNs work in conjunction with the various stock exchanges to provide liquidity and competitive prices for customers. Because ECNs compete with
market makers and specialists for customer orders, the spreads between the bid and
ask prices have narrowed over the years. Unlike professional market makers and specialists, ECNs are computerized systems that do not proﬁt from the spread. Rather,
the owners of the ECNs realize proﬁts by charging a very small fee per share of stock or
ETF executed. They do all the work behind the scenes, enabling most online brokerages to process orders for a small fraction of the previous costs.
With regard to ETF trading, there are a number of advantages to using an ECN to
place your orders. Most important is that you will get better order ﬁlls by paying only
the price you want to pay. The transparency of ETF “order books,” which enable traders to see the size and price of every buy/sell order, typically allows you to get an instantaneous order match on your executions, assuming your order is at or near the market
price. Executing your orders through a traditional specialist is often much slower and
results in worse order ﬁlls. By using ECNs, you eliminate many of the steps a broker
must take, resulting in faster order executions and better price ﬁlls. Because there is
minimal human interaction, the cost of ﬁlling your order is reduced, which allows
brokerage ﬁrms to charge lower commission rates on orders executed through ECNs.
Near the peak of the year 2000 bull market, many ECNs were competing for
market share. Nevertheless, acquisitions and consolidations have considerably reduced
(and simpliﬁed) your ECN order routing options. The dominant players are now
Archipelago (ARCA) and Instinet (INCA).
Many online brokers now provide traders and investors with a choice between
routing your order to a specialist or ECN such as ARCA or INCA. If unsure of your
broker’s options and capabilities, give him a call and ask how orders are routed. If he
tells you orders are routed directly to the ﬂoor of the exchanges, it means orders are
being routed in the traditional way, to a specialist or market maker. If this is the only
option provided, it may be time to switch to a broker who provides you with the greater
efﬁciency, lower cost, and more rapid order executions that ECNs provide. The difference won’t be noticeable on a single trade, but the savings add up over the months.
Market or Limit?

As a general rule, I use market orders for executing both buy and sell orders. The reasoning behind this is simple: It’s better to get a bad ﬁll and catch a 5-point move than
to miss getting ﬁlled by 5 cents and watching the trade run 6 points without you in it.

Tailoring Your Approach

169

Because I am typically looking to make multiple points of proﬁt from trades
with multiweek time horizons, I don’t worry about giving up nickels or dimes. This
is a lesson I have learned from my mistakes of the past when my insistence on getting a good ﬁll continually caused me to miss substantial proﬁts. I soon learned that
being stubborn by using tight limit orders is not as proﬁtable as simply trying to get
an average-priced execution over the long term. Nevertheless, there are indeed some
instances when I do use limit orders on ETF trades.
The bid/ask spread of the actual ETF determines when to use limit orders, as
some ETFs trade with much tighter spreads than others. In general, the higher the
average daily volume of a particular ETF, the more likely I am to use a market order.
Since high-volume ETFs generally trade with a spread of only 1 to 5 cents, I usually
get good ﬁlls with market orders and don’t have to worry about chasing the price for
pennies. When an ETF is not very popular, however, the spread will typically widen in
relation to the lower average daily volume. In those cases, I prefer to use a limit order.
With the less popular ETFs, I have found the best strategy is to place your order
either slightly above or below the middle of the spread, depending on whether you’re
trying to buy or sell. If you are buying, place the order about 5 cents above the middle
of the spread, and place it ﬁve cents below the middle of the spread if you are selling
or selling short (remember there is no uptick rule).
For example, assume you are trying to buy Biotech HOLDR (BBH) when the best
bid is 183.20 and the best offer is 183.40. Assuming the market is not fast-moving,
you would probably place a limit buy order around 183.30. In a fast-moving market,
however, you would place the order a little higher, maybe even go with a market order
if you felt conﬁdent it was about to run a few points. Remember, your goal is not to
catch every single cent of a move but just a good piece of the move with minimal risk.
Identifying Relative Strength Intraday

Although most of my trades have an average time horizon of several weeks to several
months, I often look for relative strength on an intraday basis, just to conﬁrm the timing for the targeted trade entry is still correct. The step-by-step process that follows
is one efﬁcient way of doing so. Further, for those of you who also day-trade, these
concepts can help you identify ideal ETF trading opportunities early on.
The basic idea is to apply the steps of the top-down strategy to a shorter time
frame. It is essentially the same top-down process for identifying the best relative
strength within the sector, and then narrowing it down to the strongest individual
ETF family within the sector, but applied on a shorter time frame.
Selecting the Sector Indexes with Relative Strength

For identifying relative strength intraday, it is easier to use the numerical method of
listing all the sector indexes on a market minder, as opposed to viewing all the percentage-change charts described in Chapter 5. Once again, you want to set up a table on

170

Fine-Tuning Your Strategy

FIGURE 11.1 Main Industry Sector Market Minder
Symbol

Description

1 Main Sector Indexes
Amex Networking Index
2 $NWX.X
CBOE Gold Index
3 $GOX.X
CBOE Internet Index
4 $INX.X
S&P Insurance Index
5 $IUX.X
PHLX Semiconductor Sector Index
6 $SOX
S&P Retail Index
7 $RLX.X
DJ US Software
8 $DJUSSW
World Solar Energy Index
9 $SOLEXP
Amex Biotechnology Index
10 $BTK.X
DJ Transportation Average
11 $DJT
Amex Pharmaceutical Index
12 $DRG.X
Dow Jones Equity REIT Index
13 $DJR.X
DJ US Real Estate
14 $DJUSRE
Amex Oil Index
15 $XOI.X
S&P Healthcare Index
16 $HCX.X
Amex Securities Broker/Dealer
17 $XBD.X
Amex Disk Drive Index
18 $DDX.X
S&P Metals & Mining Sel Ind
19 $SPSIMM.X
North American Telecomm
20 $XTC.X
KBW Bank Index
21 $BKX
PHLX Oil Service Sector Index
22 $OSX
DJ Utility Average
23 $DJUA
24 Major Indexes
DJ Dow
25 $DJI
Nasdaq Composite Index
26 $COMPX
27 $SPX.X
S&P 500 Index
28 $MID.X
S&P MidCap 400 Index
29 $RUT.X
Russell 2000 Index
30
Main Sectors
Specialty Indexes

Last

Net % Chg

% Range

301.86
169.24
283.29
392.30
500.09
470.94
635.83
1378.33
821.72
4836.32
346.44
297.08
299.35
1440.15
411.58
230.69
155.67
3183.47
1078.07
106.00
295.08
501.54

2.25%
0.64%
0.38%
0.38%
0.24%
0.14%
0.05%
–0.05%
–0.17%
–0.27%
–0.33%
–0.33%
–0.36%
–0.37%
–0.47%
–0.51%
–0.59%
–0.75%
–0.85%
–0.85%
–1.28%
–1.38%

79.62
24.83
86.17
68.60
30.14
37.66
54.96
47.52
57.66
42.15
57.62
62.72
60.47
25.43
37.99
16.92
29.89
19.49
34.00
20.00
6.83
4.74

13895.63
2701.50
1526.75
885.06
805.45

–0.12%
–0.30%
–0.30%
–0.38%
–1.04%

60.85
38.33
40.51
29.76
14.53

Source: TradeStation

your trading software of the main industry sectors and indexes you are interested in,
sorted by daily percentage change, similar to what you see in Figure 11.1.
Be sure to set up a table, like Figure 11.1, that can be dynamically sorted in real
time, in descending order, based on the percentage change from the previous day’s
close. If you are using a package without real-time data or the ability to dynamically
sort, be sure to refresh the data frequently.

Relative Strength among the Indexes
At 9:35 a.m. Eastern time (ET), ﬁve minutes after the market opens, record the percentage changes of all the major sector indexes, the specialty indexes you track, and the major
indexes. The easiest way to do this is to print your quote screen and record the time of

Tailoring Your Approach

171

the printout. Note that you are not interested in how much any of the sector indexes
have moved during the ﬁrst 5 minutes of trading. Rather, by waiting 5 minutes, you are
giving these instruments time to open, and recording how high or low they have gapped
from their previous day’s closing prices. This is essentially the same as noting opening
prices, but with a more realistic 5-minute delay. You will then use this data to compare
which sector indexes have moved the most after the ﬁrst 30 minutes of trading.
By 10 a.m., the stock market will have entered the ﬁrst “reversal period” of the day.
This is a time when stocks and ETFs often retrace slightly from their opening price
moves. The direction the major indexes settle into after 10 a.m. is usually the direction
that deﬁnes the entire morning trading session.
At this time, 30 minutes after the market opens, you once again print out your
market minder with all the sector indexes, the specialty indexes, and the major indexes.
Compare this printout with the ﬁrst one from 9:35 a.m. Generally, you are looking to
see which indexes have moved the most right out of the starting gates. To do this, start
with the sectors or indexes at the top of your list, dynamically sorted by percentage
change, and then subtract the percentage change from your ﬁrst printout.
The reason you do the manual calculation is to see which indexes have moved the
most in the ﬁrst 30 minutes of trading. Most of the time, these will be the sectors with
the most intraday relative strength throughout the entire day. If you merely looked
at the top gainers in absolute percentage terms, the gains can be deceiving because
opening gaps to the upside are not factored in.
Consider the following example:
The Dow Jones Utility Average ($DJUA) is showing a gain of 1.7 percent from
the previous day’s close as of 10 a.m. When you did the initial check at 9:35 a.m., the
index was already up 1.6 percent. Separately, you note that the Semiconductor Index
($SOX) is showing a gain of 1.4 percent as of 10 a.m., but the $SOX is only up 0.3
percent after the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of trading. Even though the gain in the utilities
sector is larger than in the semiconductor sector in absolute percentage terms, the
semiconductor sector has more intraday relative strength because it moved a much
greater percentage since the open. Nearly all the gain in the utilities was a result of the
opening gap. This is why you note the change in percentage gains after the ﬁrst thirty
minutes instead of just looking at the total absolute gains.
If the overall market is in an established downtrend, remember that the ﬁrst
step of the top-down system is to trade in the overall direction of the major indexes.
This means you would be looking for the sectors showing the most relative weakness
instead of strength, those sectors that have fallen the most in the ﬁrst thirty minutes
of trading.

Strength Relative to the Index Itself
After you identify the indexes with the most early relative strength or weakness compared to the broad market, the next step is to conﬁrm that the index is also showing
relative strength compared to itself. This is done by ensuring that your long candidate
is trading in the top third of its intraday range or the short candidate is trading in the

172

Fine-Tuning Your Strategy

bottom third of its range. If any of your indexes fail to meet these criteria, the sector
has probably lost its early relative strength or weakness and should be discarded as a
potential trade candidate.
In this event, move on to the index that has made the second-largest percentage
move from the open and determine if it is showing relative strength compared to itself
by trading in the top third of its intraday range. Repeat this process until you ﬁnd an
index that is trading within the top third of its intraday range (or the bottom third for
a short). Most of the time, the ﬁrst index that has moved the largest percentage from
the open will also be trading within the top or bottom third of its range. If the opening
gap was driven by news, however, all the excitement may have already ﬁzzled out on
the open. This method of ensuring that the index has relative strength to itself is one
way to prevent that scenario.

Narrowing Down to the Individual ETF
After making sure the sector index has not only relative strength compared to other
indexes, but also to itself, you next look in your ETF Roundup guide (see Chapter 5),
or your predetermined groupings of ETFs you otherwise follow, to brieﬂy compare
the various ETF fund families within the sector. Using chart overlays with the percentage-change charts of all the ETF families for each sector is a quick way to see which
individual ETF is the strongest within the sector. Select the ETF family with the most
relative strength.

Conﬁrming Volume
The ﬁnal step is ensuring the volume is strong enough to conﬁrm the relative strength
or weakness of your ETF. The stronger the volume of the ETF, or leading stocks
within the index, the better the setup. Volume in both the long and short candidates
should be equal to or greater than their average daily volumes in the ﬁrst 30 minutes
of trading over the past ﬁve days. The easiest way to ﬁnd out if this is the case is to plot
a moving average of intraday volume. Alternatively, you can simply eyeball the volume
bars on a 5- or 15-minute chart for each day of trading over the past ﬁve days, getting
a quick feel for whether the day’s volume is substantial.
At the end of the screening process described above, you will be left with the best
long and short trade candidates, based on their relative strength and weakness that day.

Finding an Entry Point
To ﬁnd the lowest-risk entry point on a long candidate, wait for a 0.382 (38.2 percent) Fibonacci retracement of the total range from the ETF’s intraday low to its
intraday high within the ﬁrst 30 minutes of trading. The opposite scenario applies for
short candidates.
If your ETF candidate has not made a .382 Fibonacci retracement by10:15 a.m.
ET, it usually means there is a higher probability the trend will continue because the

173

Tailoring Your Approach

relative strength is very high. As a result, if a price correction has not occurred by
10:15 a.m.—that is, a “correction by time” has occurred instead—you simply enter
the trade at the market.
If you follow these steps, you should be positioned in either the ETF with the most
relative strength or relative weakness within the ﬁrst 45 minutes of the trading day.

Exiting and Stopping
As for stop prices, this completely depends on your objective. If, for example, you were
just using intraday entry techniques to improve your entry price on a multiweek trade,
then you don’t need to worry about anything other than your preplanned protective
stop. If, however, you plan to only day-trade the entry, using MAs and intraday trendlines on the short-term 5- and 15-minute charts is important.
Putting It All Together: Trade Entry Example

Assume it’s June 21, 2007, and you would like to use the above strategy for intraday
ETF trading. Following the initial steps detailed above, you compare the percentage
changes of the major industry sectors at 9:35 a.m., noting which one is among those
showing strongest gains on the open, as well as the percentage change of the S&P
500 Index. In doing so, you observe that the Semiconductor Index ($SOX) is already
showing a gain of 0.6 percent, compared to just a 0.1 percent gain in the S&P 500.
Twenty-ﬁve minutes later, you again print the screenshot of all the sectors, comparing the percentages with those from the initial observation ﬁve minutes after the open.
You now notice that the S&P 500 has fallen to a loss of 0.4 percent from the previous
day’s close, but the $SOX is still holding near the intraday high, showing the same
gain of 0.6 percent. This clearly indicates relative strength, as the sectors that don’t
fall with the broad market will be the ﬁrst ones to rally to new highs when the major
indexes eventually bounce. Table 11.1 summarizes the actual observations you would
have made if you were trading that morning.
Having conﬁrmed that the $SOX index has strength relative to the broad market,
you next conﬁrm the index is also showing relative strength compared to itself. The
easiest way to do this is to look at the percentage-range column on your sector market
minder, making sure the $SOX is trading in the upper third of its intraday range.
Alternatively, a quick glance at the 1-minute intraday chart in Figure 11.2 would
graphically show you the same thing.
