
WHAT IS TREND TRADING?

99

Scalping
• Aim: Daily income
• Style: Chasing momentum, tape reading
• Holding time: Seconds to minutes
• Time investment: Eight to twelve hours each day
• Turnover rate: Twenty or more trades per day
• Commission costs: Extremely high
• Expected annual return: A gain of 70 percent or
more

ADVANTAGES OF TREND TRADING
The advantages of trend trading over other forms of trading are numerous. Obviously, the anticipated returns tend
to be higher than what a buy-and-hold investor would
expect, even over what position traders expect, making
trend trading in either its longer-term (swing trading) or
shorter-term (day-trading) forms an ideal way to trade for
a living. If you do not hold a day job and have 8 to 10 hours
of free time each day—not to mention the inclination to
spend that time sitting in front of a computer screen clicking a mouse—then day trading may be the ideal way to
transform the trend-trading techniques outlined in this
book into a very proﬁtable business. If you don’t have that
much spare time or would rather be doing other things
than squinting at pixels all day, then swing trading using
the trend-trading strategies we outline here may be the
ideal way to trade for a living.
Perhaps more important, trend trading does not
require the same level of expertise that sound buy-and-

100

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

holders need to turn a reasonable proﬁt year after year. No
doubt about it, phenomenal wealth can be attained through
long-term investing—but it takes a lot of hard work, a lot
of time, and a bit of luck as well. One of the world’s wealthiest men, Warren Buffett, is the epitome of the intelligent,
successful long-term investor, buying sound companies at
steeply discounted prices. But Buffett works very hard at
what he does. He knows the businesses he buys inside and
out. He lunches with the company’s executives; he interviews middle management; he visits the company’s manufacturing plants and supply chains; he pores night and day
over oodles of bottom-line information—all before committing one dime of his hard-earned cash to a new investment. Even then, there is little guarantee of success. While
Buffett is truly an investing genius, his returns over the
past 10 years have averaged only a little over 6 percent
annually.
As a trend trader, do you have to work as hard as Warren Buffett? No! You simply take one of the systems taught
in these pages, go over a few charts each night, click the
mouse a few times in the morning, and you are all set to
make a decent living.
Moreover, buy-and-hold investors, and to a lesser
extent position traders, must have a great deal of patience.
They have to wait months, if not years, for the fruits of
their labor to become evident. Not so with trend trading.
This is what makes trend trading so ideal for those who
want to trade for a living. Stock market trends are fairly
short-lived phenomena. Up to 80 percent of the time,
stocks move sideways; they run in trends only about 20 per-

WHAT IS TREND TRADING?

101

cent of the time. To follow trend-trading techniques is to
move in and out of stocks on a weekly (for swing traders)
or hourly (for day traders) basis. Thus, the payoff for your
efforts is more immediately seen.
This makes trend-trading techniques ideal for setting
up trading as a primary source of your income. If you apply
trend-trading systems to swing trading, say, your income
can be made available on a monthly basis due to the relatively high turnover rate. This allows the trend trader to
trade two weeks for income to pay the monthly bills and
then two more weeks to compound the trading account.
With day trading, the income is available even more frequently. What I do as manager of our Befriend the Trend
Fund is combine the two: swing trading for larger moves
with day trading to exploit intraday moves.
It needs to be said, of course, that like all forms of
trading, trend trading is susceptible to market ﬂuctuations
and cycles. While you can trend-trade for a living, you
need to be very careful to set aside funds during the good
periods in order to have money available to pay the bills
during the lean periods. Like any form of trading or investing, there certainly will be lean periods.
Another advantage to trend trading is that when properly executed, trend-trading strategies of the type taught
here will yield much less risk than longer-term strategies.
Long-term investors are forced to ride bear markets into
the ground, anxiously watching their net worth slip away
as the indexes grind down day after day. But trend traders
have the freedom to simply exit losing trades quickly and
step aside. Or they can use one of the strategies outlined

102

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

here that are designed especially for bear markets to play
on the short side and thus make money while the investing
world suffers a drawdown.
Finally, to trend-trade well, you needn’t worry
about . . .
• Poring over ﬁnancial statements like buy-and-hold

investors
• Catching precise market tops and bottoms like
position traders
• Seeing the bulk of your proﬁts evaporate on
overnight gaps that go against you like overnight
traders
• Learning the sophisticated nuances of Level II
and other tape-reading devices like scalpers
In short, trend trading provides the greatest amount
of return for the least amount of work of any trading style.
So, let’s get started trend trading for a living!

setting up your
watch lists

CHAPTER
6

T

HERE are over 10,000 listed and over-the-counter

stocks available for trading daily—and the list grows every
week. It is impossible to monitor the whole universe of
trading vehicles on a daily basis. So the logical thing to do,
and what trend traders must do before they do anything
else, is create and regularly update watch lists of stocks that
meet certain criteria. It is from these watch lists that we
will select most of the stocks we use for trend trading.
In order to create a watch list, we will need to screen
out those stocks that are unsuitable for trend trading.
Some charting services will offer special screening tools
for subscribers, but for our purposes the free stock screeners offered by Yahoo! Finance are sufﬁcient. Note that
Yahoo! Finance offers two free screening tools: a basic
service and a more advanced one. You should use the more
advanced tool, since the basic screener does not allow for
screening by volume. Fee-based screening can be found at
Stockcharts.com and at IQCharts; a subscription to either
service includes screening and scanning tools as part of the
package. I can also recommend the screening tool in
OmniTrader from Nirvana Systems. It runs very slowly
103

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

104

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

and thus is not suitable for frequent use, but it otherwise is
a very powerful resource.

YOUR PRIMARY WATCH LIST
I recommend setting up a list of possible trend-trading candidates by screening for the following three criteria: price,
average volume, and beta (a function of stock volatility relative to the broader market). There are usually lots of other
options available in screening packages—things such as
price/earnings ratios, quarterly growth trends, debt/equity
ratios, and often, too, a variety of technical variables. Just
ignore them for now. Subsequent chapters outline ways to
harness the full power of your screening tool to ﬁnd great
trend-trading setups. To set up your primary watch lists all
you need are the three variables mentioned.
In screening for price, we want to weed out stocks that
are either too low in price (i.e., we want to avoid “penny
stocks”) or too high in price. In screening for volume, we
want to avoid thinly traded stocks. In screening for beta, we
want to eliminate slow-moving and nontrending stocks.
Speciﬁcally, I recommend screening per the following
settings:
• Price: between $10 and $100
• Average daily volume: greater than 500,000
• Beta: greater than 2.0 (at least twice as volatile as

the S&P 500)
This screen should return at least 50 stocks, and most
of the time it will yield well over that. But in certain mar-

SETTING UP YOUR WATCH LISTS

105

ket conditions you may get less than 50 hits, in which case
it may be necessary to ﬁddle a bit with the numbers. In a
breakaway bull market of the kind we saw in the late 1990s,
for example, we may need to raise our maximum stock
price to capture the higher-priced big movers. In certain
markets you are forced to pay up for quality, and when it
comes to stocks, that is nearly always a wise thing to do.
Sometimes the market goes into a quiet period without
much movement, in which case we may not be able to ﬁnd
many stocks trading at a 2.0 beta. In that case, the ﬁgure
may need to be lowered a bit.
Traders with smaller accounts may want to focus only
on lower-priced stocks. In this case, you can change the price
screen to something like $5 to $50, or whatever is most suitable. Traders with larger accounts and options traders who
are looking for daily multipoint swings may want to raise
the price range accordingly. At Befriendthetrend.com we
keep two separate watch lists to serve our two most popular newsletters: one designed for smaller account traders
(stocks priced $5 to $15) and one for larger account traders (stocks priced $15 and up). Keeping two separate lists
like this gives me a very interesting bit of market information: I know we are in a bull market when I have too
many stocks showing up in the higher-priced screen and
too few in the lower-priced screen—and vice versa for
bear markets.
Regarding volume, it is important to note that we want
to screen for average daily volume, not single-day volume.
This avoids stocks that have a one-day high-volume event
but which on average are too thinly traded to suit our purposes. It bears repeating that in no case should the average

106

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

volume ﬁgure be lowered below 500,000 daily shares. Liquidity means stability, stability means lowered risk, and
lowered risk means greater proﬁts in the long run; thus,
liquidity is an essential element in building a long-term
trading career.
Once this screen returns a list of stocks, sort the list by
order of decreasing beta. To make your primary watch list,
take the ﬁrst 50 stocks on that list, that is, the top 50 stocks
ranked by order of decreasing beta. These are the stocks
you are going to monitor daily for trading setups. Don’t
select more than 50, because in certain market conditions
you will register too many setups to trade. Nor should you
limit your list to less than 50, because in nontrending markets you may not have any setups at all.
Once you have your list of 50 stocks, write these into
your charting software and save them as a focus list. As an
alternative, you can input the list into the Candleglance feature on Stockscharts.com. This feature gives you 10
thumbnail charts per Web page, and includes the 20- and
50-period moving averages and one technical indicator of
your choice on each chart. Figures 6.1 through 6.6 represent the six top high-beta, liquid stocks priced between $10
and $100 as screened on September 21, 2007 (note: my initial screen returned 247 stocks, which is typical of bull
markets like the one we are in now). I’ve added the CCI
indicator and set the charts at the two-month time period
(this also is variable). This is what Candleglance charts look
like once you have set them up.
Another site I like for keeping watch lists is Clear
station.com, which allows you to keep an inﬁnite number
of lists for free. If you input your list of stocks into
Clearstation—to do this you will have to register with the

Figure 6.1

CRM two-month chart with CCI and 20/50 MAs.

Figure 6.2

AKS two-month chart with CCI and 20/50 MAs.

Figure 6.3

LMC two-month chart with CCI and 20/50 MAs.
107

Figure 6.4

RMBS two-month chart with CCI and 20/50 MAs.

Figure 6.5

JOYG two-month chart with CCI and 20/50 MAs.

Figure 6.6

BZH two-month chart with CCI and 20/50 MAs.

108

SETTING UP YOUR WATCH LISTS

109

site—not only will you get thumbnail charts with moving
averages, stochastics, and MACD, you will also get daily
updates on which of your stocks have had upgrades or
downgrades, are expecting earnings, and have just triggered certain technical buy and sell signals. An advantage
of the Clearstation watch lists is that you only need to bookmark one page to access all your charts; with Stockcharts’
Candleglance feature you have to bookmark one page for
each 10 stocks on your list. A disadvantage is that Clearstation only offers bar charts, whereas Stockcharts uses the
more informative candlestick chart as its default.
I use both these services because each offers a slightly
different set of tools. I do prefer the watch list capacity at
Stockcharts to that of Clearstation, since, as a subscriber,
I have access to updates in real time (versus delayed time
for Clearstation). In truth, both are ideal for sorting
through dozens of stocks to ﬁnd a shortlist of the charts
you want to do further research on.

UPKEEP OF YOUR WATCH LIST
Now, with your watch list of the 50 most liquid and most
volatile stocks set up, you have the set of charts you will
monitor at the end of each trading day (or as a day trader,
throughout the day). To trend-trade effectively you will
need to become very familiar with these price charts. Forget the companies themselves, what they make, what service they offer, what their growth prospects are, and so
on. All of that is now irrelevant to your purposes as a
trend trader. Everything you need to know to trend-trade
for a living is right there in the price chart; the rest is just
noise.

110

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

After looking at their charts day after day, you will
begin to develop a feel for how these stocks trade. As you
train yourself in the trend-trading systems outlined in this
book, you will learn to recognize points of support and
resistance. You will be able to make notes of special trading opportunities as they set up on the charts (breakouts,
breakdowns, consolidations, movements toward or away
from major moving averages, etc.). You will be able to distinguish those that look like easy traders—that is, ones that
make smooth turns, rarely gap up or down, and have a
steady volume ﬂow—from those that look more difﬁcult.
The more difﬁcult stocks to trade tend to have sloppy,
choppy price movements, wide overnight gaps, and huge
intraday ranges. These you should delete from your watch
list. You can replace them with stocks farther down the list
of your original screening. Remember, trading is a business
and these price charts are your employees. As a good boss,
you should keep close tabs on them: ﬁre the unproductive
ones and replace them with more eager workers.
Your primary watch list will need to be updated once
a month. To do this, simply repeat the same process: screen
for price, volume, and beta; select the 50 highest beta
stocks; then input these into your charting software. As
you do your monthly updates you will ﬁnd that the list does
not change all that much over time. The same great trading vehicles keep getting screened out from among the
masses. But in most market conditions you should be
replacing about half a dozen stocks at each new screening.
Keep track of these new additions, because you will now
need to become just as familiar with them as you were with
those they replaced. Also, whenever a company is bought

SETTING UP YOUR WATCH LISTS

111

out or has a horrible news event, it is best to delete it from
your watch list. Large, multipoint gaps either up or down
tend to make for messy trading in the weeks and months
going forward.
In addition to this primary list of trading stocks, you
should add, on a daily basis, a few stocks that are screened
for special trading setups. These setups are described later.
You can add these stocks to those you have chosen from
your primary watch list, or you can do what I do: make separate watch lists for each special setup screen.
One last word on updating your watch lists: if you
choose to use Stockcharts.com for keeping your watch lists,
you have the advantage of moving the results of your
special setup screens directly into your watch lists with
a single click of the mouse. Since you will eventually be
screening for up to 10 setups—which means potentially
having 10 different watch lists in addition to your primary
list—this can prove to be a valuable timesaving option.

This page intentionally left blank

determining
general market
direction

CHAPTER
7

T art of applying technical analysis to your watch lists
HE

and then selecting which stocks to trade is a chart-speciﬁc
exercise. This is to say, your primary point of reference is
the stock’s price chart itself. All you need to know to make
proﬁtable predictions about a stock’s future price movement are the patterns of its past price movements as
recorded on the stock’s daily chart. This means that, with
the tools of technical analysis in your trading arsenal, you
do not need to:
• Watch every minute of CNBC or Bloomberg

Television
• Pore through hundreds of proﬁt and loss
statements—boring!
• Track prior quarters for earnings and revenue
growth
• Worry about things like price/earnings ratios and
debt/equity ratios
• Monitor every news dispatch on Brieﬁng.com or
Reuters
• Keep track of gross domestic product (GDP), the
113

Copyright © 2008 by Thomas K. Carr. Click here for terms of use.

114

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

consumer price index (CPI), the producer price
index (PPI), housing starts, and employment data
• Hang on every syllable of the latest Federal
Reserve announcement
• Anticipate mergers, buyouts, public offerings,
splits, FDA approvals, and so on
Instead, all you need to do to trend-trade proﬁtably with
technical analysis is to check the chart, ﬁnd trends, enter
them after they start, and exit them when they end.
Having said that, there is one further bit of analysis
beyond the stock’s price chart that you can do to add to the
likelihood that your trade will go in the intended direction.
It also involves applying technical analysis to a price chart,
but instead of the chart of the stock you intend to trade,
you will now be looking at the chart of the broader market. If you can correlate your trade as much as possible with
the general market’s directionality and momentum, then
you will add signiﬁcant percentage points to the probability that your trade will turn out a winner.
In his best-selling book How to Make Money in Stocks,
William O’Neil includes market direction as an important
part of his CAN-SLIM trading strategy (it is the “M” in
SLIM). O’Neil’s strategy combines basic principles of fundamental analysis with an assessment of the price chart of
the Dow Jones Industrial Average. O’Neil rightly concludes
that to give your trades every chance of success, whenever
possible you should avoid two fundamental mistakes: going
long in a bear market and buying into the top of a market
run.
But O’Neil overstates the case when he says, “If you

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

115

are wrong about the direction of the broad general market,
three out of four of your stocks will slump with the market averages and you will lose money” (O’Neil, p. 44). If
you follow the systems I outline here, you will be able to
make good money long in a bear market and short in a bull
market.
The key to trend-trading success in any type of market is ﬁnding good charts. And there are always great charts
that shine brightly during bear markets, just as there are
many laggards that stink up the place during bull markets.
Again, any robust technical system must be chart-speciﬁc:
if directional movement is not happening in the daily chart
of the stock, it doesn’t matter what the general market is
doing, your stock position is not likely to move.
Still, it is important to have a general sense of what
type of market we are in: bull, bear, or range-bound. One
reason this is important is not because our success is dependent on it, but because it makes our job a lot easier. It is
much easier to ﬁnd good long setups in a bull market than
in a bear market. And you will have many more shorts to
choose from in a bear market than in a bull market. So
understanding the current market dynamic and playing it
accordingly is really an exercise in efﬁciency. More important, perhaps, knowing and trading with the general market direction can put a few percentage points of probability
on our side. Were we infallible chart readers, this would not
matter. But the fact that bull markets tend to cause more
stocks to go up than down, and bear markets cause more
stocks to go down than up, means that getting on the side
of the general market direction can help cover a multitude
of chart-reading sins.

116

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

GENERAL MARKET
Before we look more carefully at types of general markets,
let’s talk a bit about what we mean by the general market.
The truth is, there is nothing “general” about the stock
market. It is a collective of very specialized market niches,
each one of which has the capacity to sway the whole. Still,
we are able to get a day-by-day picture of the market’s consensus by looking at the various stock indexes. For the purposes of trend trading, we will need to look at only two
primary indexes: the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq 100. To
make things as simple as possible, I like to use charts of the
exchange-traded fund (ETF) proxies for these indexes:
SPY for the S&P 500 and QQQQ for the Nasdaq 100. You
can also refer to the Dow Jones Industrial Average (whose
ETF is DIA). It is a much-revered benchmark, and it does
represent the country’s 30 largest companies working the
world’s most productive industries. But it so closely shadows the S&P 500 that it needn’t be a requisite part of our
general market analysis.
More experienced traders can also add special market
cap indexes and sector indexes to their analysis. If you want
to do that, let me suggest that you also add the following
charts to your general market watch list (again, put these
in your Stockcharts.com or Clearstation.com watch lists
for added convenience):
General Markets
• SPY (S&P 500)—tracks the 500 largest publicly
traded companies

DETERMINING GENERAL MARKET DIRECTION

117

• QQQQ (Nasdaq 100)—tracks the 100 largest

tech, biotech, and telecom companies
Market Cap Indexes
• MDY (S&P Midcaps)—tracks 400 representative
midcap companies
• IWM (Russell 2000)—tracks 2,000 representative
small-cap companies
Sector Indexes
• SMH—semiconductor companies
• IBB—biotech companies
• OIH—oil services companies
• HHH—Internet companies
• RTH—retail companies
• XLF—ﬁnancial services companies
• XHB—home building companies
This is not an exhaustive list by any means, but it is a
good start. These ETFs also make great trading vehicles,
by the way. At Befriendthetrend.com, we offer The Index
Newsletter, which trades these and other ETFs exclusively,
including the brand-new ultra funds, which move in sync
with the broader indexes but are leveraged at 2:1. I use several. Many subscribers use this letter to determine their
sense of general market direction as well as proﬁt from the
trend-trade picks listed there. But if you would rather
determine general market direction on your own, we give
you here the rules for doing so.
Assume, for the sake of convenience, that you are
