
 Half an hour later, just before one in the morning, the engine stopped. The whirring and clicking stopped with it. The boat went quiet. 

 When the engine quit for the first time, I was rolling around in bed, attempting to calculate the size of the waves from the violence with which I was thrown back against the wall and forth into the safety board that had been installed to prevent me from being hurled out of the bed altogether. Even I could tell that something had gone wrong. One moment there was the low whir and the feel of a machine cutting purposefully through the waters. The next moment the boat was adrift. The waves rocked the bed more violently than before, and in new directions. Up top I went. 

 The watch from midnight to four in the morning was manned by Jaime, the Australian first mate, Peter, the American steward, and Celcelia, the Swedish deckhand. Normally, they’d be wandering about checking up on things. When I arrived, all three were in the control room, pushing buttons on the computer screens. They were clearly perplexed. A small red light marked “Alarm” flashed on the computer, which emitted its annoying high-pitched beep. Luckily, the next person to arrive was Robert. 

 “I couldn’t sleep,” he said, popping his head through the hatch. “What’s happened?” 

 “The engine just stopped,” said Jaime. 

 “Well, that’s unfortunate,” said Robert, and moved to the screen and switched off the alarms. The beeping sound ceased. In its place appeared the man who invented the idea of the beeping sound. “What’s going on?” said Clark, climbing up the stairs from the main salon to the control room. “It sounded like the engine stopped.” He moved into a position immediately in front of the bank of display screens. He punched in the password that enabled him to enter God Mode. The darkness was relieved only by the light orange glow of the computer screens. 

 It was just past one in the morning. To fully appreciate what happened next, you have to remember that it had been at least four days since anyone had slept properly. Now, six of the twelve people on board were in the control room. Robert and Jim, their faces lit a pale orange, poked woozily at the computer screens while the first mate, Jaime, hovered behind them and waited to hear the news. The screens offered no end of information: the sea beneath us was 5,732 meters deep, the wind behind us blew at sixteen knots, the boat we were on drifted at a little more than a knot, in the direction of Antarctica, the wine cellar was cooled to perfection, the door to the captain’s cabin was closed, the captain’s lights were out…on and on the computer went, explaining everything but what we wanted to know: Why had the engine stopped ? The engine was our salvation. The engine would propel us out of the path of cackling Filipino monkeys. The engine was what would take us home instead of to Antarctica. 

 Robert vanished into the bowels of the boat. Four minutes later the engine restarted, and everyone breathed easier. Robert reappeared with the look of a man trying to disguise, even to himself, how pleased he was with his work. Thirty seconds later he had some help: the engine quit again. Again Robert vanished, again the engine restarted, again everyone breathed easier. And again Robert reappeared, but this time without a trace of self-satisfaction. The engine rewarded his humility. This time it did not quit. 

 Louie now stumbled up the stairs from his cabin. Like all good photographers, Louie clearly had a talent for turning up where he wasn’t wanted, and remaining inconspicuous. Soon he was snapping away. “Now you know,” drolled Robert, just loud enough for Clark to hear but not so loud that he clearly intended Clark to hear; “if you want to get your picture in the newspaper, all you have to do is go to a screen, open up about five windows, and look like you know what you’re doing.” 

 Clark said nothing. Robert fixed things. Robert was useful . There was nothing wrong with Robert. Ergo, Robert was permitted his careful bit of insolence in this tense moment. Clark and Robert then stood together at the computer screens. Clark naturally wanted to know what Robert had done. Robert explained to Clark that the problem was in something called the “sea chest.” The sea chest took in salt water from the ocean to cool the engine. The salt water did not actually circulate through the engine, of course. It merely drew away heat from the outside surface of the engine. If the sea chest contained air, rather than water, the engine lost some of its ability to cool itself. The computer understood that it was dangerous for the engine to overheat. When the engine overheated, the computer shut the engine down. 

 “When I went down the first time, I saw air in the sea chest,” Robert said. “I must not have got it all the first time I blew it out.” 

 On that lovely mahogany bridge at one in the morning there were three responses to our condition. The five nontechnical people—me, Louie, Jaime, Peter, Celcelia—were pleased as punch. The sea chest—whatever the hell that was—had been fixed! The engine worked! We would not drift into Antarctica! The mechanical man—Robert—was satisfied but hardly pleased. Anytime the engine failed, his world became slightly less certain. The third response came from Clark. Clark always insisted on his own response to any technical problem, and it gave him a kind of control over the opinion surrounding the problem. He was distinctly concerned. After listening to Robert’s explanation, he said, “That doesn’t make sense.” Robert asked him why not. “The seas are too calm,” said Clark. “I can see how the sea chest might take in air when the boat was really being tossed around, but it shouldn’t take in air in these conditions.” 

 At that point the engine was running fine, and so this sounded like the idle carping of an intellectual. Clark pressed his point anyway. “If the engine was overheating,” he said, “we should have had an alarm before it shut down.” He motioned to the computer screen. “The alarms that went off were all in response to the engine shutting down. They came after .” 

 It wasn’t that Robert failed to see the reason in Clark’s thinking. He saw it clearly enough. Robert had worked for a lot of rich yacht owners; Clark was the first who presumed accurately to know a great deal about his machine. Robert was forever saying things like “The difference between talking to Jim and talking to Allan is the difference between talking to someone who understands what you are trying to tell him instantly and someone who you know will never understand.” But Robert was equipped with a disposition slightly different from Clark’s: when the machines were working, he was not inclined to suspect that something was wrong. And the engine worked! Robert said as much. Clark appeared to agree: if the engine was running, Robert must have fixed it. Wearily, Robert returned to bed. Clark kept fiddling with the computer. 

 Fifteen minutes later the engine quit again. 

 This time, as the ocean hurled us crazily, Jaime and Peter and Celcelia spoke nervously among themselves, though when they saw me coming they shut up. When the crew begins to hide the situation from the passengers, the passengers should begin to worry. “This is crazy,” Clark said, more to himself than to the five people who watched him with incomprehension. “I can’t figure it out.” 

 He pointed to what he was unable to figure out. Attached to the engine were dozens of sensors. The sensors measured pretty much everything that can be measured inside an engine. The computer ordered and monitored this data. But one piece of data—the pressure on the engine—made no sense. The number on the pressure gauge should always be positive, there being no such thing as negative pressure. The number should also be fairly small—typically it read between 1 and 2. Now the computer screen read -38883354.6669. It was a crazy number. The computer clearly had a screw loose. 

 Clark said, “Steve.” He turned around as if he expected to find Steve over his shoulder. “Steve is…where?” he asked. 

 “Steve’s asleep,” said Jaime. It was now well past two in the morning. Steve was more than asleep, I said. Steve was in a coma. 

 “Wake him up,” said Clark. 

 Steve was awakened. He struggled out of bed and up onto the bridge. He did not look well. The truth was that Steve’s brain, unlike Clark’s, had a limited appetite for technical malfunction. Steve long ago had banned computers from his home back in Silicon Valley to prevent the blasted machines from following him everywhere he went. Here on the high seas he could not escape them; here home was a computer. 

 In that falsely bright tone peculiar to people hoping to persuade others that they are fully conscious when they are not, Steve said, “So, what’s up?” 

 “Something is fucking up these computers,” said Clark. 

 “That’s new,” said Steve. 

 Steve and Clark now stared at the screens together. Clark pressed buttons with more energy than before, like a man who needed to get his money out of the ATM in a hurry. Apparently, a lot of the data was strange. According to the computer, for instance, the wind direction was exactly the opposite of what it had been a few minutes earlier. “The wind has really come around,” said Clark. He turned to Jaime. “Has the wind changed?” 

 Jaime said that the wind had not changed. Sailors know these things. 

 “But this screen shows the wind coming out of the north,” said Clark. “It was coming out of the south.” 

 “This computer is definitely a bit funky,” said Steve. “The wind direction is wrong on it.” 

 “What the hell is going on?” Clark said. It wasn’t really a question. He wasn’t exactly angry at Steve, more at the situation in which Steve, unfortunately, happened to be central. 

 “The computers have some strange problems,” said Steve. 

 The only two people on board equipped even to discuss the computer for more than a minute or two stared uncomprehendingly at the funky screens. This was not obviously dramatic. One hundred years from now, I thought, if they dredged us up perfectly preserved from the bottom of the ocean, the salvage team would conclude we had gone down without a struggle, staring blithely into a row of computer screens. On the other hand, one hundred years from now salvage crews might understand that staring at the computer screen on Jim Clark’s boat was the fiercest form of struggle. With computer people, the appearance of inaction masks the drama of their thoughts. They were maybe the first tyrants to attempt to conquer the world logically. The screen was the fodder for their endless series of “if…then” statements. If the computer triggered alarms before the engine overheated, then the engine must not have overheated. If the engine did not overheat, then the trouble might lie outside the engine. If the problem was outside the engine, then it could be inside the computer. 

 Since all of the important problems on the boat, with the exception of who had sex with whom and how well we ate, were routed through the computer, this thought was not terribly reassuring. At length Clark decided he could not get what he wanted out of the computers on the bridge. “Let’s go downstairs,” he said. We did. 

 Once they were seated in front of the Silicon Graphics work station built into the wall of his cabin, Clark’s conversation with Steve vanished into a black hole of arcana. 

 “This negative number is very strange,” said Clark. 

 “The MSB is in units of 10,” said Steve. God knows what it meant, but that’s what he said. 

 “But you see here—it keeps flipping back to a large negative number,” said Clark, punching a button. “Which causes me to be suspicious that it’s not in our code.” 

 None of this made any sense to anyone who had not programmed the computer. But the general drift was now at least clear to me: the problem might be not in the engine but in the software that controlled the engine. Clark thought that the crude computers attached to the engine—known as PLCs, for programmable logic controllers—could be transmitting bad data to the fancy Silicon Graphics machines in the computer room. He thought that the computers had wrongly perceived something wrong with the engine, and so switched the engine off. A problem in the software implicated Steve, but only in a general way. The PLCs had been programmed by some Dutch guys back in the boatyard. The programming of PLCs was meant to be trivial, which was why the job had been left to the Dutch guys in the first place. 

 Steve and Jim were well on their way to a long, baffling conversation about the boat’s software, but before they could get there the engine started up . The boat stopped pitching madly. It cut with renewed purpose through the sea. The engine, it seemed, had a mind of its own. Then Robert appeared with a sneaky smile on his face. All by himself, without telling anyone, he’d woken up, clambered down to the engine room, blown out the sea chest, and started up the engine. Now, however, he conceded that he could not swear he had fixed the deeper problem, since he was not sure what the deeper problem was. But at least the boat was running again. Clark and Steve returned to the bridge; this time Robert followed. 

 Up top, in front of the four big computer screens, Clark complained about the state of his art. “Steve, something is really fucking these computers up,” he said. Steve muttered something about there being a lot more work to do. Clark then hit the button that pulled up the map of the world, with Hyperion on it. Its accuracy had actually slipped since the trials in the North Sea. The boat appeared on the map as a blue scaphoid. At that moment, according to the computer, we were cruising just north of Yemen. Clark just stared at the screen as his yacht crept across the Saudi Arabian desert. “Fuck it” was all he said. 

 Even he was too tired to think about what it might mean. In any case, he was soon distracted by other problems. On each side of the bridge were the radar screens that let us know if we were about to be plowed under by Filipino monkeys. The radar screen on the left began to blink, like a faulty light bulb. All the other pieces of equipment, along with the data they generated, had been stuffed away in cabinets, where they played the bit part of sending data directly to the computers. Clark’s software acted as a kind of operating system through which every other instrument must connect; he had played the same sort of trick on the manufacturers of sailboat equipment as Microsoft played on the entire software industry. The radar was the lone exception. The radar was the only instrument Clark had neglected to subsume; he just never quite got around to doing it. When he saw the blinking radar, Clark’s shoulders sagged. The radar had been his responsibility. “I guess I created that problem,” he said. 

 It was now well past three in the morning. No one wanted to bother with yet another computer problem. The engine was running fine. Robert was obviously exhausted. Still, he could not hide how pleased he was by his response to a potential crisis. “Had we been in the Straits of Gibraltar with an oil tanker coming towards us,” he said, “we’d have been all right. I had that engine running in five minutes.” He headed off to rescue sleep from the two hours before our watch. Steve wandered out on the aft deck and gazed up at the world’s tallest mast. He noticed how much it resembled an endless chain of crucifixes that reached up, and finally vanished, into the starry night sky. “You could hang huge statues of Jesus from each spreader, and it would look like a Mexican pickup truck,” he said. With that he stumbled over to one of the computer screens on deck—the one Allan sat in front of but ignored—and stuck a yellow Post-it sticker on its surface. It read, “Allan: I fucked up the longitude program. We are not in the Arabian desert. Steve.” 

 Then he, too, went back to bed. Clark soon followed. It was nearly four in the morning. After three hours of struggle Hyperion was once again pointed south. The two men who fully understood the computer, and the one man who fully understood the engine, had exhausted themselves. At no point did it occur to any of these technical people to wake Allan Prior. Through it all he had slept soundly. In a technological crisis, the captain was plainly of no use. And all crises on board Hyperion were now technological.

The New New Thing 

 16 

 Chasing Ghosts 

 T he morning after the engine failed, the seas were unusually calm. For the first time since we’d left the Canaries, the sun shone bright and hot. Normally, there weren’t more than two people on the bridge. Everyone who wasn’t on watch either ate or slept, or tried to. That afternoon was an exception. Simon and Jaime and Celcelia swabbed the decks. Steve hunted for the bug that might have disturbed the engine. Robert nosed around in the kitchen cupboards, and then disappeared down into the bowels of the ship. It was as if each person on board had offered himself a fresh start. Someone spotted a school of porpoises gamboling in the bow wake. Even Clark, in a brief but failed stab at genuine enthusiasm, came up top to see. 

 “Hyp 4 is talking to Hyp 19,” said Steve, hunched over a computer and trying to find the bug that generated the numbers that made no sense. Each of the twenty-five computers on board had been assigned a number. According to Steve they had already acquired their own personalities—a trait that did not bode well for the Home of the Future. Now two of the more troublesome were speaking to each other. 

 “What?” said Allan, disinterestedly two seats away. He wasn’t listening. He was reading intently from another computer screen. 

 “There is something funky going on here,” said Steve. 

 Allan continued staring into his own screen. Finally, after Steve had ascertained he was being ignored, and gone back to the mystery at hand, Allan looked up. He said, with the satisfaction of a man at the end of a long day’s work, “@Home just bought Excite.” Long pause. “That’s all right.” 

 “Really?” said Simon, the computer deckhand, who was passing through. “What did the stock do?” He was interested. 

 “That’s all right!” exclaimed Allan, again, more to himself than to Simon or Steve. He hit a few buttons on the keyboard he had hooked up to the computer. He was recalculating the value of his portfolio of highly volatile technology stocks. 

 This turned out to be why Allan occasionally could be found, rapt, in front of a computer screen. Twice a day, once at noon and again at seven in the evening, he logged onto the Internet through the satellite phone. The satellite phone on board Hyperion had the mysterious authority of the conch in Lord of the Flies . It cost either twelve or twenty dollars a minute, depending on which crew member quoted you the price. Its time was precious, except, of course, when Clark used it. Even in mid-Atlantic, Clark spent hours on end on the phone, talking to journalists about Healtheon, to friends who wanted him to invest in their new Internet start-up, to anyone he thought might divert his mind from the tedium of the ocean crossing. For everyone else but Allan the satellite phone was off-limits. The captain’s control over it gave him his one real source of power, the power to determine what news came on board, and when it came. When Allan logged on, he pulled down three clumps of digital data precious to the crew: e-mail, the weather forecasts for the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, and the news from Wall Street. 

 All in all, this took him about four minutes. In those four minutes Allan sat rapt before one of the five flat-panel display screens on the bridge. It was the only time you ever saw him volunteer his attention to a computer screen, and the event clearly meant something to him. His shoulders tensed; then he swiveled in his high captain’s chair and punched several buttons. One button sent the e-mails to their various recipients, another sent the closing prices of stocks in his portfolio to a separate screen, a third sent financial analyses and the weather forecasts to the printer. He then turned fully around in his chair, opened the mahogany drawer with the printer inside of it, and grabbed the financial analyses. The weather forecasts presumably could wait. 

 That day @Home, the company that sought to deliver the Internet into American homes through the pipes owned by cable television companies, had announced it would be acquiring Excite, the Internet portal company. Excite’s stock price had jumped forty-two points; @Home’s had leaped six points. Clark had helped create @Home and talked Tom Jermoluk, his old friend from Silicon Graphics, into running the company. By shrewdly following Clark’s interest, Allan had purchased shares in @Home; by shrewdly following Allan’s movements, Simon had done the same. Clark had sold his shares, and made forty million dollars. Not Allan and Simon. They had held on. That was their strategy. 

 Broadly, there are two types of stock market investors. The first might be called “value” investors. Probably the most famous set of rules for value investing were those laid down in the 1950s by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd. Graham and Dodd investors subject companies to careful analysis. They derive their sense of the fair value of a company’s stock price from its profits. A company with no profits holds no appeal for a Graham and Dodd investor. As a result, no committed Graham and Dodd investor ever bought an Internet stock. Graham and Dodd investors are people who place a very high value on having the last laugh. In exchange for the privilege they have missed out on a lot of laughs in between. 
