 That is because an idea meritocracy needs to operate in accordance with agreed-upon principles and to be evidence-based and fair instead of following the more autocratic and arbitrary decisions of the CEO and his or her lieutenants. Rather than be above the principles, the people responsible for running the organization must be evaluated, chosen, and—if needed—replaced in an evidence-based way according to rules, just like everyone else in the organization. Their strengths and weaknesses, like everyone’s, must be taken into consideration. Collecting objective data about all people is essential for this. And you need good tools to convert data into decisions in agreed-upon ways. Moreover, the tools allow the people and the system to work together in a symbiotic way to improve each other. 
 a.  To produce real behavioral change, understand that there must be internalized or habituated learning. Thankfully, technology has made internalized learning much easier today than it was when books were the primary way of conveying knowledge. Don’t get me wrong, the book was a powerful invention. Johannes Gutenberg’s printing press allowed easy dissemination of knowledge that helped people build on each other’s learnings. But experiential learning is so much more powerful. Now that technology makes it so easy to create experiential/virtual learning, I believe that we are on the brink of another step-change improvement in the quality of learning that will be as great as or even greater than Gutenberg’s. 
 We have been trying to create internalized learning at Bridge-water for a long time, so how we do it has evolved a lot. Since we tape virtually all our meetings, we have been able to create virtual learning case studies that allow everyone to participate without actually being in the room. People see the meeting transpire as though they were in it, and then the case study pauses and asks them for their own thinking on the matter at hand. In some cases, they input their reactions in real time as they watch. Their thinking is recorded and compared with others’ using expert systems that help us all understand more about how we think. With this information, we can better tailor their learning and their job assignments to their thinking styles. 
 That is just one example of a number of tools and protocols we have developed to help our people learn and operate by our principles. 
 b.  Use tools to collect data and process it into conclusions and actions. Imagine that virtually everything important going on in your company can be captured as data, and that you can build algorithms to instruct the computer, as you would instruct a person, to analyze that data and use it in the way you agreed it should be used. In that way, you and the computer on your behalf could look at each person and all the people together and provide tailored guidance, just like your GPS provides you guidance by knowing all the traffic patterns and routes. You don’t have to make it mandatory to follow that guidance, though you can. Generally speaking, the system operates like a coach. And the coach can learn about its team: Data is collected about what people do so that if they make more insightful moves or less insightful moves, learning will occur and be used to create improvements. Because the thinking behind the algorithms is available to everyone, anyone can assess the quality of the logic and its fairness, and have a hand in shaping it. 
 c.  Foster an environment of confidence and fairness by having clearly-stated principles that are implemented in tools and protocols so that the conclusions reached can be assessed by tracking the logic and data behind them. In all organizations, it’s always the case that some of the people judged to be ineffective will argue that those judgments are wrong. When that happens, a data- and rules-based system with clearly laid-out criteria allows less room for such arguments and greater belief that the system is fair. Though the system won’t be perfect, it is much less arbitrary—and can much more easily be examined for bias—than the much less specified and much less open decision making of individuals with authority. My ideal is to have a process in which everyone contributes criteria for good decision making and those criteria are assessed and selected by appropriately assigned (believable) people. If people maintain the right balance of open-mindedness and assertiveness so they understand where they are and aren’t believable to make decisions, having these open discussions on the criteria for assessing and managing people can be very powerful in building and reinforcing the idea meritocracy. 
 We have early-stage tools that achieve these things and we are striving to refine them so that our people management system operates as effectively as our investment management system. 
 Even with its imperfections, our evidence-based approach to learning about people, guiding them, and sorting them is much fairer and more effective than the arbitrary and subjective management systems that most organizations still rely on. I believe that the forces of evolution will push most organizations toward systems that combine human and computer intelligence to program principles into algorithms that substantially improve decision making. 
 In the Appendix, I’ve provided detailed descriptions of a number of the tools and protocols that support this idea-meritocratic approach and reinforce the behaviors that people need to operate consistently with it. They are designed to help us achieve our goals of 1) learning what people are like, 2) sharing what people are like, 3) providing personalized training and development, 4) offering guidance and oversight in specific situations, and 5) helping managers sort people into the right roles or out of the company based on what they are like and what is required. 
 You don’t need to use these same tools and protocols for your own idea meritocracy, but you should have ways of producing the internalized learning that it will require. While ours have evolved a lot, yours don’t have to be as fancy or automated. For example, providing a form or a template to help guide people through the steps required for them to manage their work or carry out a process will yield better results than expecting them to just remember—or figure it out—on their own. 
 How you decide to use tools and protocols is up to you. The main point I want to make here is that they’re important.

Principles 

 16 And for Heaven’s Sake, Don’t Overlook Governance! 
 A ll that I’ve said thus far will be useless if you don’t have good governance. Governance is the oversight system that removes the people and the processes if they aren’t working well. It is the process that checks and balances power to assure that the principles and interests of the community as a whole are always placed above the interests and power of any individual or faction. Because power will rule, power must be put in the hands of capable people in key roles who have the right values, do their jobs well, and will check and balance the power of others. 
 I didn’t realize the importance of this sort of governance until after I transitioned out of the CEO role, because I was an entrepreneur and company builder (as well as an investment manager) who largely did what I thought was best. While I needed and developed double-checks on myself—I created a Management Committee that I put above me so that I had to report to it—I always had the power of my equity to change things, though I never used it. Some might say that I was a benevolent despot because while I had all the power (the complete voting rights), I exercised my power in an idea-meritocratic way, recognizing that the good of the whole was best for us all, and that I needed to be double-checked. I certainly did not create the sort of governance system appropriate for Bridgewater, given its scale. 
 For example, Bridgewater didn’t have a board of directors overseeing the CEOs, there were no internal regulations, no judicial system for people to appeal to, and no enforcement system, because we didn’t need them. I, with the help of others, simply created the rules and enforced them, though everyone had the right to appeal and overturn my and others’ judgments. Our principles were the equivalent of what the Articles of Confederation had been to the United States in its first years, and our policies were like our laws, but I never created a formal way of operating such as a “Constitution” or a justice system to enforce them and resolve disputes. As a result, when I stepped out and passed the power to others, confusions about decision rights arose. After conferring with some of the world’s greatest experts on governance, we put a new system in place based on these principles. Still, I want to make clear that I don’t consider myself an expert on governance and can’t vouch for the following principles as much as I can vouch for the previous ones, because they are still new as of this writing. 
 16.1 To be successful, all organizations must have checks and balances. 
 By checks, I mean people who check on other people to make sure they’re performing well, and by balances, I mean balances of power. Even the most benevolent leaders are prone to becoming more autocratic, if for no other reason than because managing a lot of people and having limited time to do it requires them to make numerous difficult choices quickly, and they sometimes lose patience with arguments and issue commands instead. And most leaders are not so benevolent that they can be trusted to put the organization’s interests ahead of their own. 
 a.  Even in an idea meritocracy, merit cannot be the only determining factor in assigning responsibility and authority. Appropriate vested interests also need to be taken into consideration. For example, the owners of a company might have vested interests that they are perfectly entitled to that might be at odds with the vested interests of the people in the company who, based on the idea meritocracy, are most believable. That should not lead the owners to simply turn over the keys to those leaders. That conflict has to be worked out. Since the purpose of the idea meritocracy is to produce the best results, and the owners have the rights and powers to assess that, of course they will make the determination—though I recommend they choose wisely. 
 b.  Make sure that no one is more powerful than the system or so important that they are irreplaceable. For an idea meritocracy, it is especially important that its governance system is more powerful than any individual—and that it directs and constrains its leaders rather than the other way around. The Chinese leader Wang Qishan drew my attention to what happened in ancient Rome when Julius Caesar revolted against the government, defeated his fellow general Pompey, seized control of the Republic from the Senate, and named himself emperor for life. Even after he was assassinated and governance by the Senate was restored, Rome would never again be what it was; the era of civil strife that followed was more damaging than any foreign war. 
 c.  Beware of fiefdoms. While it’s great for teams and departments to feel a strong bond of shared purpose, loyalty to a boss or department head cannot be allowed to conflict with loyalty to the organization as a whole. Fiefdoms are counterproductive and contrary to the values of an idea meritocracy. 
 d.  Make clear that the organization’s structure and rules are designed to ensure that its checks-and-balances system functions well. Every organization has its own way of doing this. The diagram on the next page is a sketch of my conceptualization of how this should work for Bridgewater, which is currently an organization of about 1,500 people. The principles it follows, however, are universal; I believe that all organizations need some version of this basic structure. 

 There are one to three chairmen working with seven to fifteen board members supported by staff, whose purpose is primarily to assess whether: 1) The people running the company are capable; 2) The company is operating in accordance with its agreed-upon principles and rules. The board has the power to select and replace the CEOs, but doesn’t engage in the micromanagement of the firm nor the people running it, though in the event of an emergency, they can drop into a more active role. (They can also help the CEOs to the extent they want it.) While Bridgewater’s idea meritocracy is ideally all-inclusive, there need to be various circles of authority, trust and access to information, and decision-making authority, which are shown in the chart’s three circles. 
 e.  Make sure reporting lines are clear. While this is important throughout the organization, it is especially important that the reporting lines of the board (those doing the oversight) are independent of the reporting lines of the CEOs (those doing the management), though there should be cooperation between them. 
 f.  Make sure decision rights are clear. Make sure it’s clear how much weight each person’s vote has so that if a decision must be made when there is still disagreement, there is no doubt how to resolve it. 
 g.  Make sure that the people doing the assessing 1) have the time to be fully informed about how the person they are checking on is doing, 2) have the ability to make the assessments, and 3) are not in a conflict of interest that stands in the way of carrying out oversight effectively. In order to assess well, one has to gain a threshold level of understanding and that takes time. Some people have the ability and the courage to hold people accountable, while most don’t; having such ability and courage is essential. And the person doing the assessing must not have conflicts of interest—such as being in a subordinate position to the person they are intended to check on—that stand in the way of holding them accountable, including recommending that they be fired. 
 h.   Recognize that decision makers must have access to the information necessary to make decisions and must be trustworthy enough to handle that information safely. That doesn’t mean that all people must have access and be trustworthy. It is possible to have subcommittees who have access to sensitive information and make recommendations to the board that are substantiated with enough information to make good judgments, but without disclosing the highly sensitive particulars. 
 16.2 Remember that in an idea meritocracy a single CEO is not as good as a great group of leaders. 
 Dependence on one person produces too much key-man risk, limits the range of expertise (because nobody is good at everything), and fails to establish adequate checks and balances. It also creates a burden because there’s generally too much to do. That’s why we have a co-CEO model at Bridgewater that is essentially a partnership of two or three people who lead the firm. 
 At Bridgewater the CEOs are overseen by a board largely via the executive chairman or chairmen. In our idea meritocracy, the CEOs are also held accountable by the employees of the company, even though these employees are subordinate to the CEOs. The challenge of having two or three people is for them to dance well together. If they can’t do that, and coordinate well with the chairmen, they have to notify the executive chairman or chairmen so changes can be made. 
 For the same reason we have more than one CEO overseeing management of the company, we have more than one chief investment officer (there are currently three). 
 16.3 No governance system of principles, rules, and checks and balances can substitute for a great partnership. 
 All these principles, rules, and checks and balances won’t be worth much if you don’t have capable people in positions of power who instinctually want to operate for the good of the community based on the agreed-upon principles. A company’s leaders must have wisdom, competence, and the ability to have close, cooperative, and effective working relationships characterized by both thoughtful disagreement and commitment to following through with whatever the idea-meritocratic process decides. 

 We work with others to get three things: 
 1) Leverage to accomplish our chosen missions in bigger and better ways than we could alone. 
 2) Quality relationships that together make for a great community. 
 3) Money that allows us to buy what we need and want for ourselves and others.

Principles 

 WORK PRINCIPLES: PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
 S ince the relative importance of these three things varies by person, it is up to you to determine the quantities and mix you want. The important thing to realize is that they are mutually supportive. If you want to accomplish your mission, you will be better off having quality relationships with people committed to that mission and financial resources to put behind it. Similarly, if you want to have a great work community, you will need a shared mission and financial resources to support you, and if you want to make the most money possible, you will need clear goals and tight relationships to achieve them. In my life, I have been lucky to have much more of all three of these than I could have ever imagined. I have tried to convey the approach that worked for me—an idea meritocracy in which meaningful work and meaningful relationships are the goals and radical truth and radical transparency are the ways of achieving them—so that you can decide what, if any of it, is of use to you. 
 Recognizing that I gave you a pile of principles that could be confusing, I want to make sure that the headline I’m trying to get across comes through. It is that of all approaches to decision making, an idea meritocracy is the best. 40 It’s almost too obvious to warrant saying, but I will anyway: Knowing what you can and cannot expect from each person and knowing what to do to make sure the best ideas win out are the best way to make decisions. Idea-meritocratic decision making is better than traditional autocratic or democratic decision making in almost all cases. 
 That’s not just theory. While there is no such thing as utopia just like there is no such thing as perfect, there is great—and there isn’t much doubt that the results of this idea-meritocratic approach have been pretty great for Bridgewater for more than forty years. Because this approach can work equally well in most organizations, I wanted to lay it out clearly and in detail. While you needn’t follow this idea-meritocratic approach exactly as I’ve done it, the big question is: Do you want to work in an idea meritocracy? If so, what is the best way for you to do that? 
 An idea meritocracy requires people to do three things: 1) Put their honest thoughts on the table for everyone to see, 2) Have thoughtful disagreements where there are quality back-and-forths in which people evolve their thinking to come up with the best collective answers possible, and 3) Abide by idea-meritocratic ways of getting past the remaining disagreements (such as believability-weighted decision making). While an idea meritocracy doesn’t have to operate exactly in any particular way, it does have to by and large follow those three steps. Don’t worry about remembering all the particular principles that I gave you in this book. Just go after having an idea meritocracy and figure out what works for you by encountering your trade-offs and coming up with your principles for handling them. 
 In my case, I wanted meaningful work and meaningful relationships, and I believed that being radically truthful and radically transparent were required to get those. Then I went after them and encountered problems that forced me to make choices. By writing down how I made these choices, I was able to flesh out my principles, which led me to shape Bridgewater’s idea meritocracy with the people I worked with so that it would work well for us. As you set out on your own and encounter your own impediments, you might want to refer back to these principles because chances are that I’ve encountered many of the same impediments, did my wrestling with how to handle them, and laid out my thinking in principles. And then write down your own. 
 Of course, people’s abilities to influence how their group works vary, and I don’t know your circumstances. But I do know that if you want to work in an idea-meritocratic way, you can find your own way of doing that. Maybe it will be by helping shape your organization from the top, maybe it will be by choosing the right organization for you, and maybe it will be by simply dealing with the people you work with in an idea-meritocratic way. No matter your position, you can always practice being open-minded and assertive at the same time, and thinking about your and others’ believabilities when deciding what to do. 
 Above all else, my wishes for you are that: 1) You can make your work and your passion one and the same; 2) You can struggle well with others on your common mission to produce the previously mentioned rewards; 3) You can savor both your struggles and your rewards; and 4) You will evolve quickly and contribute to evolution in significant ways. 

 40  I’m not saying that it is always the best, as there are some cases where it’s not. I’m saying that I believe that it is almost always the best if it can be implemented well. 

 It’s up to you to decide what you want to get out of life and what you want to give.

Principles 

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 My Life and Work Principles are a result of my encounters with reality over many years. Because these encounters were most importantly shaped with Bob Prince, Greg Jensen, Giselle Wagner, Dan Bernstein, David McCormick, Eileen Murray, Joe Dobrich, Paul Colman, Rob Fried, Ross Waller, Claude Amadeo, Randal Sandler, Osman Nalbantoglu, Brian Kreiter, Tom Sinchak, Tom Waller, Janine Racanelli, Fran Shanne, and Lisa Safian, they are the people to whom I am most grateful. 
 Bob, Greg, and I have spent the greater parts of our adult lives trying to discover the timeless and universal laws of economies and markets. In the process, we had daily interactions that were typically thoughtful, infrequently bloody, and occasionally euphoric. While our meetings were primarily about economies and markets and led to the discovery of invaluable economic and investment principles, they also taught us a great amount about ourselves and about how people should be with each other. We captured these lessons as life and work principles that were even more valuable. More recently, we did that with Eileen Murray and Dave McCormick, who together replaced me as co-CEOs. Thank you, Dave and Eileen, for contributing to, receiving, and taking care of the boon. 
 When I first imagined transitioning Bridgewater from a first-generation organization to a second-generation one, I decided to pull together my scattered collection of principles into this recipe book to help others at Bridgewater. Collecting and transforming what started as a messy pile of principles into this beautiful book was an epic effort that Mark Kirby, more than anyone, was responsible for helping me with. I also appreciate Arthur Goldwag’s and Mike Kubin’s contributions in tightening up and refining the entire manuscript. (Mike did that as a friend.) I further appreciate Arianna Huffington, Tony Robbins, Norm Rosenthal, and Kristina Nikolova for taking the time to read the book and provide valuable suggestions. 
 Those who enabled me most on a daily basis were “Ray’s Angels” (Marilyn Caufield, Petra Koegel, Kristy Merola, and Christina Drossakis), “Ray’s Leveragers” (Zack Wieder, Dave Alpert, Jen Gonyo, and Andrew Sternlight—and past leveragers Elise Waxenberg, David Manners-Weber, and John Woody), and “Ray’s Researchers” (Steven Kryger, Gardner Davis, and Brandon Rowley—and past researcher Mark Dinner). I am also thankful to Jason Rotenberg, Noah Yechiely, Karen Karniol-Tambour, Bruce Steinberg, Larry Cofsky, Bob Elliott, Ramsen Betfarhad, Kevin Brennan, Kerry Reilly, and Jacob Kline, who are among the next generation who help spark and shape our investment principles; to Jeff Gardner, Jim Haskel, Paul Podolsky, Rob Zink, Mike Colby, Lionel Kaliff, Joel Whidden, Brian Lawlor, Tom Bachner, Jim White, Kyle Delaney, Ian Wang, Parag Shah, and Bill Mahoney, who have personified our principles to our clients; to Dave Ferrucci, who, more than anyone else, has helped me convert the Work Principles into algorithms; and to Jeff Taylor, Steve Elfanbaum, Stuart Friedman, and Jen Healy, who are helping me convert them into common sense for a lot of people. Though my interests and directions have always been diverse, these teams made my missions their missions, and kept me moving forward. Without their help, I wouldn’t have accomplished anything close to what I have. Thank you for enduring me and for selflessly supporting me. 
 Whatever beauty you see in the book’s design was the result of Phil Caravaggio’s generosity and talent. After I put the original version of Principles online as a PDF, he came to me as a stranger bearing the gift of a gorgeously designed print edition, created with the help of the artistic book designer Rodrigo Corral. Phil, who is a brilliant entrepreneur in his own right, just wanted to thank me because the principles had helped him. The book’s beauty astounded me, and Phil’s account of what these principles meant to him was another gift that nudged me closer to making the book a reality. Once I decided to make it, Phil went on to work tirelessly with Rodrigo to shape the aesthetic of what you are now holding in your hands—doing so again solely as a gift. Thank you, Phil! 
 Six years ago, Jofie Ferrari-Adler, Executive Editor at Simon & Schuster, read the principles online, found them valuable, and explained to me why sharing this book was an important thing for me to do to help others. He has been a valued partner in making that happen. In exploring my publishing options, I triangulated with others to find the best agent available. This search led me to Jim Levine. I learned why he is so admired by his clients as he provides his great time, skill, and empathy. Jim guided me through the publishing process, which led me to Jon Karp, Simon & Schuster’s President. From the start, Jon wanted my book to be more what I wanted it to be than what he wanted it to be, and he helped me make it happen. 
 Finally, I’d like to thank my wife, Barbara, and my sons Devon, Paul, Matt, and Mark for putting up with me and my principles—and for giving me the time and space to create both these principles and this book.
