
Wave A: Another Retracement to Buy or the Beginning of the End
The concepts of Accumulation and Distribution, as well as the life cycle of a stock, build upon the
notion that professional investors consistently make money over time while amateur or retail
investors consistently lose money to professionals over time. Notice the different actions professional
and retail traders take during the accumulation phase or during Elliott's Waves 1 and 2. The first
correction Wave has the same dynamics.
To the professionals, Wave A represents the beginning of a new bear market or a new Mark-down
phase, so they have either exited their positions prior to the top or are doing so during the first wave
down. Other professionals short sell shares in an attempt to establish a position as close to the top as
possible. On the other hand, what are the vast majority of retail or amateur traders doing? For the
most part, they are buying during this retracement wave down as they think it is just another
opportunity to buy a retracement within the context of a lengthy rising uptrend that has no end in sight.
If they just see the price on a standard line chart, then this retracement is no different to them than any
of the prior retracements that resulted in higher price highs.
During Wave A, savvy traders often observe new momentum or breadth lows, or price breaking
under long-term trendlines or important short- or intermediate-term moving averages. If you start to
see a sudden down-move in price form after a clean negative divergence undercut the recent price
high, you may be looking at Wave A beginning a new bear phase.

Wave B: The Phony Rally
B Waves can be enormously deceptive, even to experienced traders. Wave B forms after Wave A has
taken price lower, usually after a clean negative divergence undercut the recent price high. Wave B
might begin to form from under the 20- or 50-day moving averages. Again, conceptualize this in terms
of professionals and amateurs. Professionals are positioned defensively during this phase and they are
skeptical that this rally will carry price to a new high. Amateurs do not see the price chart damage
(trendline or moving average breaks, new momentum lows) that occurred and thus fully expect that
price will continue its merry way to a new high, and may be fully positioned long after buying what
they believed was another typical retracement (which, in reality, was Wave A).
Just like the second wave is not another bear market swing that will take price to a new low, Wave

B is not another bull market swing that will take price to a new high. However, here is where B
Waves get tricky. While Wave 2 cannot form a new low in price under Wave 1, Wave B can form a
new price high above Wave 5. This is one of the reasons why Elliott Wave is confusing to many
people who study it for the first time.
Generally, Wave B does not form a new swing high but there are occasions where it does. In the
event that Wave B does form a new high, the new price high is almost always undercut with negative
breadth, volume, and momentum divergences. Thus, professional traders see the new price high but
understand that the floor is likely to collapse in price in the next swing ahead. Amateurs will not see
these blatant nonconfirmations and will continue buying shares eagerly during the false rally.
Eventually, price will continue the Mark-down phase as the worst is yet to come.

Wave C: The Panic Phase
By the time the third wave, or swing, of the Distribution Phase, Mark-down phase, or Bear Market
(whatever your definition of a down-trend in price) occurs, most professionals have completely sold
their positions, are positioned short already, or will soon sell any remaining shares they own. C
Waves can be similar to third waves in their dynamics, because at this time, a positive feedback loop
develops that pushes price sharply to the downside. Those traders who bought long during the prior
waves, including the B Wave, must now liquidate their shares as price triggers their stop-loss orders.
In combination, Wave C often breaks sharply under the A Wave low, which triggers many aggressive
traders to short sell shares, driving the price even lower. If Waves 4, 5, A, and B have formed a
horizontal rectangle consolidation or negative feedback loop (price compression), then Wave C will
often be the wave that breaks to the downside and triggers a breakout range expansion, positive
feedback loop environment.
Amateur traders who bought shares at any time during Waves 4, 5, A, or B suffer potentially
devastating losses as price falls sharply to the downside, and they often remain positioned long until
the point where they can no longer bear the emotional pain of financial loss. Unfortunately, this point
often occurs near the latter phases of Wave C, which ends the life cycle phase that Elliott defined and
begins again with the dynamics of accumulation that sets the cycle in motion again for a Wave 1 yet to
come, and thus the eventual birth of a new cycle.

THE THREE RULES OF ELLIOTT WAVE
Despite the complexities of Elliott's theory, the Elliott Wave principle lists only three rules that
cannot be broken except in rare instances. In hindsight, identifying proper waves on a chart is simple,
but in real-time, traders refer to the following three rules to guide both their primary and alternate
assessments of waves in progress.
First, Wave 2 cannot retrace more than 100 percent of Wave 1. Stated differently, in a rising Wave
1, the corrective Wave 2 cannot trade under the low of Wave 1, and in the context of a falling Wave
1, Wave 2 cannot rally higher than the beginning high price of Wave 1. Traders often report difficulty
in identifying Waves 1 and 2 as they develop, so this rule guides them in their real-time assessment.
They must change their wave labels if their developing wave count violates the first rule.
Second, Wave 3 cannot be the shortest of the three impulse waves 1, 3, and 5. While Wave 3 cannot
be the shortest wave in a proposed count, the rule does not necessitate that the third wave be the

longest wave, which is most often the case. This rule comes into play when you label a very large
wave as the first wave, and then a smaller middle wave as the third wave, and then believe price to
be in a terminal fifth wave. When this situation happens, it is most likely that the price remains in a
larger third wave that might be persisting longer than you think, which would cause you to label price
in final fifth wave too early. Remember, look for divergences when you begin to label fifth waves.
Finally, Wave 4 cannot enter the price territory of Wave 2, or, stated differently, Wave 4 cannot end
under the price high of Wave 1. This is also a cross-check on your real-time wave count that states
that the third wave is usually the most dynamic. If you believe a third wave to have ended and you
label price in a current fourth wave, then what you label as the fourth wave should not trade lower
than the high of what you labeled as Wave 1, as Wave 2 begins at the high of Wave 1.
I suggest envisioning the character of waves as described above in terms of the characteristics to
expect and the psychology of the traders involved, rather than getting bogged down in the tiny details
of precise wave counting. Elliott Wave complements Charles Dow's work on trend, but what is most
important is understanding the prevailing trend and then assessing the momentum structure that
confirms or fails to confirm the trend. Elliott Wave is a formal method to achieve that same goal of
assessing the trend direction and strength.

ELLIOTT WAVES EXAMPLE: RESEARCH IN
MOTION
Let's take a real-world example to compare the progression of stages and waves. Research in Motion
(RIMM) moves from accumulation through distribution on its weekly price chart from 2005 to 2009
in Figure 7.7.
FIGURE 7.7 Elliott's Waves and Dow/Wyckoff's Stages Overlaid in Research in Motion

Investors in Research in Motion held price within a two-year trading range from 2005 to early 2007
with an upper resistance line at $35.00 and a lower support line just above $20.00 per share. The
two-year period marked an accumulation phase that gave way to the beginning of Realization with the
October 2006 break above $35.00 per share.
Though the scale is small, notice the new price high and momentum high in the 3/10 MACD
Oscillator that formed in the later part of 2006. This range breakout phase began the first wave, which
marked a positive feedback loop until the sideways consolidation phase that marked Wave 2. Notice
how price supported on the rising 20-week exponential moving average and then broke above the
second accumulation phase, or negative feedback loop, in May 2007. The break to new price highs,
which also formed another new momentum high, marked another confirmation of the Realization
phase in progress and sparked the beginning of Elliott's third wave.
Third waves often mark the most powerful sustained move of a bull market, and Research in
Motion's weekly chart highlights this concept. The realization phase continued with only a minor
pause halfway through that took price back to the rising 20-week moving average. The third wave
spanned from the $50.00 level to the peak at $130.00 in late 2007 in an almost vertical positive
feedback loop that marked a powerful range expansion impulse to the upside. Traders took profits
here and price fell back to the rising 50-week exponential moving average at the $85.00-per-share
level. This relatively steep pullback was not the peak in the price move, but was only a Wave 4
pullback to rising moving average support that set the stage for the final distribution phase, or Elliott's
fifth wave.
Price supported off the rising 50-week EMA in early 2008 as traders rushed to purchase shares.
Professionals, who had purchased shares for a longer-term investment accumulated their positions at

lower prices before the sharp price rise. These investors aimed to sell their shares to lock in their
gains as eager amateur traders swooped in to purchase the shares that the professionals sold.
Amateurs, driven mostly by emotion, whether fear of missing out on easy money or greed of making
money very quickly, failed to see the negative divergence as price pushed to new highs beyond
$130.00 to peak just shy of $150.00 per share in June 2008.
Pay close attention to the structure as price progresses down from the fifth wave to begin the first
corrective wave lower. This is one of the main benefits of incorporating Elliott Wave into your
analysis. Notice that price fell from $140.00 sharply lower to the $105.00 level to bounce solidly off
the rising 50-week EMA at the point I labeled Wave A. Look closely at the new low that the 3/10
MACD Oscillator forms when price did not form a new price low under the early 2008 swing low
labeled Wave 4. This pattern is called the Kick-off, and is a revealing signal that most traders miss;
identifying it allows you to distinguish between a standard retracement swing in the context of an
ongoing bull market (which should not form a Kick-off signal) and a potential first swing down in a
new bear market that may be developing.
If the momentum oscillator breaks to a new indicator low beyond recent lows in the oscillator, but
price does not break to a new price low beneath the prior swing low, then you have momentum
sending you a potentially strong warning sign that the trend may be reversing. Again, the signal comes
from the 3/10 MACD Oscillator or other momentum oscillator forming a new swing low in July 2008
that takes out the oscillator low formed in January 2008. Compare the oscillator lows to the price
lows that formed them. The July 2008 price low bottomed above $100.00, while the January price
low bottomed at the $80.00-per-share level. The momentum oscillator formed a new low while price
did not. This Kick-off signal often warns of a turn in trend to mark an A wave down, which gives you
an early warning signal of a potential trend reversal.
To anyone else, this downswing in price is just another higher low that bounces off a rising moving
average, which is a classic buy signal. Amateur traders do aggressively buy here, which helps push
the price higher in a false rally to create Wave B. Professionals observed the divergences that formed
on the prior fifth wave impulse to new highs, and may also see the new oscillator Kick-off lows that
characterized Wave A while amateurs will not see this warning signal. As such, when the buying that
pushes price to a rally in Wave B ends, price will then transition to the final down move which can
be as violent in terms of positive feedback and range breakout expansion as a rising third wave.
Whether you draw a rising trendline connecting the $60.00, $80.00, and $105.00 price lows, or
draw a horizontal trendline at the $110.00 level, price breaks all trendlines as well as the rising 50week EMA at the $110.00 level, which begins a violent positive feedback loop of selling, with bulls
selling unwillingly to take stop losses and bears selling willingly to enter new short-sale positions.
Either way, Wave C brings out panic selling from retail investors who purchased shares anywhere
during the Distribution Stage or specifically from Waves 4, 5, A, or B.
If you combine the Elliott Wave notation and the distribution concept, you can visualize a trading
range or distribution phase that occurred between the $110.00- and $135.00-per-share price level.
Notice the particularly violent volatility in the form of a straight down move during Wave C or
Wyckoff's Mark-down phase. During September 2008, price fell from a monthly high of $125.00 to a
monthly low of $69.50, which was a 45 percent price drop in a single month. Traders or investors
who held long during that month were shell-shocked and uncertain whether to lock in their losses or
keep holding on in hopes that price would bounce so that they could recoup some of their sudden
losses. Holding and hoping was the wrong decision: after the 45 percent one-month drop to $70.00,

price fell another 50 percent to bottom three months later in December 2008 at $35.00 per share.

FINAL TIPS FOR APPLYING THE LIFE CYCLE IN
REAL TIME

When doing your own analysis and trading, remember that it is far more important to understand the
phases during the life cycle that a stock experiences rather than struggle with the precise wave count.
If you have tried to apply Elliott Wave in any form other than hindsight, you will know that the real
world does not always follow the textbook counts. Take the time to understand the psychology of the
groups of investors or traders, specifically the thoughts of the professionals versus the amateurs as
price moves from stage to stage. Understanding the insights from large-scale investor psychology will
be far more important than perfect real-time labeling and the frustration traders experience when what
they labeled as a fifth wave then springs new life on to a sixth, seventh, eighth, or even ninth wave.
Realize that you will probably miss real-time identification of a first and second wave as they form.
To most people, waves 1 and 2 are indistinguishable from any typical bear market swing. The first
clue for most people comes when price breaks to a new high above the peak of Wave 1—this is often
the official Kick-off to the Realization phase and dynamic third wave.
Look beyond the price to volume, sentiment, breadth indicators (if assessing an index), and
momentum oscillators. Look for new breadth, momentum, and volume highs to accompany what you
believe to be third waves. Look to buy the pullback into support in what you believe is a fourth wave.
Look for negative divergences in volume, momentum, and breadth to serve as nonconfirmation of
price highs during what you believe to be a fifth wave.
Look for technical damage in the form of price penetrations under a key short- or intermediate-term
average during a possible Wave A. Look to see if momentum forms a new low in a Kick-off signal
when price does not form a new low on the chart; if so, you may be observing Wave A at the official
start of a new Mark-down distribution phase. Look for Wave C to break through established
trendlines, prior support areas, or moving averages and make sure momentum forms new lows along
with price during this potentially violent final phase of distribution or the Mark-down phase.
We have now arrived at the end of the price principles and trading strategies that form the basis of
specific trade setups. Using this as a departure point, we will now pivot to discuss how to
incorporate all we have learned so far into specific setups. Our goal as traders is to recognize shortterm, high-probability trading opportunities with low-risk entries.
Make sure you fully understand the principles of trend continuity, momentum's role, and the price
alternation (range contraction and expansion). In your analysis, look for specific candle bars and
price patterns to guide your analysis of the current price structure. Within the context of a trending
move, draw Fibonacci grids over price swings to find hidden support or resistance levels that many
traders miss. Finally, put all of your analysis into the broader picture of the life cycle of a price move
on the larger frame from accumulation to distribution, and back again.
Armed with this knowledge of how to analyze price on a chart, you can now turn the page to the
final section to learn how to execute specific tactics to take advantage of opportunities that exist
within the developing price structure.

PART III
Execution and Trade Setups

CHAPTER 8
Edge, Expectancy, and Execution
So far, we have discussed trend, momentum, and volatility as the foundation price principles that
define market movement. We then examined specific trading tools such as candlesticks, price
patterns, and Fibonacci retracements to build upon the leading price principles of trend, momentum,
and volatility. Moving averages assist in trend identification; unbound momentum oscillators reveal
the momentum structure of the market as a confirmation of a price move or a nonconfirmation through
divergences. For volatility, we assess the degree of price range compression or expansion directly on
the charts, or through indicators such as Bollinger Bands, the ADX Indicator, or hand-drawn
trendlines.
All of the information of a chart fits within the life cycle of a price move from accumulation through
realization on to final distribution, and we can apply the appropriate strategy depending on our
assessment of price's location in the broader cycle. No matter what timeframe you're using,
understanding these principles and how to use the right chart tool at the right time will help you to
locate the best opportunities for low-risk trades.
However, being able to recognize opportunities alone won't make you successful. You must have
confidence to act on those opportunities and to focus on the big picture. Many traders fail to achieve
long-term profits due to deficiencies in execution, risk management, money management, or emotional
management.
Once you acquire the basic skills, you will find that long-term trading success requires balancing
competing interests. Some of the factors you will have to balance as you develop your own trading
plan and strategies are:
How much money to risk (too much and you invite the risk of ruin, too little and you will
not profit from your endeavors),
How many markets or stocks to follow (too many and you miss opportunities, too little and
you don't have enough opportunities)
How to manage emotions (too much greed and you take risky bets that lead to large losses,
but too much fear causes you to miss opportunities)
When to enter a position (if you enter before a signal triggers, you will incur more losses
but if you enter too late after a signal triggers, you will erode your risk/reward edge—
inactivity is costly)
When to exit a position (too early and you leave money on the table, or too late and you
give back unrealized profits)
How to balance bias with objectivity (if you are too biased that the market must rise or fall,
you will miss conflicting evidence that suggests your bias is wrong)
How much time you commit to trading (too much and you risk burnout and social isolation,

too little and you miss critical information and opportunities)
Most of the decisions you make will be personal, tied directly to your personality, risk-tolerance,
experience, age, account size, financial goals, and life experiences.
This chapter scratches the surface on some of the more important components of your trading plan. I
would suggest you spend as much time seeking to answer these questions as you do learning about
trade setups and management. It's one thing to know what to do, but it's an entirely separate thing to
enter and exit trades in real time under conditions of uncertainty. Let's start our deeper journey by
discussing why understanding edge is critical to every trader.

ALL ABOUT EDGE
Without an edge, you should not trade, but how do you define edge? In a probabilistic arena such as
the markets with uncertain outcomes, an edge may be defined as a higher probability of one outcome
occurring over another. Edge also represents an advantage over time. Education and experience give
an advantage, or edge, to professional traders when compared to new or less-educated, lessexperienced traders; this is the information and experience edge. There are actually many types of
edge in the market, but for this discussion, we will focus on how to assess your mathematical
accuracy edge and monetary edge, both in individual trades and over time as part of your broader
trading strategy.

The Casino's Edge in Roulette
In the gambling arena, the casinos have the edge or advantage over the players in all games. One of
the best examples to describe what an edge means is to consider a night at the roulette table, and how
many gamblers misunderstand their odds of success. A typical roulette board contains 36 numbered
spaces that are colored either red or black, and two green spaces numbered 0 and 00 (zero and
double-zero). There are 18 red numbers and 18 black numbers and at first glance, it seems to the new
gambler that there is an even 50/50 chance of a successful outcome if the gambler bets on a red
number rather than a black number, because the number of red and black numbers is equal on the
roulette wheel. This would be correct, except for the casino's addition of the two green zero and
double-zero spaces.
Mathematically speaking, there are 38 squares on a roulette wheel in which the spinning ball can
rest, and of those 18 are black and 18 are red. If we want to bet on a red number coming up, we need
to find the probability of that outcome happening. To do so, we divide 18 (the number of red squares)
by 38 (the total number of squares) and calculate that there is a 47.5 percent chance of success.
How did that happen? If there are an equal number of red and black squares, how is it that there is
only a 47.5 percent chance of a red number coming up? The house edge is represented by the two
green squares, which are neither red nor black, and occasionally the ball stops in one of these
squares. In this event, no gambler who bet on red or black is paid—the house takes all the money of
those who bet on either red or black. Because there are two green squares out of 38, there is a 5
percent chance that the ball will stop in one of the green squares.
Because players cannot bet on a green-color square coming up, they must limit their color bets to
the 36 of 38 squares that contain a red or black color. So, if a player bets on the ball landing in a red
