
P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

48

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

looking for an edge, and more and more firms are using computers to find the edges
and place the trades.
A trader cannot possibly analyze a report and all of its implications in time to
place a trade on the 5 minute chart. Computers can process information and place
orders far faster than an individual trader can, and this gives them a huge edge over
individual traders just after a report is released. When a trader’s opponent has a
huge edge, he is at a big disadvantage, which means that he has no edge. Since
his edge can never be large and he should trade only when it is there, he should
avoid trading when it is not, especially when a competitor has a particularly large
one. However, he can still make money from the report. Since so many firms now
have computers that quickly analyze reports and then place trades based on that
analysis, all a trader has to do is be able to read a chart to see what the consensus
opinion is from all of that analysis. The computers will show you what the report
means to the market, and all you have to do is trade in the same direction. Incidentally, computers have an additional edge at the end of the day. When traders have
been trading for hours, they naturally become tired, slower, and resistant to taking
trades. Computers never get tired and are as effective up to the final seconds of the
day as they were at the open. If traders are not at their best, which is often the case
in the final hour, they have less of an edge or no edge, and they should take a trade
only if both they and the setup are strong.
If you think about it, an inherent problem that HFT firms face is that they can
kill the goose that is laying those golden eggs. Their trading is statistically based,
and although it is mostly tested over many years, they certainly pay attention to the
way that the market has been behaving over the past few weeks. If enough firms
make adjustments due to recent price action, there won’t be enough volume to take
the other side of their trades, and as a result they won’t be able to trade the way
their algorithms intend and they won’t make as much money. They might even lose
money. This imbalance results in a change in the price action. For example, if the
recent daily range has shrunk to about a third of its long-term average, it cannot last
that way for too long. Eventually everyone will figure out how to make money off of
the small days, and they will likely all be doing the same thing. At some point, there
won’t be enough money left to take the opposite side of their trades, and either
they won’t get filled or they will have to accept worse entries. In either case, that
will change the behavior of the market.
Many institutional traders who are working to fill large orders for institutional
clients are angry with the high-frequency traders, but I suspect that a lot of it is
jealousy. These institutional traders used to be at the top of the food chain and
were responsible for all the significant moves in the market. Not anymore. They
see the quants consistently making more money, and they are doing it in a way
that totally disregards the fundamentals that traditional institutional traders think
forms the bedrock of Wall Street. They hate these upstarts coming into their game,

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

49

disregarding their rules and everything they hold dear, having much better track
records, commanding the most awe, and probably becoming more desirable places
to work for the very best young, new traders. It is likely that some of their client
money is getting diverted to HFT and other program trading firms, and this threatens some of their income. However, the goal is to make money; I am happy to have
the added liquidity and I like all of the strong swings that are now common. I even
like the tight trading ranges that these quants create, but they are more stressful
to trade.
Liquidity means the immediate availability of shares at a fair price, and this
means that high-frequency traders are actually helping institutional traders get a
good price on their trades. This liquidity used to be provided by order offsetters
(market makers), but their role has largely been taken over by HFT firms. Incidentally, just as there are complaints about HFT firms, there used to be complaints
about unfair practices of market makers. One big complaint is that they fail to take
the other side of trades when the market is crashing, which is the time when most
traders desperately need someone to take the other side of a trade. There are other
complaints about dark pools, flash trading, crossover networks, front-running, and
just about every other aspect of computerized trading, but most of the unfair practices will likely be minimized by the federal government and should not cause a
problem for individual traders in the long run.
The quants are providing liquidity to the market and reducing spreads for all
traders, but their programs can sometimes contribute to big moves in a matter of
minutes if enough of them are doing the same thing at the same time. These scalping
programs probably do not have much influence on the swings during the day, which
are more the result of institutional orders being filled for clients. Over the long run,
fundamentals rule, but over the next few seconds to minutes, program trading often controls the market and it probably has nothing to do with the fundamentals
of the market in question. The fundamentals determine the direction and the targets over the next several months, but mathematicians determine the path that the
market will follow to that target. Since the algorithms are statistically based, they
may in fact enhance support and resistance and trending because of market inertia. Markets tend to keep doing what they are doing, so the program writers will
detect recurring behavior and write programs that capitalize on this. Since a trend
is likely to continue, the programs will keep taking with-trend positions, and this
might make the trend more reliable and have smaller pullbacks. Also, most breakout attempts of trading ranges fail, and they may even be more likely to fail with so
much volume betting that they will.
Although markets have inertia, at some point the current price action becomes
excessive. For example, if the daily SPY is in a bull channel and it has not touched
the moving average for 45 days and it has only done that once in the past 10 years,
the current behavior is extremely unusual. Anything that is extreme cannot last

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

50

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

long because eventually it will show up as an excess on every imaginable measure
of excess, and excess is opportunity. The market is not good at determining how
far is far enough, but it is very good at knowing when the market has reached an
excess. Once enough firms have decided that there is an excess, they will see it
as an edge and place bets on a regression toward the mean. They will bet that
the market will go back to doing what it has always done. In the case of that SPY
bull, the strong bears will short and add on higher as the number of days away
from the moving average becomes even more extreme. Also, the strong bulls will
see the unusual behavior and they will begin to take profits and not look to buy
again until the market pulls back at least to the moving average. The market can
reach extremes in any type of behavior, like the number of consecutive bear trend
bars; the number of consecutive days where the range is half of the average or
twice the average; the number of consecutive bars with lows, highs, or closes above
those of the prior bar; and just about anything else that you can imagine. There are
institutions out there that pay attention to any form of extreme behavior and they
will fade it. Also, extreme behavior will eventually show up as extreme on every
conceivable indicator, so traders basing their decisions on indicators will also begin
to bet that the behavior will end. Yes, the extreme will eventually end, but unless
you are very confident in your read, do not fade the trend, because the market can
sustain its unusual behavior longer than you can sustain your account.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

Figure PI.1

FIGURE PI.1

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

51

Two-Legged Pullbacks

Figure PI.1 and all of the charts in the book are available for download at www
.wiley.com/go/tradingtrends, and you will be able to zoom in on the charts to see
the details.
Two-legged corrections are reliable setups for trades in the direction of the
trend. Bar counting is discussed in detail in a later section (in the second book),
but since ABC patterns appear on just about every chart, they are worth discussing
briefly here. As shown in Figure PI.1, bar 3 was the first leg down after the strong
move up to bar 2. That made it the A leg of the ABC pullback. The little move up
to the bar 4 high was the B leg, and the move down to the bar 5 low was the C leg.
Since most pullbacks are not clear ABC patterns and instead often have just one
leg and others have three or four, it is useful to have an alternative way to describe
what is happening. Labeling a four-legged pullback as an ABCDE is too awkward to
be useful. Instead, when there is a pullback in a bull leg, like to bar 3 in Figure PI.1,
then the first bar that goes above the high of the prior bar is a high 1 long entry.
Bar 4 is an example, as is the bar after bar 7. If the pullback continues down for
a second leg, like it did to bar 5, then the first bar after bar 5 that goes above the
high of the prior bar would be a high 2 entry. The bar after bar 5 is an example of a
high 2 long entry, as is the bar after bar 9. Bars 5 and 9 were the high 2 buy setups
or signal bars. If there was a third leg down in the bull flag, the entry would be a

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

52

PRICE ACTION

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

Figure PI.1

high 3 buy entry, and if there was then a fourth leg down and the market turned up,
the entry would be a high 4 long. When the market is in a bear leg, like it was in the
move down from bar 10, the first leg up is the A leg of the ABC correction. Bar 12
or the bar before it was that A leg. The pullback from that small leg up was the B
leg, which was bar 13. And then the second leg up was the C leg, which ended with
the bar before bar 14. This was a sideways ABC, and it is common for the C leg to
not surpass the A leg in an ABC pullback. Bar 13 was a low 1 short entry, as it was
the first bar that traded below the low of the prior bar in a bear flag. Bar 15 was a
low 2 short entry bar.
The big legs are essentially unstoppable, but the small price action is fine-tuned
by some institutional traders who are watching every tick or have programs designed to take trades based on small price movements. For example, some Emini
traders will try to scalp out with a one-point profit, or four ticks. If they just entered
a buy, the market will usually have to move six ticks above the high of the signal bar.
They probably entered on a buy stop at one tick above the high of the signal bar,
and their profit-taking limit order is four ticks above their entry price. It usually will
not get filled unless the market trades one tick higher than their limit order, which
is six ticks above the signal bar’s high. Sometimes when the market just keeps hitting five ticks but not six (a potential five-tick failure), there will suddenly be a trade
of 250 Emini contracts and the price does not tick down. In general, anything over
100 contracts should be considered institutional in today’s Emini market. Even if
it is just a large individual trader, he likely has the insight of an institution, and as
he is trading institutional volume, he is indistinguishable from an institution. Since
the price is still hanging at five ticks, almost certainly that 250-lot order was an institutional buy. This is because if institutions were selling in a market filled with
nervous longs, the market would fall quickly. When the institutions start buying
when the market is up five ticks, they expect it to go more than just one tick higher
and usually within a minute or so the price will surge through six ticks and swing
up for at least many more. The institutions were buying at the high, which means
that they think the market will go higher and they will likely buy more as it goes
up. Also, since four-tick scalps work so often, it is likely that there is institutional
scalping that exerts a great influence over most scalps during the day.
Traders pay close attention to the seconds before key time frames close, especially 3, 5, 15, and 60 minute bars. This is also true on key volumes for volume bar
charts. For example, if many traders follow the 10,000 shares per bar chart for the
10-Year U.S. Treasury Note Futures contract, then when the bar is about to close
(it closes on the first trade of any size that results in at least 10,000 shares traded
since the start of the bar, so the bar is rarely exactly 10,000 shares), there may be a
flurry of activity to influence the final appearance of the bar. One side might want
to demonstrate a willingness to make the bar appear more bullish or bearish. In
simplest terms, a strong bull trend bar means that the bulls owned the bar. It is

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

Figure PI.1

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

PRICE ACTION

53

very common in strong trends for a reversal bar to totally reverse its appearance in
the final few seconds before a 5 minute bar closes. For example, in a strong bear,
there might be a long setting up with a very strong bull reversal bar. Then, with five
seconds remaining before the bar closes, the price plummets and the bar closes on
its low, trapping lots of front-running longs who expected a bull trend reversal bar.
When trading countertrend against a strong trend, it is imperative to wait for the
signal bar to close before placing your order, and then only enter on a stop at one
tick beyond the bar in the direction of your trade (if you are buying, buy at one tick
above the high of the prior bar on a stop).
What is the best way to learn how to read price action? It is to print out charts
and then look for every profitable trade. If you are a scalper looking for 50 cents in
AAPL or two dollars in GOOG on the 5 minute chart, then find every move during
the day where that amount of profit was possible. After several weeks, you will
begin to see a few patterns that would allow you to make those trades while risking
about the same amount. If the risk is the same as the reward, you have to win
much more than 60 percent of the time to make the trade worthwhile. However,
lots of patterns have a 70 percent or better success rate, and many trades allow
you to move your stop up from below the signal bar extreme to below the entry
bar extreme while waiting for your profit target to be reached, reducing your risk.
Also, you should be trying to enter trades that have a good chance of running well
past your profit target and you should therefore only take partial profits. In fact,
initially you should focus on only those entries. Move your stop to breakeven and
then let the remainder run. You will likely have at least a couple of trades each
week that run to four or more times your initial target before setting up a reverse
entry pattern.
Fibonacci retracements and extensions are a part of price action, but since
most are just approximations and most fail, they only occasionally are helpful in
trading. For example, the first pullback in a new trend often retraces about 62 percent of the first leg but not often enough to place a limit order to enter there. That
limit order would have you entering in the opposite direction of the market. For
example, if the market is falling and you are trying to buy what you hope will become a higher low, the risk/reward ratio is not high enough and the stress is too
great to be doing that routinely; however, there are exceptions when it is a sensible
strategy. If a Fibonacci number is good, it will be associated with a chart pattern
that is reliable and tradable on its own, independent of the Fibonacci measurement
or any indicators.
Elliott Wave Theory is also a type of price action analysis, but for most traders
it is not tradable. The waves are usually not clear until many, many bars after the
ideal entry point, and with so many opposite interpretations at every instant, it
requires far too much thought and there is too much uncertainty for most active
day traders.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 1

The Spectrum of
Price Action:
Extreme Trends
to Extreme
Trading Ranges

henever anyone looks at a chart, she will see areas where the market is
moving diagonally and other areas where the market is moving sideways
and not covering many points. The market can exhibit a spectrum of price
behavior from an extreme trend where almost every tick is higher or lower than
the last to an extreme trading range where every one- or two-tick up move is followed by a one- or two-tick down move and vice versa. Only rarely will the market
exist in either of these extreme states, and when it does, it does so only briefly,
but the market often trends for a protracted time with only small pullbacks and it
often moves up and down in a narrow range for hours. Trends create a sense of certainty and urgency, and trading ranges leave traders feeling confused about where
the market will go next. All trends contain smaller trading ranges, and all trading
ranges contain smaller trends. Also, most trends are just parts of trading ranges
on higher time frame (HTF) charts, and most trading ranges are parts of trends on
HTF charts. Even the stock market crashes of 1987 and 2009 were just pullbacks
to the monthly bull trend line. The following chapters are largely arranged along
the spectrum from the strongest trends to the tightest trading ranges, and then deal
with pullbacks, which are transitions from trends to trading ranges, and breakouts,
which are transitions from trading ranges to trends.
An important point to remember is that the market constantly exhibits inertia
and tends to continue to do what is has just been doing. If it is in a trend, most
attempts to reverse it will fail. If it is in a trading range, most attempts to break out
into a trend will fail.

W

55

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

56

PRICE ACTION

FIGURE 1.1

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 1.1

Extreme Trading Range and Trends

Figure 1.1 has two extreme trends and one extreme trading range. This day began
with a strong bear trend down to bar 1, then entered an unusually tight trading
range until it broke out to the upside by one tick at bar 2, and then reversed to a
downside breakout into an exceptionally strong trend down to bar 3.
Two-legged moves are common, but unfortunately the traditional nomenclature is confusing. When one occurs as a pullback in a trend, it is often called an
ABC move. When the two legs are the first two legs of a trend, Elliott Wave technicians instead refer to the legs as waves 1 and 3, with the pullback between them as
wave 2. Some traders who are looking for a measured move will look for a reversal back up after the second leg reaches about the same size as the first leg. These
technicians often call the pattern an AB = CD move. The first leg down begins with
point A and ends with point B (bar 1 in Figure 1.1, which is also A in the ABC
move), and the second leg begins with point C (bar 2 in Figure 1.1, which is also B
in the ABC move) and ends with point D (bar 3 in Figure 1.1, which is also C in the
ABC move).
Some corrections go for a third or even a fourth leg, so I prefer a different
labeling system to account for this and discuss it later in the books. In its simplest
form, it counts the legs of a pullback. For example, if there is a down leg in a bull
trend or in a trading range and a bar then goes above the high of the prior bar, this

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

Figure 1.1

THE SPECTRUM OF PRICE ACTION

57

breakout is a high 1. If the market then has a second leg down and then a bar goes
above the high of a prior bar, the breakout bar is a high 2. A third occurrence is
a high 3, and a fourth is a high 4. In a bear leg or in a trading range, if the market
reverses back down after one leg, the entry is a low 1. If it reverses back down after
two legs up, the entry is a low 2 entry and the bar before it is a low 2 setup or signal.
Since measured moves are an important part of trading and the AB = CD terminology is inconsistent with the more commonly used ABC labeling, the AB = CD
terminology should not be used. Also, I prefer to count legs and therefore prefer
numbers, so I will refer to each move as a leg, such as leg 1 or the first push, and
then leg 2, and so forth. After the chapter on bar counting in the second book, I will
also use the high/low 1, 2, 3, 4 labeling because it is useful for traders.

Deeper Discussion of This Chart
The day broke out above yesterday’s high on the open and the breakout failed, leading to a “trend from the open” bear trend day. This was also a trend resumption bear
trend day. Whenever there is a strong trend on the open and then a tight trading range
for several hours, the chances for a trend resumption day are good. There is often a
false breakout between approximately 11:00 a.m. and noon PST, trapping traders into
the wrong direction, and that failed breakout is a great setup for a swing trade into
the close.

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c01

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:9

Printer: Donnelly

P1: OTA
JWBT576-c02

JWBT576-Brooks

October 10, 2011

13:42

Printer: Donnelly

CHAPTER 2

Trend Bars,
Doji Bars,
and Climaxes

he market either is trending on the chart in front of you or it is not. When
it is not, it is in some kind of trading range, which is composed of trends on
smaller time frames. When two or more bars largely overlap, they constitute a
trading range. The trading range can have many shapes and many names, like flags,
pennants, and triangles, but the names are irrelevant. All that matters is that the
bulls and bears are in some equilibrium, often with one side slightly stronger. On
the level of an individual bar, it is either a trend bar or a trading range bar. Either the
bulls or bears are in control of the bar or they are largely in equilibrium (a one-bar
trading range).
The two most important concepts in trading are that there is a mathematical basis for everything, and that at any moment when you are convinced of the market’s direction, there is someone equally smart who believes the opposite. Never be convinced of anything, and always be open to the
possibility that the market will do the exact opposite of what you believe. Although
the market at times is imbalanced and moves strongly up or down for many bars,
most of the time it is relatively balanced, even though it might not appear to be so
to a beginner.
Every tick is a trade, which means that there was someone who thought that
the price was a good value to sell, and someone else who thought it was a good
value to buy. Since the market is controlled by institutions and they are smart, both
of these traders are smart and were acting rationally, and both have strategies that
they have tested and shown to be profitable. One of the most important skills that a
trader can develop is the ability to understand whether a trend bar is the beginning
or end of a move. If you see a strong bull trend bar only as bullish and a strong bear
