
286

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

Next, look at conformity between the index futures. Have they
pressed above or below nearby barriers in unison, or is one still lagging
behind? Consider how these markets acted when they came into the
vicinity of the March 2008 Bear Stearns low in the second half of that
year. The S&P 500 broke down first, in July, while the Nasdaq-100 held
above that price level until September, when it also broke down. The subsequent convergence triggered one of the steepest declines in market
history, with the S&P 500 falling 40% in just two months. This synergistic behavior isn’t limited to generational crashes or bubbles. Rather,
these inflection points set up continuously in smaller scales, with rapid
price movement and fewer whipsaws when the index futures move from
divergence into convergence and pass through major charting landscape
features in unison.
Market Volatility Index (VIX) defines opportunity and danger
through absolute price levels and trending direction. The indicator
swings up and down in multiyear cycles that generate relatively confined
movement between floors and ceilings. In Figure 12.2, VIX carved out a
four-year range (1) between 1998 and 2002, encompassing the tech bubble
and subsequent crash. It traded between 10 and 25 for many years (2) after
the 2002 low, pointing to a period of easy trading and relatively low risk.
VIX then ramped higher in 2007, briefly entering a range between 15 and
35 (3) and then spiking up to 89 in the 2008 crash (4).
Trading risk increased geometrically when VIX broke 25 and again
when it broke 35. The breakout over 35 in 2008 corresponded with the
September index convergence that preceded the crash. This exposes a
paradoxical aspect of trade collaring because that period was marked
by both high opportunity and high risk. This combination demanded an
extremely tight collar for most market players—i.e., to stay out of the game
completely—but was a call to windfall profits for the minority with edges
that could capitalize on the high volatility. Those edges, whether through
sizing, scaling, stop loss management, or VIX futures, overcame the highrisk profile enough to tap into a historic profit opportunity.
Now take this aggressive-defensive approach into the intraday arena,
where the index futures are grinding through tests at three-day highs and
lows or trying to fill morning gaps. The same principles apply, with tight
collaring when prices are stuck between testing barriers and loose collaring when those levels are mounted or broken in unison. Trend relativity
comes into play with these mini-breakouts, breakdowns, and gap fills
because the significance is tied to the relative location of price within daily
and weekly patterns. For example, when the S&P 500 and Nasdaq-100
index futures rally above three-day resistance, your long positions are

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

F I G U R E

287

12.2

VIX cycles.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

still at risk if a two-month swing high is sitting a point or two above
the breakout.
Like so many things in the market, finding the right collar for that
session or month is a complex puzzle requiring proper interpretation of
multiple inputs. Fortunately, the task is made easier through simple application of Dow Theory, which always looks first at the sequence of highs
and lows on the index charts. Just keep in mind that we’re not using the
classic indices described in Charles Dow’s work nearly a century ago.
Rather, we’re focusing our efforts on the two index futures that have
become the nerve center of the modern market environment.

PART SIX

288

Managing Risk and Reward

Index direction is equally important if you’re a long- or short-biased
trader because the collar needs to tighten significantly when a trend
develops in the opposite direction of your bias. This can be as simple as a
natural buyer staying out of the market on a down day, or a natural seller
switching to fixed income instruments in a raging bull market. Of course,
adverse movement actually favors your bias at times by opening up more
advantageous entry prices, but that’s a collaring issue as well.
Say you’re a short-biased trader playing the eBay downtrend off the
October high near 41, illustrated in Figure 12.3. This is a loose collar environment, so you increase position size and hold on longer, trying to get

F I G U R E

12.3

eBay short-side defensive collar.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

289

a bigger piece out of each selling impulse. You catch a nice momentum
move in which the eight-day SMA (1) acts as stubborn resistance. The
Nasdaq-100 then bottoms out on November 12 (2), forcing you to tighten
the collar because eBay is a tech stock and an index component. The
market is also heading toward November options expiration. The five- to
six-week period (3) between that expiration and the last day of December
triple witching expiration marks a seasonally positive time because money
managers routinely mark up stocks to paint the numbers for their year-end
reports. The positive tone then continues through the holiday week but
ends abruptly at the start of January.
The stock continues lower into the start of November expiration
week. The S&P 500 then bottoms out (4), triggering index convergence
and setting up ideal conditions for a short squeeze. You recognize the
danger and shift into a sharply defensive collar by covering positions
and avoiding the breakdown patterns that attracted your capital during
the selling impulse. eBay reacts to the positive forces by reversing to the
upside, closing above the eight-day SMA (5) for the first time in nearly
a month and then gapping higher. As a short-biased trader, you’re not
interested in playing the long side because you have no edge, so you sit
on your hands through December expiration while the stock fails three
attempts (6) to rally above the 50-day EMA and 38% selloff retracement.
You ease up slowly on the defensive collar during the holiday week because
seasonal forces will come to an end when the calendar turns. This gradual
shift lets you build pullback positions at resistance in anticipation of the
next primary selling wave. The downtrend cycle then reasserts itself at the
start of January (7), and you shift into a fully aggressive collar, adding to
short sales as the bottom drops out and the decline resumes.
If you’ve read your aggressive-defensive cycles properly, you’ve
exposed yourself to the market when it favored your strategies and were
sitting on the sidelines reading a good book or playing a video game when
it didn’t. Now consider the game-changing impact of trade collaring on
our boom-bust performance cycles. Since the majority of our losses come
when we’re taking edgeless risk, this simple filtering mechanism has the
power to overcome years of destructive yo-yo behavior and mediocre
annual returns.
Applying the right collar for a particular session goes well beyond
simple index analysis. For starters, is the premarket setting up a sharp gap
against your exposure? Losses triggered by overnight movement require
a defensive collar, even if everything else is firing on all cylinders. At a
minimum, the glowing red numbers are saying you’re wrong about the

290

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

market, and, whether you like it or not, you’ll start that session triaging
losses, which will detract from a natural focus on other opportunities. The
best strategy in this all-too-familiar scenario is to take a deep breath and
deal aggressively with the matters at hand. Then, after the fires are put
out, you can reconsider how you want to collar the rest of that session.
News flow also impacts trade collaring. Big events, like FOMC
meetings and monthly labor reports, require defensive collaring that’s
independent of anything you’re looking at on the index tickers. Simply
put, index prices are manipulated into market moving news in order
to encourage weak-handed positions. One classic example is the wellknown tendency for the market to tick higher ahead of a Fed rate
announcement. Marginal players are fooled into believing they’re
watching a reaction to undisclosed news at that time, when the uptrend is
nothing more than an effort to trigger scalping plays and set up traps for
later in the day.

Collaring Strategies
Execute your collaring strategy by adjusting position sizing, scaling into
and out of positions, and altering holding periods. These three elements
can handle just about any type of environment, from a raging bull market
to a late summer chopping block. Shorten the holding period and decrease
position size during dangerous times, and lengthen holding period and
increase position size when the market is offering free money. Scaling into
positions works best during adverse periods, because it lets you test the
waters before taking a full measure of risk. Conversely, favorable markets
support an all-in mentality that takes a 100% position immediately and
then scales out slowly in order to maximize profits.
Risk increases as a function of your time in the market. In other
words, you risk losing more money the longer you hold onto a position.
Reviewing the discussion in Part Three, the most urgent holding decision
comes at the end of the session, when you choose to keep the position
overnight or to dump it and move on. This element extends into timeof-day strategy as well. First hour positioning works best when trends
are clear-cut, and everything is moving in your direction. The first hour
increases volatility, which you can use to build risk for that particular
session. Readers of The Master Swing Trader may recognize this statement
as a partial contradiction. It’s true that times have changed, and just sitting

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

291

on your hands during the first hour, day after day, is a poor way to earn a
living in the financial markets. However, it still makes sense to avoid the
opening hour in conflicted or adverse markets. Wider ranges work against
the trader at those times because price action is painting a picture that
makes the session look “reasonable” to the greatest number of market participants. In other words, it’s easier to get fooled and make bad decisions
when you think you see something interesting in the first hour of a nonsupportive market.
The lunch hour and last hour also mark important inflection points
where collaring strategies come into play. Trend days, higher or lower,
tend to stall around the lunch hour, while a countertrend impulse kicks
into gear. At times, this reactive force is strong enough to flip over the
day and begin a substantial retracement or reversal. Those are the sessions
in which big bull hammers or shooting star candlesticks develop on the
daily index charts. More often, however, the midday impulse fails and
gives way to a test of the rally high or selloff low in the last two hours
of the trading day. So, if your collar is set defensively because you’re a
long-side trader and the market is selling off, it’s vitally important to steer
clear during the midday countertrend and to honor your strategy straight
through to the closing bell.
The final hour also brings the daily collaring strategy to an end.
Traders need to be thinking ahead at this time, visualizing how closing
prices are likely to impact the opening of the next session. For example,
does selling pressure look washed out after a downside trend, with the
evolution of two- to four-hour bowl-shaped patterns on the index futures?
This rounding off suggests that sellers have had their say, with a buying
impulse setting up in the next one or two sessions. In turn, this observation loosens the collar, with the trader considering long positions that
might take advantage of the upcoming bounce.
Adjust sizing and scaling strategies to reflect the current collar.
Limit your exposure to just one-third of total account size during adverse
periods, when a defensive collar is utilized. Your two goals at that time are
simple: to make a little money and to avoid losing a lot of money. Ratchet
up total exposure to 90% of equity in supportive markets, and increase
your holding period at the same time. These elements work together in
recognition of the more favorable environment, trying to “make hay while
the sun shines.” Save margin exposure for those rare times during the
year when the planets line up harmoniously and everything favors your
proven strategy. However, don’t trade margin, ever, if you don’t have a
strategy backed up by several years of profitability. Also, be on guard for

PART SIX

292

F I G U R E

Managing Risk and Reward

12.4

Adjust your trading collar in the final hour of the session after reviewing intraday price action. The Russell 2000
Index Trust gaps down and breaks support at 56.80. It trends lower until the late morning and then eases into a
sideways pattern through the middle of the day. The quiet action generates a double bottom and mild uptick into
the last hour. The trader, sensing that selling pressure has been washed out, loosens the collar and hunts for a
little overnight exposure.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

the brick wall at the end of those wonderfully profitable periods because
they tend to disappear as quickly as they appear.
A loose collar favors two entry-scaling techniques, when you don’t
choose to go all-in at once:
• Trade three to four pieces in declining size. This keeps the average
entry price closer to the failure target and lets the market take you
out with a smaller loss if you’re proven wrong.

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

293

• Trade three to four pieces, equally sized, but only after calculating
the intended average entry price and total loss you’re willing to
take on the position.
The second methodology provides less control than the first because
more things can go wrong when you’re trying to establish an average
entry price. There are two common scenarios with an equalized strategy,
depending on whether or not the market is moving when the execution
process is under way. In quiet times, the instrument is likely to be jogging
back and forth in a trading range. Entry scaling is relatively easy within this
constricted price action because you can pick up pieces during pullbacks.
However, it’s best to save at least one segment of the trade for a breakout
or breakdown from the range as a reward for getting the first part of the
position into a profit.
It’s harder to manage an equalized strategy in a moving market. Our
natural tendency is to add to positions as sympathetic momentum builds,
but this adversely affects the loss incurred if price turns tail and hits the
failure target. A trailing stop loss will manage this added danger, but it’s
best to wait until the entire position is taken. In other words, rely at first
on the original stop put in place after the first piece, because it matches the
assumptions you’ve made about the average entry price. Then reexamine
your exposure after adding the last piece, noting how price differs from
reality, and adjust your stop loss accordingly.
Moving markets are less risky when utilizing a decreasing size
strategy because you’re weighting the trade in the direction of the stop loss.
However, it still makes sense to avoid momentum entries and instead use
smaller-scale countertrends to build position size at more advantageous
prices. As usual, you’ll find these pullbacks on the 15-minute or 60-minute
charts, when your setup is spinning off a daily chart. In Figure 12.5, we can
see how this works with Apple, which exploded higher during a broadbased summer tech rally. The initial buy signal triggers when it breaks
above the two week high near 145. We buy 500 shares (1), giving us an
average entry price at 145. The stock then rallies 10 points and pulls back
to the 62% retracement of the buying wave, supporting a second scale. We
buy 300 shares (2) at 150, raising the average entry price to 146.87. The stock
bounces strongly and rallies to another high. It then starts to creep higher,
carving out a 60-minute trendline. We buy another 200 shares (3) when it
dips into trendline support at 157, giving us 1,000 total shares and raising
our average entry price to 148.90. So, although the stock has risen 12 points
since the breakout, our average entry price has risen just 3.90 points.

PART SIX

294

F I G U R E

Managing Risk and Reward

12.5

Scaling into Apple.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

The defensive collar precludes heavy exposure in adverse markets
so scaling strategies are relatively simple. Limit yourself to just two pieces
applied at the right time, with each segment smaller than usual in deference to the increased danger. The initial entry just follows the pattern—
buying or selling narrow range, a pullback, or a momentum move. The
last piece comes as a reward for services rendered. In other words, buy or
sell an equal number of shares when the trade finally produces a profit.
However (and this is the tough part), don’t add a third piece if it continues
to move in your favor, although you might be salivating like Pavlov’s dog.
Your defensive collar is on, preservation is the name of the game, and it
makes no sense to turn a winner into a loser.

CHAPTER 12

Capital Preservation

295

Finally, remember that cash is a position too. You’ll run into historic
environments that are so dangerous you need to step aside, hide in a closet,
and let other traders take the risk. Of course, horrendous volatility in the
fourth quarter of 2008 offers a perfect example. It was the type of market
in which you could make a fortune in one hour and then lose your shirt in
the next hour, especially if your risk management strategies weren’t state
of the art and perfectly executed.

Exit Strategies
The wisdom to “buy low and sell high” sums up our participation in the
financial markets. Of course, this deceptively simple advice can be real
hard to follow in the real world and in the heat of battle. Just consider how
often a good-looking position has moved in your favor and then turned
violently, triggering a shock loss. Of course we’re absolutely stunned
when this happens because, in our minds, we’ve already started to count
the unrealized profits.
What’s the right exit strategy when a position is going nowhere? Of
course, all trades need time to perform, but sometimes they just flatline
or lose the elasticity we were counting on to start a big rally or selloff.
When that happens, we have to decide whether it’s best to hang around or
to move back to the sidelines and wait for another trade. It’s really a
question of opportunity-cost. In other words, will another position make
better use of our resources, keeping in mind the capital placed into the
position as well as the brainpower required to watch it from day to day,
or hour to hour?
Curiously, the main reason we sit in nonperforming trades is to get
payback for the energy we put into finding the opportunity in the first
place. This is a losing mindset because the market doesn’t care how much
sweat it took to find the trade, which will either work out as expected or
won’t. On the flip side, we all know how it feels to dump a nonperforming
position and then sit there, dumbfounded, while it takes off without us.
That fear of missing out is another reason we’re so reluctant to give up
and head back to the sidelines. It’s easy enough to overcome this phobia
by starting a journal and keeping tabs on how these positions perform
after you get out. The process helps tremendously because you’re likely
to discover you’ve done the right thing the vast majority of the time.
However, if you find the opposite is true, take a giant step back and give
your positions more room to run before pulling the plug.

296

PART SIX

Managing Risk and Reward

Trending markets hypnotize traders, forcing them to forget the
valid reasons they took their positions in the first place. The subsequent
brain cramp can trigger all kinds of impulsive behavior and bad decision
making when it’s finally time to get out. There are three basic reasons we
exit our positions: to book profits, take losses, or respond to a change in
market character. Each reason demands multiple strategies to manage the
unique attributes of that particular scenario. Traders need to play out these
exit plans in their heads over and over again, so they take spontaneous
action when the time to act arrives. This role-playing exercise is extremely
important in developing effective risk management skills.
Taking a loss is the easiest of the three strategies to learn but the
hardest to execute in real-time trading. Simply stated, we need to get out
when we’re proven wrong. In most cases, this means dumping a long
position that breaks a support level you expected to hold when you did
your market analysis. As noted throughout this text, the survivalist trader
places the initial stop loss just behind one of these narrow levels, after
measuring the impact of rinse jobs, and gets taken out of the position automatically when price hits it. Unfortunately, many folks jump into long side
trades that show little or no support for many points below their entry
prices. In these cases, placing a stop loss under support can be a very costly
activity. As discussed in Part Five, you’re forced to manage the added risk
by (a) placing a percentage stop loss under the entry price, taking the loss
at 2%, 5%, or 10%, depending on risk tolerance, or (b) looking at the chart
in the next lower time frame and placing the stop loss under any support
found on those smaller-scale patterns.
Also keep in mind that there’s nothing wrong with reentering a
losing trade as long as it fulfills certain risk requirements. In fact, it might
be the smartest thing you can do when the instrument reverses right after
you give up and head back to the sidelines. Buying a pullback into support
in an uptrend, after you get shaken out of a momentum breakout, offers a
perfect example of how this can happen.
In Figure 12.6, Schlumberger charges higher in a strong energy sector
rally. The uptick stalls near 100 and gives way to an intermediate pullback
that reaches the 50-day EMA in early August. The stock bounces for a few
days and then pulls back to test support. The trader buys (1) when price
sells off into the moving average, placing a stop loss (3) under the low of
the first pullback, expecting a double bottom reversal. However, the stop
gets hit the next day when a down gap surges through the two-week low.
Price drops three more points and then shoots higher, closing in a longlegged bull hammer. The stock jumps back above the 50-day EMA just one
