The Schabacker approach (which is not known by that name because few people know
the history behind Edwards and Magee) is the predominant school of modern technical
analysis, but there is another path.
The second broad school of technical analysis is Richard Wyckoﬀ’s approach. The core
concept here is that chart patterns have very limited utility, and what predictive power they
do have is highly dependent on the context in which they appear. The only real purpose of

(Continued )

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

22

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

chart patterns is to quantify and to deﬁne the buying and selling pressure in the market.
In many cases, traders using both approaches will arrive at similar conclusions. These
are two diﬀerent means to the same end, but many traders ﬁnd a richness and depth in
the Wyckoﬀ approach that surpasses a simplistic focus on chart patterns. We trade the
underlying buying and selling imbalance, which is what will move price in our favor if we
are correct.

Reading Inside the Bars
One skill that is often overlooked in chart reading is the ability to look at a bar on a chart
and to infer what price action might have created that bar. In practical terms, this means
being able to look at a bar on one time frame and immediately understand the most likely
lower time frame scenarios that could have created that bar. In almost every case, there
are multiple possibilities, but some are much more likely than others. It is not necessary
to be 100 percent correct on this; sometimes we will simply guess wrong, but working
to develop this skill will greatly increase the trader’s intuitive grasp of price charts. For
instance, consider the single candle in Figure 1.11 with an empty body (meaning that
the close was higher than the open) and with moderately small shadows on the top and
bottom. There are three things we know with certainty about this candle: the close was
higher than the open; at some point, the market traded lower than the open; and, at some
point, it traded higher than the close.
Most people with a little bit of trading experience would assume the candle opened,
traded down to put in the low, trended up to make a high, and backed off to close under

FIGURE 1.11 A Candle Is a Snapshot in Time—How Was This Candle Formed?

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

23

The Trader’s Edge

#1

#2

#3

#4

FIGURE 1.12 Some of the Many Possibilities of Lower Time Frame Action That Could Have
Produced Figure 1.11

that high. This is the most obvious possibility (scenario #1 in Figure 1.12), but there are
many others, some of which are also shown. Traders developing a sense for price action
need to spend a lot of time contemplating all of the lower time frame scenarios that
could produce each bar. Being locked into a single interpretation without considering
the context can blind us to what might really be going on in the market.
Though charts contain a lot of noise and random action, there are points where structures within individual bars, or a small set of bars, are very important. One simple pattern
to think about is that the location of the closing point relative to the high and the low of
the bar may give some insight into the buying or selling conviction within that bar. For
instance, a close near the high of the bar usually shows that buyers were in control going
into the end of the time period. Yes, there are other possibilities and patterns that could
have created the close near the high, but, more often than not, buyers were in control.
Conversely, closes near the middle of the bar, visible as long shadows on candle charts,
show a certain neutrality and lack of conviction. It is also worth considering the extreme
case where several bars in a row close on their absolute highs. Many traders would assume that this is indicative of a very strong market, but, statistically, this condition more
often indicates short-term exhaustion and at least a slight reversal—be careful of entering with the trend after several bars close on their highs.
Trend and Trading Range Bars Large bars relative to recent bars on one time
frame most likely contain trends on the lower time frame, especially if the close and open
are near opposite ends of the bars. Small bars on one time frame are probably trading
ranges on lower time frames, and, in general, bars that have their opens and closes nearer
to the center point of the bar are also more likely to have been trading ranges. This is a
simple concept, but understanding this dynamic is a key to building intuition about price
action and the interaction of time frames. There is much subtlety here, but these are the
essential concepts. Figure 1.13 shows lower time frame trends and trading ranges within
the three boxes in the left panel that correspond to the three higher time frame bars in
the right panel. Do not accept price bars at face value. Always think deeply about what
is going on behind the scenes, on lower time frames.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

24

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 1.13 One- and 15-Minute S&P Bars, Showing Lower Time Frame Trading Range and Trend
within Higher Time Frame Bars

The right panel of Figure 1.14 shows a daily chart of the E-mini S&P 500 futures at
a time when the trend on that time frame was losing momentum. What are the signs on
this time frame that suggest a loss of momentum? Each bar continues to make a higher
high up into mid-April, but at a declining rate. We could characterize these as “reluctant
highs,” to indicate waning momentum. In addition, the bars are becoming smaller, indicating that trading interest is drying up, and there are no more large trend bars (that
open near the lows and close near the highs) in April. On each of the multiple time frame
charts in this book, the lower time frame in the left pane expands on the highlighted area
of the higher time frame chart on the right. In this case, the lower time frame tells the
same story of loss of momentum, but in much more vivid detail. There are multiple failure tests above the highs, as the market spikes to new extremes and is unable to find the
buying pressure to support itself there. Note that this reversal on the lower time frame
could simply be subsumed into a trading time frame consolidation, but the lower time
frame clearly shows the change in the buyers’ conviction.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Edge

25

FIGURE 1.14 Three-Hour (Left Pane) and Daily S&P 500 Futures Charts
Notice that the lower time frame shows multiple tests and failures at the high. This level of resolution
is lost on the higher time frame, which simply shows a gently rounding top.

Many traders focus on trading pullbacks. A pullback (also called a flag or consolidation) is a move against the prevailing trend. For instance, a pullback in a downtrend
bounces against the trend and is an opportunity to enter a short position; a pullback in an
uptrend is a decline. Most traders train themselves to see these structures easily, but pullbacks can also be hidden in higher time frames: one or two small bars that hold near the
extreme of a trend leg (near the lows in a downtrend or the highs in an uptrend) are often
a complete lower time frame pullback. As such, these simple one- or two-bar pullbacks
(high and tight flags) are tradable structures in very strong trends, as in Figure 1.15. This
is a common and important pattern.
Another important pullback pattern in an uptrend has several bars with downward
closes separated by a single bar with an upward close. This pattern usually hides a complex pullback on the lower time frame, which is a three-legged structure consisting of
an initial pullback followed by a small, failed attempt to resume the initial trend. From
that second leg, the market turns down again to make another countertrend leg that is
usually approximately as long as the first one. This is a very common pattern, especially

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

26

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 1.15 The Small Bars on the 15-Minute EURUSD Chart (Right Pane) Hide a More Signiﬁcant
Pullback on the 2-Minute Lower Time Frame

in extended trends, and will be explored in much more detail later. Figure 1.16 shows an
example of a two-legged complex pullback. On the higher trading time frame, it is not
so obvious and has to be inferred from the presence of one or two with-trend candles
in the middle of the pullback, but the complete structure is clearly visible on the lower
time frame.
One of the quantifiable tendencies of price motion is for markets to make directional
moves out of periods of contracted volatility. Even if the normal expectation for a market
is mean reversion and reversal (as it is in the short term for equities), there is usually at
least a slight edge for continuation out of areas of volatility compression. One simple
way to quantify volatility contraction is by looking for inside bars, which are bars whose
entire range is enclosed within the range of the previous bar—in other words, a bar
whose high is equal to or lower than the previous high and whose low is above or equal
to the previous low. A series of multiple inside bars on one time frame usually contains a

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Edge

27

FIGURE 1.16 The Daily Chart of X (Left Pane) Shows a Clear Two-Legged Complex Pullback
The weekly chart hints at this structure, but it must be inferred from the single upward-closing
candle in the middle of the pullback.

triangle on the lower time frame, which is a visual pattern that strongly suggests volatility
contraction. Trading within triangles is usually a losing proposition, as the market is in
equilibrium and the actual movement within the pattern is highly random. However, they
can set up good breakouts with expectations for strong, extended moves away from the
pattern. It is easy to overlook multiple inside bars (see Figure 1.17), but this is a powerful
and subtle pattern that is worth some attention.
The examples in this section were deliberately chosen to be less than perfect because it is important to start thinking about these concepts in the context of actual market action, which is always less clear and noisier than we wish. Remember that charts
are artificial structures that we impose on market data. They are useful because they
organize the data, but we are always dealing with a trade-off between effective summarization and loss of detail. There is no perfect answer, but many of the limitations can
be overcome if we work to constantly remember what the chart actually is, and to try to
understand the buying and selling pressure that each bar represents. The chart is not the
market; the chart is a representation of the market.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

28

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 1.17 Multiple Inside Bars on the Hourly Chart of the E-mini S&P 500 Futures (Right Pane)
Hide a Clear Lower Time Frame Triangle on the 10-Minute Chart

CHARTING BY HAND
I started trading in the 1990s, in the twilight years of the old, classic paper chart books. A
book would come in the mail at the beginning of the week, printed on newsprint; each day
it was up to the trader to track down prices for each of the markets and update the charts
by drawing a new price bar. At the beginning of the next week, a new book would arrive
with the past week’s prices filled in, and the process would repeat. Actually, in my very
early trading days I did not even have the chart book, but I bought a pad of graph paper,
went to the library, and started building charts from histories I found in back issues of
newspapers. I did not realize the value of what I was doing at the time, but this process
immersed me in patterns as they were emerging. There is something about physically
drawing lines that engages a different part of the brain than looking at a screen does.
Because of this work, I assimilated patterns quickly and developed a sense of the forces
at work behind the patterns early in my development. When you are drawing open, high,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Edge

29

low, and close on each price bar, you will spend time during the day wondering what
new configurations could appear at the end of the day, and thinking about how the day’s
trading might unfold to create those patterns.
Most readers are probably shaking their heads and laughing at this point, thinking
that this is a quaint and hopelessly anachronistic practice, but I beg to differ. Modern
computer charting has the advantage of breadth. It would simply not be possible to review a large number of charts every day without the aid of a computer to generate those
charts; however, there is still great value in pencil and paper. This is not a practice that
will reward you with immediate results and profits; it works on a much deeper and more
profound level of perception, and it takes time. I would suggest that interested traders
commit to doing this for a period of not less than two months, consistently, and then
evaluate the impact of the exercise on your ability to read the market. I know of no better exercise to help a developing trader assimilate the patterns of the market and to begin
building intuition. You will be amazed at the transformation in your vision.
There are two specific ways to do this exercise. One is to simply plot standard bar
or candle charts, by hand, for whatever time period is under consideration. Every trader
can at least do daily charts, but intraday traders might be able to do 15- to 30-minute time
frames. Lower time frames will give much more exposure to patterns, but the time for
contemplation is reduced. Above all, you want to pick a time frame that will allow you to
make an unfailing commitment to this exercise. Doing it for a few days and then giving
up will result in nothing but wasted time.
The other way is to construct a swing chart, which is also known as a kagi chart. In
this type of chart, vertical lines indicate price movement (along the y-axis of the chart),
while short horizontal lines illustrate the breaks between upswings and downswings.
These breaks are defined according to some rule set, the specific choice of which is not
that important. Traditionally, you may look for a specific dollar or point amount of a
reversal off a high, and then flip direction, as in a standard point and figure chart. For
instance, suppose a trader is working with a $1.00 reversal; if the stock trades up to

FIGURE 1.18 Example of Swing Charting (Kagi) by Hand

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

30

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

$60.00 and then backs off to $59.25, this is only a $0.75 reversal off the high, so the only
line on the chart is currently a vertical line that stops at $60.00. If the market turns back
up from $59.25 and trades up to $65.00, that original line is now extended to $65.00 on the
chart. Assume now that the market falls back to $63.00, which exceeds the $1.00 reversal
threshold, so now a short horizontal line is plotted at $65.00 (the high of the previous
swing) to connect to the next downward vertical line, which now extends to $63.00.
This process is repeated, so the x-axis is not scaled for time or activity, but rather for
specific reversal amounts off previous swings. (Consider what this type of chart tells us
in relation to the previous discussions on pivots and length of swings.) It is also possible
to define the reversal with other tools, such as reversing a specific multiple of the average
range off the previous swing, J. Welles Wilder Jr.’s Parabolic SAR (stop and reverse),
moving average crossovers, or whatever trend indicator you find appropriate. Figure 1.18
shows an example of this type of chart, drawn by hand. Do not underestimate the power
of this simple charting exercise.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 2

The Market Cycle
and the Four Trades

To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under
the heaven.
—Ecclesiastes 3:1, KJV

he early twentieth century was a time of great progress in markets and in thinking
about markets. There were giants on the earth in those days—legends like Jesse
Livermore, old man J. P. Morgan, Bernard Baruch, and Charles Dow. In this fertile
environment, Richard Wyckoff developed his understanding of markets and the trading
process through conversations and interviews with these master traders. After amassing
a sizable personal fortune in the markets, he laid out his system in a set of correspondence courses, as was the practice of the day, to educate the public and to help them
avoid the scams and frauds that were so prevalent at the time. Referring to the Wyckoff method is a bit of a misnomer, for he offered no simple system or one way to trade.
Rather, Wyckoff created a method for understanding the buying and selling convictions
of very large traders and institutions through the patterns their activity left on prices. If
the smaller trader could recognize the signs they left in the market, he could align his positions with their activity and interests; in the end, it is the buying and selling pressure of
these large pools of money that actually moves the markets. This method is as powerful
and as relevant today as it was a hundred years ago.
Wyckoff proposed a four-stage market cycle. His idea was that the cycle resulted
from the actions of these large players who planned their operations in the market to
take advantage of the uneducated public’s inappropriate reactions to price movement,
but we also see evidence of this cycle in the price patterns of assets such as medieval
commodity prices; stocks in early, unsophisticated markets; or trading on very short
time frames. It is unlikely that there is the same intervention and manipulation in all of
these cases, so the Wyckoff cycle may simply be an expression of the normal ways in
which human psychology expresses itself in the marketplace.

T

31

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

32

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

WYCKOFF’S MARKET CYCLE
In this brief introduction, we will consider three aspects of each phase of the cycle. First,
we will try to understand the market using a simplified model focusing on the psychological perspective of two major groups: the smart money players who are assumed to
be driving the market, and the general, uninformed public. Second, we will consider the
crowd psychology of the public, and how individuals are naturally inclined to make mistakes that work in favor of the smart money. Last, we will begin to consider the distinctions and patterns of each part of the cycle from a pure price-pattern perspective;
this analysis is important because it motivates and provides context for many trading
patterns and methods.
Figure 2.1 presents this cycle in a simple, idealized format. The four phases are:
1. Accumulation: A sideways range in which large players buy carefully and skillfully,

without moving the price. The public is unaware of what is going on; the market is
off the radar and out of the public focus while under accumulation.
2. Markup: The classic uptrend. At this point, the public becomes aware of the price

movement, and their buying serves to propel prices higher. Smart money players who
bought in the accumulation phase may sell some of their holdings into the strength
of the uptrend, or they may just hold and wait for higher prices.
3. Distribution: Eventually, the uptrend ends and the market enters a distribution

phase in which the smart money players sell the remainder of their holdings to the
public who are still generally anticipating higher prices. Really smart money players
might even sell more than they own and go short in this range.
4. Markdown: The downtrend that follows distribution. Smart money players who are

short will buy back some of their shorts into this weakness. Eventually, the public realizes that higher prices are not in their future, so they panic and sell their positions.
This panic, more often than not, marks the end of the downtrend.
Distribution

Markup

Accumulation

FIGURE 2.1 The Classic Wyckoﬀ Cycle

Markdown

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

The Market Cycle and the Four Trades

7:22

Printer: Hamilton Printing

33

Accumulation—Building a Base
Accumulation is the first stage of the cycle; large operators (funds, banks, other institutions, or even large individual traders) buy without alerting the public to their intentions.
This is actually very difficult to do, as buying pressure will naturally support and even
raise prices. These players must buy slowly and generally passively over a long period
of time to build their positions. From a technical perspective, prices move sideways in
a trading range bounded by rough areas of support and resistance, an intermediate-term
moving average is flat, and price chops back and forth on both sides of that moving average. As we mentioned earlier, these conditions are indicative of a market in equilibrium,
and most technical traders should avoid trading price action like this. However, Wyckoff argues that this is precisely the goal of the longer-term players. They are working
very hard to make this look like a market in equilibrium, but it is not. There is a subtle
imbalance as smart money is buying and accumulating positions in preparation for the
coming uptrend.
There are a few important points to keep in mind about a market in accumulation.
First, there is the obvious play of positioning in the accumulation area with the smart
money; in most cases this is essentially a higher time frame play. The line between trading and investing can become somewhat blurred if the technical trader plays in these
areas, but the key difference is that traders remain alert for signs that the accumulation
has failed. If contradictory price action and market structure emerge, they will exit their
positions, while investors will usually wait for lagging fundamentals to signify that something has changed. This leads to the second point, which is that accumulation areas are
usually not simple plays in actual practice. It is difficult to time the precise beginning
and end of these areas, and the limits of the range are often not cleanly defined. Traders
paying breakouts above the range, or stopping out of their positions below the range, will
often find themselves executing at exactly the wrong points as they react to price spikes
in the noisy range. This is what the market action is designed to do in these areas, so do
not play this game.
There are some price patterns and clues we typically see associated with classic
accumulation. The most common of these is what Wyckoff called a spring, which is
called a failure test at the bottom of the range in modern terminology. To understand
this pattern, think of it from the perspective of the large players accumulating inventory
in the range. If these large buyers were to go into the market and buy aggressively, that
buying pressure would be a significant portion of the market activity. The market would
almost certainly explode higher, which is not what the large players want at this point. It
is critical that they measure their buying activity over a long period of time so that they
do not lift prices; it is a game of deception. If these large players discover that they can
consistently get filled near the bottom of the range (where the market is cheapest), they
might buy even more slowly to see if the prices would decline even further. Low prices
are good for these players, who are trying to accumulate large positions at the lowest
possible price. What if they wanted to judge the other market participants’ interest in
the stock? Perhaps they might stop buying altogether and let the market fall under its
own weight.
