
book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

The Story of George Sisler

Page 117

117

He shook his head and frowned. “Nope. That’s what I was going to tell
you earlier. George never instituted that system with his group. He could
have, but he didn’t. And it wasn’t imposed from the outside.”
“So they held onto the losing positions?”
“Yes. They did. They were all in this together, you see—and none of
them wanted to blink first. Especially George. He should have shut the
whole thing down when they went to breakeven for the year—when they
lost one hundred million, they were back down to the same amount they
had started with. They had lost all the profit for the year.”
“And he didn’t shut it off?”
“No, he didn’t. He kept it open—remember, if he closed the trades he
would lock in a zero gain so far that year, and that would lock in a zero
bonus. Holding on, to George, was the only way he saw that he could save
the profit.”
“But he didn’t have the profit any longer!”
“Exactly!” Harvey yelled. “Exactly, my boy! You are solidly dead on
point. He didn’t have the darned profit any longer! He was holding onto the
trade, hoping it would come back—so that he could save something that
he had already lost. He had several options. But for now, let’s just say that
he and everyone in that office were holding onto the trade when they knew
they shouldn’t.”
“Wasn’t he worried about getting fired?”
“Harry, he had a lot of autonomy. The bank was headquartered in
Switzerland. He had negotiated a lot of freedom. He had locked up the
firm’s capital for a year, meaning they had an agreement that he would
have at least a year to produce returns and then they would review the success of the fund. And breakeven wasn’t going to get him fired. So he wasn’t
worried about his job. He was seriously concerned about his pay. That became the first and most important priority.”
“Did the trade turn around?”
“It did for a little while. It came back and they were up by about 10 percent for the year—so they had only lost half their profits and could have
still been okay. But they all decided, under George’s lack of leadership, that
they wanted to ride it out. That they were sure they made the right decision
and they weren’t going to back down. Truth is, most of those guys were in
the same financial position as George—they had overextended themselves
and only a bonus could get them out.”
The solution here seemed really obvious to me. “Why not close the
trades and climb back with better ones?”
“Because that would make sense. It would require a brain. Here’s the
deal, Harry. Traders who only think about the money are bound to blow up
because they are less likely to close their losing positions. They don’t want

book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

118

2:23 PM

Page 118

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

to lose money. Or they feel that they can’t lose money. They have to win because they need the money to pay bills, or buy new cars, or prove that they
were right. Trading attracts some pretty egotistical people. That’s true for
George and it’s true for you, and it’s true for most people who watch latenight television and buy trading software. They want to be right. They believe they should be right. So they let their losers run.”
“I have heard the statement that traders should let their winners run
and they should cut their losses short.”
Harvey winked. “Yep. That’s true. Even more true is that if you don’t
cut your losers, you can’t have any winners.”
“How so?”
“It’s like you said, Harry,” he continued. The olives were gone but the
story continued. “Because they had tied up their capital in the losing position, they couldn’t take any more trades. So they were locked into a bad
spot.”
“What did they do?”
“They started to hedge the position.”
“What does that mean?”
“Using their relationships with banks, they actually traded the other
side of the position.”
“They sold Pounds?”
“Right. About one hundred points lower than they had bought it, they
started to sell it. Meaning, with separate liquidity providers, they opened
the opposite position. This means that they were now locked into a onehundred-point loss.”
“What good would that do?”
“First, it prevented them from having to be wrong. Closing the trade
completely would mean they had to admit they were wrong. And they
didn’t want, above all else, to close the position and then see the trade go in
their favor. Think about it! They were afraid of losing money that they
hadn’t earned! They were afraid of missing out on a move that hadn’t happened and had become less and less likely. By the time they hedged the losing position with another set of trades, they had way overextended
themselves on their capital, they had removed the chance of opening new
trades, and they were locked into a sure loss.”
“This sounds so unlike George.”
“Unlike the George you met today. But totally like the George you
would have met back then.”
I scratched my head. “When did you come in?”
“Not yet. By this time, I knew about George and his positions. I was
helping the trader who took the other side of his hedged positions. He was
on the sales side of trading, and was in the business of providing liquidity
for funds and for some midsize manufacturing companies. I was helping

book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

The Story of George Sisler

Page 119

119

him learn not only how to quote Pounds but how to know when he should
offset the positions to reduce his risk, or to actually take the other side of
the trade and build a position for the bank. He’s still working at that same
desk now and makes a huge amount of money.”
“Can we visit him?”
“Yes. Sure. We’ll do that next week perhaps.”
“Great! I appreciate that. What happened next to George?”
“He held onto this losing position for three months. By then, three
traders had quit and he couldn’t hire more because he’d have to show them
his terrible trades. He started to get depressed. He came into the office every
day, and they were watching the same position, over and over. Looking for a
time to get out of one side, and keep the other. Sterling fell, but they were in
a buy and a sell at the same time, so that didn’t help. Then it rose back up, but
they didn’t know if it had bottomed out, so they stayed in. These were professional traders making a lot of money, and they were basically sitting on their
rumps for months, watching something go nowhere. Can you picture that?”
“It’s hard for me. I imagined that professional traders would be, well,
more professional. Or better.”
He chuckled, “Harry, that is the single greatest myth about bank
traders. That they know more, or have access to special information, or
more profitable systems.” He was looking around for more food. When he
didn’t find any, he continued: “And maybe they do have access to all of that
stuff. Maybe. But they don’t have access to more discipline. And discipline
is all that matters.”
“You’re saying that access to better information, or inside information
even, doesn’t make a difference.” That didn’t make sense to me, and I told
him so.
“Well, let’s say that George and his team of traders really had a great
system for getting into the Sterling. That’s why they bought it. But without
a Daylight Limit, or a cutoff point, what good is the system? What good is
the system, or the special inside information, if you don’t have the discipline to implement it according to the rules?”
“So you’re saying this is about money management.”
“Sure! Of course! But it’s more than that. It’s about agreeing to a set of
principles that will guide you as a trader, and then never violating those
rules. That’s all that matters. I’ve been training traders for many, many
years—more years than you would believe. They have all been professionals. The one great distinction between the winners and the losers is selfdiscipline. That’s why George, at the end of the year, shut down the entire
operation.”
“How much did he lose?”
“They lost 27 percent of the starting capital. On December 26, George
closed all the positions and waited for them to settle—it takes three

book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

120

2:23 PM

Page 120

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

business days. That ended the year with the loss. Then he packed up his office and left.”
“Where did he go? Had he been fired?”
“No, Harry, he wasn’t fired. Not by the bank, anyway. They would have
happily let him go at least another year. But he fired himself. He had lost
his confidence. He had gone from up 20 percent to down 27 percent. It was
a staggering amount of money to lose. He couldn’t stop thinking that he’d
been looking at a profit of one hundred million dollars but then couldn’t
hang on to it. That he had violated his rules when he hedged the position.
That he had played dead and let a losing position run for months and
months without confronting it. These are basic principles that he had
learned a long time before.”
“And without the discipline to implement those principles, he didn’t
feel able to trade.”
“Exactly, Harry. Perfectly right.”
“So he fired himself from trading.”
“Yep.”
“But you helped him? You’re the reason he’s trading again today?”
Harry shook his head. “I helped him, yes. But I only brought out of
George what he already had inside himself. And that’s what I’m going to do
with you.”
With that, he stood up and I knew today’s instruction was over.
“Harry, do remember that George asked you to look into a way to do
the carry trade on the retail platform? That’s your homework for the next
week. I want you to look into that. I don’t know if it is even possible.”
“What are we going to work on tomorrow? What about the buy trade
on the EUR/USD? Is there any chance that it will still happen? Do you think
that 1.2200 is a good entry?”
“Harry, I do think that 1.2200 is looking better and better. If you can
justify taking the trade on your own analysis, then I agree that you should
take it. Otherwise you should avoid it. But remember, if you take it, you are
going to have to prove to me that you justified it in some way. And I’m
going to be hard on you about it.”
“I agree. And tomorrow?”
“Tomorrow I am going to Hong Kong, to celebrate the one-year anniversary of working with a hedge fund manager. Then I am traveling to
see some prospective students until we meet again next week.”
“All right. I am grateful for everything I’ve learned so far.”
“I know you are. But you aren’t out of the woods just yet. Remember
what I told you: No trading. You can only take the EUR/USD trade if you
can justify it to me.”
“Agreed.”
“Harry, remember what happened to George. Okay? You got me?”

book_c13.qxd

12/20/06

2:23 PM

The Story of George Sisler

Page 121

121

“I understand.”
“You can lose a lot of money very quickly if you start screwing
around.”
“I understand that, too,” I said, laughing. “I am not going to trade. I
have a lot to think about.”
And I meant what I said when I promised not to trade. As he walked
away, moving down the sidewalk of Grand Street and then up Mulberry, I
had a peaceful feeling that came from knowing that for right now, I didn’t
have to trade, but instead I could work on figuring out the interest rate
carry trade, I could write down my notes about my visit to the Sisler hedge
fund, and I could hold on to my trading capital until the time was right.
But I broke my promise. I did take a trade.

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 122

CHAPTER 14

Back to
Square One

y wife was excited for me, but she was anxious that I start making
money. It was hard to argue with her about that. If I didn’t make
money, then we were going to have to dip farther and farther into
savings. We did have the money from selling off all our cool stuff and the
savings/severance, which meant we had $30,000. I had put $5,000 of that
into my trading account. Gini didn’t mind at all, especially considering that
I was planning a trade with the supervision of a bank trader and it seemed
more reliable this time.
It shouldn’t have seemed like trading was urgently necessary, but
when she spoke, it was impossible to remain patient. I had what might be
the chance of a lifetime for a currency trader—to follow an order and pick
up on the momentum created by a major bank.
“The longer you take to start trading, the less in savings we are going
to have,” she said that evening. “And if you start making more good trades,
we can keep more in savings, and maybe even have more to use for trading
down the road.”
“That is true.” Although her words conflicted with what I had promised
Harvey, she was my wife first. I wasn’t married to Harvey. I didn’t have to
put a roof over Harvey’s head. I didn’t have to buy him food or school supplies. So I decided that I would take a look at the charts.
The first chart I opened was the four-hour chart for the EUR/USD (see
Figure 14.1). Harvey told me that I could trade it if I could justify it, and
that’s what I intended to do. To miss out on a trade that he and Hank
Doorecker had planned—it was too much to resist. Perhaps his admoni-

M

122

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 123

Back to Square One

FIGURE 14.1

123

Four-hour chart for the EUR/USD.

tion not to trade had been a test: to see if I could adequately justify a trade
on the EUR/USD. Just to see if I was really listening.
I saw nothing. There wasn’t anything here I could work with. Zero.
What in the world were they looking at over at U.S. National Bank? What
was so inviting about selling the Euro? I could see that it had tanked on Friday after the jobs report. I could see that it had now risen back up a bit. Big
fat hairy deal! That didn’t give me any trade ideas. I couldn’t justify selling
it now or at 1.2200, for that matter. What was going to happen at 1.2200?
Harvey had said that bank traders didn’t necessarily have access to better
information. Well, apparently they did!
That’s when the phone rang. It was Craig Taylor.
“Harry, I hear you’ve met with Harvey. That’s the word on the street.”
It was good to hear his voice. Not only did I need to thank him for setting me up with Harvey, but I needed help on this trade.
I told him how much I had learned already and how much I appreciated the introduction. Then I told him I was stuck. “I can’t figure out where
they go with this trade idea,” I admitted. “Harvey told me that I could trade
it if I could justify it, and I sure do want to trade it.”
“What are you looking at?” he asked.
“The four-hour chart,” I replied. “I have been explicitly commanded
not to look at short-term charts.”
“That’s good. You’re working from one of Harvey’s favorite time
frames. So you’ve made a good start. What else do you have on the chart?”
“Nothing.”
“No indicators at all? No trendlines?”

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 124

124

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

I admitted that although I had read about all those things, I’d not found
the time to implement them. “Well, Harry,” Craig began. “You first of all
shouldn’t start with the idea of trying to figure out what Harvey is thinking.
That’s not going to work. If you are going to justify this trade, you are going
to have to come up with some type of analysis of your own.”
“I have no idea where to start. I know what a trendline is, but I’m not
sure what to do with them.”
“I gotta run, Harry. You can figure this out. But doing some testing and
experimenting on your own is going to make a huge difference.”

FORCING MYSELF TO DO SOME LINES
I sat in front of my computer screen for at least 20 minutes before making
a move. Determined to not give in, I prepared myself to sit there until I at
least drew some lines or plotted some indicators on my chart. I finally decided that I would at least draw a line at the entry price of 1.2200. I would
start there. That was my goal: the number that I wanted to justify. After I
drew the line, my chart looked like the one in Figure 14.2.
At least I had a starting point now. I could see where I was planning to
buy. Was it wrong of me to be back doing this trade? Although I was doing
my own research here, I couldn’t take credit for the original idea. It oc-

FIGURE 14.2

Harry’s entry price.

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Back to Square One

Page 125

125

curred to me then that Harvey wanted me not only to explain why the trade
was reasonable, but also to start developing my own ideas. Harvey had
other traders to work with. He wouldn’t be available forever to keep feeding me trading ideas that I would go home and justify. Part of what I wanted
to do that night was to figure out how to plan these trades on my own.
The books I’d read had a lot to say about indicators—moving averages,
oscillators, and so forth. It seemed rational that I would jump into some of
those. So I added a 200-period moving average as a dotted line. The moving
average was just what it sounded like: an average of the price over a certain period of time—in this case 200 periods of four hours each. Once plotted, I saw that it hovered above the current price and seemed to have
stopped the currency pair from rising earlier in the month of April. Perhaps
the average would stop it again and that was a good justification for the
trade. But how could I say that price was going to hit the 200 moving average again? And that it would fall back? That was stretching things a bit.
The books also talked about oscillators. These were indicators that
supposedly showed when a currency pair would be overbought (and ready
for a move down) or oversold (and ready for a move back upward). I
flipped open to a page in one of the books that talked about the stochastic.
That seemed popular enough! So I added that, too, with the standard settings of 14, 3, 3. This time I was getting closer. The stochastic was rising
and nearing the top. Could it be as simple as that? That I could sell the pair
every time the oscillator reached the top? And buy every time it reached
the bottom? Perhaps. But there was no way that Harvey was basing his entire trading system on something that simple.
The MACD, or moving average convergence-divergence, was an indicator of momentum. It was basically a way to follow a trend, built from
moving averages. Perhaps that would provide an extra clue. One of the
books talked about adding a second or third indicator to confirm what I
was seeing on the first. That seemed reasonable—getting some backup.
Actually, it sounded more than reasonable. It was perfectly clear to me that
any successful trader wasn’t going to base his entire strategy off one indicator. No wonder that I had felt uncomfortable with the stochastic alone.
Or with just the moving average. So I added the MACD, with the standard
settings of 26, 12, and 9. I didn’t really know what those meant, but who
cared? I was trying to justify a trade, not write a book report on Gerald
Appel, the creator of the indicator.
It told me nothing at all. I could hardly understand what it meant in the
first place. Now I had a hill-and-valley shaped thingy in the middle of the
MACD and some lines crossing above and below. The lines were underneath and the hilly shape was sort of flat. Ho-hum. This was worthless. I’d
really rather see the indicator with the hills going down or the lines going
down as soon as the EUR/USD price hit 1.2200. Maybe Harvey and Hank

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Page 126

126

ADVENTURES OF A CURRENCY TRADER

Doorecker had a computer program that could predict that the MACD
would be topping out or heading for a move downward once it got to their
special entry price.
What if I could also find that at the same time the price was hitting the
200 moving average and that the Stochastic Oscillator (a measure of when
a currency pair had moved too far in either direction) was overbought?
Now I was getting someplace. Still not sure that I had enough to justify the
trade, I decided that I would add some other indicators.
The next one that I added was a Fibonacci retracement. I drew a line
from the highest recent point the pair had reached, all the way to the lowest point it had reached. This then produced a series of numbers in between the high and the low, where, according to one of the books in front
of me, price was expected to encounter resistance, or selling pressure. The
50 percent level of the retracement that I drew was right at 1.2182. Now we
were onto something! Perhaps Harvey was watching for price to rise up to
this level, where it was more likely to fail and go no further. I liked this. If I
could show that the Stochastic was overbought, that the price was nearly
hitting the Fibonacci retracement level—I might be able to justify taking
the trade.
I had plotted a lot of stuff on my charts at that point. Well, that’s an understatement. My chart looked as if a book on technical analysis had exploded all over the place (see Figure 14.3).
By this time, I had been working for four hours and my family was
asleep. I hadn’t even heard my wife put the kids to bed. This process had
consumed me and I was really getting into it. Another candle was forming

FIGURE 14.3

Harry’s first chart.

book_c14.qxd

12/20/06

2:24 PM

Back to Square One

Page 127

127

but it wasn’t going anywhere. Price was stalling at the 1.2100 mark and not
going anywhere. I was exhausted. I hoped that I didn’t have to show Harvey my chart before I took the trade, because I intended to sell the
EUR/USD just like he was going to do, and I had my justification.
My wife stumbled in a few moments later and, rubbing her eyes,
looked at my chart.
“That looks complicated,” she remarked.
“It does,” I admitted. “I’m not sure I know what all that means. But I
think it is telling me that the Euro is going to be a good sell trade when it
gets to 1.2200.”
“That’s the trade that your friend Harvey is going to take?”
“Yes. That’s right.”
“Why don’t you take it now?” she asked.
She had just risen from bed so I could understand why she was confused. “The price has to rise another 100 points before I can sell it,” I told
her. “We’re going to sell it at 1.2200.”
“If you know it’s going to 1.2200,” she replied, “why don’t you buy
it now?”
Then she walked back into the bedroom. I wasn’t sure if she had been
sleepwalking or if she really meant what she said. But it made sense! She
was right! If Harvey was so sure that the pair was going up and then was
going to be a good sell, then why not make some money on the way up, and
then on the way down again? Wow! That was brilliant.
I looked at the chart more carefully. Price seemed to be drawn like a
magnet to the 200 moving average—it was surely on its way up there all
over again. And the stochastic was showing that it was trending upward
and not overbought yet. It had more room to go! And the MACD, like I had
seen earlier, was rising, with the hill on the top side forming just now. And
price was moving up toward that 50 percent retracement level.
For the next 30 minutes, I added a few more indicators that seemed to
be all telling me the same thing—it was rising upward and I was going to be
able to buy it on the way up. So I opened my trading platform. I had $5,500.
If I traded long now, I stood to make 100 pips. If I traded $1,000,000 in currency, that would be $100 per pip, for a gain of $10,000. That would be a
huge gain and bring back way more than I needed to pay for a month of
bills. It would redeem just about everything I had done before I started
making stupid decisions. I clicked on my trading platform, entered and
double-checked the numbers, and took the buy trade.
At 12:35 A.M., I bought at 1.2098. It cost me $2,500 in margin to make
the trade.
I did not place a stop loss or a take profit order. I just pulled myself up
from the computer table and stumbled into the bedroom and fell asleep. I
didn’t even get out of my clothes.
