
Why the Public Usually Loses
If the insiders are able to do this with fair regularity then it stands also fairly apparent to reason that the opposite element in market trading, the public, is going to lose
the money that the insiders make through their profitable operations. In other
words, the public is the ‘‘goat’’. Many authorities and market writers will take
exception to such a bald and sweeping statement. They have done so in the past, but
the logic of our argument still holds.
It holds further when we consider that the inside element is in this business from
a professional angle. This is their livelihood, their income. They must make a comfortable margin of average profit or they would no longer stay in that business. The
unsuccessful insiders therefore drop out, but the successful ones remain to make up
the group which takes its major living by buying and selling stocks to the public for
a fairly consistent profit.
Though we are convinced that this is the theoretical case, still we would not have
the reader assume a fatalistic attitude toward such a situation. That is largely the
purpose of this group of studies. In the first place, the insider does not always make
a profit. He makes mistakes too, but they are in the minority.
In the second place, and conversely, the public does not always lose. In the third
place, the statement is a wide and general one that when the insider profits, the public loses. In countless situations and campaigns both may profit.
And finally, our previous definition of the insider and the public is necessarily also
a general one. There is no clear-cut dividing line between the two groups. The man
who runs a grocery store in Keokuk might conceivably place himself in the theoretical ranks of the inside element, by extraordinary ability, and reap handsome prof– 32 –

IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS

its, comparatively just as large as the real insider, even though he is not accepted,
strictly speaking, in the definition. He would be our idea of the model student who
thoroughly digests this and other studies on successful stock market trading and
who therefore, in greater measure than the rest of the public class, makes it his business to profit from stock trading.

How to Become an Insider
We are fully conscious that representatives of both of these general trading classes
may read and profit from this course, but its effort is directed more toward aiding
the ambitious student in the public class to approach the ability, the technique and
the profits of the true insider.
There are two chief methods of accomplishing such a purpose. The first is to study
conditions and analyze them along the lines pursued by the insider, who must of
necessity be an expert at technical action. The second is to discover what the insider is doing in the
The strongest indications
market and to follow his lead.
are the result of
The first method is to analyze probable future
organized buying or
operations of the public trading element. The secselling.
ond is to analyze the probable future operations of
the inside element. The technical market student is
therefore somewhat between these two classes and, it may be hoped, at an advantage over both.
In many cases it is impossible to differentiate between the technical signals
accounted for by public operations or inside activity, but in such cases it is generally
also unnecessary. If our chart studies of technical action show us, for instance, that
much more powerful buying than selling is going on in a stock we need not worry,
for the immediate future, about whether the buying is coming from the public or
from the inside element. It would be more likely to justify our complete faith if it
came from the inside element but the important thing is that it is present and must
be considered the chief forecasting element in our analysis.
So public buying and selling has a most decided effect upon our technical picture,
but we must now also realize that the strongest and most important indications are
the result of organized buying or selling for a real campaign by the inside interest.
We must keep the activities, past, present and future, of both classes in mind, but we
shall find activities of the more professional element our most reliable and, fortunately, our most frequent guide.

– 33 –

STUDY II

The Professional Group
The best known and most important element in the past in our group of professional
insiders is the ‘‘pool’’.2 We shall not weary the reader with a detailed explanation of
what a pool is and how it operates; old style ‘‘pools’’ have presumably been outlawed by the SEC. The fact remains, however, that professional groups do still operate in the market and do create the same old technical situations. We may define a
professional group as an organization of the inside element banded together for a
campaign in any stock or group of stocks. That campaign consists in engineering
portions of a complete cycle which, in turn, consists of four parts – accumulation,
mark-up, distribution and mark-down.
A bull group accumulates, marks up and distributes. A bear group distributes,
marks down and accumulates. The former makes a profit by buying stocks from the
public, advancing their market price, and reselling them to the public. The latter
profits by selling stocks to the public, depressing the price and buying the same
stocks back again from the public.
The public, of course, is by no means always the same set of individuals but it is
the same general class of individuals. Furthermore, we must not be understood to
mean that a bull group is dishonest or unfair in advancing or depressing the price of
its favored issue. On the contrary, if the group has made its analysis correctly the
stock will move in the right direction largely of its own accord. Suffice it now to say
merely that the stock chart helps us to detect such professional operations and to
‘‘get aboard’’ on the right side of the market, through observation of recurring patterns and their subsequent results.

Charts Detecting Professional Operations
The stock chart is constantly giving us a picture of all trading history. It is not always
an intelligible picture. In fact, the formations which are replete with forecasting significance, develop rather infrequently; but they are highly important when they do
appear. They are important because the science of chart reading is devoted to studying certain standard pictures which help us to forecast future price movement
through their successive appearance and the unanimity with which certain future
price movements follow such standard patterns.
After we have observed the usual habits of such successively appearing patterns
Today the activities of numerous groups of interested parties operating in various stocks along the lines
described in the text are no longer referred to as ‘‘Pools’’. These days ‘‘Sponsorship’’ describes widespread operations on stock exchanges everywhere that are not all that far removed from connections with
the old pools. The old saying still holds that ‘‘the more things change, the more they stay the same’’.
2

– 34 –

IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS

or pictures we may come to give them technical names. We may find some pictures
which generally forecast a reversal of previous price movement and others which
mean merely a continuation of the previous movement. According to their relative
position with respect to the past movement we may say that they indicate accumulation, distribution, mark-up or mark-down, and we
may thus act accordingly, to take advantage in our
Formations which are
practical market trading of the promised future
replete with forecasting
movement.
significance develop
Some of these pictures can be explained quite lograther infrequently, but
ically, Others must be laid to the habits of those
are highly imporatnt.
interested in certain stocks who always use the same
campaign tactics. Other patterns can hardly be
explained at all, except by the use of some rather vague and involved theories. But
if we find such patterns valuable in forecasting the future price movement of a stock
we need not worry too much about what causes the patterns or their subsequent
habitual movement. It is enough, for our practical trading purposes, to recognize the
pattern and know its probable future significance.

Establishing the Patterns
The following lessons offer as complete a picture as possible of the more important
patterns, rules and practices, connected with this field.
The science of chart reading, however, is not as easy as the mere memorizing of
certain patterns and pictures and recalling what they generally forecast. Any general stock chart is a combination of countless different patterns and its accurate
analysis depends upon constant study, long experience and knowledge of all the
fine points, both technical and fundamental, and, above all, the ability to weigh
opposing indications against each other, to appraise the entire picture in the light of
its most minute and composite details as well as in the recognition of any certain and
memorized formula.

Turns Are Most Important
The most important general element of analysis, it will easily be seen, is the judging
of important changes in trend, or turning points, in the price movement of a stock.
In detail, this will be the greatest part of our future study, but it is not too early to call
attention at this time to a few generalizations about the analysis of such reversals.
It is unusual for the price movement of any stock or the general market to remain
stationary for long intervals. Prices are usually going places and doing things. They
are either going down or up, and are in process of pursuing a trend – generally an
– 35 –

STUDY II

irregular trend, but a trend none the less. Once a major trend is established it must
be assumed, and quite logically, that such trend will continue until it is reversed.
That is a simple statement but it calls attention to the importance of gauging general
turning points in chart analysis. And we shall have more to say later concerning the
error of bucking such a major trend once it is established.
Suffice it now to say that trends are the important practical money-making aspect
of stock chart trading. They should be followed until a reversal is fairly defined.
That, of course, is the rub. Detecting reversal formations is not easy, for there are
many minor reversals which mislead the amateur and even the experienced student.
In the main, however, there are a few general observations which may assist. A
major trend seldom reverses itself suddenly or without warning. Once a trend is
established it takes considerable time and power to turn it. Signals of reversal are
generally given, therefore, for some time previous to the actual turn.
The most important signal is the beginning of minor reversals, the slowing up of
the previous movement, perhaps a gradual rounding off of that movement. After
the final extreme price of the previous trend has been established it must be tested
by subsequent movements. If such movements tend to depart in the opposite direction of the previous trend then the proof grows gradually clearer that a definite
reversal has taken place.

Importance of Volume
But the price range is not the only tool we have for judging such turns. There are, of
course, countless minor indications to the practiced student but the most easily
apparent, and valuable one, next to the course of actual price range, is the increase
in volume, or the activity of trading.
We shall have considerably more to say about volume throughout our entire
study, and especially in Study VIII, which is devoted to a detailed study of volume
action on reversals. A logical explanation of why volume of sales is important on
reversals, however, seems properly in order at the beginning of our studies.
Our charts and our study of technical action go back, as always, to their foundations in actual open-market trading and the balance of buying and selling. We have
seen that when buying is stronger or heavier than selling the price tends to advance,
and vice versa. So while a stock is in a declining major trend the balance of supply
and demand is slightly on the supply, or selling, side. Until there is a change in the
technical situation this will continue to be the case.

Why Volume Increases on Reversals
But what is it logical to expect when our awaited change in the technical situation
– 36 –

IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS

does take place? Naturally, the change will be increased buying power. More and
better buying will be the most logical thing that will tend to reverse this technical
down trend. Gradually the buying will become more active and will slowly return
to a more equal balance with the selling. Finally, if the buying continues to improve,
it will exceed the selling and slowly move the balance of power from the selling to
the buying side and the major price trend is reversed.
But how can volume be affected by such a change? After all there must be a seller
for every buyer. This is quite true, but we must consider that there is a certain
amount of momentum to the major trend. Selling may conceivably ‘‘dry up’’ and
result in a change of the balance without increased volume. But generally, the selling has sufficient momentum to keep it in steady supply until our friends, the public, begin to realize that the selling was unwise. They realize it long after the trend
has been reversed. We are attempting to realize it before the public does.

Volume Needed to Overcome Momentum
Granted then that in most cases the selling will continue in fairly stable volume
while the turn is being made, it is going to take a greater amount of buying to turn
the major trend than had been normal while the trend was downward. There are still
just as many shares sold as are bought but it takes more of both to stem and reverse
the momentum of the downward trend. Thus on major turns our index of sales volume will almost show an increase from the previous normal.
If the reader does not immediately visualize the logic of this tabloid explanation
he need not worry about the matter just now. This particular explanation for high
volume on reversals is not important from a practical standpoint, is admittedly far
from a complete explanation, and will be discussed more fully in our later studies.
In fact, if this were the sole explanation then we could not expect volume to
increase very greatly on reversals and the change might be so slight as to make our
consideration of the phenomenon unimportant. We have given this explanation first
because it seems the most basic and automatic one, but there are plenty of others,
perhaps more important and more easily understandable.
One of these additional causes for the common tendency for volume to increase is
simply because the previous move has begun to meet resistance. Insiders with large
blocks of stock to sell or buy must go slowly for fear of forcing prices down or up
too rapidly. But when they see the stock absorbing such selling or buying more easily, their first and natural tendency is to increase the speed of their operations, completing them sooner, raising volume of sales and leading to reversal, provided, as
assumed, that the new buying or selling power continues its own campaign.
Somewhat the same observations apply to professional operations or other artificial manipulation. The best way for an inside group to buy stock easily is to put it
– 37 –

STUDY II

down first, selling a lot of it, perhaps employing matched or wash sales (outlawed
under the SEC, but … ?) to raise volume and attract trading attention, and then suddenly to reverse into buying activity and buy up all the stock which its previous
campaign of discouragement has brought into the market. It is easy to see how such
artificial manipulation would raise volume of sales on the turn, or reversal.
In Study VIII we shall note a type of exception where high volume comes after the
turn instead of before it. This exception to the rule occurs most frequently when a
bear trend is reversed into a bull trend, but almost never on the reversal from a bull
to a bear market.

The One-Day Reversal
Our volume rule holds generally, however, and leads to what we shall name a oneday reversal. It describes what many call a turnover day, a volume shake-out, or a
climax. If the market has been declining steadily on steady volume there may suddenly appear one day of exceptionally high volume, with price weakness in the
morning and strength in the afternoon, and with the close not far from the best price
and at the opposite end of the range line from the extreme low.
The logical assumption is that the one-day reversal was engineered for the purpose of obtaining stock. They sell recklessly in the morning and catch many stoploss orders on the way down. Also the sharp decline and high volume of activity call
attention to the stock and many unwary traders sell it in anticipation of much lower
prices.
Just when this weakness and heavy selling is at its height, they reverse their tactics and buy all the stock there is for sale. They find much more for sale on the way
up in the afternoon than on the way down in the morning for many watchers have
put their selling orders in just above the market, thinking the rally is only a short one.
The day ends with the price back up near the highest, ready to continue the move
upward tomorrow or within a few days, and the insiders have accumulated a nice
line of stock for their campaign. High volume is the natural accompaniment of such
a movement.

Examples of One-Day Reversal
The one-day reversal occurs at the top of a movement, indicating a change to a
downward trend, just as it does at the bottom, and with the same implications. In
either case it may be defined as a day of high volume with prices moving early in
the day in the same direction as the previous general trend and farther than previous levels, then turning back during the latter part of the day and closing at or near
the end of the day’s price range opposite its opening thrust.
– 38 –

IMPORTANT REVERSAL FORMATIONS

We can find several examples of the one-day reversal in the charts accompanying
this study. Note the following.
Fig II.2 – A one-day bottom reversal on May 14.
Fig II.3 – An excellent example of a one-day bottom reversal on February 5, and a
one-day top reversal on February 25 though less typical since the volume
did not run as high as on the preceding day.
Fig II.5 – A one-day bottom reversal on April 23.
It should be noted that the one-day reversal in itself is not a forecasting signal to be
given undue weight in practical trading. For one thing, not all one-day reversals
lead at once to rapid, worthwhile moves in the new trend; days and weeks may
elapse before the reverse move really gets under way.
However, as a phenomenon occurring frequently within other patterns or formations that are indicative of impending turns, it gives an important clue to probable
trends, and is most useful as a warning to watch closely the chart in which it may
have appeared to see what patterns may follow and to be ready for the move when
it comes.

Comparative Volume on ‘‘Tops’’ and ‘‘Bottoms’’
We have been discussing the general rule of high volume accompanying changes in
price trends, mentioning incidentally the one-day reversal as a phenomenon frequently appearing at these times. It remains to be noted that volume is a relative
matter; i.e., when we speak of high volume we mean a volume of transactions
greater than has been prevailing for some time previously. It is particularly important to bear this relativity in mind when comparing the volume which usually
accompanies and signals a ‘‘top’’ or change from an upward to a downward price
trend, with the volume accompanying a bottom. Each is normally characterized by
high volume; i.e., higher volume than has been prevailing, but the high volume at
tops is almost always much greater than the high volume at bottoms.
The prime cause for this difference between volume at tops and bottoms is
undoubtedly the fact that the public becomes interested and actively engaged to a
far greater extent in an upward or bull movement so that more pressure of volume
is required to overcome and reverse this optimistic public participation than is
required to stem the relatively uninteresting and inactive markets at the end of a
downward movement.

Price and Volume Must Be Considered Together
The point of our recent discussion is that both the price picture and the volume
– 39 –

STUDY II

picture are important in themselves but that for complete and efficient working
analysis of technical formations both price and volume must be considered in combination.
We have spoken previously of the importance of volume in stemming a movement, either up or down, after it has gained momentum. The reader will discover that high volume is
For efficient analysis of
helpful in anticipating reversals in many other situtechnical formations
ations also.
both price and volume
The practical trader, by ear, eye or chart, knows
must be considered.
full well how often a stock or the general market
does quite the opposite of what the public expects
and should expect it to do. This is merely a point of insider psychology. The public
is generally wrong in its forecast because it would be difficult for anyone to make
money in the market if prices always did the obvious thing.
The insider is in business to make money, but he cannot make money by following the crowd and doing the obvious thing. He makes money by dealing on the
opposite side from the public.

Volume Showing Insiders Crossing the Public
So it is not illogical to expect that technical action can be a great friend in detecting
when the insider is crossing the crowd and preparing to reverse the obvious movement. In October of 1931, for instance, the general market turned from a major
decline into an intermediate recovery. At about that time Woolworth declared an
extra dividend and there was very bullish enthusiasm in the press and brokerage
gossip about the split-up of its British subsidiary.
There appeared no reason for any further bear market in a stock seemingly so well
placed as this one. The public bought avidly. It advanced from 45 to 55 in a few days.
But just about when the best news was coming out the stock began to hesitate. Volume of sales was terrific but the price barely advanced for several successive days.
The reader is right. It was inside distribution. The public was buying, but the stock
was not going up as fast as it should under such conditions. Why? Because the insiders were selling tons of it. The stock barely got above 55 around the end of October
and before the close of the year it was back down to 35.
Another example of how high volume bears out a turn when prices cross public
psychology may be recalled when Lorillard suddenly resumed dividends around
the first of December, 1931. The stock rose only two points on the day of the
announcement and could get no further. The volume was tremendous, with nearly
40,000 shares traded in a single day, compared with a normal average of less than
10,000 shares a day. In the following week the stock not only lost those two points of
– 40 –
