to look and wait for the reversal trigger, which came when the market made
a high close doji pattern.
The next few chapters will really bring home the message of the value
of incorporating pivot points and candlestick patterns. Using the pivot
point as a moving average in addition to using the pivot point calculations
to identify target ranges will certainly make you a more prepared trader.
This method has captured the attention of many experts who are now
using it; and its accuracy at predicting turning points in the market constantly amazes me. Believe me, many people are fascinated by this concept.
In December 2002, Futures Magazine first published an article I wrote on
the subject, “Combining Cycles and Pivot Points to Predict Market Values”
(p. 38), and has published several other articles of mine. Perry Kaufman, the
famous technician and author, in the fourth edition of his nearly 1,200-page

180

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 6.15
Used with permission of www.nationalfutures.com.

Pivot Point Moving Average System

181

FIGURE 6.16
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

New Trading Systems and Methods (Wiley, 2005) quoted my work from
such magazine articles. Many other educators have come to listen to me
teach, have taught my ideas, and have seen improvement in their students.
I have had the opportunity to share my work and research with others, and
I would like to share it with you. These trading ideas are not new, and they
have stood the test of time.
Here is an excerpt from an online interview I had in February 2003 (see
www.nationalfutures.com). The concepts I was talking about then pretty
much cover what we have gone over so far and will continue to cover in the
following chapters. The difference is that I am going over in detail what the
specific signals, settings, and rules are for the trading triggers.
Q: How long have you been involved in the markets?
A: I started in the business back in 1979 as a runner on the floor of the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange [CME]. I then worked for George and Carrie
Lane, the innovator and premier educator for the stochastics oscillator.
Back then, we looked for day trading opportunities in agricultural commodities, bonds, and foreign currencies. The best markets that we used

182

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

specifically for quick day trading were in the Swiss franc and the German
deutsche mark. Floor traders used these numbers and kept them to themselves as a secret formula for their day trading numbers. These are known
as the pivot point calculations. I started incorporating them in my trading
approach back in 1984 and have been using them ever since.
Q: How do you calculate pivot points?
A: I use the traditional formula. To determine current support/resistance levels, the first step is to find the pivot point [PP] number: PP = (H +
L + C) divided by 3
The first resistance level (R-1) = (PP × 2) – L
The second resistance level (R-2) = PP + H – L
The first support level (S-1) = (PP × 2) – H
The second support level (S-2) = PP – H + L
Q: What time frames do you apply to calculate the pivot points?
A: I find it extremely important to use multiple time frames in my research and analysis. For those who are familiar with the “numbers” from
the pivot point calculations, the idea of applying them from any time period
other than the prior day’s session may make little or no sense. However, I
apply the daily, weekly, and even monthly target numbers and incorporate
these in my traders “tool box.” Often traders will comment, “If I am a day
trader, why would I want to be concerned with a monthly or a weekly market outlook?” Consider that in every month, there will be a high and a low,
and the close will be somewhere in between. In one week, a high or a low
will be established; and in one day of the week, the market will form that
point of interest. More often than not, in an hour or so, trades will take
place that will establish that high and subsequently that low!
Q: What are the various time periods in forex markets from which you
take the data to calculate the numbers?
A: For the daily numbers, I take the New York Bank settlement. For
weekly numbers, I use the data beginning from the open on Sunday night to
the close on Friday afternoon. Monthly numbers are calculated by calendar
periods.
Q: What is the main purpose for using the pivot points, and how can
traders use them?
A: One popular application of the pivot point concept is to go long or
cover any short positions at either of the two support levels or to go short
or sell at the projected resistance levels. Knowing these fixed price levels
gives the trader unambiguous points to trade off, to enter, or to exit the
market or, more important at times, where not to enter a position. For example, you should not buy right at either of the resistance levels. These levels act as boundaries that can turn back price advances or declines, at least
on the first attempt. Another technique is to trade the breakout of the first
support or resistance levels. If prices do break through the S-1 or R-1 level,

Pivot Point Moving Average System

183

traders have a new target at the R-2 or S-2 level to take profits. The benefits
of using the both short- and longer-term pivot points for a short-term day
trader are numerous: They give a trader a better edge due to the ability to
work with predetermined price levels, which lead to precise entry and stoploss points, all of which give the trader the additional edge in the quest for
bigger profits.
Q: You use different technical tools in your daily videos. On which ones
do you put more trust or emphasis?
A: Great question! I use stochastics as an overbought/oversold indicator, and I use it to help me determine divergence and convergence signals.
I use three-period variable moving averages to help keep me focused on the
trend. Moving averages also help me identify potential turning points when
the short-term average crosses over or below the longer-term average.
Q: You use candle charts over bar charts. Why is that?
A: Each candle has different characteristics that represent the difference, or the distance, between the high, the low, the open, and the close.
These characteristics use colors to differentiate the relationship between
the open and the close, referred to as the real body. Candlestick charting
acts as an immediate way to illustrate and to help identify the current market’s environment and the current time frame’s acceptance or rejection of
a specific support or resistance level in a clear visual manner. If, for example, on a given trading session, prices move higher from the opening price,
establish the high, and then fall, the distance formed from those points of
interest is called the “shadow.”
Candle charts give me color and depth, which help me almost immediately determine where current prices are in relation to past price levels.
Candlestick charting techniques can be used from data for whatever time
period you are looking at: hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly. There are 60 to
70 different classifications of named candlestick patterns—from one on up
to several candle components. They can signal reversal, stalled, and continuations of a market’s price move. Day traders want to focus on a small
arsenal of the more consistent and reliable reoccurring formations. Several
patterns that a trader wants to home in on and recognize are the more powerful reversal formations at tops and bottoms of price ranges.
Q: How do candlesticks help you in your trading?
A: My trading approach incorporates time-tested techniques but uses
the aid of candlestick charts, which help me identify the true condition of
the markets. If you believe market prices are simply the reflection of human
emotion on perceived current value and focus on what the market is doing,
rather than on what the market might do, then you are ahead of the crowd
in understand how markets function. With that understanding, you will
then be able to have the confidence to act swiftly and to execute or trigger
into a trade or position in the market.

184

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

Q: Which do you favor more—fundamental or technical analysis?
A: I watch what reports are coming out, as some can generate wild gyrations (e.g., monthly unemployment report). I rely heavily on technical
analysis. After all, it is the purest and most objective study of price action.
It is used for expedience. You can review one, five, ten, or even twenty
charts in a matter of seconds or minutes to get a quick overview of the general trends. How long would it take to study the fundamental reports on the
economy or interest rates in various countries to develop an opinion to buy
or sell a foreign currency? That process could take hours, days, or even
weeks to figure out. Specific chart patterns and price actions have a high
degree of repetition. They are not 100 percent accurate; however, they do
have a high percentage of reoccurrences. Success comes in the simple form
of managing risk when applying a systematic method to these principles
and being able to quickly identify when and why a particular pattern fails.
Q: You learned that certain candle patterns developed near these pivot
points. Which ones do you look for near support or resistance levels?
A: Top reversal or bearish, such as dojis, bearish haramis, harami
crosses, dark cloud covers, and evening star formations. And for bottom reversal or bullish candle patterns, I look for bullish haramis, harami crosses,
bullish piercing patterns, bullish engulfing patterns, or, my favorite, a rare
occurring pattern called a morning doji star.
Q: How significant are doji patterns?
A: Extremely significant, especially if you know what to look for. There
are specific criteria that dojis need to meet; but if you know what these are,
they can be very powerful in helping your trading decisions. Doji formations help confirm reversals. There are different names and nuances associated with certain dojis. Dojis indicate indecision, the market ends or
closes, where it began or opened. Dojis signify that confidence is lost from
buyers or sellers after the open as the market made a lot of intraday noise
as the range during the day was established. In a bullish or bearish trending
market, indecision is the last thing you want to see. Strong rejection or failure from the high and/or the low is a significant telltale sign that changes
are coming.
Q: What other considerations can you share with us regarding dojis?
A: In a strong uptrending market, usually the market will close near a
high, as larger capitalized traders will hold positions overnight. If the large
money traders are not confident the market will move higher in price, then
usually the market closes back near the open. I find it uncanny how many
times dojis form at or very close to the actual pivot point calculated support
or resistance numbers. That is what helps me set up my trades; it is the relation of the next candle’s close after a doji that triggers my entries, especially if they are lined up at the pivot points.
Q: What is the shortest time frame that you use for charting?

Pivot Point Moving Average System

185

A: Five minutes.
Q: What other time frames do you track?
A: Besides monthly, weekly, and daily charts, I use the 5-, the 15-, and
the 30-minute and even the 60-minute for overnight trend trading.
Q: What is your favorite or most reliable time frame?
A: For day trading, the 5- and 15-minute are equally important; so I
watch both.
Q: Do you just use pivot points, or do you use other methods for forecasting support and resistance levels?
A: In my book A Complete Guide to Technical Trading Tactics: How
to Profit Using Pivot Points, Candlesticks, and Other Indicators, I demonstrate many powerful ways to anticipate support and resistance levels, including Fibonacci retracement, Fibonacci extensions, and projection
methods. In fact, in my trading course, I teach specific trade setups and
confirm signals to trigger or execute trades, how to manage a trade, and
how to know when to exit or even reverse a position.
Q: What signals or rules do you follow for a trading trigger?
A: Without giving away too many of my trade secrets, there is one that
can be found in my advanced trading course—a special trading setup that I
look for in a bullish setup.
• When the market approaches a key pivot point, buy on the close or
on the next open once a new closing high is made above the previous bullish reversal candle pattern or a doji.
• Place your initial risk-management stop below the low of the lowest
low point of the bullish candle pattern on a stop-close-only basis.
• Exit the trade on the close or on the first open of a candle that
makes a lower low after a prolonged uptrend, especially if it is near
a pivot line.
• One can use a “filter,” or a back-up process, to confirm the buy signal against a major pivot point number, such as a bullish convergence stochastic pattern.
Remember, a bullish candle pattern can be a harami, a harami doji
cross, a bullish piercing pattern, a bullish engulfing pattern, a doji, or a
morning doji star.
Q: Tell us about this course and book you have mentioned?
A: The book was published by John Wiley and Sons in May of 2004. I
put the course together based on several seminars I conducted, one of
which was at the Chicago Board of Trade back in May 2003 and then again
in December 2004. I had a huge response from folks who could not attend
but were impressed with my methods. I offer it on my web site, which is
www.nationalfutures.com. Both the book and the course are available on
my site, and I do get asked to autograph and add a personal message when
these are prepurchased from my web site.

CHAPTER 7

Candle Charts and
Top Reversal
Patterns

andlestick charting is an extremely pronounced and effective
method for tracking and examining the four most important price
points: the open, the high, the low, and the close. Using candlestick
charting helps me visually to better compare current price activity in relation to past price points of interest. The advantage of using candlestick
charting in place of bar charting is that you can use the same techniques
and analysis that you do with bar charts and have the diversity and unique
signals that candlesticks generate. As you learn this method of charting,
you will come to see how it is a great barometer of human emotion, namely,
fear and greed.
In addition, this is a simple, yet certainly more specialized format of
charting. It has gained in popularity in the United States and is currently
followed by more and more analysts. My first book covered most of
the top formations, and I want to review what I believe are the more frequent and reliable patterns. This chapter will show some statistical evidence that there are certain patterns that develop over and over again.
Candlestick charting is extremely easy to learn; and once you remember
the sequence of events that form a trending market condition, the candles
will certainly be your best tool in spotting market reversals at tops
and bottoms. Having that information will certainly stack the odds in
your favor for making money consistently in the markets as an independent trader.

C

187

188

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

CANDLESTICK CHARTING
Candlestick charting gives a detailed depiction of a price graph with almost
a three-dimensional effect. What stands out most is that a chartist can see
patterns more clearly and distinctly than with other types of charts. There
are over 60 candle patterns that form to create certain setups. This book
will focus on only a few select patterns and, what matters most, the triggers
that initiate a call to action.
If you are not familiar with candlestick formations, I am going over the
foundation of how to construct a candle and what it represents. If you wish
to become an expert at each of the patterns, several authors have written
great books on the subject. One is Steve Nison, who introduced the Western world to candles. (In my first book, on page 44, I wrote about how he
discovered candles.) Others are Steve Bigalow and Greg Morris.
For the expert, this section will be a great review. Since each market
has a different trading characteristic, such as volatility or price moves, certain candlestick patterns vary and may occur more or less frequently. Each
candlestick pictured has a different characteristic that represents the difference or the distance between the high, the low, the open, and the close.
Candlestick charting techniques can be used from data for whatever time
period you use: hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly. Candlestick charts lend
themselves to pattern recognition and trendline support, resistance, and
channel lines. Candles also help to corroborate other forms of technical
analysis, especially pivot point analysis.
I want to explain the basics, and then I want to show you specific patterns so you can see for yourself how to utilize them. I will also show a few
examples of the more popular named candle formations. Moreover, I will
explain the psychology of what is behind creating the pattern as it relates to
the open, the high, the low, and the close of a given time period. Armed with
the knowledge of which patterns have a higher frequency of occurring and
with the understanding of what they symbolize, you should be able to trade
the markets from recognizing them; and when patterns do develop, you
should be able to instinctively act on the signals, thereby increasing your
ability to make money as a trader.
The components of a candlestick are derived from the open, the high,
the low, and the close. In Figure 7.1, we see a dark candle (in a color charting software package, it would be a red candle). This signifies that this particular time period’s close is below the open. It does not indicate whether
the market closed higher or lower than the previous time period did. The
computer code for this sequence would be C < O—the close is less than the
open. We can also assign a negative (–) value or reading to help determine
the relative strength of a trend.
In Figure 7.2, the white, or hollow, candle signifies that the concluded

189

Candle Charts and Top Reversal Patterns

FIGURE 7.1

Selling or Short

FIGURE 7.2

Buying or Long

time period shows that the close is above the open (in a charting software
package, you would universally see this as a green candle). Keep in mind
that you can adjust almost any parameter in any software package to your
liking. Therefore, you may want the candle to be white. The point is that the
color of a “lower close than open” candle should be different from the color
of the “higher close than open” candle. The computer code for this sequence would be C > O—the close is greater than the open. We can also assign a positive (+) value or reading to help determine the relative strength
of a trend by how many more positive, or “higher close than open,” candles
exist.
The three main components of candle charts that we need to identify are:
1. Relationship between Open and Close (Candle Bodies). With the real

candle body colored and representing a negative or a positive reading,
we can see what is dominating the market.
In uptrends, or bullish market conditions, we see buying come in
on the open; and as we learned from the stochastics indicator, the market should settle closer to the highs. It should also close above the
open; and that is why in bullish market conditions, we see hollow,
white, or green candles. This is why I assign it a positive (+) reading.
How much the bulls are dominating the market is reflected by the
length or the distance between the open and the close. If the market
opens on the low and has a large range where it closes at the high of the
session, that signifies that the bulls are in strong control. However, if
the market has a wide-range session and the market price closes back

190

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

near where it opened—say, in the middle of the range—that is not a
sign that bulls dominate the market for that particular time period.
In a bearish market condition, or a strong downtrend, we would
see dark- or red-colored real body candles. This represents sellers entering the market on the open and dominating the session right into the
close of that time period. If the market opens on the high and prices decline where the close is at or near the low, this shows that the bears are
firmly in control. This is why I assign a negative (–) reading. The distance factors between the open and the close are illustrated in a much
more defined way in candle charts than in bar charts due to the shape
and color coordination of the candles.
2. Shadows and Correlations to Candle Body. The distance of a low
and/or a high in relation to the real body as created by the open and the
close can really illustrate the market’s denial of a support or a resistance level. Long shadows, tails, or wicks, as they are called, that form
after a long downtrend indicate a potential that the trend has exhausted
itself and that demand is increasing or supply is dwindling. Shadows,
tails, or wicks formed at the tops of real bodies, especially after a long
price advance, indicate that demand is drying up and supply is increasing. The overall size of shadows is important to watch in relation to a
real body and can be easily identified.
3. Size or Length of the Overall Candle. Now this is one that is hard to
miss using the color-coded method of candle charts. A long candle that
opens at the bottom and closes at the high, which would be an abnormal occurrence, has significant meaning. After a long downtrend, seeing this formation indicates that a major trend reversal is taking place.
After a long uptrend, seeing an unusually long candle that closes above
the open (a positive value) would indicate that an exhaustion or blowoff-top condition may exist.
The reverse is true in down trades. After a long price decline, a tall
red- or dark-colored candle, which represents the market close below
the open (a negative assigned value), may indicate that a capitulation
or an exhaustion bottom has formed. After a long uptrend or price advance, if that same candle was formed, it might indicate that a major
trend reversal is occurring.

CANDLE FORMATIONS
The candle development will give us immediate identification of the current
market’s environment and the market participant’s acceptance or rejection
or a support or resistance level in a clearly visual manner.
