
152

153
pricing of an item is the best measure of its value.
The odd thing about believing in efficient markets is
that you have to surrender your beliefs and ego to the markets.
Several years ago, a director of the Office of Management and Budget made a statement that budget
projections should be based on the assumption that long-term interest rates would eventually decline to 5 to
6 percent, at a time when rates were over 8 percent. The market-implied interest rate level reflects the net
intelligence of thousands of traders battling it out daily in the bond market. In comparison, the 0MB director's
personal opinion doesn't mean anything. If he's basing government policy on the assumption that long-term
interest rates will be 5 to 6 percent, when the market's best guess is 8 percent, he's doing grave harm to
society. Presumably, if he were smart enough to predict interest rates better than the market, he could make
a fortune trading the bond market, which he obviously can't do.
My guess about where interest rates will be in the next twenty years is better than that of almost any
economist, because all I have to do is look at where the bond market is trading. If it's trading at 8 percent,
that's my projection. Someone can spend millions of dollars developing an elaborate interest rate forecasting
model, and I'll bet you that over the long run the bond market's forecast will be better. The general principle
is that if you can give up your ego and listen to what the markets are telling you, you can have a huge source
of information.
==== I know that your bottom-line advice to people regarding trading is:
Don`t think that you can beat the market However, is there any advice you can offer for those who do
participate in the markets? ====
If you invest and don't diversify, you're literally throwing out money. People don't realize that
diversification is beneficial even if it reduces your return.
==== Why? ====
Because it reduces your risk even more. Therefore, if you diversify and then use margin to increase your
leverage to a risk level equivalent to that of a nondiversified position, your return will probably be greater.
==== I tend to agree. I like to say that diversification is the only free lunch on Wall Street ====
The way I would put it is that not diversifying is like throwing your lunch out the window. If you have a
portfolio and are not diversifying, you're incinerating money every year.
The type of professional option arbitrage trading in which Yass engages obviously has little direct
relevance to most ordinary traders. However, there are still some significant messages here that have
broader application. Perhaps Yass's most important point is that it is critical to focus on maximizing gains
rather than the number of wins. One obvious application of this concept is that regardless of your trading
style, a betting (i.e., trading) strategy that increases the stakes on trades deemed to have a higher
probability of success could significantly enhance the final results. Another point emphasized by Yass is that
our initial impressions are often wrong. In other words, beware of acting on the obvious.
//**Note:**// //Readers unfamiliar with options may wish to read the Appendix in order to understand
the trading-related references in this chapter.//

153

154
PART VII The Psychology of Trading

154

155
Zen and the Art of Trading
"We has met the enemy, and it is us. "
The famous quote from Walt Kelly's cartoon strip, "Pogo, " would provide as fitting a one-line summation
of the art of trading as any. Time and time again, those whom I interviewed for this book and its predecessor
stressed the absolutely critical role of psychological elements in trading success. When asked to explain what
was important to success, the Market Wizards never talked about indicators or techniques, but rather about
such things as discipline, emotional control, patience, and mental attitude toward losing. The message is
clear: The key to winning in the markets is internal, not external.
Zen and the Art of Trading
One of the hazards of doing a book of this sort is that you can go through the arduous process of
transforming a rambling 250-page raw transcript into a readable 25-page chapter only to have the interview
subject with hold permission to use the material. (In order to provide an atmosphere conducive to openness
on the part of those I interiewed, I felt it necessary to offer them the right of final refusal.) One of the traders
I interviewed, an individual who had made several hundred million dollars in trading profits for his firm, felt
that the resulting chapter, which contained a lot of copy related to intuition, dreams, Eastern philosophy, and
trading anecdotes, presented an image of him that would be viewed askance by his corporate clients. I
prevailed upon him, however, to allow me to use the following excerpt anonymously, as I felt it offered an
unusual and insightful perspective on trading.
==== I still don't understand your trading method. How could you make these huge sums of money by just
watching the screen? ====
There was no system to it. It was nothing more than, "I think the market is going up, so I'm going to
buy." "It's gone up enough, so I'm going to sell." It was completely impulsive. I didn't sit down and formulate
any trading plan. I don't know where the intuition comes from, and there are times when it goes away.
==== How do yon recognize when it goes away? ====
When I'm wrong three times in a row, I call time out. Then I paper trade for a while.
==== For how long do you paper trade? ====
Until I think I'm in sync with the market again. Every market has a rhythm, and our job as traders is to
get in sync with that rhythm. I'm not really trading when I'm doing those trades. There's trading being done,
but I* m not doing it.
==== What do you mean you're not doing it? ====
There's buying and selling going on, but it's just going through me. It's like my personality and ego are
not there. I don't even get a sense of satisfaction on these trades. It's absolutely that objective. Did you ever
read Zen and the Art of Archery?
==== No, I have to admit, I missed that one. ====
The essence of the idea is that you have to leam to let the arrow shoot itself. There's no ego involved. It's
not, "I'm shooting the arrow, and I'm releasing it." Rather, the arrow is shot, and it's always right.
The same concept applies to trading. There's no sense of self at all. There's just an awareness of what will
happen. The trick is to differentiate between what you want to happen and what you know will happen. The
intuition knows what will happen.
In trading, just as in archery, whenever there is effort, force, straining, snuggling, or trying, it's wrong.
You're out of sync; you're out of harmony with the market. The perfect trade is one that requires no effort.
==== You talk about knowing what will happen. Can you give me an example? ====
The current decline in the mark versus the yen is something that I just knew would happen.
==== Before the mark went down versus the yen, it had trended in the other direction for quite some time.
How did you know when the timing was right for the trade? ====
The trigger was actually a Freudian slip. I was talking about the yen/mark rate with another trader when it
was trading at 87.80. I kept on referring to the price as 77.80. The other trader finally said, "What are you
talking about?" I realized that I was off by ten big figures in my price references. Obviously, there was some
part of me that was looking for the rate to go down to that level. It was literally bubbling out of me.

155

156
Charles Faulkner: The Mind of an Achiever
Charles Faulkner abandoned graduate school (he was studying psy-cholinguistics at Northwestern
University) after becoming enamored with two early books written by Richard Handler and John Grinder, the
cofounders of Neuro-Linguistic Programming (more on NLP in the interview). Starting in 1981, Faulkner
studied extensively with Grinder and then with Bandler and other key NLP codevelopers, becoming a certified
NLP trainer in 1987. Faulkner's focus has been on modeling human excellence, with projects that have
included accelerated learning, physician decision making, and futures trading. Faulkner is also a consultant,
NLP seminar leader, and program designer and author of several audio tape programs applying the
techniques of NLP. I met Charles Faulkner when he approached me after a talk I had given at a futures
industry symposium. During my speech, I had made several references to this volume, which at the time was
about half-completed. Faulkner explained that he had been doing research and consulting directed at helping
traders overcome mental impediments to success. I told him that I was quite interested in his work because
it
Note: ID several instances in this interview, where I thought iE would help clarify or expand the
information, I supplemented Faulkner's responses with adapted excerpts from the Nightingale-Conant tape
series NLP: The New Technology of Achievement NLP, for which Faulkner was the program designer and
principal coauthor.
might fit as a feature in the new book but that my scheduling on that trip did not leave enough time for an
interview. He gave me a boxed tape set, asking me to see what I thought about it.
The tape series dealt with applying NLP to various aspects of achievement. Although there are a number
of NLP elements that I have trouble relating to, certain segments of the series made great sense to me and
seemed helpful in increasing motivation and focusing goals. Overall, I was sufficiently impressed with
Faulkner's tape series to schedule another trip to Chicago to interview him.
A portion of NLP is concerned with studying the cues people provide through their gestures, eye
movements, language, and voice intonations. Faulkner has obviously had a great deal of experience honing
these interpretative skills, and he struck me as being extremely perceptive. He had thoughtfully arranged for
the use of a private conference room in a hotel near the airport in order to maximize our time together.
You're a Neuro-Linguistic Programming trainer. That's not going to mean very much to most readers of
this book. Let's start with a layperson's definition of NLP.
Actually, Natural Learning Processes might have been a better name. NLP's principal cofounders, Richard
Bandler, an information scientist, and John Grinder, a professor of linguistics, define NLP as the study of
human excellence. NLP studies great achievers to pinpoint their mental programs-that is, to learn how great
achievers use their brains to produce results. They began their study with extraordinarily talented therapistsindividuals who consistently produced positive changes in the lives of others. Succeeding there, they went on
to study talented people in other fields-managers, negotiators, athletes, and artists-to find what those
individuals did to get their outstanding results. The models of the natural learning processes these people
used to become extraordinary in their fields can be used by anyone wishing to excel.
To understand how NLP works, let me make an analogy to the beginning of modem skiing. Until the
1950s, most people thought skiing was a matter of natural talent. You either had the talent to do it, or you
didn't. Then something happened that changed the sport forever. Films were made of some of Europe's great
skiers to identify all the
movements that characterized them. It was found that they all had certain techniques in common. Beyond
that, it was discovered that the techniques of these exceptional skiers could be taught to anyone. All kinds of
people could learn to be very good skiers. The key was to identify the movements that made a great skierthe essence of their skills-so it could be taught to others. In NLP we call that essence a model. The same
basic principles can be applied to any other endeavor or to various aspects of human interrelationships. I like
to describe NLP as software for the brain. It provides mental programs that allow you to develop new abilities
and have more of the kinds of experiences you want.
As evident by NLP`s middle name, linguistics plays a pivotal role. I'm not at all clear how linguistics can
dramatically affect behavior. Can you give me an example?
How do our brains process language? The answer is very, very literally. People often say things like,
"Don't worry" or "Don't think about it." What happens if I tell you not to think about a problem? Well, despite
what I said, you'll think about that problem. That's because our brains cannot understand putting something
in negative language. In order to know what not to think about, our brains have to first think of it.
Consider the example of experienced traders telling new traders, "Don't think about the money.
Remember, don't think about the money." Although that may sound like good advice, what's going to
happen? The new traders will repeat that phrase to themselves until they are literally obsessing about the
money.
Because of the way our brains process language, which is literally, NLP recommends taking negative
thoughts and stating them in positive terms. Instead of saying what you don't want, state what you do want.
Instead of advising a trader, "Don't think about the money," it would be far more effective to say, "Focus
your attention on following your method."
==== What are the basic principles of NLP? ====
NLP is based on principles different from those in psychology. Five essential principles or presuppositions
guide NLP. The first is: The map is not the territory. The map is our thoughts and feelings; the territory is

156

157
reality. We respond to our thoughts and feelings
about reality; we don't respond to reality. This is
good news because it means that it is possible to get a better map-a better way to think and feel.
The second fundamental principle of NLP is: Experience has a structure. In other words, the way in which
memories are arranged in our minds determines what they will mean and how they will affect us. If we can
change the structure of our memories, we will experience those events in our lives differently. Change the
structure of our thoughts and our experiences will change automatically.
The third major principle of NLP is: If one person can do it, anyone else can leam to do it. This is the great
promise of NLP. Excellence and achievement have a structure that can be copied. By modeling successful
people, we can leam from the experience of those who have already succeeded. If we can leam to use our
brains in the same way as the exceptionally talented person, we can possess the essence of that talent.
The fourth basic principle is: The mind and body are part of the same system. If you change your mind
about something, your abilities will change. If you change your posture, breathing, or other parts of your
physiology, your thoughts will change. The great psychiatrist R. D. Laing used to say, "Change your mind,
change your body. Change your body, change your mind."
The fifth principle is: People have all the resources they need. In NLP, an image, a sound, or a feeling is a
resource. Our brain has the ability to see inner pictures. Whether these pictures begin as fuzzy or clear, they
can be built up into great motivating visions. Inner voices can criticize us or they can encourage and guide
us. Any feeling we've had in our lives-confidence, challenge, indomitable will, whatever it is-even if we've
only had it once, can be transferred to any situation in our lives where we want or need it.
==== When you say, "The map is not the territory," do you mean that people have distorted views of reality
that lead them astray? ====
NLP believes that all maps (mental and physical) are a distorted, or selected, view of reality. A
topographical map, a street map, and a weather map all provide different views of the same territory and all
are true representations. Usefulness, rather than truthfalness, will guide you to want a different map at
different times. The different forms of market analysis can be seen as different maps of the same territory.
Outstanding traders seek to have maps that most closely match the market territory in a way that is useful
for them.
Of course, not all maps are true or useful. Let me offer one example that is particularly significant for
traders. It relates to the statistical concept of regression to the mean. This mathematical phenomenon
implies that if you do extremely well, you're likely to do more poorly the next time, while if you do very
poorly, you're likely to do better the next time. This pattern is an inevitable consequence of the law of
averages and tends to skew traders' perceptions and evaluations of their own performance.
For example, if a trader does very well in one period and only average in the next, he might feel like he
failed. On the other hand, if the trader does very poorly in one period, but average in the next, he'll probably
feel like he's doing dramatically better. In either case, the trader is very likely to attribute the change of
results to his system or his feelings rather than to a natural statistical tendency. The failure to appreciate this
concept will lead the trader to create an inaccurate mental map of his trading ability. For example, if the
trader switches from one system to another when he's doing particularly poorly, the odds are that he'll do
better at that point in time even if the new system is only of equal merit, or possibly even if it is inferior. Yet
the trader will attribute his improvement to his new system. In contrast, supertraders understand the concept
of regression to the mean and use it to their advantage instead of being misled by it.
Incidentally, the same phenomenon also explains why so many people say they do better after they have
gone to a motivational seminar. When are they going to go to a motivational seminar? When they're feeling
particularly low and inactive, In a sense, it doesn't matter what the presenter does, because statistically, on
average, these people will do better hi the period afterwards anyway-whether or not they attended the
seminar. But since they did, they'll attribute the change to the seminar.
==== In the seminar example you just cited, isn't it also possible that people will feel and perform better
because of the placebo effect? For that matter, isn't it possible that the results attributed to NLP may also be
a placebo effect? ====
In part, this contention may be valid, and it fascinates me that this is supposed to be a criticism. Medical
science researchers take the view that the placebo effect is something bad. You can hear it in their language:
"We have to rule out the placebo effect." However, Bandler and Grinder looked at it differently. They saw the
placebo effect as a natural human ability-the ability of the brain to heal the rest of the body. This actually
presents exciting possibilities. What if this ability can be called forth when we want it or need it? What if our
brains can literally make us feel better? NLP is concerned with results. If the favorable results are partially
due to the placebo effect-that is, the natural ability of the brain to affect how we feel, heal, and function,
mentally and physically-let's use it deliberately.
==== NLP makes claims of being able to change behaviors and feelings very quickly through simple mental
exercises. Can you give me an example of such an exercise in order to give readers who are completely
unfamiliar with NLP some flavor of the approach? ====
Let me offer an example that will probably be of use to most of your readers. We've all been in trading
situations where the market moved dramatically against our position. The question is: How unsettling or
disconcerting was it? What happens when you're in a similar situation a couple of weeks or even a couple of
months later? If you begin to experience some of the same unsettling feelings just thinking about it, you've
conditioned yourself just like Pavlov's dogs. This is what NLP calls "anchoring." If these feelings are disturbing
your trading decision concentration, use the following NLP technique to neutralize them.

157

158
Quickly go through your movie of that disturbing
situation and pick out one frame, like a still
photograph, that symbolizes for you the whole disappointment. When you've found it, notice whether you see
yourself in that still snapshot of that time. That is, do you see that earlier you, dressed as you were back
then, in that photo? You probably won't, and this is usually the case. So in your mind's eye, begin to pull
back so that more and more of the scene becomes visible, until you can see your earlier self in the scene.
Imagine that scene rendered in the style of a famous painter, as if it were a Renoir, a van Gogh, or even a
Lichtenstein. Now consider what kind of frame might be most appropriate around this picture. Perhaps a
big old-fashioned gold frame might seem right, or maybe you'll choose a modem steel frame. You might
even want to add a museum light. Take a moment to appreciate this picture as one of the framed memories
in your mind. Now notice your feelings about that time. Most people will find that their disturbed or anxious
feelings have been greatly reduced, or even completely eliminated. This NLP process detaches our emotions
from the memory. It's like an emotional reset button and provides a real-world example of the NLP principle:
Experience has a structure. By changing the structure, we change the experience. Taking just the few
minutes to do this exercise will allow a trader to regain his emotional objectivity.
Another way to change disturbing memories is to do the following:
Think of that incident of disappointment and mn it back to the beginning, like it's a movie. Now put on
circus music, or the William Telt Overture, better known as me theme to the "Lone Ranger" TV series. Any
rich, compelling music will do, especially if it mismatches the emotions of your memory. Pick a tune, and
start it playing nice and loud as you rewatch that incident in a new way. Once the memory has played
through to its end with the music, then rewind it to the beginning. Now play that scene again without the
music. Notice your response to it this time. For some people, the incident has become humorous, even
ludicrous. For many, the previous feelings of disappointment have been neutralized, or at least greatly
mitigated.
Obviously, one approach is more visual and the other more auditory. Depending on whether a person has
a stronger visual or auditory sense, one of these two approaches will work better than the other.
==== Good, that helps clarify the type of process involved. Give me another example ====
The following is an example of how to transfer feelings of confidence (or for that matter any emotional
state) from one time of your life to another. As with many NLP techniques, the following will work more
deeply and completely when done in a relaxed, interruption-free environment.
There are many times in your life when you've felt confident. Go back in your memories to a particular
time when you felt abundantly confident. Relive the moment, seeing what you saw and hearing what you
heard. As you begin to reexperience that confidence and feel it building, imagine a colored circle on the floor
around you. As the feeling gets strong, exhale as you step out of the circle, leaving those confident feelings
inside the circle. (I am fully aware that these sound like strange instructions.)
Now think of a specific time in the future when you want to have that same confidence. As you begin to
think about that specific future time and place, step back into the circle and spontaneously feel those
confident feelings again. You have just anchored together that future time and your feelings of confidence
from your past. To test whether this has worked, think of that specific future time. You'll feel some of that
confidence as you do. This feeling is now automatic and will be there without your thinking about it when that
future situation arrives. This exercise can be repeated for as many different future occasions and as many
different feelings as you would like.
==== Why doesn't success bring happiness? What does? ====
I think it's because people base their ideas of success on outdated models or patterns of what it means to
be successful. For example, someone might have the idea that in order to be successful he or she must have
a certain kind of house, a certain kind of car, and a certain kind of spouse. They're using those things as
evidence for whether they are a success, but they're leaving themselves out of the picture. They don't ever
actually step into that picture and ask, "Do I really want to live this type of life?'" So I recommend that
people not merely visualize what it would be like to actually live the type of life they are trying so hard to
achieve, but to step into that life and mentally experience several weeks or months. When people do this
exercise, they may find there are things they want to change, and I recommend they make those changes.
After all, since they're working so hard for this future, it ought to be one they'll enjoy when it arrives.
==== Are you saying that the reason people don't find happiness after achieving their goals is because they
have the wrong goals? ====
It's because they aren't going for goals that will fulfill them. They're striving for goals that society, or their
family, or the media told them to have. We are inundated with all these images of how we'll know whether
we are successful. For example, what is valuable in this culture in a spouse? We know the answer from all the
advertisements we see-someone who is young and attractive. But what else is important? I think people
sometimes get lost; they don't explore what success means for them.
==== How can people identify what goals would make them happy? ====
One NLP exercise that deals with this question is having people imagine themselves at the end of their
lives. Some people are reluctant to do this exercise, but when I tell them to go ahead and imagine that it's
been a very long, healthy, and active life, they're more willing to try it. Then I ask them to look back on what
they have accomplished, and see whether they wish they had done something else or something more.
Although it's a mind trick, by adopting this end-of-life perspective, unconscious expectations are revealed,
and people find it easier to make an assessment about what they really want to fill their lives. I ask my
clients, "What is really worth the time of your life?"
