
192

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

Even then, opening traps become commonplace as soon as one side of the
market gets too aggressive.
The three-dimensional trend puzzle is especially difficult for novice
traders to translate into working strategies. As a result, these folks should
continue to play single holding periods and step back to the sidelines
whenever trapping behavior starts to undermine their results. This discipline requires the addition of a filtering mechanism that responds to
weakening profit and loss patterns while avoiding the mental juggling
act that comes from turning a day trade into an overnight position and
vice versa.
You’re probably thinking it’s impossible to figure out which market
players and holding periods are getting targeted at any point in time, but
nothing could be further from the truth. Start by asking this question:
who are the weakest hands in the market right at this minute? The answer
is often obvious because it aligns with the strategy and time frame that
requires the least effort, i.e., the lazy trade. In a nutshell, the lazy trade will
always get punished. Still not clear on this simple point? Then head over
to the mirror, and look at the guy or gal staring at you from the other side.
We’ve all been lazy traders from time to time and understand, instinctively, the gut pull we feel during every twist and turn in the price action.
Giving in to that stomach-churning instinct invariably triggers the lazy
trade and an eventual smack across the face.
The best way to manage multiple holding periods is to keep separate
accounts for intraday, overnight, and multiweek positions. This isn’t always
practical because the resources of most retail traders are limited. Retirement
accounts generally work better with longer-term holding periods due to
the cash settlement limitations. The separation between accounts comes
in handy when positions move against you because longer-term holding
periods yield different reward:risk profiles and looser stops than shorterterm holding periods. That said, at times even the longest holding periods
can get trapped just as viciously as overnight plays. Just ask the American
public, which lost nearly $40 trillion in family and retirement accounts
during the 2008 crash.
While it makes sense to utilize multiple accounts to handle different time frames, it isn’t always possible. Many times, we’ve established
positions with the intention of holding on for multiple days, but intraday
price action alerts us to the likelihood of a trap if we stick around too long.
This early warning signal requires on-the-fly holding period adjustment
to account for the rising danger. Admittedly, this is more art than science
because it depends on incomplete observations that might change by the

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

193

closing bell. The best path in this scenario is to reduce position size and
lock in some profits. A smaller position, by itself, might address the perceived danger of adverse movement. At a minimum, money lost on the
smaller trade can be averaged with the real savings of pulling a piece off
the table at the right time.
While it’s important to understand human behavior when computing the likelihood of an overnight trap, basic technical tools also do a
decent job. Reversals and shakeouts tend to occur at major conflict levels
on the charting landscape. Emotional bias becomes the main obstacle in recognizing these inflection points because we tend to ignore contrary technical
signals when caught up in price action that’s favorable to our positions. In
fact, if you look back at the many times you’ve turned a winner into a loser
by holding it overnight, you’ll discover the traps were often identifiable
through convergence-divergence signals, i.e., the location of advancing or
retreating price in relationship to various support and resistance levels.
Large-scale pattern features, like the 200-day moving average or
a multiyear high/low, require special holding period considerations.
Markets can test these long-term price levels for weeks before giving way
to a breakout, breakdown, or reversal. In the interim, the back and forth
swings test the emotions of traders that see every uptick as a breakout
or every downtick as a breakdown. The proper response to this testing
process is to shorten the holding period considerably and to keep things
on a tight leash until the market finally shows its hand. Indeed, marginal
players get into huge trouble at these levels because they lack the discipline to follow this simple admonition and to take profits aggressively
rather than wait for the phantom trade of the century.
For example, a falling stock pulls back into 200-day moving average
support. We know there’s a good bounce trade setting up, but it probably
won’t reward longer-term entries until downside momentum finally
washes out of the system. That reversal process could take days or weeks
because this level points to a conflict zone rather than a narrow line in
the sand. With this in mind, a shorter-term holding period makes sense,
taking opportunistic profits on buying spikes and heading back to the
sidelines until a basing pattern finally sets up and supports the long-term
bull pattern that caught our attention in the first place.
Finally, scale down this two-pronged approach to smaller charting
landscape features, like the 50-day moving average or a horizontal Bollinger Band. Opportunistic hand-to-mouth strategies and holding periods
are just as important because these levels also signal conflict that favors
trapping behavior, at least for a few bars. As with the longer-term scenario,

194

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

we tighten the holding period until a reversal pattern (on the 60-minute
chart, in this case), sets up to support the bigger play.

Remote Trading
Modern markets support a variety of time-based strategies. At one end of
the spectrum, the fast-fingered crowd throws money at price swings that
come and go in minutes. At the other end, old-timers toss stock certificates
into boxes and forget about them for decades. Most of us feel comfortable
playing in the broad middle ground between these two extremes. In other
words, we don’t jump on every wiggle or waggle, but we still respect the
virtues of market timing. A few of us have the opportunity to watch the
ticker tape in real time, waiting for perfect trades to set up, but the vast
majority have real lives away from the markets and need to apply timebased strategies that match their busy lifestyles.
Longer-term charts work well with a part-time trading style because
they let us access the markets remotely and still have time for family,
friends, and career. Apply this strategy by looking for opportunities on
the weekly charts, instead of the daily charts. Review open positions and
place new orders during the weekend, leaving the weekdays for the rest
of your life. Weekly charts filter out high noise levels and get right to the
major trend, but you can’t throw money at a long-term chart without
picking your entry and exit spots carefully. One effective weekly strategy
combines investor and trader techniques, applying the best of both worlds.
You do this by entering the position over time, using dollar cost averaging
but aligning the trade with major support and resistance levels.
You’re stalking the Dow Jones Transportation Average Index Fund
for a weekly trade on the long side. Figure 8.2 shows that it breaks out
in October (1), rallies up to 77.50, and drops into a trading range (2) with
support near 73. An average entry near 74 looks like a low-risk trade,
because it’s situated in the lower half of the weekly trading range. To fit
this number, you enter three reduced-size positions, at 75, 74, and 73, over
the course of a few weeks. You then protect the position with a stop loss
(3) just under the sideways pattern, near 72.
An alternate entry strategy also works well with this long-term
pattern: place a single limit order at the edge of support near 73, and then
sit on your hands until that price gets hit. You can refine this strategy even
further by breaking the order into two pieces, with one on either side of
range support. As I’ve noted throughout this text, a decline will often

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

F I G U R E

195

8.2

Long-term transports entry.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

overshoot a big support level before reversing sharply. Splitting the order
into two pieces will let you catch that final dip, if there is one.
Both entry techniques will get you into good trades at relatively
low-risk prices. Let me emphasize how important it is to remain patient
and stalk the setup until the price trigger gets hit. It’s real easy for weekly
traders to feel left out of the action and to start chasing the market, looking
for a quick buck. That behavior will undermine the long-term strategy,
which relies on absolute detachment until the precalculated entry price
comes into play.
Now here’s some great news for the remote trader. Technical analysis
actually works better on long-term charts than short-term charts these days

196

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

because it’s harder for program algorithms to manipulate price direction
over time. The natural forces of supply and demand take control in these
broader time frames, letting the chart do the job it was designed to do,
namely, identify support-resistance levels and predict trends. As a result,
moving out on the time spectrum also aligns perfectly with a survivalist
trading mentality.
To get started as a remote trader, here are 10 useful techniques to
play the long-term charts:
1. Look back at least 10 to 15 years to find every high and low swing
that might affect the outcome of your trade.
2. Take small positions and stop using margin. This lowers risk
by letting price jump around without shaking you out of good
trades.
3. Limit your portfolio to slower movers that are less likely to
exhibit sudden or violent price movement.
4. Trade exchange-traded funds whenever possible because you’ll
avoid company news that sends individual issues through the
roof or over a cliff.
5. Keep stops loose and out of the way of the current swing, making
sure they’ll get hit only if there’s a change in the underlying
trend.
6. Apply weekly Bollinger Bands set to 20-week and 2 standard
deviations. This tool will expose the most favorable periods to
enter and exit positions.
7. Trade at the edges of support and resistance, finding the price
where weak hands will get shaken out. That’s where you want
to place your order.
8. Build the position over time with dollar cost averaging, but line
up your entries with large-scale support and resistance.
9. Use weekly 5-3-3 Stochastics to identify long-cycle buy-sell
swings. Try to buy on the upswing and sell on the downswing.
10. Do nothing until the market planets come into perfect alignment.
It’s easy for remote traders to get bored and lose their discipline.
Choose less volatile stocks and use physical stop losses, unless
you’ve established a real time alert system. Beyond that, remote trading
with long-term charts can be done with great success. However, there’s

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

197

a real danger if your reach exceeds your grasp, i.e., you get lucky a few
times, forget your limitations, and start playing too aggressively. With so
many points between major price levels and so much time to kill, it’s easy
to step into a high-risk situation without realizing it and then fail to get out
of the position when things go haywire.
As I noted previously, most traders enter positions that are too large
for their experience level or account size. This mistake can be catastrophic
with a remote trading strategy. Keep in mind that size equals risk. By
reducing position size, you let a financial instrument move over a greater
distance without damaging your equity. This helps in two ways. First,
you don’t have to worry as much about a narrowly defined entry or exit
price, because your size will reduce the impact of trade execution. Second,
you’ll survive whipsaws better, because you can place your stop loss
farther away from an obvious support or resistance level and not break
the bank.
Avoid market orders entirely if you can’t watch as the trading day
unfolds. Do your homework and place a limit order at your prechosen
price, regardless of where the stock is trading at that time. Then let the
market come to you and pick up your order. Never chase momentum if
you’re a remote trader, because you can’t control the increased risk. You
can glance at the intraday markets if you really want to, but keep your
distance because that rapid-fire price action will prompt you to make
bad decisions. Whenever it’s practical, save your analysis and decision
making for an evening or weekend review. Check progress, adjust stops,
and recalculate profit and loss objectives at that time, doing your best to
follow the plan to the bitter end, even if hasn’t worked well for that particular day or week.
Although you’re trading longer-term patterns, you still need fast fill
reports and many different ways to get at them. In other words, you want
to know as soon as your order gets filled, whether the information comes
through a smartphone, computer, or a landline telephone. Fill reports
tell you things you want to know right away, including the urgent need
to place your stop order. They may also warn of impending danger. For
example, you place a limit buy order way below the market, expecting to
wait at least a week to get into the position. Instead, your fill report shows
up right away. You now know the stock dropped like a rock before it hit
your buy order. You could be incurring unexpected risk and need to take
immediate action.

198

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

The Real World: The Needle in the Haystack
Flipping through the charts, doing your nightly review, you see all the
things that can and will go wrong with deceptively perfect patterns.
I’m a great cook and like to brag about my culinary skills, but not all my
creations turn out for the best. In fact, I recall one time when I ruined a
big pot of turkey soup with a single, mindless blunder. I had just bought
some fresh parsley, which I had never used in any recipe, and thought
the hot brew would benefit from a dose of the herb. Sadly, the aromatic
plant completely overwhelmed all the subtleties and flavors of the
fresh soup. In the end, even my dog wouldn’t consume that ugly green
nightmare.
The point of my food tale is simple and direct: one bad ingredient
can spoil the otherwise perfect pattern you’re staring at right now as
you consider tomorrow’s trading opportunities. In a word, good trades
combine diverse elements that work in harmony to yield predictable
outcomes, and it takes just a single discordant element to ruin profit
potential. So, when you’re cooking up your next position, learn to recognize these trade killers before they put a bad taste in your mouth.
A quick note before I point out a few examples. Perhaps you can
dance in the snake pit of mediocre trades and not get bitten, but it’s still
a dumb thing to do because this is an odds game in which anything can
happen at any time. In other words, in order to succeed over time, we
must respect the laws of probability and obey them without question. To
this end, trade killers reveal price patterns in which the odds are turning
against us, sometimes slowly and sometimes with a vengeance. Of
course we can get lucky and make money anyway, but in the long run,
smart stock picking is our most potent defense against disaster.
Dillard’s looks like a dream come true. In Figure 8.3, it rallies up to 22
in December (1) and starts to pull back. The decline ends near 14, where
the stock bounces twice (2) and returns to the high in April (3). Price
grinds sideways for two weeks and then ticks higher (4), completing a
four-month cup and handle breakout pattern, with resistance at 22. In
addition, that resistance level has now converged with the 200-day
EMA, adding a layer of cross-verification. The bottom line: it looks like a
breakout is coming, and we’ll be riding the profit wave to high ground.
Well, maybe not, because breakouts don’t matter when price has no
place to go.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

F I G U R E

199

8.3

Dillard’s cup and handle.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

Look back to the prior year and note how the stock posted lower high
swings at 23.50 and 25 (5) just before the December rally. Each of these
levels will now act as firm resistance against a cup and handle breakout.
Since the lower of the two highs is sitting just one and a half points
above the breakout level, that’s the total reward we can expect to take
out of a well-timed trade. With those barriers in place, the reward:risk
profile is skewed sharply against the C&H setup, telling the survivalist
trader to stand aside and move on to the next chart.
The moral of the story: it’s better to pass on this one and find
something that will pay off in a few days, instead of a few weeks—
or never.

PART FOUR

200

F I G U R E

Managing Opportunity

8.4

Gymboree continuation gap.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

Everyone wants to catch a falling knife, and we all have the scars to
prove it. On the surface in Figure 8.4, it looks like Gymboree is grinding
through a bullish pullback after a powerful five-wave rally. Prior examples
illustrate how a decline into support at a continuation gap (1) can trigger
a reliable buy signal for a bounce that retraces a good chunk of the
prior decline. But hidden trade killers are telling the survivalist trader
that jumping in at gap support on this particular chart probably isn’t the
smartest play. First, the stock sells off in a hole-in-the-wall gap (2), the
one-bar reversal pattern discussed in Chapter 11 of The Master Swing
Trader. The decline then breaks the 50-day EMA (3), triggering the highest
volume day (4) since the September continuation gap. This trifecta of
negative price action confirms new resistance at the moving average.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

F I G U R E

201

8.5

AutoNation triangle.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.

Typical swing dynamics come into play when the stock gaps down
into the edge of the continuation gap and then bounces higher (5) in
the following session. But the recovery is short-lived, with a second gap
down (6) and down thrust that kills the pullback pattern. This follows a
useful entry filter designed specifically to protect the trader from this
type of scenario. In a nutshell, a selloff into a continuation gap can be
bought except when price gaps down to reach the entry target. Even so,
the survivalist trader still wouldn’t touch this setup with a 10-foot pole
because the intensity of downward pressure warned that sellers were
in control despite the apparently bullish setup.
The moral of the story: easily observed details often mark the difference between a healthy profit and a painful loss.

202

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

It’s easy to fall in love with a pattern because you “saw it in a book,”
but the market usually won’t give up its gifts so easily. In Figure 8.5,
AutoNation sold off from 23 to 12 and bounced in January (1). The first
upswing stalled near 16.50 (2) and gave way to a three-month sideways
pattern (3) that carved out an ascending triangle. Nearly all systems
were go for higher prices by early May, but two negative factors were
undermining this bullish-looking setup. First, an ascending triangle
near a downtrend low is less likely to yield a reliable breakout than the
same pattern situated near an uptrend high. Second, triangle dynamics
require adequate room to run above a breakout level. In other words,
the next resistance level needs to be located well above the triangle so
that momentum has a chance to catch fire before short sellers have an
opportunity to attack the stock. Readers of The Master Swing Trader will
recognize this open space as “clear air.”
Now look back at the long series of lower highs posted in the second
half of 2007 (4). This negative pattern tells the survivalist trader there
are plenty of bag holders stuck in losing positions at higher levels.
Undoubtedly, some of these folks have a long-term view, but others
will be looking to sell into any rally that approaches their entry prices. In
turn, this overhead supply is likely to act as a deadweight following any
triangle breakout. The one-day rally over the 200-day EMA (5), followed
by an immediate reversal through support, puts a final nail in the triangle’s coffin. This is a perfect location for the start of a new downtrend
because it traps reactionary buyers at the same time as it triggers a
failure signal that draws short sellers into the action.
The moral of the story: avoid formfitting when you’re interpreting a
popular pattern. In other words, look at every wart, bruise, or blemish
that might undermine a winning trade.

FIVE
P A

R

T

Controlling
Exposure

This page intentionally left blank

9

C

H

A

P

TE

R

Position
Management

T

raders spend hours extracting the next great setup and then blow the
opportunity by screwing up their entry, stop loss, or exit. This isn’t
a surprise because position management is far more challenging than
finding a pretty pattern or uncovering an exploitable inefficiency. We see
this dichotomy all the time in the conflict between traders and technical
analysts. This is especially true in a culture of keyboard jockeys who believe
their ego-based opinions equal financial accomplishment. Of course,
that’s a popular delusion in our self-absorbed Net-based culture.
Societies and standards have turned the voodoo of technical analysis
into a respected field of study in recent decades, but in the real world,
you can’t make a dime tossing a few trendlines and indicators on a stock,
futures, or currency chart. Rather, every penny of profit needs to come
from good trade decisions made in the heat of battle or through a preplanned strategy that’s executed with precision. Even system traders are
forced to make great decisions, although the majority of those judgments
come when they’re preprogramming their machines rather than watching
205
