
PORTFOLIO CONSIDERATIONS
Active traders do not usually think in terms of building portfolios, but the reality is that
any set of assets held at the same time in an account will behave as a portfolio. Much
of the math and many of the assumptions of modern portfolio theory (MPT) are flawed,
but investors and managers who are used to thinking in terms of portfolios usually internalize some sense of the risks and peculiar behaviors of portfolios. (MPT was created
in 1952, so calling it modern is a bit of a misnomer.) Active traders may not have the
same intuition, but these are important factors that can substantially alter the total risk a
trader is exposed to. Anytime multiple positions are held, even for a few minutes, some
of these portfolio considerations apply.

Correlated Positions
That correlated positions will tend to move together is obvious, but many people are
not aware of how unstable correlations can be. Correlations between diverse and seemingly unrelated markets all tend to move toward 1.0 in times of financial stress or crisis.
The traditional defense to correlation is diversification—holding many different assets
with varying degrees of correlation so that losses in one asset class over a time period are cushioned by gains in another. However, long-term investors have been taught
this important lesson time and time again: the supposed benefits of diversification are
not there when they are most needed. An investor holding long equities, U.S. dollars,
bonds, gold, crude oil, cocoa, and wheat would normally expect that some pieces of
that portfolio are uncorrelated and some are usually negatively correlated. If the markets go into crisis mode, there will be periods when every asset in that portfolio loses
value at the same time. In addition, correlations shift over time, both as a function
of random noise and due to longer-term structural influences. Changes in correlations
present a serious challenge to managers and investors who would build portfolios designed to weather the rough times; robust portfolio construction is a lot harder than many
people think.
Short-term traders often tend to ignore correlations, assuming that whatever positions they have on are driven by price action dynamics that are unique to each of those
markets. This is often true, but, when it is not, the losses can be catastrophic. Stock
traders, in particular, do not have as many positions as they think. If you are an equity
trader, consider the sum of the open risks in all of your positions and ask if you would
take equivalent risk in a large single position in an index product. The answer, in almost
all cases, will be no, but in reality, this is what you are doing. It’s very simple: if the
market makes a big move, your positions are going to move together. You will win or
lose on the long and short sides of your book as two large blocks, regardless of what
diversification you thought you had built into the equation.
For futures and forex traders, the situation is usually a little less complicated, though
traders need to be aware of shifting correlations and unexpected influences in shocks.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

252

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

For instance, a futures trader might expect that a portfolio of Gold futures, Sugar futures,
and Wheat futures would be fairly uncorrelated, but there will be periods of time when
those assets are more correlated than history would suggest. Monitor these shifting correlations from both a quantitative and a commonsense, qualitative perspective. Be clear
on this: it is the shifts in the correlations that usually present the most danger to portfolios. Forex traders need to be aware of the obvious portfolio effects of their positions. A
book that is long AUDUSD, JPYUSD, and EURUSD is very heavy on the short USD position, which may or may not be desired. The first step in wrestling with these problems is
simply to become aware of them; most short-term traders do not invest significant time
and energy thinking about these issues.
One practical rule set is equity-centric, and another applies to all asset classes. These
are not heavily optimized rules, but they are a robust commonsense approach to managing correlated risk in an actively traded book. These are very similar to the rules I use in
my own trading; you may prefer to use slightly different rules, but you must have rules
like this in place before you begin trading.

r For equity traders, define X, the percentage of the portfolio to be risked on any one
trade. Risk no more than 2X to 3X in highly correlated positions, for instance in
multiple stocks in the same sector. Be aware that the correlations between all of
your names, even across cyclical and defensive groups, are likely to be much higher
than you expect. Furthermore, do not expect that long/short sides of your book will
offset each other in a decline. Many technical traders find that their longs get hit in
a sell-off, and the shorts hold steady because of the nature of the specific technical
patterns being traded. Sometimes one side of the book is reduced by stop orders at
the worst point, and the account suffers when the market turns. Plan for the worst.
r Risk no more than 1.5X to 2X in highly correlated groups (precious metals, petroleum
products, grains, and so on for futures traders) or in currencies that share regional or
economic influences. Assume that something bad could happen to the entire group
and you could take a loss on that part of your book as the positions move in unison.
Also be aware that the diversification effect you expect between noncorrelated parts
of your book may not be there.
r The common thread here is to plan for the worst so that individual positions do not
add up to an unacceptable risk to the overall portfolio.

Maximum Portfolio Risk
If you trade long enough, everything that can happen eventually will happen. It is also
important to have a rule that limits the total amount of the damage that can be done
to your account on any one day, assuming that every long and every short position hit
their designated loss limit for that day. In reality, this may happen once every 5 or 10
years, but the psychological and financial impact of taking a 50 percent hit in a single
day is irrecoverable. One way to deal with this kind of tail risk is simply to limit the
total portfolio loss to a specific number, and, if that number is hit, exit all positions. This

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Trade Management

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

253

value could be an x multiple, as in total portfolio risk is 5x, or it can simply be a fixed
barrier past which you do not want to lose. As you consider this number, think about the
asymmetry of the gains required to recover a large loss. Too often, traders simply focus
on the upside without really being aware of the risks they are assuming or the potential
long-term effects of large losses. Manage the risk first and foremost, and the upside will
take care of itself.

PRACTICAL ISSUES
This chapter has presented many ideas, but I hope a clear picture has emerged: There
are many possibilities in how to manage trades. Ideas have to be adapted to your own
personality and trading system, and not everything works. You cannot simply pick and
choose random ideas, put them together, and expect good results; you must do the hard
analytical work and be sure that you are crafting a rule set that really has an edge. Finding
patterns to get into the market is only one small part of the picture; some traders would
argue that it is one of the least important pieces. Once that is accomplished, trading
size, risk, initial stop placement, and how to manage the evolving trade become very
important—answers to all of these questions must be worked out in advance. In addition,
the market is dynamic and will throw many surprises at traders. Field Marshal Helmuth
von Moltke’s statement that “no battle plan survives first contact with the enemy” is as
applicable in trading as in war; experienced traders learn how to adapt and to make
decisions within the framework of their rules as the trade evolves.
To make these ideas easier to apply, we need to connect the dots and consider some
of the practical issues that traders will face. Many of the ideas in this section are directed
to the trader holding overnight positions, but can be applied, with little modification,
to traders who hold only intraday positions. Portfolio managers building portfolios and
managing risk in the traditional models may also find some ideas that they can apply in
their investment process as well. Newer traders should also be wary of trying to do too
much at once and of trying to trade too many markets. It is far better to have on one
or two positions and to know everything about those markets than to get lost trying to
manage positions in eight different markets.
The work of monitoring and reviewing your positions must be done every day without fail. The less you want to do it, the more important it is. Traders usually will find excuses to skip reviews on days they have incurred losses, or after a string of losing days,
but these are precisely the points at which you must do even more work. Of course, you
may need to stop the bleeding in your account, but these moments are also exceptional
learning opportunities. It is possible that you are simply suffering at the hand of a random
market, but it is also possible that your behavior and your decisions have been suboptimal. Asking the hard questions is always painful, but the alternative is to keep losing.
Every moment in the market is a learning opportunity; make sure you are doing the work
to benefit from those opportunities.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

254

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

Monitoring Tools
Another point to consider is how often you will look at your positions. If you are an
intraday trader, you must be present at the screen every moment of the trading day.
You will eat lunch at the screen and will reduce your break time to the bare minimum
necessary for taking care of bodily functions, and there will be days you will even skip
those. One of the advantages of being a trader with a longer time horizon is that it is
acceptable to monitor your positions less frequently. For instance, a two-day to twoweek swing trader can legitimately check in on her positions two or three times a day,
perhaps on the open and again near the close, if there is a system in place for monitoring
and catching unusual moves in her markets. Longer-term investors may well check in
on their portfolios once a week, but it still behooves them to check daily for large and
unusual moves in their holdings or in related markets. It is much easier to do this with
some basic infrastructure in place to support these functions.
Position/Risk Sheet Figure 8.6 shows an example of a daily risk and P&L sheet. For
most traders, this is perhaps the most important daily record. After each session close,
it serves the purpose of reviewing and summarizing the day’s P&L and of measuring the
intended risk for the next session. While the market is actually open, the stop levels and
risk information on this sheet are important reminders and guides for behavior. Most
traders get into trouble when they ignore risk parameters and end up taking large losses
that are multiples of intended risk. Having this document and committing to following it
religiously will insulate the trader from some of these catastrophic losses. Figure 8.6 is
only an example showing the simplest and most basic information needed on this sheet.
You can take this model and elaborate on it to fit your style and your needs.
Though some of the fields are self-explanatory, this sheet is extremely important, so
it is worth the time to go through it in some detail:

r DateIn: This is the initial entry date of the first trade for the position.
r Patt: It is a good idea to have some way to distinguish among trades placed by different systems, from different patterns, or on different criteria. If you have only two or
three positions, this may not be necessary, but it becomes important once you have
on more than four or five. Furthermore, this classification is essential when doing
statistical analysis of your trade results.

FIGURE 8.6 A Basic Daily Risk and P&L Sheet

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Trade Management

255

r Ticker: This one is self-explanatory. If you are not completely comfortable with futures and options symbology, you might consider a field here in plain English.

r L/S: Long or short.
r #: Net size in shares, contracts, or units. This can be more complex than it seems, as
it is common to have a position on and add and subtract to it as the trade develops. At
any time, this number must reflect your net exposure coming into the day’s session.
r PriceIn: The average price of the position. This can be surprisingly complicated, as
it raises some accounting issues. For instance, imagine you buy one contract at $10,
later buy another at $15, and then sell one at $20. Your net position is obviously
1 (1 + 1 − 1), but what is the entry price? There are actually two right answers, but
the calculation has to be done correctly and consistently from an accounting standpoint. The two choices are first in, first out (FIFO) or average price. Using the example, FIFO would keep your entry price at $10 for the one contract, recording a $5
win on a closed trade for one contract. Average price would show the long position
marked from $12.50 (average of $10 and $15), recording a closed trade win of $7.50.
Both methods will show the same total P&L for the sum of open and closed trades,
but it is important to understand which system is being used to mark open trades.
r Close: The settlement price for the instrument you are trading. Ideally this should
be the same price that your broker’s statement uses for settlement to make this P&L
record match your broker’s statement as closely as possible.
r OpenPL: This is the P&L associated with the open portion of the position. Again,
there is an accounting issue to be resolved, because this will depend on how the
entry price for the open position is calculated.
r ClosedPL: This is the closed P&L associated with the OpenPL position on this sheet.
For instance, it would be possible to be carrying an open P&L of a $1,000 loss while
having closed out $5,000 of the same position at a profit. The $1,000 loss, taken alone,
would be misleading and must be considered together with the closed P&L. Also, the
actual closed P&L will be different depending on the particular accounting system
chosen, but the total of the open and closed will be the same, regardless. One more
issue to consider is that sometimes a trade will be closed, and then another trade will
be initiated that is a continuation of the first trade. Make sure you have considered
these possibilities and planned for them in your accounting package. There is no one
right way to deal with these issues, but you must be absolutely consistent.
r TotalPL: The total of the OpenPL and ClosedPL for this particular trade. This number
will be the same regardless of the accounting method used, as the choices between
FIFO and average price affect only the distribution of P&L between open and closed
trades.
r PL%R: This is the P&L on the trade, expressed as a ratio of the amount initially risked
on the trade.
r Stop: The stop-loss point for the trade. If the position carries multiple stops, you may
need to create a sheet to show all of those points or simply display the one closest
to the market (the highest stop level for a long trade or the lowest level for a short).
r Risk: The name of the column is slightly misleading, and should be the intended risk
on the trade. This shows the size of the loss from the current price (closing price in

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

256

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

TRADING STRATEGIES

this case) to the stop-loss level for each individual trade, or the maximum intended
loss this position would incur the next trading session. Be aware that an opening gap
could result in a much larger loss than indicated on the sheet. It is also possible that
market conditions such as liquidity or a sudden price spike intraday could make it
impossible to execute the stop at the intended level. Just remember, it is certainly
possible to have a loss that is larger than the intended risk.
r PLStop: This field shows the total trade P&L if the stop were hit. In other words, it is
the current, total P&L (open and closed) for the trade minus the Risk field. Use this
as a what-if scenario to judge your overall risk on the trade.
r 1StDev: It is helpful to have some sort of dollar-adjusted volatility measure that
shows you how much the position is likely to swing on an average day. This helps
to moderate expectations as a proxy measure of risk. The choice of volatility measure to use is a personal decision; I use 20-day historical volatility, but Average True
Range, average absolute change, or any other measure could be adapted, depending
on what you are trying to accomplish. (An excellent plan might be to use the higher
of 20-day historical volatility or implied volatility.) If you are assessing risk, it probably makes sense to use a multiple of this number in your mental calculations—for
instance, expecting that many markets could make moves 3 times this volatility measure while also remembering that extremely large moves (10 times or more) are possible. It is also a good idea to consider the sum of these numbers, or, more properly,
a correlation-adjusted sum, as an assessment of single-day portfolio risk.
Use this sheet as a departure point for your own position and risk management system. It is relatively easy to build a P&L tracking system that incorporates your trades in
real time into a spreadsheet that also updates with live market prices. Though brokerage software and execution platforms do provide position accounting, there is currently
no retail-level platform that provides this degree of risk and position information. There
is some value to having a hard-copy, printed-paper version of this sheet every day, but
remember (obviously) that it will show positions as they stood at the end of the previous day. Active traders may find a real-time spreadsheet a more viable solution, or they
may prefer to update the written sheet several times during the trading day. Last, some
traders will find it helpful to not report P&L in actual dollars, but rather to standardize
everything either for unit risked or as a percentage of the account equity. This could be
done by reworking all of the fields on the sheet that show dollars to show risk multiples of the intended risk on the trade. As long as the risk levels are comparable, the P&L
between trades will also be comparable.
Dynamic Tracking Tools Very long-term investors who intend to hold positions for
many months or quarters can safely ignore all but the largest single-day moves in their
positions as noise. The rest of us do not have this luxury; even for the multiweek swing
trader, a single large day can have a dramatic impact on the total P&L of a position. Many
traders will not want to flip through charts of many positions every day. It is far better to
have some kind of consistent screen that presents relevant data for movements in your

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c08

JWBT634-Grimes

Trade Management

May 10, 2012

7:48

Printer: Hamilton Printing

257

positions and related markets. For futures and currency traders, I would recommend two
sections to such a screen: markets in which you have positions and every other significant market, tracking front month or ratio-adjusted continuous contracts in all futures
markets. This is, at most, 30 markets for domestic futures traders, so it is certainly a
manageable number. Traders trading spreads can adapt this concept to track a number
of spreads in addition to outrights. For equity traders, the situation is considerably more
complex because of the number of moving pieces in the market. I would recommend
that equity traders start with a screen that has four divisions: first, your actual positions;
second, major broad market indexes representing three or four slices across market capitalizations (i.e., S&P 500, Russell 2000, Nasdaq Composite); third, 9 or 10 broad sector
indexes (energy, financials, etc.); and fourth, perhaps 50 significant names drawn from
various sectors. The list of significant stocks will change over time, but should be highvolume, high-visibility stocks in each sector so that you will see the impact of news on
these leaders possibly even before it filters through to the broad sector. Once you have
the selection of markets you wish to follow, consider tracking some of the following
specific quantitative elements.

r The most obvious screen is one that is probably provided by your brokerage software, a simple accounting of the P&L for each position. I find it useful to track
P&L in three pieces: the day’s change or P&L marked from the previous close, any
closed P&L related to the position, and the total P&L from inception. Some of this
accounting will probably have to be done manually, and the risk sheet in the previous
subsection shows one way to incorporate open and closed P&L into a total position
P&L. It is also good to be able to track where, at any instant, each market is in relation to predefined stop and target levels. Ideally, this distance should be measured
on some volatility-adjusted basis, for instance as an ATR multiple or a standard deviation. Comparisons made on a simple raw point or dollar basis are not very useful;
everything must be adjusted for volatility.
r Particularly for equity and futures traders, some tool to monitor gap openings is very
helpful. Of course, these can mean dramatic and immediate changes in the P&L for
any existing position, but many gaps in related markets (e.g., stocks in the same sector or industry) can show an imbalance that might have a lasting influence through
the trading session. More and more markets are moving toward becoming true 24hour markets; gaps in those markets are not actual gaps but are the result of overseas
trading in our off-hours. Most futures markets are technically at this point already,
and currencies certainly are. In another decade, this focus on overnight gaps is likely
to seem like a quaint anachronism, but, for now, the open of our U.S. session is still
important for many markets.
r It is also helpful to have a tool that simply identifies markets that are making large
moves that day, perhaps with large changes in volume if that is relevant for the market you trade. It is important to standardize these measures of large moves and volume for recent market history; many traders use ATR multiples, saying, for instance,
a particular stock is up 1.5 ATRs while another is up only 0.5 ATR. My personal
