
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c04

JWBT634-Grimes

114

May 10, 2012

7:30

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

more random; price action within the range, timing of the exit from the range, and the
direction of that eventual exit are all much less predictable than corresponding points in
trending markets. Because markets in trading ranges tend to approximate random walks,
most traders are well advised to avoid trading within the randomness of these structures
and to limit any involvement to the margins, near support or resistance.
In context, trading ranges generally have one of two structural functions relative to
the previous trend: they can be large-scale continuation patterns, or they can function
as reversal patterns. Traders who are aware of these different functions, and of some
of the distinguishing factors that may tilt the odds in favor of one resolution over the
other, can often position for the next major trend move within the trading range. Note
that this is not the same as trading within the range itself; a trader following this plan is
essentially positioning within a higher time frame structure and ignoring minute details
on the trading time frame. This is potentially confusing, so some examples will help to
clarify this concept.

Continuation Ranges
Traditional technical analysis tells us that, all other things being equal, trading ranges
are usually consolidations in the trend that preceded them, and are usually continuation
patterns. In my experience, this is one of the pieces of conventional wisdom that is correct; it makes sense to approach most ranges with the idea that they will be continuation
patterns, that the trend will continue and is “innocent until proven guilty.” It is also often
helpful to consider these formations on higher time frames. After an extended trend run
on the trading time frame, the market may be essentially unreadable on that time frame
as it enters into a large trading range with many unpredictable movements. However, the
higher time frame will often tell a simple story: the trading time frame trend may have
pushed the higher time frame into an overbought or overextended condition, and the unreadable range on the trading time frame is actually just a simple pullback on the higher
time frame. This is a case of a higher time frame providing clarity by pulling us up out of
the noise on the focus time frame.
Consider Figure 4.14, which shows daily and weekly charts of the S&P 500 Cash
index in late 2008. The daily chart in the left pane is a mess; it is very hard to suss out any
useful information from this chart—there are many competing and conflicting technical
factors, and the best we can do is to label it some kind of trading range. However, the
weekly chart tells a very different story, and shows a clear pullback in a downtrend. This
is a case where the longer range on the daily chart resolves into a simple continuation
pattern on the higher time frame.

Reversal Ranges
The other possibility is that the range can be a reversal of the higher time frame trend.
Any of the factors that can suggest an end of a trend on one time frame (overextension,
momentum divergence, specific terminating formations, etc.) apply to all time frames.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c04

JWBT634-Grimes

On Trading Ranges

May 10, 2012

7:30

Printer: Hamilton Printing

115

FIGURE 4.14 The Weekly Chart (Right) Clariﬁes an Otherwise Unreadable Situation on the Daily
Chart (Left)

Figure 4.15 shows the S&P 500 Cash index again, this time at the highs in early 2010. The
weekly was overextended, and daily price action suggested a certain lack of conviction
at the highs. Again, to show that this isn’t hindsight analysis, here is what I wrote in my
morning report on April 26, 2010, the point marked A on the daily chart: “The market
[may be] vulnerable so that when a shock finally does hit, the effect may be out of all
reasonable proportion. This is why we are focusing attention on finding a good spot to
enter a countertrend trade. . . . Today, we have a potential trade setup in the S&P 500
index. If the index closes below the previous YTD high . . . we will be short.” This turned
out to be the exact high of the market for many months, and we were fortunate to cover
the last of that short a few days later, near the lows on the day of the Flash Crash.
It is also worth mentioning that there are many cases in which it is not so simple to
make a directional call. Though we have just looked at several good examples, realize
that they are best-case situations. Sometimes it is not possible to make any kind of directional call, and traders have no justification for taking a position. In these cases it is
appropriate to stay flat (to have no position) and to wait for further clarification before
making a trade.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c04

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:30

116

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

FIGURE 4.15 A Potential Reversal on the Weekly Gives a Downward Bias to the Trading Range
on the Daily

Volatility Conditions in Trading Ranges
I believe it is counterproductive to catalog too many variations of patterns within trading
ranges, due to the random nature of price action within these ranges. The Edwards and
Magee crowd will recognize more than a dozen variations of trading ranges, but, to me,
they are all the same. They all fulfill one of two functions in the higher time frame, and
they are all noisy patterns roughly bounded by support and resistance. Why clutter a simple model with unnecessary variations, qualifications, and conditions? Visually, the most
important factor in distinguishing between different types of ranges is what is happening
with the edges of the range. Is the range contained by parallel lines, are the edges converging, or are they expanding? Each of these may have some subtle differences, with
some effect on the expected resolution of the patterns.
Parallel Ranges: The Box The simplest range is one that trades between parallel
prices in a box formation; volatility is relatively constant for the duration of the range.
On the lower time frame, we will see trends (it is a little-known fact that many of the best

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c04

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:30

Printer: Hamilton Printing

117

On Trading Ranges

Drop below range just expands the
range. Support is now lower.

FIGURE 4.16 A Simple Parallel Range

trends occur within higher time frame consolidations) that terminate in the trading time
frame support and resistance. The confines of the range may be violated, but violations
will usually be short-lived. It is also possible to see prices probe to a level and hold
slightly beyond the range, and for the range to now trade between these expanded price
levels. Do not naively assume that every break of a range will lead to an actual breakout.
Many times, the range is simply expanded, as in Figure 4.16.
A common variation of this box pattern is the diagonal trading range, which is a box
with sloping sides. This is a very common structure as a retracement in the higher time
frame trend, and, in fact, the diagonal range sloping against the higher time frame trend
(see Figure 4.17) could be considered the most common pullback pattern. Again, there
may be lower time frame trends within this trading time frame trading range, and there
may be temporary violations of the edges of the range—do not expect perfect, clean
tests. This pattern is especially important because it often defines a complex pullback.
Be on guard for springs near support in larger-scale uptrends, and for upthrusts near the
highs of these patterns in downtrends. These offer exceptional entries into higher time
frame trends.

FIGURE 4.17 A Sloping Parallel Range Is a Very Common Continuation Pattern

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c04

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

118

7:30

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

FIGURE 4.18 A Tighter Consolidation Against Resistance Often Leads to a Break of That
Resistance

One final structure to be aware of is a tight consolidation near the edge of one side
of the range, as in Figure 4.18. Remember, if the edges of the range are going to hold as
support or resistance, the pattern we expect to see is price rejection near the level. If,
instead, prices are able to consolidate and hold near one side of the range, this is more
indicative of pressure building against that side of the range. This is a classic precursor
of breakout, and many chartists would read this as a smaller range inside a bigger range,
a not incorrect definition. Furthermore, this pattern is also the basis for the classic cup
and handle chart pattern, but reading the simple dynamics of emerging market structure
will usually give a better read on the market than any chart pattern.
Converging Ranges Trading ranges are periods of relative consensus, where the
market tends to trade around a price level in equilibrium. One common variation of the
trading range idea sees the market making successively smaller swings, as if zeroing in
on a target price level. The edges of this range appear to converge at some point in the
future, and this pattern often appears to be a triangle on price charts, as in Figure 4.19.
Traditionally, the assumption is that these triangles set up good breakout trades, and
there are many rules regarding direction and price targets for these breakouts. I have
not found any of these traditional rules to be effective or reliable; sometimes they work

FIGURE 4.19 A Converging Range

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c04

JWBT634-Grimes

On Trading Ranges

May 10, 2012

7:30

Printer: Hamilton Printing

119

FIGURE 4.20 An Ascending Triangle. Holding Higher Lows into Resistance Is a Sign of Increasing
Buying Pressure

well, but just as often they do not. My trading rules for triangles are simple and reduce to
one principle: do not fade the first breakout from one of these formations. Though these
breakouts may not be reliable or consistent enough to build a trading program on, you
certainly do not want to be caught on the wrong side of a strong move out of any kind of
consolidation.
There are many variations of these converging ranges, which chartists describe as
symmetrical triangles, ascending or descending triangles, wedges, pennants, and so on,
usually with the qualification that “volume is very important in these formations.” (How
do they know that?) Most of these are traditionally taken to be continuation patterns, but,
for me, it is simple: they are all basically the same pattern. They clearly show volatility
compression, which puts us on guard and in breakout mode, looking for continuation of
any breakout from these ranges. There is one exception that might be slightly more significant: the ascending triangle (see Figure 4.20), where price holds successively smaller
declines (higher lows) into a clearly defined resistance level (or the same formation, inverted, to the downside). This type of pattern typically shows strengthening conviction
on the part of buyers, reflected in weakening price rejection from resistance, and usually
leading to a breakout above that resistance. This is another pattern that sets up good
breakout trades.
Whenever a market makes a very large, sharp movement in one direction, followed
by a similar move in the other direction, this suggests confusion on the part of market
participants as they try to process whatever information caused the price shock. The
normal expectation, following this kind of price movement, is for the market to spend a
period of time consolidating, most likely in some kind of converging triangle formation.
It is very common to see traders incur multiple losses in these areas because they are
first drawn to the market by the large price movements, and then they get caught in the
random oscillations of the triangle. Simply by recognizing that a large spike followed by a
quick reverse spike usually leads to a triangle and a very suboptimal trading environment,
many of these losses can be avoided.
Expanding Ranges Chartists also recognize a number of formations relating to
widening triangles where each swing, both up and down, is bigger than the preceding swings. There are also a number of diamond-shaped formations where price first

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c04

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

120

7:30

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

FIGURE 4.21 An Expanding Range

expands and then contracts in a classic triangle, and, of course, there are associated
trading rules and targets for each formation. My rule for these is simple: the market is
confused (as evidenced by the price action) and I do not have to have a position. I find
it difficult to define my risk or to control my positions when volatility is expanding in an
unpredictable (nondirectional) fashion. Furthermore, these areas tend to expend a lot of
stored-up energy and we do not often see strong moves out of these patterns. More often
than not, they resolve into random, directionless, low-volatility ranges. As much as possible, I avoid these types of environments or at least significantly reduce risk in them, but
this may not be the right answer for all traders. Figure 4.21 shows a schematic example
of a widening range.

SUMMARY
Compared to trends, trading ranges are more complicated, and present more challenges
and dangers to traders who would trade within these structures. The highly random nature of price action in these ranges often creates illusions of patterns that do not exist.
In addition, lower volume and potential liquidity problems create a real danger of large
adverse price spikes which result in much larger than expected losing trades. However,
market structure rests on an alternation of trending and trading range patterns; it is not
possible to truly understand the story of how supply and demand plays out in the market
without a thorough understanding of trading ranges, and of price action around support
and resistance.
So far, we have looked at both trends and trading ranges in some depth, but our
study is still missing an important element. Many of the best opportunities come at those
points where trends become trading ranges and vice versa. Many of the largest losses
and greatest dangers also come in these areas, so it is important that we spend some
time studying price action and market structure in these transition areas.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 5

Interfaces between
Trends and Ranges

What we call the beginning is often the end. And to make an end is to
make a beginning.
—T.S. Eliot

ven the most powerful market trends eventually come to an end, and they can do
so in several ways. Traders riding trends need to understand the patterns of trend
termination, but it is also equally important to consider what follows the end of a
trend. At best, these interfaces between trends and trading ranges are periods of great
uncertainty and potential volatility. At worst, many traders will find that these are the
most difficult areas of market structure to read reliably, and that they are the source of
consistent losses. These areas also offer the greatest opportunity for many traders, but
this opportunity is accompanied by risks and uncertainty. Using a simplified model of
market structure where markets are always either trending or in trading ranges, there
are only three possible transitions:

E

1. Breakout: A market breaks out of a trading range, and enters a trend.
2. Trend termination into trading range: An established trend ends, and the market

enters a trading range.
3. Trend reversal: An established trend ends, and reverses into a trend in the opposite

direction.
To this list we must add a few failures that may complicate issues. After the fact, we
might miss these areas as they will simply be continuations of previous conditions, but
a trader making decisions at the hard right edge of the chart would likely have placed
trades based on information available at the time. This difference between “middle of
the chart” (i.e., after the fact) analysis and trading at the right edge is poorly understood

121

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

122

MARKET STRUCTURE

by many traders, and is a key reason why trading results often diverge from backtest and
study results. If we are going to do analysis that mirrors what a trader experiences as the
chart unfolds in real time, we must consider the new information provided by every bar
on the chart. To complete our analysis of possible scenarios, we need to also consider
these failure patterns:

r A market breaks out of a trading range, a new trend does not develop, and the market
remains locked in a larger trading range.

r An established trend appears to end, but the trend termination fails and the market
continues in the established trend.
Let’s consider some of the patterns, opportunities, and dangers associated with each
of these scenarios.

BREAKOUT TRADE: TRADING RANGE TO TREND
The term breakout trade is applied to a class of trades where the trader attempts to
enter in the direction the market is already moving, usually when a support or resistance
level is broken. Many breakout trades come at points where the market has pressed
against the same support or resistance level several times, but has been unable to break
(or hold) beyond that price level. Once the level is actually broken, pent-up buying or
selling pressure may drive the market into a sharp, dramatic trend. It is easy to find
examples of good breakout trades on charts (see Figure 5.1) where a trader could have
realized an extremely high reward/risk ratio by taking a position on the breakout. There
are a number of profitable trading systems that rely on breakout entries, and anecdotal
evidence suggests that this trade entry was one of the main concepts behind the Turtles’
success in the 1980s and 1990s. There is also good, simple logic for focusing on these
types of trades: if a market is going to go higher, it has to take out previous price highs. If
a market is going lower, it must take out previous lows in the process. Traders focusing
on breakout trades will naturally catch all the big trend moves.
There is a significant problem—the majority of breakout trades fail. In most cases,
excursions beyond support or resistance are usually short-lived, as they are quickly met
by offsetting pressure that pushes the market back into the range. Traders indiscriminately entering breakouts would find that any profits they make would be eaten away by
transaction costs and by failed breakouts. In many cases, volatility is high and liquidity is
low at these points. Even in the best cases, with the best possible risk control, the small
losses will quickly add up. In the end, it is a case of death by a thousand cuts that will
slowly grind a trading account down to nothing.
There is a slight division in the trading world between equity traders and futures
traders regarding terminology for these trades. To most stock traders, a breakout is
specifically a break above resistance, while a breakdown is a break below support; in
other words, a breakout is a long trade, while a breakdown is a short. Futures traders,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

123

FIGURE 5.1 Breakout Trade in DryShips Inc. (Nasdaq: DRYS), Summer 2007

however, tend to use the term breakout without distinction for both cases. In general,
most stock traders, especially nonprofessionals, view shorting in a different light than
going long, and futures traders are much less likely to have this bias. In this book, I use
breakout for both trades as well, since there is really no quantifiable difference between
the two.

Patterns Preceding Good Breakouts
The best breakout trades are driven by high institutional interest and involvement. Markets, especially deep, liquid ones, do not make large moves without the commitment of
large pools of money. In general, these large traders are usually trading positions that
are so large they could not enter them on the actual breakout. Small traders—the public
who, on balance, tend to lose money—focus a lot of attention on entering at the actual
breakout points. In many cases, the larger traders who are already positioned will take
advantage of the volatility and sell a portion of their positions to the small traders rushing to buy the breakouts. Think about this if you trade breakouts; this is the pressure
that often results in failed breakouts. How smart is it for you to be buying where very

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

124

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

large traders are selling, or vice versa? Since these large traders have often positioned
themselves before the breakout, they often create telltale patterns that help us separate
the best breakouts, driven by large-scale interest, from those that are more likely to fail.
Higher Lows into Resistance One of the classic patterns sees prices holding higher
lows into a more or less clearly defined resistance level. To understand the significance of
this ascending triangle pattern, imagine that a market is oscillating randomly in a trading
range, but then some large buyers become interested in accumulating a position. They
would naturally want to buy at as low a price as possible, so they would use the declines
to begin buying. Eventually their buying pressure will arrest the decline and the market
will resume its upward movement, at which point they will likely turn off their buying
to avoid paying elevated prices. Skilled operators could even offer some of their line
out, with the dual intent of booking a small profit and of actually holding prices down
by their selling pressure. If several large buyers recognize this activity in the market,
they will become more aggressive in their buying, while still attempting to measure and
control it so as not to force prices higher. As competition in the market intensifies and
buying interest builds, the declines will become shallower simply because more people
are buying them; this will force large traders to become even more aggressive in buying
at higher prices. A mild feedback loop develops within the trading range that often leaves
the patterns shown in Figure 5.2. This is often a setup for an excellent breakout trade,
and applies equally well, inverted, to the downside.
Tight Range Near Extreme of Larger Range Another pattern, conceptually similar to the previous one, is a tight range near the edge of a larger, established trading
range. This tight range is often less than 25 percent of the height of the larger range, and
shows that large traders have become interested enough in the market to hold it near
the edge of the larger range. Why are they now willing to pay higher prices (or to short
at lower prices), rather than letting the market naturally drift back into the middle of
the range? This pattern suggests more urgency to their actions and more conviction, and
also frequently supports exceptional breakout trades. Figure 5.3 shows a schematic representation of this pattern, which was mentioned in Chapter 4 as one of the classic signs
that support or resistance is likely to fail. Remember, a failure of support or resistance is
often a successful breakout trade.
