
S T O C K AROUND THE

The current market mania, particularly in the dot.com and other
Internet stocks, has deceived many people into believing that trading
is easy. Some guy buys Yahoo, makes four times as much as the best
fund managers, and thinks he is a genius.

How important is gut feel to successful trading1?
Normal human tendencies are traits that cause you to do poorly.
Therefore, to be successful as a trader you need to condition abnormal responses. You hear many traders say that you have to do the
opposite of your gut response—when you feel good about a position,
you should sell, and when you feel terrible about it, you should buy
more. In the beginning that's true, but as you condition yourself for
abnormal responses, somewhere along the line you become skilled.
Then your gut becomes right. When you feel good, you actually
should go long, and when you fell bad, you should sell. That's the
point when you know you have reached competency as a trader.
What differentiates you from the majority of traders who are a
lot less successful?
Discipline. I don't think anyone is more disciplined than J am. When
I put on a trade, I have a contingency plan for every possible outcome. 1 can't think of any circumstance that would be an exception.
If there were, I would have a plan for that too.
What else?
I trade for a living. When you have to earn a living every day from
trading, finding a way to be consistent becomes a necessity.
How do you know when you are wrong in a position?
The stock goes down. That's all you need to know.
How much vacation time do you take a year?
I don't take vacations during trading days. I haven't missed a day in
the market in over ten years.
Even when you're sick?
Even when I'm sick. I've traded through pneumonia. I've traded with
a temperature of 105 degrees.
What is your typical day like?
I get into work around 8 A.M. and work till about 7 P.M. Then I take a
few hours to eat and exercise, and go back to work from ten at night

until one in the morning. Then I do it all over again. Sunday I usually
work from midday into the night. Saturday I rest and recharge.

No vacations, six-day workweeks, and fourteen-hour workdays.
Don't you ever feel the need to take a break?
My desire to be the best trader is greater than my desire to take a
break. I don't like to get out of the swing.

Sure, I would have liked it better if Minervini had been more
forthcoming with the specifics of how he selects stocks and times his
trades, but I have to agree with him that the most important advice
he can give—and does provide—relates to his trading philosophy.
The main points of this doctrine include:
*• Rigorously control your losses.
K Develop a method that fits your own personality, and master
that one style.
^ Do your own research, act on your own ideas, and don't be
influenced by anyone else's opinion.
>• Have a contingency plan for every possible event, which
includes how to get back into a trade if you are stopped out and
when to take profits if the trade goes in your direction.
>• Maintain absolute discipline to your plan—no exceptions!
Yes, I know, some of these points, such as discipline and loss control, have become cliches as trading advice. But this doesn't make
these principles any less important. Why do you think they became
cliches? The fact is that discipline and loss control are the two factors that were most frequently mentioned as keys to trading success
by the traders I interviewed, both in this book and its two predecessors. The problem is that traders and investors have heard this advice
so often that they often fail to hear it at all—and that would be a crucial mistake.
One exercise that Minervini did that proved extraordinarily helpful to him was to analyze his past trades. The insights of this analysis
changed his trading style forever and helped him to make the transi-

MARK*

tion from marginal performance to spectacular success. In his own
case, Minervini found that by capping the maximum loss on his
trades, he could dramatically increase his overall returns, even after
allowing for winning trades that would have been eliminated by this
rule. This discovery allowed him to make a lot more profit with much
less aggravation. Other traders and investors may find that a similar
comprehensive analysis of their past trades reveals patterns that
point the way to improve their own performance.
Interestingly, the methodology that Minervini eventually developed was precisely the opposite of his instinctive approach as a
novice, which was buying low-priced stocks that were making new
lows. Success required not merely the adaptability to modify his initial approach, but also the flexibility to acknowledge that his original
ideas were completely wrong. The lesson is that early failure does not
preclude long-term success, as long as one is receptive to change.

STEVE LESCARBEAU

The Ultimate Trading System

Steve Lescarbeail's systems are the next best thing to a daily subscription to
tomorrow's Wall Street Journal. Lescarbeau invests in mutual funds. His
goal is to hold them while they are going up and to be in a money market
fund while they are going down. He times these asset transfers with
such precision that he more than triples the average annual returns of
the funds he invests in while sidestepping the bulk of their periodic
downturns.
During the five years he has traded, Lescarbeau has realized an average annual compounded return of over 70 percent. As impressive as this
may be, what is truly remarkable about his track record is that this high
return has been achieved with extraordinary risk control: His worst
equity decline from a month-end peak to a subsequent month-end low
was a minuscule 3 percent. His consistency is also astounding: He has
been profitable in 91 percent of all months, and his annual return has
exceeded 50 percent every year.
For reasons he explains in the interview, Steve Lescarbeau is almost
paranoid about revealing any details about his trading systems. He is also
not interested in raising any money to manage. Why then did Lescarbeau
even agree to do this interview? First, I assured Lescarbeau that he would
see this chapter and have the opportunity to approve it before it was
printed. Second—and this is just my guess—by his own account, Lescarbeau's initial research direction was inspired by the Gil Blake interview in
my book The New Market Wizards. Perhaps agreeing to this interview was
a courtesy granted for having provided this indirect aid to his own career.
Lescarbeau doesn't let up. Even though he has created some incredi-

189

THE U L T I M A T E TR5DING S Y S T E M

bly effective trading systems, he continues his research to find even better systems. His drive is not restricted merely to the markets; when he
was in sales, he was consistently the top salesman in his company.

Lescarbeau even approaches his leisure activities with intensity. He
doesn't merely go for a bicycle ride; he goes for a hundred-mile bicycle
ride—at least he did until he blew out his knee by doing excessive repetitions, at too high a setting, on a weight-training machine.
Lescarbeau works alone at his home in a small rural town outside of
Albany, New York. The interview was started and completed in Lescarbeau's home office, a corner room with dark wood paneling, floor-to-ceiling
bookcases, and windows overlooking his lawn. The middle portion of the

interview was conducted over a buffet lunch at a local Italian restaurant,
at which we were the only diners (due to the lateness of the hour for
lunch, not the quality of the food).

How did you first get interested in the stock market?
I got involved in the financial services industry in 1983, working for a
mutual fund company. To be perfectly candid, 1 switched into this
field because I thought it was the place I could make the most
amount of money as a sales kind of guy. I had a degree in chemistry
from Boston University, which helped, but no training whatsoever on
the financial side.
How do you go from chemistry to the sale of financial investments?
As a plug to BU, my degree in chemistry has been extremely helpful.
I think that a physical science degree is as good as if not better than a
financial degree because it trains you to be analytical. If there is anything I am really good at, it's being a researcher. I'm not a particularly
good trader. When I got out of school, I was sick and tired of studying,
and I just wanted to make money. I got a job in sales using my chemistry background.

You didn't try to get a job directly in chemistry?
No, chemists don't make any money, but salesmen do.
Didn't you figure that out in college?
Yes, when I was a senior [he laughs].

What were you selling?
Filtration systems to the pharmaceutical and electronic industries. It
was very high-tech stuff. I was very good at selling, I was number one
in sales for three years in a row.
How did you develop the talent for sales?
I'm just a willful person.
How did you go from selling filtration systems to selling financial

investments?
When I won the salesman-of-the-year award, one of the prizes was a
trip to La Costa, California. I remember driving clown the Monterey
Peninsula, seeing all these phenomenal houses, and thinking that I
would never make the kind of money to be able to afford a similar
house if I stayed with my firm. That's when I decided to leave and do
something where I could make more money. I looked into two
fields—medical delivery and financial services—because the incomes
were unlimited for a salesperson. In 1983, 1 took a job as a regional
sales manager at a mutual fund company.
Did you have any experience in financial markets?
None whatsoever. In fact, when I won the salesman-of-the-year
award at my previous job, they also gave me a hundred shares of
stock. I didn't even know what it was. I guess you can't be much more
ignorant of the market than that.

How did the new job work out?
I loved the job and did very well over the next few years. However,
because of limitations that the company placed on me, I realized
that if I wanted to take the next step, I would have to do something
different.
I decided to become a stockbroker. I was interviewed and hired by
Shearson Lehman Brothers. While I was there, I met Tim Hoik, who
was in managed futures—an area I knew absolutely nothing about.
Tim had raised some retail money for Commodities Corporation. [At
the time, Commodities Corporation had a group of in-house traders
who managed the firm's proprietary funds as well as outside investor
funds. Two of the traders I interviewed in Market Wizards—Michael
Marcus and- Bruce Kovner—achieved their early success at Commodities Corporation.] One day, I went down with Tim to meet with

T H E U L T I M A T E TODING S Y S T E M

some traders at Commodities Corporation. After that meeting, I told
Tim, "Screw the retail money; let's go after institutional money."
I cold-called Eastman Kodak. That initial call ultimately led to
their opening a $50 million account—the largest investment ever in
managed futures. They eventually upped their investment to $250
million.
What did you know about managed futures?

Nothing, but I did know enough to realize that it was a waste of time
to call individuals and that it made a lot more sense to call institutions.
Then how did you sell Kodak on the product?
I told them, "Here is an investment that has no correlation with the
stock market and has been compounding at about 30 percent per
year." The Kodak account started me toward financial independence.
After the Kodak sale you must have thought: "This is really easy!"
I expected the money to pour in.
Were you successful at opening other accounts?
We tried to open other institutional accounts, but nothing happened.
We basically had one account. No other institutions stepped up the
plate.
So, on your first sales call, you landed a $50 million account,
and then you never made another sale again.
It's hard to believe, but it's the honest-to-God truth. The Kodak
account was my only source of income.
Still, given the size of the account, you had to be doing pretty
well.
We were making a lot of money off the account, but the problem was
that it was a typical managed futures account—up-and-down, upand-down—it was sickening to watch. The traders would make
money, and then they would give it all back. I was concerned about
losing the account because of all the volatility. So I started looking
around for something else to do.
Sometime around 1993, I became interested in a stock market
newsletter written by a guy in Texas. He put out recommendations on
mutual sector funds and had a good track record. I called him up and
suggested that we do a fund. He agreed, and the fund was launched
in September 1993. He was the trader, and I raised the money.

Had he traded before this fund was formed?
No, he was just a newsletter writer. This was his first experience with
trading real money.
Hadn't the idea of trading occurred to him before?
I think he was somewhat conservative. He had a good position at
IBM, which he was reluctant to give up. He had been writing the
newsletter on the side. I convinced him to leave IBM. In the first ten
months I raised approximately $10 million. After the first year, he was
up about 9 percent with a lot of volatility. I realized that this was not
for me—the equity swings were just too volatile relative to the
mediocre returns being realized.
By late 1994, I had become completely disenchanted. At the same
time, I had begun doing my own research on mutual fund timing and
thought I could do better. The trading manager and I agreed to split
. up. He kept the individual managed accounts, and I took over management of the partnership account.
You said you began doing research. Had you developed a trading
method by the time you took over as the fund manager?
No, 1 didn't have enough confidence in my research. I knew I wasn't
quite there yet.
Then what was your plan for trading the fund?
I didn't have any great plan. I just knew that what we were doing
wasn't working. I had enough confidence in my abilities to believe
that I could come up with something better.
So your trading method was still a work in progress at the time
you took over the trading responsibilities.
Yes.
Did you consider delaying the split with your partner until you
had developed your own trading strategy?
No, I knew I would come up with something. There was absolutely
no doubt in my mind. I had never failed to succeed at anything that I
put my mind to, and this was no different.
Still you had never traded successfully.
The characteristics of being a good trader or investor are very similar
to the traits needed for success in general. I think it would be very difficult to find someone who was not successful at what he was cur-

STEVE LESCARBEAU

rently doing, put him in a trading position, and make him successful.
I don't think that is going to happen. The same qualities that make
you a successful person in whatever you're doing are going to make
you successful in trading. You have to be very decisive, extremely disciplined, relatively smart, and above all, totally independent. I have
those traits. Therefore, when I decided to become a money manager,
it didn't require a leap of faith to believe that I would be successful.
Since you hadn't fully developed an alternative trading method
when you began trading the fund, how did you make your trading
decisions?
It was a joke. I didn't know what I was doing. I did what everyone else
does. I looked at a chart, and if it looked strong, I bought it.
How long did this go on?
For most of the first quarter of 1995. I was lucky to finish the quarter
up a few percent. By March 1995, I had systematized my approach
and felt confident that I had come up with something that would
work. I implemented an embryonic version of what I do now.
That implies that you have changed your system very substantially since you first started. Were these changes a consequence
of ongoing research, or were they triggered by your trading
experiences?
I had several important events in my track record that caused me to
change significantly from what I had started out doing. I had a very
good first year. 1 finished 1995 with a 58 percent gain and no losing
months from the time I adopted my systematic approach.
In January 1996, however, I found myself down about 5 percent
by midmonth. That may not sound like much to most people, but to
me it was a huge amount. Because of that drawdown, I spent an enormous amount of time doing research on the computer and ended up
making very significant changes to my methodology.
Everything went along well until late 1996, when my trading
results went relatively flat. For the fourth quarter of 1996 and the first
quarter of 1997 combined, 1 was up only a little over 1 percent. This
was definitely not what I was looking for. I realized that I had to make
some changes. During that period, I was on the computer all day,
almost every day. In March 1997, 1 implemented some very signifi-

DING S Y S T E M

cant changes to my systems. Since then, the performance has been

quite good.
Although my systems have been unchanged since then, over time
I realized that I could combine my systems with my experience. Now
my systems tell me what to do, but there is also judgment involved.
This judgment doesn't necessarily make me more money, but it does
reduce my equity swings. I usually err on the side of caution if I lack
conviction on a trade.
Can you give me an example of how you use judgment.
There is never any judgment whether to buy or sell; the only judgment is how much to buy or sell. The problem with system trading is
that it doesn't tell you how to trade your portfolio; it just gives you buy
and sell signals. I trade several different systems, each based primarily on one indicator. I might have a system that has been performing
extremely well give me a buy signal, but I may decide to take a
smaller-than-normal position because other systems are giving me
contradictory indications.

What is another example of judgment causing you to deviate
from the strict signals of your system?
Let's say the market has been trending up for a while, my systems are
long, and I'm making a lot of money. Although everything may look
great, I get uncomfortable when my equity line starts going above its
long-term uptrend. I am likely to cut back my position size, anticipating that the equity line will come back to the long-term trend. Judgment like that saves me money rather than makes me money.
Judgment is also important in deciding which systems I use. Interestingly, the systems I used a few years ago are not doing particularly
well anymore. Somehow I've been successful in changing so that I'm
usually trading the best systems. I can't tell you how I've managed to
do it. I guess it must be intuition.
If you stop trading a system because it shows some deterioration,
do you sometimes go back to using it several years later?
No, because I replace inferior systems with superior systems. There
is a reason why I replace trading systems, and the reason is that I
have a better idea. I still keep an eye on old trading systems, but I
won't use them.

STEVE

LI

Doesn't it sometimes happen that a discarded system begins performing better than a system you are currently using?
It probably will happen at some point, but it hasn't happened yet.
Do you trade individual stocks?
No, although it is very likely that my systems would also work on
stocks. In fact, that's my next research project.
So, what is your trading vehicle?
Mutual funds, but I'm not a market timer. Let's discriminate between a
market timer and what I consider myself—a market reactor. A market
timer says, "The market is too risky here. I think the Dow is going down
to 8,000 during the next three months." They have a view about what is
going to happen. They prognosticate the market. I do not attempt to
prognosticate the market. I react to what happens in the market.
Your actions, however, will be the same as a market timer. You
will switch back and forth between a mutual fund and cash,
based on the timing signals of your systems. Isn't that the same
thing as a market timer?
The actions may be the same as a market timer, but the thinking is
completely different. I make no predictions. I have absolutely no idea
what is going to happen [he laughs].
Why are you laughing?
I'm laughing about the people who do make predictions about the
stock market. They don't know. Nobody knows. I don't think anybody
has any idea what is going to happen in the stock market.
Does your own performance depend on the mutual funds you
choose to trade?
Only to a very limited extent.
Do you trade mutual funds that represent the broader market?
I have tested my systems on marketwide funds, and they work well.
But I usually prefer to go after a smaller area of the market. I'm looking for funds that would have a bit more zing on the upside, and the
S&P is not zing. Therefore, I'm much more likely to trade something
like a technology fund than a broadly diversified fund.

I don't expect you to reveal the systems you are currently using.
However, are there systems that you developed in the past and
that worked for a while, but are worthless to you now? At least

T H E U L T I M A T E TRADiTTG S Y S T E M

that would provide an illustration of what a system idea that
worked for a while looks like.
I can give you an example of something that might not be too distant
from what I used to do by describing my perception of Gil Blake's system. [Blake was a trader interviewed in The New Market Wizards.]
Gil's approach was to follow different sectors, and if on a given day, a
sector had both above-average volatility and above-average return, it
would be considered a buy signal for that sector fund, or a "green
light," to use his terminology. Then he would hold the long position in
that fund until his sell condition was met, which might have been a
down day, or the passage of a specific number of days following the
buy signal, or some other liquidation condition.
That system provides a good example of the kind of thinking that 1
do. There is no reason why you couldn't implement that type of system today. Although it wouldn't do remotely as well as what I am
using now, it would probably still work to some degree.
Did you have that type of idea before you read the Gil Blake
chapter?
No. Reading the Gil Blake chapter was a key turning point for me.
Although what I do now has nothing to do with what Gil was doing
then, it at least helped me get to the point where 1 could start doing
research on the computer.

Did you ever talk to Gil Blake?
Yes, I called him when I first started managing money and said, "My
name is Steve Lescarbeau, and I just wanted to tell you that you're
the reason I'm in this business." He groaned, "Oh God."
Yes, I could imagine how many times he had heard that line. If
you had not read his chapter, would you have ended up in this
business?
I don't know; it was that important.
