
The eBay Model of Supply and Demand
Securities are not regular goods, and to apply orthodox supply-and-demand
economics to securities trading can result in some silly conclusions. In the
biggest macroeconomic perspective, securities are indeed subject to the standard laws of supply and demand, but as a practical matter for your day-to-day
trading, the auction model is more useful.

www.pdfdummies.com

24

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis

Securities aren’t socks: The demand effect
Securities are different from cars, bread, and socks. You don’t buy a security
for the joy of owning it and using it. You can’t drive it, eat it, or wear it. Aside
from getting a dividend or coupon payment, the only reason to buy a security
is to sell it again, preferably for more than you paid for it. Unless you’re a
merchant, you hardly ever buy anything with the idea of selling it again —
except securities.
In standard economic thinking, the law of supply and demand states that
demand for an item depends on its price, which is a function of scarcity. If
something is rare, it’s expensive. At higher and higher prices, demand falls
off. At some point, the high price induces suppliers to produce more of the
thing, whereupon the price falls. Equilibrium consists of demanders and suppliers finding the mix of quantity and price that both parties find acceptable.
This process is called price discovery, and it can take time.
In contrast, in securities trading, the pricing process is like the pricing process in an auction. For one thing, prices move a lot faster. Plus, in an auction
(such as the online auctioneer eBay), demand for the item often rises as the
price rises. If you ever participated in an auction, you probably paid more for
something than you should have. But you just couldn’t let the other guy win,
right? Every time someone else outbids you, you want the item more than
ever and become determined to be the winner. The intrinsic value of the item
doesn’t matter. Sound familiar? You may even have an object or two in the
hall closet you’re ashamed of having bought at an auction. I certainly do.
In an auction (whether live or online), what gets your blood running is that
someone else also wants to buy the item in question. Visible demand begets
more demand. Auction economics are contrary to what traditional economics teaches — that demand will decrease as the price rises. In the auction
situation, demand increases as the price rises. The item may or may not be
actually scarce in the real world. It doesn’t matter.
The immediacy of the auction is what skews prices, sometimes to absurd
levels. Later, when suppliers see the high prices, they may indeed be able
to find or produce more of the item — but by then, the specific demand
dynamic of that one auction is gone.

Creating demand from scratch
When you are wearing your investor hat, you may buy stocks and bonds
chiefly to get the dividend or the interest rate coupon, with capital gain on
the price a secondary consideration. When you are wearing your trader hat,
you buy a security because you think the price will rise. You decide to sell
because you have a profit that meets your needs or because you have taken
an intolerable loss. You seldom think about the true supply of the security.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement
While, technically, the supply of any security is limited by the number of
shares outstanding and the like, supply may be considered infinite for all
practical purposes. If you really have to have 100 shares of Blue Widget
stock, some price you can offer will get you those shares. Turn it around, and
you can easily see why. A price exists at which you can be induced to sell the
stock for which you paid $10. It might be $20, or $200, or $10,000 — but rest
assured, some price will force you to part with it, and right now.
In technical trading, think of demand for a security as rising on rising prices,
not falling ones. Similarly, the supply of a security dries up on rising prices,
at least in the short run. (Later, when the long-term security holder sees how
high the price has gone while he wasn’t looking, he may say “Holy Toledo!”
and call his broker to sell, making more supply available.)

Identifying Crowd Behavior
Technical analysis is the art of identifying crowd behavior in order to join
the crowd and take advantage of its momentum. This phenomenon is called
the bandwagon effect. (A subset of the bandwagon effect is named momentum
investing, which I talk about in Chapter 13.) Here’s how a bandwagon works:
A fresh piece of news comes out. Many traders (or a few with deep pockets)
interpret the news as favorable to the security, and buying overwhelms selling
so that the price rises. You profit by going with the flow. Then when everyone
is jumping off the bandwagon, you should jump, too.
Traders are people, and people often behave in predictable ways. When it
comes to emotions like fear and greed, people today are not so different from
people 100 years ago or maybe even 1,000 years ago. People become reckless
and irrational in a mania. They become overly cautious after a bubble bursts. A
mania is a situation in which traders buy an object or security without regard
for its intrinsic value or even whether they’ll be able to sell it again later at a
higher price. They fear being left out of an opportunity. They’re caught up in
the moment and temporarily irrational. A panic is the opposite — people can’t
sell the thing fast enough and will accept ever-lower prices just to get any
money back at all.
In economic history, a mania or a panic comes along only a few times in a
century. However, in the technical world, mania and panic happen every day,
in miniature. Emotional extremes lead to price extremes in the context of the
hour, day, or week — minimanias and minipanics occur all the time. Those
words aren’t used in technical trading lingo, but the emotion and the price
effects are the same as in big-picture manias and panics. (I lead you through a
technical terminology minefield in the “Identifying and Responding to Crowd
Extremes” section in this chapter.)

www.pdfdummies.com

25

26

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis

The individual versus the crowd
People behave differently as individuals from the way they act when they’re
part of a crowd. Crowd behavior encompasses fraternities, sports teams, political parties, gangs, religious sects, mobs, people attending an auction — the
list goes on. A crowd is more than the sum of its parts. Otherwise sensible
individuals can behave in the most extraordinary ways when they become
part of a crowd. One famous case is how people in 17th-century Holland saw
tulipmania, the trading of tulip bulbs for sums like $250,000, deflate overnight
when someone mistakenly ate one, revealing how ridiculously far prices had
diverged from any reasonable concept of value.
You know that if someone shouts, “Fire!” in a crowded theater, people will
trample each other to get to the exits. In markets, you see the same thing in
the price of a security when bad news about it is released. Also, if someone
shouts, “Free ice cream!” people will throw elbows at anyone just to be first
in line. The same thing happens to securities prices as they reach new highs,
especially if an authority figure pronounces the security a gem and a bargain.
Don’t be surprised when traders invent rumors to try to create a stampede —
in either direction. As a technical trader, you want to be sensitive to what the
crowd is doing without succumbing to the ruling passions of the crowd itself.
Technical traders work hard at not listening to chatter about securities, even
from experts. You may get information overload — and you may get disinformation (deliberately misleading information). All the information you need to
make a trading decision is embedded in the price. The price incorporates the
crowd reaction to information, and it’s more practical to look at prices than
to guess what the crowd might be thinking. When you check the news for the
cause of a price action, do it with a healthy dose of skepticism.

Playing games with traders’ heads
The market is self-regarding — it watches itself. One behavior begets another
in a dynamic way. For example, many advisors recommend a rule that if a
price falls by x percent from a peak, it’s prudent to exit the trade. William
O’Neil of Investor’s Business Daily made the 8 percent rule popular. Famous
investor Gerald Loeb and others used the 10 percent rule. Other advisors recommend a 25 percent rule. Because these rules are so well known, many traders use then and cause the rule to be self-fulfilling. Traders know that others
will exit at a level of (say) 8 to 10 percent or 25 percent under the peak, and
will sell the security specifically to get everyone else to exit, whereupon
they’re able to buy the security at a cheaper price. Activities like this reveal
the game-playing aspect of trading.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement
Game playing can become incredibly complex, replete with bluffing, cheating,
feints, and double crossing. Note that many top traders are also top competitors in fencing, chess, backgammon, bridge, and poker. Each security or class
of securities has a different degree of crowd complexity. The crowd that
trades the S&P e-mini futures contract is different from the crowd that trades
the soybeans futures contract, and in turn, that crowd is different from the
one that trades the Swiss franc and the one that trades IBM stock.
Each security has its own crowd, and you will get a payoff if you can figure out
what pushes the buttons of the crowd that trades your security. One crowd
may always respect a support line, for example, while others enjoy breaking
the support line by just a little to induce selling so they can buy at a cheaper
price. (For more on support lines, see Chapter 10.) In foreign exchange (FX),
the Elliott Wave theory has a grip on many traders’ imaginations. You may
think the theory is ridiculous, but you still want to know the wave count and
the retracement levels in order to know that the FX crowd is thinking. See
“The Elliott Wave principle” sidebar in this chapter.

Figuring Out What’s Normal: Considering
the Normal Distribution
Each crowd, whether a fraternity or a gang, develops criteria for normal
behavior, such as wearing certain colors or having a secret vocabulary.
In trading, the crowd that trades a specific security has a firm grip on the
normal daily high-low trading range and can easily and quickly spot any
big price move beyond that normal range. (I cover the high and the low in
Chapter 6 and the average range in Chapter 7.)
This section describes how to identify what is “normal” and outlines a trading technique that some traders use. I think it’s equally useful to identify
what is normal in order to be able to spot what is “abnormal” — in other
words, what constitutes an extreme. Alas, I have to throw in a few math
terms, but fear not. You can easily wrestle the concepts to the ground.

Reverting to the mean
The phrase reversion to the mean refers to a statistical concept that accepts
as its core assumption that high and low prices are temporary and a price
will tend to go back to its average over time. The first step is to identify
the normal trading range of the security, say $5 per day. (For more on the
trading range, see Chapter 7.) You can observe that the price varies by

www.pdfdummies.com

27

28

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
about $5 every day around an average price of (let’s say) $20 over the past
week. Therefore, if the current price is $17.50, that’s half of the normal trading range below the average price and a buying opportunity. If the price is
$22.50, that’s half of the average trading range above the average and a selling opportunity. If prices are normally distributed, you can buy at $17.50 and
sell at $22.50 for a $5 profit. In other words, deviations from the average price
are expected to revert to the average.
Okay, here it comes — I just introduced a fancy word, deviation. The concept
of deviation (and its cousin, standard deviation) is not as hard as it sounds.
When discussing the idea of normal distribution and deviation from normal
distribution, textbooks use the height of a group of people in a room. The
average height is (say) 5 feet 8 inches, with some short people distributed
out on the left-hand side at 4 feet 10 inches and some tall people out on the
right-hand side at 6 feet 4 inches. The height measurement of the majority
of people, about 67 percent, falls near the center, while the very short and
very tall cases are out near the edges, called the tails. In this example, the
“normal” height is 5 feet 8 inches — it’s the average, and the normal range
is 4 feet 10 inches to 6 feet 4 inches. In this crowd, you would instantly spot
someone who was 3 feet 2 inches or someone who was 7 feet 10 inches.
Prices clustered around the average are normal and represent the market
consensus of the rough equilibrium price for that day. The prices farther
away from the normal price tend to deviate by only one unit from the average
in each direction: higher or lower. This unit is named a standard deviation.
Frankly, that’s all you need to know about the standard deviation — it’s a
unit of measurement that describes how far away from an average higher or
lower prices are likely to fall, based on the past distribution of highs and lows
against a past average.
The one standard deviation region is symmetrical. When you use the normal
distribution concept, you assume that an equal number of prices will fall on
each side of the average. This assumption isn’t always true, of course. Prices
are trended at least some of the time, and so if the price is on a generally
rising trend, expect to see the distribution curve skewed to one side, toward
the higher prices. You’ll also see days in which the prices form a double
hump or are just flat across the daily range.

Trading mean reversion
To trade the concept of mean reversion means that you find an average price
over some past period, figure out the high-low range, and simply buy when
the price has deviated to the low side of the range and sell when it gets to the
high side.

www.pdfdummies.com

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement
Does this sound too good to be true? Well, it is. Mean-reversion trading
ideas have the appearance of applying basic statistical concepts to securities prices to derive trading rules, but mean-reversion trading faces severe
obstacles, such as:
✓ What is the ideal lookback period to determine the average? Say, for
example, that Blue Widget stock over the past two years averaged $20 —
but that $20 average incorporates a few abnormal prices like $1 and $40.
An average can disguise multiple deviations that have already occurred.
✓ Is it true that securities prices are normally distributed? Statisticians
say that securities prices are not actually normally distributed — they
just look that way sometimes. In technical analysis, your primary goal
is to determine whether your security exhibits a price trend. You also
want to know how strong the trend is and whether it might be ending
soon. To accept the assumption that the distribution of prices will be
normal is the same thing as saying that you know in advance where the
price trend will end — at or near the price represented by the average
plus one standard deviation. If the price goes higher than the price that
one standard deviation dictates, the trading rule embedded in the meanreversion trading technique would have you sell.
You consider the security “overpriced” on a statistical basis. And yet
you can’t be sure that the other traders in the market performed exactly
the same analysis as you did. Even if they are using the mean-reversion
concept, maybe they used a different lookback period to calculate the
average. Because the other traders in this security don’t see the security
as overpriced, they may keep buying, and buying, and buying — pushing the price to the equivalent of the guy in the room standing 7 feet 10
inches. The opposite is true, too. The mean-reversion process would not
identify the situation where the price keeps going to zero.

Identifying and Responding
to Crowd Extremes
Statistical analysis cannot capture the nuances of crowd behavior. One way to
get a handle on crowd behavior is to master the key terms referring to crowd
behavior. These terms range from general trading-lore descriptions to words
that are specific to technical analysis. Notice that most of the lingo applies to
crowd extremes. These words and phrases, whether old news or brand-new to
you, are important as you navigate the technical trading waters.

www.pdfdummies.com

29

30

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
Ready to dive right in? Here’s what you need to know:
✓ Accumulation: As market participants get excited about a security, they
become increasingly bullish and either buy for the first time or add to
positions, a phase named accumulation.
✓ Distribution: When traders become disillusioned about the prospect of
their security price rising, they sell, a stage called distribution.
✓ Changing your position: To buy 100 shares of a stock is to enter a position. To buy another 100 shares for a total of 200 is to add to your position. If you have 500 shares and sell half, you would be reducing your
position. To sell all the shares you own is to square your position. When
you’re square (also called flat), you have no position in the security. All
your money is in cash. You’re neutral. (I talk more about changing your
position in Chapter 5.)
✓ Too far: After traders have been accumulating the security on rising
prices, eventually the price goes too far. Too far is a relative term and can
be defined in any number of equally valid ways. In the mean-reversion
case in the “Reverting to the mean” section in this chapter, too far would
be a price of $32.50 when the normal distribution would cap the highest
price at $22.50.
If you like to draw support and resistance lines (for more info, see
Chapter 10), too far is a level beyond the lines, a breakout. If you’re of a
statistical bent, you will determine that too far lies just outside a band
constructed from the average true range, two standard deviations away
from a moving average (called a Bollinger Band), or some other nonjudgmental measure. See Chapter 14 for a description of those techniques.

Breaching the limits: Overbought
and oversold
When a price has reached or surpassed a normal limit defined by an indicator,
that price is at an extreme. In an up move, everyone who wanted to buy has
already bought. In this case, you can say that the market is overbought, a term
specific to securities trading. In a down move, when everyone who wanted to
sell has already sold, the security is called oversold.
Technical traders apply the concepts of overbought and oversold to market
indices as well as individual securities. Overbought and oversold are usually
measured by the momentum indicators, which I cover in Chapter 13.

www.pdfdummies.com

Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

Chapter 2: Uncovering the Essence of Market Movement
Notice that the terms overbought and oversold are applied to the security,
but what the terms secretly refer to is how much money the traders in that
security have available at the moment. By the time most of the market participants have jumped on the bandwagon, the wagon has become so heavy it
can’t move forward. Traders are tapped out. All their money is in a position.
Traders have to get out of their positions just to put cash back into their
pockets so they can conduct additional trades.
Position squaring is the closing of positions after a big price move. Position
squaring doesn’t necessarily imply that market participants think a move is
over. They may plan to reenter the security in the same direction later on.
Position squaring occurs for many reasons, including the following:
✓ Traders think that the move is exhausted for the moment.
✓ Traders have met a price objective — whether profit or loss.
✓ Traders have met a time limit, such as the end of the day, week, month,
or tax period.
✓ Traders want to withdraw money from the security to trade a different
security, or for a non-trading purpose.
Position squaring occurs when a large number of traders have big losses, too.
Say, for example, a high percentage of traders believe in a particular pricemove scenario that then fails to develop in the expected way. Eventually, a
few traders throw in the towel. The resulting change in prices causes bigger
losses for the remaining traders, and they, in turn, give up. You get a succession of stop-loss orders being hit that turns into a down-market rout, or
even a panic. A stop-loss order is an order you give to your broker to sell your
position if it goes against you too far and reaches the maximum loss you’re
prepared to accept. (I talk about stop-loss orders in Chapter 5.)

Going against the grain: Retracements
When a price has gone too far and traders deem the security overbought
or oversold, the price stops rising or falling. It doesn’t just stop, though,
and hover at a particular level. As nature abhors a vacuum, traders abhor
an unmoving price. Instead, the price moves in the opposite direction for a
while, as traders take profits or cut losses, as the case may be. As I mention
in Chapter 1, a move in the opposite direction of the main trend is named a
retracement. A retracement is also called a correction, which explicitly recognizes that the security had gone too far and is now correcting course, like a
ship. A retracement may also be termed a pullback or throwback.

www.pdfdummies.com

31

32

Part I: Defining Technical Analysis
Prices seldom move in one direction for long. Even a major trend exhibits
retracements. When the market runs out of cash, traders have to close positions to get their cash back so they can put on new trades. If they’ve been
buyers, they need to sell. If they’ve been sellers (shorting the security), they
need to buy. Therefore, at the extreme outside limit of a price move, you
should expect a temporary, minor reversal of the previous price move. In an
uptrend, a retracement is always a drop in price. In a downtrend, a retracement is always a rise in price. Position squaring generally causes a price move
in the opposite direction of the trend.
Retracements can get out of hand and transform themselves into trend reversals, too. At the time a retracement starts, you don’t know for sure that it is a
retracement. For all you know, it could be a full reversal, with the price switching directions. In this situation, you do well to check the fundamentals — the
news and events pertaining to the security. An ordinary retracement caused
by normal position squaring can suddenly turn into a full-fledged rout in the
opposite direction if fresh news comes out that seems to support a reversal.
But also remember that sometimes big traders try to trick you into thinking
they have interpreted fresh news in a particular way, when all they’re trying to
do is push a retracement farther so that they can stampede you into a trading
action that is to their benefit.
In Figure 2-1, the chart shows a primary trend with several retracements,
each outlined by an ellipse. In this instance, the retracements last only a day
or two, but retracements can last a lot longer, even several weeks on a daily
chart, for example.
The press often asserts that every retracement is a profit-taking correction.
This assumption isn’t accurate. If traders took profit on every correction,
they’d all be rich. Remember, somebody bought at the high. If the correction
goes too far against him, he must get out of the position at a loss. From this
observation you should deduce that to stick to a position when it is correcting
against you requires the courage of your convictions — and capital. (I talk
more about managing money during retracements in Chapter 5.)
