
Bullish
Consensus

Number of
Bulls

Number of
Bears

Contracts
per Bull

Contracts
per Bear

12,000
12,000
12,000

50
80
20

500
800
200

500
200
800

24
15
60

24
60
15

1. If bullish consensus equals 50 percent, then 50 percent of traders are
long and 50 percent are short. An average trader who is long holds as
many contracts as an average trader who is short.

PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS

21 2

.

78

D. Mark Weekly

Bullish Consensus

0

68
55
58
45
40

38

35
25

Figure 39-1.

Bullish Consensus

The opinions of market advisors serve as a proxy for the opinions of the
entire market crowd. The best time to buy is when the crowd is bearish,
and the best time to go short is when the crowd is bullish. The levels of
bullishness at which to buy or sell short vary from market to market.
They need to be adjusted every few months.
This weekly chart shows a bull market in the D. Mark, steadily moving up between a trendline and a parallel channel line. Whenever
bullish consensus fell below 45 percent during this bull market, it gave a
buy signal. The lower the bullish consensus, the more explosive the subsequent rally!

2. When bullish consensus reaches 8 0 percent, it shows that 80 percent
of traders are long and 20 percent are short. Since the sizes of total
long and total short positions are always equal, an average bear is
short four times as many contracts as are held long by an average bull.
This means that an average bear has four times more money than an
average bull. The big money is on the short side of the market.

3. When bullish consensus falls to 20 percent, it means that 20 percent of

39. CONSENSUS INDICATORS

21 3

traders are long and 80 percent are short. Since the numbers of long
and short contracts are always equal, an average bull holds four times
more contracts than are held by an average bear. It shows that big
money is on the long side of the market.
Big money did not grow big by being stupid. Big traders tend to be more
knowledgeable and successful than average - otherwise they stop being big
traders. When big money gravitates to one side of the market, think of trading in that direction.
To interpret bullish consensus in any market, obtain at least twelve
months of historical data on consensus and note the levels at which the market has turned in the past (Figure 39-1). Update these levels once every three
months. The next time the market consensus becomes highly bullish, look
for an opportunity to sell short using technical indicators. When the consensus becomes very bearish, look for a buying opportunity.
Advisory opinion sometimes begins to change a week or two in advance
of major trend reversals. If bullish consensus ticks down from 78 to 76, or if
it rises from 25 to 27, it shows that the savviest advisors are abandoning
what looks like a winning trend. This means that the trend is ready to
reverse.

Signals from the Press
To understand any group of people, you must know what its members want
and what they fear. Financial journalists want to appear serious, intelligent,
and informed; they are afraid of appearing ignorant or flaky. It is normai for
financial journalists to straddle the fence and present several sides of every
issue. A journalist is safe as long as he writes something like "monetary policy is about to push the market up, unless unforeseen factors push it down."
Internal contradiction is the normal state of affairs in financial journalism.
Many financial editors are even bigger cowards than their writers. They print
contradictory articles and call this "presenting a balanced picture."
For example, a recent issue of Business Week had an article headlined
"The Winds of Inflation Are Blowing a Little Harder" on page 19. The article stated that the end of a war was likely to push oil prices up. Another article on page 32 of the same issue was headlined "Why the Inflation Scare Is
Just That." It stated that the end of a war was going to push oil prices down.
Only a powerful and long-lasting trend can lure journalists and editors

PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS

214

Platinum

'-

660

..

648

..

620

4 ::

580

..

540

..
..

528

5 ads fur platinum on The Wall
Street Journal futures page

1:: 60E

h@l4 dl "i'
+

I{

l/l@",P,~

No ads for platinumon The Wall
Street Journal futures page

!I,/'
T

llar
~PP
JWI
kl
Figure 39-2. Advertising as a Contrary Indicator

:: 568
..

588
488

By the time several firms prepare ads for the same product and place
them in the same newspaper, the trend is ready to reverse. More than
three ads for the same market on the same page is a bearish warning.

down from their fences. This happens when a wave of optimism or pessimism sweeps the market at the end of a major trend. When journalists
climb down from the fence and express strongly bullish or bearish views, the
trend is ripe for a reversal.
This is also the reason why the front covers of major business magazines
are good contrarian indicators. When Business Week puts a bull on its cover,
it is usually a good time to take profits on long positions in stocks, and when
a bear graces the front cover, a bottom cannot be too far away.

Signals from the Advertisers

A group of three or more ads touting the same "opportunity" on the same
page of a major newspaper often warns of a top (Figure 39-2). Only a well-

40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS

215

established uptrend can break through the inertia of several brokerage
firms. By the time all of them recognize a trend, come up with trading recommendations, produce ads, and place them in a newspaper, that trend is
very old.
The ads on the commodities page of the Wall Street Journal appeal to the
bullish appetites of the least-informed traders. Those ads almost never recomrnend'ielling; it is hard to get amateurs excited about going short. When
three or more ads on the same day day tout opportunities in the same market,
it is time to look at technical indicators for shorting signals.

40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS
Several government agencies and exchanges collect data on buying and selling by several groups of investors and traders. They publish summary
reports of actual trades-commitments of money as well as ego. It pays to
trade with those groups that have a track record of success and bet against
those with poor track records.
For example, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
reports long and short positions of hedgers and big speculators. Hedgersthe commercial producers and consumers of commodities-are the most
successful participants in the futures markets. The Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) reports purchases and sales by corporate insiders.
Officers of publicly traded companies know when to buy or sell their company shares. The New York Stock Exchange reports the number of shares
bought, sold, and shorted by its members and by odd-lot traders. Members
are more successful than small-time speculators.

Commitments of Traders

Traders must report their positions to the CFTC after they reach certain levels, called reporting levels. At the time of this writing, if you are long or
short 100 contracts of corn or 300 contracts of the S&P 500 futures, the
CFTC classifies you as a big speculator. Brokers send reports on positions
that reach reporting levels to the CFTC. It compiles them and releases summaries once every two weeks.
The CFTC also sets up the maximum number of contracts, called position

216

PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS

limits, that a speculator is allowed to hold in any given market. At this time,
a speculator may not be net long or short more than 2400 contracts of corn or
500 contracts of the S&P 500 futures. These limits are set to prevent very
large speculators from accumulating positions that are big enough to bully
the markets.
The CFTC divides all market participants into three groups: commercials,
small speculators, and large speculators. Commercials, also known as
hedgers, are firms or individuals who deal in actual commodities in the normal course of business. In theory, they trade futures to hedge business risks.
For example, a bank trades interest rate futures to hedge its loan portfolio, or
a food processing company trades wheat futures to offset the risks of buying
grain. Hedgers post smaller margins and are exempt from speculative position limits.
Large speculators are those traders whose positions reach reporting levels. The CFTC reports buying and selling by commercials and large speculators. To find the positions of small traders, you need to subtract the holdings of the first two groups from the open interest.
The divisions between hedgers, big speculators, and small speculators are
somewhat artificial. Smart small traders grow into big traders, dumb big
traders become small traders, and many hedgers speculate. Some market participants play games that distort the CFTC reports. For example, an acquaintance who owns a brokerage firm sometimes registers his wealthy speculator
clients as hedgers, claiming they trade stock index and bond futures to hedge
their stock and bond positions.
The commercials can legally speculate in the futures markets using inside
information. Some of them are big enough to play futures markets against
cash markets. For example, an oil firm may buy crude oil futures, divert several tankers, and hold them offshore in order to tighten supplies and push
futures prices up. They can take profits on long positions, go short, and
deliver several tankers at once to refiners in order to push crude futures
down and cover shorts. This manipulation is illegal, and most firms hotly
deny that it takes place.
As a group, the commercials have the best track record in the futures markets. They have inside information and are well-capitalized. It pays to follow
them because they are successful in the long run. The few exceptions, such
as orange juice hedgers, only confirm this rule.
Big speculators used to be highly successful as a group until a decade or
so ago. They used to be wealthy individuals who took careful risks with their
own money. Today's big traders are commodity funds. These trend-follow-

40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS

217

ing behemoths do poorly as a group. The masses of small traders are the
proverbial "wrong-way Corrigans ' of the markets.
It is not enough to know whether a certain group is short or long.
Commercials are often short futures because many of them own physical
commodities. Small traders are usually long, reflecting their perennial optimism. To draw valid conclusions from the CFTC reports, you need to compare current positions to their historical norms.
The modem approach to analyzing commitments of traders has been developed by Curtis Arnold and popularized by Stephen Briese, publisher of the
Bullish Review newsletter. These analysts measure deviations of current commitments from their historical norms. Bullish Review uses the following formula:
7

COT Index =
where

Current Net - Minimum Net
Maximum Net - Minimum Net

= commitments of Traders Index.
= the difference between commercial and
speculative net positions.
Minimum Net = the smallest difference between commercial and speculative net positions.
Maximum Net = the largest difference between commercial
and speculative net positions.
Net Position = long contracts minus short contracts of any
given group.

COT Index
Current Net

When the COT Index rises above 90 percent, it shows that commercials
are uncommonly bullish and gives a buy signal. When the COT Index falls
below 10 percent, it shows that commercials are uncommonly bearish and
gives a sell signal.
Insider Trading
Officers and investors who hold more than 5 percent of the shares in publicly
traded companies must report their buying and selling to the Securities and
Exchange Commission. The SEC tabulates insider buying and selling and
releases this data to the public once a month.
Corporate insiders have a record of buying stocks cheap and selling dear.
Insider buying emerges after severe market drops, and insider selling accelerates when the market rallies and becomes overpriced.

218

PSYCHOLOGICAL INDICATORS

Buying or selling by a single insider matters little. For example, an executive may sell shares in his firm to meet major personal expenses or may buy
shares to exercise stock options. Analysts who researched legal insider trading found that insider buying or selling was meaningful only if more than
three executives or large stockholders bought or sold within a month. These
actions reveal that something very positive or negative is about to happen to
the firm. A stock is likely to rise if three insiders buy in one month and to
fall if three insiders sell within a month.

Stock Exchange Members

Membership in a stock exchange - particularly as a specialist -is a license
to mint money. An element of risk does not deter generations of traders from
paying hundreds of thousands of dollars for the privilege of planting their
feet on a few square inches of a crowded floor.
The Member Short Sale Ratio (MSSR) is the ratio of shorting by members to total shorting. The Specialist Short Sale Ratio (SSSR) is the ratio of
shorting by specialists to shorting by members. These indicators used to
serve as the best tools of stock market technicians. High readings of MSSR
(over 85 percent) and SSSR (over 60 percent) showed that savvy traders
were selling short to the public and identified stock market tops. Low readings of MSSR (below 75 percent) and SSSR (below 40 percent) showed that
members were buying from the bearish public and identified stock market
bottoms. These indicators became erratic in the 1980s. They were done in by
the options markets, which gave exchange members more opportunities for'
arbitrage. Now it is impossible to tell when their shorting is due to bearishness or to arbitrage plays.

Odd-Lot Activity

Odd-lotters are people who trade less than 100 shares of stock at a time - the
small fry of the stock exchange. They remind us of a more bucolic time on
Wall Street. Odd-lotters transacted one quarter of the exchange volume a
century ago, and 1 percent as recently as two decades ago. Odd-lotters as a
group are value investors. They buy when stocks are cheap and sell when
prices rise.
The indicators for tracking the behavior of odd-lotters were developed in

40. COMMITMENT INDICATORS

.

219

the 1930s. The Odd-Lot Sales Ratio measured the ratio of odd-lot sales to
purchases. When it fell, it showed that odd-lotters were buying and the stock
market was near the bottom. When it rose, it indicated that odd-lotters were
selling and the stock market was near the top.
The Odd-Lot Short Sale Ratio was a very different indicator. It tracked
the behavior of short-sellers among odd-lotters, many of whom were gamblers. Very low levels of odd-lot short sales indicated that the market was
near the top, and high levels of odd-lot short sales showed that the stock
market was at a bottom.
These indicators lost value as the financial scene changed in the 1970s
and 1980s. The intelligent small investors moved their money into well-run
mutual funds, and gamblers discovered that they could get more bang for
their money in options. Now the New York Stock Exchange has a preferential mechanism for filling odd-lot orders, and many professionals trade in 99share lots.

New Indicators

41. ELDER-RAY
Elder-ray is a new technical indicator. It was developed in 1989 by this
author and named for its similarity to X-rays. Doctors use X-rays to see bone
structure below the surface of the skin. Traders can use Elder-ray to see the
power of bulls and bears below the surface of the markets.
To be a successful trader, you do not have to forecast the future. You need
to find when bulls or bears are in control and trade with the dominant group.
Elder-ray helps you see when bulls and bears become stronger or weaker.

How to Construct Elder-ray

Elder-ray combines the best features of trend-following indicators and oscillators (see Section 24). It includes an exponential moving average, which is
a trend-following indicator. Its Bull Power and Bear Power components are
oscillators.
To create Elder-ray, divide your computer screen or chart paper into three
horizontal windows. Plot a bar chart and an exponential moving average
(EMA) in the upper window. Plot Bull Power in the middle window and
Bear Power in the bottom window.
It takes four steps to construct Elder-ray (see worksheet, Figure 41-1).

41. ELDER-RAY

221

Gold

Figure 41-1.

Elder-ray Worksheet

Bull Power = High of the bar - 13-day EMA.
Bear Power = Low of the bar - 13-day EMA
It is normal for Bull Power to be positive and for Bear Power to be
negative. The higher the Bull Power, the stronger the bulls, and the
deeper the Bear Power, the stronger the bears. When Bull Power turns
negative, it shows that the bears are so strong they completely overpower the bulls. If Bear Power turns positive, it shows that bulls are
uncommonly strong, completely overpowering the bears.

1. Draw a bar chart of any trading vehicle in the top window of your
screen.
2. Plot an EMA of closing prices in the same window. A 13-day EMA is
a good choice.

Bull Power = High - EMA
Bear Power = Law - EMA

3. Calculate Bull Power according to the above formula. Plot it as a histogram in the middle window. Bull Power of any day equals the high
of that day minus the EMA of that day. Normally, the high of a bar is
above the EMA, Bull Power is positive, and the histogram is above

NEW INDICATORS

the centerline. The entire bar may sink below the EMA during a sharp
break. When the high is below the EMA, Bull Power turns negative
and its histogram falls below the centerline.
4. Calculate Bear Power and plot it as a histogram in the bottom window.
Bear Power of any bar equals the low of that bar minus the EMA.
Normally, the low of a bar is below the EMA, Bear Power is negative,
and the histogram is below the centerline. If the entire bar rises above
the EMA during a sharp rally, then Bear Power turns positive and its
histogram rises above the centerline (Figure 41-2).

Trading Psychology

Elder-ray combines several pieces of information: price, a moving average,
the high of each bar, and the low of each bar. We need to understand their
meaning in order to understand Elder-ray.
Each price is a momentary consensus of value (see Section 12). Buyers
are buying because they expect prices to rise. Sellers are selling because
they expect them to fall. The undecided traders are standing aside, but their
presence puts pressure on bulls and bears. A trade takes place when a
buyer is willing to buy and a seller is willing to sell, both prompted by fear
that an undecided trader may step in and snap away an opportunity. The
price of every trade reflects the latest consensus of value of any trading
vehicle.
A moving average shows the average consensus of value during its time
window. A 10-day MA represents the average consensus of value for the
past 10 days, a 20-day MA for the past 20 days, and so on. An exponential
moving average is more reliable than a simple MA (see Section 25). The
most important message of a moving average is its slope. When it rises, it
shows that the crowd is becoming more bullish. When it declines, it shows
that the crowd is becoming more bearish. Trade in the direction of the slope
of a moving average.
The high of any bar reflects the maximum power of bulls during that bar.
Bulls make money when prices rise. They keep buying until they cannot lift
prices any higher. Bulls would love to raise prices one more tick-but they
are out of breath. The high point of a daily bar represents the maximum
power of bulls during the day, the high point of a weekly bar represents the
maximum power of bulls during the week, and so on.
The low of any bar represents the maximum power of bears during that

I

t

10.00
5.00
-5.08

beargower

5.@0
- 5.00
-10.00

lJun

Figure 41-2.

lJul

lfiug

IS~P

IOct

Elder-ray

The 13-day EMA reflects the average consensus of value; its slope identifies the market trend. Bull Power reflects the ability of bulls to lift prices
above the average consensus of value. Bear Power reflects the ability of
bears to push prices below the average consensus of value.
The best buy signals are given by bullish divergences-when prices fall
to a new low, but Bear Power stops at a more shallow bottom. The best
shorting signals are given by bearish divergences-when prices rise to or
above the previous high, but Bull Power reaches a lower peak.
A bearish divergence in June and July gave a sell signal-a double top
in price, accompanied by a lower peak in Bull Power. The sell signal
was confirmed when the 13-day EMA turned down. Bull Power became
positive several times during the downtrend, showing where to add to
short positions. When Bull Power turns positive during a downtrend and
then ticks down, place an order to sell short below the last day's low.
A bullish divergence developed in September when gold fell to a new
low, but Bear Power made a more shallow low. The buy signal was confirmed when the 13-day EMA of gold turned up. At the right edge of the
chart, the new peak in Bull Power confirms that the rally i s strong and
likely to continue.

224

NEW INDICATORS

bar. Bears make money when prices fall. They keep selling and shorting
until they cannot push prices down another tick. The lowest point of a daily
bar reflects the maximum power of bears during the day, the low of a weekly
bar shows the maximum power of bears during the week, and so on.
Elder-ray compares the maximum power of bulls and bears to the average
consensus of value. It does this by measuring the spread between the high
and the low of every bar and an exponential moving average.
Bull Power reflects the bulls' ability to push prices above the average
consensus of value. It measures the distance from the bar's high to the EMA.
Bull Power is normally positive. It rises when bulls become stronger and
falls when they stumble. Bear Power turns negative when bulls' heads are
under water.
Bear Power reflects the bears' ability to push prices below the average
consensus of value. It measures the distance from the bar's low to the EMA.
Bear Power is normally negative. It deepens when bears grow stronger and
rises when they become weaker. If Bear Power turns positive, it shows that
very strong bulls are holding bears up in the air by the scruff of their necks.
To summarize the key points of Elder-ray:
