 In the next chapter I’ll explain what I know about when to sell a stock, but here I want to discuss selling as it relates to portfolio management. I’m constantly rechecking stocks and rechecking stories, adding and subtracting to my investments as things change. But I don’t go into cash—except to have enough of it around to cover anticipated redemptions. Going into cash would be getting out of the market. My idea is to stay in the market forever, and to rotate stocks depending on the fundamental situations. I think if you decide that a certain amount you’ve invested in the stock market will always be invested in the stock market, you’ll save yourself a lot of mistimed moves and general agony. 
 Some people automatically sell the “winners”—stocks that go up—and hold on to their “losers”—stocks that go down—which is about as sensible as pulling out the flowers and watering the weeds. Others automatically sell their losers and hold on to their winners, which doesn’t work out much better. Both strategies fail because they’re tied to the current movement of the stock price as an indicator of the company’s fundamental value. (It wasn’t that Taco Bell the company was in bad shape when the price was beaten down in 1972—only Taco Bell the stock. Taco Bell the company was doing well.) As we’ve seen, the current stock price tells us absolutely nothing about the future prospects of a company, and it occasionally moves in the opposite direction of the fundamentals. 
 A better strategy, it seems to me, is to rotate in and out of stocks depending on what has happened to the price as it relates to the story. For instance, if a stalwart has gone up 40 percent—which is all I expected to get out of it—and nothing wonderful has happened with the company to make me think there are pleasant surprises ahead, I sell the stock and replace it with another stalwart I find attractive that hasn’t gone up. In the same situation, if you didn’t want to sell all of it, you could sell some of it. 
 By successfully rotating in and out of several stalwarts for modest gains, you can get the same result as you would with a single big winner: six 30-percent moves compounded equals a fourbagger plus, and six 25-percent moves compounded is nearly a fourbagger. 
 The fast growers I keep as long as the earnings are growing and the expansion is continuing, and no impediments have come up. Every few months I check the story just as if I were hearing it for the first time. If between two fast growers I find that the price of one has increased 50 percent and the story begins to sound dubious, I’ll rotate out of that one and add to my position in the second fast grower whose price has declined or stayed the same, and where the story is sounding better. 
 Ditto for cyclicals and turnarounds. Get out of situations in which the fundamentals are worse and the price has increased, and into situations in which the fundamentals are better and the price is down. 
 A price drop in a good stock is only a tragedy if you sell at that price and never buy more. To me, a price drop is an opportunity to load up on bargains from among your worst performers and your laggards that show promise. 
 If you can’t convince yourself “When I’m down 25 percent, I’m a buyer” and banish forever the fatal thought “When I’m down 25 percent, I’m a seller,” then you’ll never make a decent profit in stocks. 
 For reasons that should by now be obvious, I’ve always detested “stop orders,” those automatic bailouts at a predetermined price, usually 10 percent below the price at which a stock is purchased. True, when you put in a “stop order” you’ve limited your losses to 10 percent, but with the volatility in today’s market, a stock almost always hits the stop. It’s uncanny how stop orders seem to guarantee that the stock will drop 10 percent, the shares are sold, and instead of protecting against a loss, the investor has turned losing into a foregone conclusion. You would have lost Taco Bell ten times over with stop orders! 
 Show me a portfolio with 10 percent stops, and I’ll show you a portfolio that’s destined to lose exactly that amount. When you put in a stop, you’re admitting that you’re going to sell the stock for less than it’s worth today. 
 It’s equally uncanny how stocks seem to shoot straight up after the stop is hit, and the would-be cautious investor has been sold out. There’s simply no way to rely on stops as protection on the downside, nor on artificial objectives as goals on the upside. If I’d believed in “Sell when it’s a double,” I would never have benefited from a single big winner, and I wouldn’t have been given the opportunity to write a book. Stick around to see what happens—as long as the original story continues to make sense, or gets better—and you’ll be amazed at the results in several years.

One Up on Wall Street 

 17 
 The Best Time to Buy and Sell 
 After all that’s been said, I don’t want to sound like a market timer and tell you that there’s a certain best time to buy stocks. The best time to buy stocks will always be the day you’ve convinced yourself you’ve found solid merchandise at a good price—the same as at the department store. However, there are two particular periods when great bargains are likely to be found. 
 The first is during the peculiar annual ritual of end-of-the-year tax selling. It’s no accident that the most severe drops have occurred between October and December. It’s the holiday period, after all, and brokers need spending money like the rest of us, so there’s extra incentive for them to call and ask what you might want to sell to get the tax loss. For some reason investors are delighted to get the tax loss, as if it’s a wonderful opportunity or a gift of some kind—I can’t think of another situation in which failure makes people so happy. 
 Institutional investors also like to jettison the losers at the end of the year so their portfolios are cleaned up for the upcoming evaluations. All this compound selling drives stock prices down, and especially in the lower-priced issues, because once the $6-per-share threshold is reached, stocks do not count as collateral for people who buy on credit in margin accounts. Margin players sell their cheap stocks, and so do the institutions, who cannot own them without violating one stricture or another. This selling begets more selling and drives perfectly good issues to crazy levels. 
 If you have a list of companies that you’d like to own if only the stock price were reduced, the end of the year is a likely time to find the deals you’ve been waiting for. 
 The second is during the collapses, drops, burps, hiccups, and freefalls that occur in the stock market every few years. If you can summon the courage and presence of mind to buy during these scary episodes when your stomach says “sell,” you’ll find opportunities that you wouldn’t have thought you’d ever see again. Professionals are often too busy or too constrained to act quickly in market breaks, but look at the solid companies with excellent earnings growth that you could have picked up in the latest ones: 

 T HE 1987 B REAK 
 In the sell-off of October, 1987, you had a chance to buy many of the companies I’ve been mentioning throughout this book. The 1,000-point drop between summer and fall took everything with it, but in the real world all the companies listed below were healthy, profitable, and never missed a beat. Many of them recovered in quick fashion, and I took advantage whenever I could. I missed Dreyfus the first time around, but not this time (fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me). Dreyfus was beaten down to $16 and the company had $15 in cash after debt, so what was the risk? In addition to the cash, Dreyfus actually profited from the crisis, as many investors switched out of stocks and into money-market funds that Dreyfus manages. 

 WHEN TO SELL 
 Even the most thoughtful and steadfast investor is susceptible to the influence of skeptics who yell “Sell” before it’s time to sell. I ought to know. I’ve been talked out of a few tenbaggers myself. 
 Soon after I started managing Magellan in May of 1977, I was attracted to Warner Communications. Warner was a promising turnaround from a conglomerate that had diworseified. Confident of the fundamentals, I invested three percent of my fund in Warner at $26. 
 A few days later I got a call from a technical analyst who follows Warner. I don’t pay much attention to that science of wiggles, but just to be polite I asked him what he thought. Without hesitation he announced that the stock was “extremely extended.” I’ve never forgotten those words. One of the biggest troubles with stock market advice is that good or bad it sticks in your brain. You can’t get it out of there, and someday, sometime, you may find yourself reacting to it. 
 Six months or so had passed, and Warner had risen from $26 to $32. Already I was beginning to worry. “If Warner was extremely extended at $26,” I argued to myself, “then it must be hyperextended at $32.” I checked the fundamentals, and nothing there had changed enough to diminish my enthusiasm, so I held on. Then the stock hit $38. For no conscious reason I began a major sell program. I must have decided that whatever was extended at $26 and hyperextended at $32 has surely been stretched into three prefixes at $38. 
 Of course after I sold, the stock continued its ascent to $50, $60, $70, and over $180. Even after it suffered the consequences of the Atari fiasco, and the price declined by 60 percent in 1983–84, it was still twice my exit price of $38. I hope I’ve learned my lesson here. 
 Another time I made a premature exit from Toys “R” Us, that nifty fast grower that I’ve already bragged about. By 1978, when Toys “R” Us was liberated from Interstate Department Stores (a woeful dog) in that company’s bankruptcy action (creditors were paid off in new Toys “R” Us shares), this was already a proven and profitable enterprise, expanding into one mall after another. It had passed the tests of success in one location, and then of duplication. I did my homework, visited the stores, and took a big position at an adjusted price of $1 per share. By 1985, when Toys “R” Us hit $25, it was a 25-bagger for some. Unfortunately, those some didn’t include me, because I sold too soon. I sold too soon because somewhere along the line I’d read that a smart investor named Milton Petrie, one of the deans of retailing, had bought 20 percent of Toys “R” Us and that his buying was making the stock go up. The logical conclusion, I thought, was that when Petrie stopped buying, the stock would go down. Petrie stopped buying at $5. 
 I got in at $1 and out at $5 for a five-bagger, so how can I complain? We’ve all been taught the same adages: “Take profits when you can,” and “A sure gain is always better than a possible loss.” But when you’ve found the right stock and bought it, all the evidence tells you it’s going higher, and everything is working in your direction, then it’s a shame if you sell. A fivefold gain turns $10,000 into $50,000, but the next five folds turn $10,000 into $250,000. Investing in a 25-bagger is not a regular occurrence even among fund managers, and for the individual it may happen only once or twice in a lifetime. When you’ve got one, you might as well enjoy the full benefit. The clients of Peter deRoetth, who first told me about Toys “R” Us, did just that. He stuck with it all the way in his fund. 
 I managed to repeat the error with Flowers, a bakery company, and then again with Lance, a crackers company. Because somebody told me that these were takeover candidates, I kept waiting for them to be taken over and finally got bored and disposed of my shares. After I sold, you can imagine what happened. The lesson this time was that I shouldn’t have cared if this profitable bakery company got taken over or not. In fact, I should have been delighted that it stayed independent. 
 I already reported that I almost didn’t buy La Quinta because an important insider had been selling shares. Not buying because an insider has started selling can be as big a mistake as selling because an outsider (Petrie) has stopped buying. In the La Quinta case I ignored the nonsense, and I’m glad I did. 
 I’m sure there are other examples of my having been faked out that I’ve conveniently forgotten. It’s normally harder to stick with a winning stock after the price goes up than it is to believe in it after the price goes down. These days if I feel there’s a danger of being faked out, I try to review the reasons why I bought in the first place. 
 THE DRUMBEAT EFFECT 
 This is one instance where the amateur investor is just as vulnerable to folly as the professional. We have fellow experts whispering into our ears; you have friends, relatives, brokers, and assorted financial factotums from the media. 
 Maybe you’ve received the “Congratulations: Don’t Be Greedy” announcement. That’s when the broker calls to say: “Congratulations, you’ve doubled your money on ToggleSwitch, but let’s not be greedy. Let’s sell ToggleSwitch and try KinderMind.” So you sell ToggleSwitch and it keeps going up, while KinderMind goes bankrupt, taking all of your profits with it. Meanwhile the broker gets a commission from both sides of the transaction, so every “Congratulations” message represents a double payday. 
 Beyond the broker, every single dumb idea you hear about stocks gets into your brain the same way that “Warner is overextended” got into mine. These days, dumb ideas are at a deafening roar. 
 Every time you turn on the television there’s somebody declaring that bank stocks are in and airline stocks are out, that utilities have seen their best days and savings-and-loans are doomed. If you flip around the radio dial and happen to hear the offhand remark that an overheated Japanese economy will destroy the world, you’ll remember that snippet the next time the market drops 10 percent, and maybe it will scare you into selling your Sony and your Honda, and even your Colgate-Palmolive, which isn’t cyclical or Japanese. 
 When astrologers are interviewed alongside economists from Merrill Lynch, and both say contradictory things and yet sound equally convincing, no wonder we’re all confused. 
 Lately we’ve had to contend with the drumbeat effect. A particularly ominous message is repeated over and over until it’s impossible to get away from it. A couple of years ago there was a drumbeat around the M-1 money supply. When I was in the Army, M-1 was a rifle and I understood it. Suddenly M-1 was this critical digit on which the entire future of Wall Street depended, and I couldn’t tell you what it was. Remember One Hour Martinizing? Nobody can tell you what that is, either, and millions of dry-cleaning patrons have never asked. Maybe M-1 actually stands for Martinizing One, and some guy on the Council of Economic Advisors used to run a dry-cleaning business. Anyway, for months there was something in the news about the M-1’s growing too fast, and people worried that it would sink our economy and threaten the world. What better reason to sell stocks than that “the M-1 is rising”—even if you weren’t sure what the M-1 was. 
 Then suddenly we heard nothing further about the dreaded rise in the M-1 money supply, and our attention was diverted to the discount rate that the Fed charges member banks. How many people know what this is? You can count me out once again. How many people know what the Fed does? William Miller, once Fed chairman, said that 23 percent of the U.S. population thought the Federal Reserve was an Indian reservation, 26 percent thought it was a wildlife preserve, and 51 percent thought it was a brand of whiskey. 
 Yet every Friday afternoon (it used to be Thursday afternoon until too many people jostled into the Fed building to get the number in advance of the Friday stock market opening) half the professional investing population was mesmerized by the news of the latest money supply figures, and stock prices were wafted up and down because of it. How many investors got faked out of good stocks because they heard that a higher money supply growth rate would sink the stock market? 
 More recently we’ve been warned (in no particular order) that a rise in oil prices is a terrible thing and a fall in oil prices is a terrible thing; that a strong dollar is a bad omen and a weak dollar is a bad omen; that a drop in the money supply is cause for alarm and an increase in the money supply is cause for alarm. A preoccupation with money supply figures has been supplanted with intense fears over budget and trade deficits, and thousands more must have been drummed out of their stocks because of each. 
 WHEN TO REALLY SELL 
 If the market can’t tell you when to sell, then what can? No single formula could possibly apply. “Sell before the interest rates go up” or “sell before the next recession” would be advice worth following, if only we knew when these things would happen, but of course we don’t, and so these mottos become platitudes as well. 
 Over the years I’ve learned to think about when to sell the same way I think about when to buy. I pay no attention to external economic conditions, except in the few obvious instances when I’m sure that a specific business will be affected in a specific way. When oil prices go down, it obviously has an effect on oil-service companies, but not on ethical drug companies. In 1986–87, I sold my Jaguar, Honda, Subaru, and Volvo holdings because I was convinced that the falling dollar would hurt the earnings of foreign automakers that sell a high percentage of their cars in the U.S. But in nine cases out of ten, I sell if company 380 has a better story than company 212, and especially when the latter story begins to sound unlikely. 
 As it turns out, if you know why you bought a stock in the first place, you’ll automatically have a better idea of when to say good-bye to it. Let’s review some of the sell signs, category by category. 
 W HEN TO S ELL A S LOW G ROWER 
 I can’t really help you with this one, because I don’t own many slow growers in the first place. The ones I do buy, I sell when there’s been a 30–50 percent appreciation or when the fundamentals have deteriorated, even if the stock has declined in price. Here are some other signs: 
 • The company has lost market share for two consecutive years and is hiring another advertising agency. 
 • No new products are being developed, spending on research and development is curtailed, and the company appears to be resting on its laurels. 
 • Two recent acquisitions of unrelated businesses look like diworseifications, and the company announces it is looking for further acquisitions “at the leading edge of technology.” 
 • The company has paid so much for its acquisitions that the balance sheet has deteriorated from no debt and millions in cash to no cash and millions in debt. There are no surplus funds to buy back stock, even if the price falls sharply. 
 • Even at a lower stock price the dividend yield will not be high enough to attract much interest from investors. 
 W HEN TO S ELL A S TALWART 
 These are the stocks that I frequently replace with others in the category. There’s no point expecting a quick tenbagger in a stalwart, and if the stock price gets above the earnings line, or if the p/e strays too far beyond the normal range, you might think about selling it and waiting to buy it back later at a lower price—or buying something else, as I do. 
 Other sell signs: 
 • New products introduced in the last two years have had mixed results, and others still in the testing stage are a year away from the marketplace. 
 • The stock has a p/e of 15, while similar-quality companies in the industry have p/e’s of 11–12. 
 • No officers or directors have bought shares in the last year. 
 • A major division that contributes 25 percent of earnings is vulnerable to an economic slump that’s taking place (in housing starts, oil drilling, etc.). 
 • The company’s growth rate has been slowing down, and though it’s been maintaining profits by cutting costs, future cost-cutting opportunities are limited. 
 W HEN TO S ELL A C YCLICAL 
 The best time to sell is toward the end of the cycle, but who knows when that is? Who even knows what cycles they’re talking about? Sometimes the knowledgeable vanguard begins to sell cyclicals a year before there’s a single sign of a company’s decline. The stock price starts to fall for apparently no earthly reason. 
 To play this game successfully you have to understand the strange rules. That’s what makes cyclicals so tricky. In the defense business, which behaves like a cyclical, the price of General Dynamics once fell 50 percent on higher earnings. Farsighted cycle-watchers were selling in advance to avoid the rush. 
 Other than at the end of the cycle, the best time to sell a cyclical is when something has actually started to go wrong. Costs have started to rise. Existing plants are operating at full capacity, and the company begins to spend money to add to capacity. Whatever inspired you to buy XYZ between the last bust and latest boom ought to clue you in that the latest boom is over. 
 One obvious sell signal is that inventories are building up and the company can’t get rid of them, which means lower prices and lower profits down the road. I always pay attention to rising inventories. When the parking lot is full of ingots, it’s certainly time to sell the cyclical. In fact, you may be a little late. 
 Falling commodity prices is another harbinger. Usually prices of oil, steel, etc., will turn down several months before the troubles show up in the earnings. Another useful sign is when the future price of a commodity is lower than the current, or spot, price. If you had enough of an edge to know when to buy the cyclical in the first place, then you’ll notice the price changes. 
 Competition businesses are also a bad sign for cyclicals. The outsider will have to win customers by cutting prices, which forces everyone else to cut prices and leads to lower earnings for all the producers. As long as there’s strong demand for nickel and nobody to challenge Inco, Inco will do fine, but as soon as demand slackens or rival nickel producers begin to sell nickel, Inco’s got problems. 
 Other signs: 
 • Two key union contracts expire in the next twelve months, and labor leaders are asking for a full restoration of the wages and benefits they gave up in the last contract. 
 • Final demand for the product is slowing down. 
 • The company has doubled its capital spending budget to build a fancy new plant, as opposed to modernizing the old plants at low cost. 
 • The company has tried to cut costs but still can’t compete with foreign producers. 
 W HEN TO S ELL A F AST G ROWER 
