
MidAmerican
On March 14, 2000, Berkshire acquired 34.56 million shares of convertible preferred stock along with 900,942 shares of common stock in
MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company, a Des Moines-based gas and
electric utility, for approximately $1.24 billion, or $35.05 per share.
Two years later, in March 2002, Berkshire bought 6.7 million more
shares of the convertible preferred stock for $402 million. This brought

Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

153

Berkshire’s holdings to over 9 percent voting interest and just over 80
percent economic interest in MidAmerican.
Since 2002, Berkshire and certain of its subsidiaries also have acquired approximately $1.728 million of 11 percent nontransferable
trust preferred securities, of which $150 million were redeemed in
August 2003. An additional $300 million was invested by David Sokol,
MidAmerican’s chairman and CEO, and Walter Scott, MidAmerican’s
largest individual shareholder. It was, in fact, Scott who initially approached Buffett ; it was the first major deal they had worked on together in their 50 years of friendship.
The price Buffett paid for MidAmerican was toward the low end of
the scale, which according to reports was $34 to $48 per share, so he
was able to achieve a certain discount. Yet Buffett also committed himself and Berkshire to MidAmerican’s future growth to the extent that
they would support MidAmerican’s acquisition of pipelines up to $15
billion. As part of its growth strategy, MidAmerican, with Buffett’s
help, bought pipelines from distressed energy merchants.
One such purchase happened almost immediately. In March 2002,
Buffett bought, from Tulsa-based Williams Company, the Kern River
Gas Transmission project, which transported 850 million cubic feet of
gas per day over 935 miles. Buffett paid $960 million, including assumption of debt and an additional $1 billion in capital expenses.
MidAmerican also went on to acquire Dynegy’s Northern Natural
gas pipeline later in 2002 for a bargain price of about $900 million, plus
the assumption of debt. Then, as of early January 2004, Berkshire announced it would put up about 30 percent of the costs, or $2 billion, for
a new natural gas pipeline tapping Alaskan North Slope natural gas reserves that would boost U.S. reserves by 7 percent. MidAmerican chairman Sokol said that without Buffett’s help, the investment would have
been a strain on MidAmerican.
In another but related transaction, a Berkshire subsidiary, MEHC
Investment Inc., bought $275 million of Williams’s preferred stock.
This preferred stock does not generally vote with the common stock in
the election of directors, but in this deal Berkshire Hathaway gained the
right to elect 20 percent of MidAmerican’s board as well as rights of approval over certain important transactions.
Later that summer, Buffett, along with Lehman Brothers, provided
Williams with a one-year $900 million senior loan at over 19 percent,

154

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

secured by almost all the oil and gas assets of Barrett Resources, which
Williams originally acquired for about $2.8 billion. It was reported that
Buffett’s loan was part of a $3.4 billion package of cash and credit that
Williams, still an investment-grade company, needed to stave off bankruptcy. The terms of the deal were tough and laden with conditions and
fees that reportedly could have put the interest rate on the deal at 34
percent. Still, it can be argued that not only was Buffett helping an
investment-grade company out of a tight spot but also protecting himself against the high risk of the situation.
Although MidAmerican was not Buffett’s only foray into the thenbeleaguered energy industry, it definitely was a complex, multifaceted
investment. Buffett believed that the company was worth more than its
then-current value in the market. He knew that the management, including Walter Scott and David Sokol, operated with great credibility,
integrity, and intelligence. Finally, the energy industry can be a stable
business, and Buffett was hoping it would become even more stable and
profitable.
In MidAmerican, Buffett bought a fixed-income investment with
an equity potential. As with all his other investments, he took a characteristic ownership approach and committed himself to the company’s
growth. He made some money off the Williams fixed-income instruments while protecting himself with covenants, high rates, and assets
(Barrett Resources). As it turned out, by October 2003, MidAmerican
had grown into the third largest distributor of electricity in the United
Kingdom and was providing electricity to 689,000 people in Iowa,
while the Kern River and Northern Natural pipelines carried about 7.8
percent of the natural gas in the United States. In total, the company had
about $19 billion of assets and $6 billion in annual revenues from 25
states and several other countries, and was yielding Berkshire Hathaway
about $300 million per year.


It is important to remember that Buffett thinks of convertible preferred
stocks first as fixed-income securities and second as vehicles for appreciation. Hence the value of Berkshire’s preferred stocks cannot be any
less than the value of a similar nonconvertible preferred and, because of
conversion rights, is probably more.

Investing in Fixed-Income Securities

155

Buffett is widely regarded as the world’s greatest value investor,
which basically means buying stocks, bonds, and other securities, and
whole companies, for a great deal less than their real worth, and waiting
until the asset value is realized. So whether it is blue-chip stocks or highyield corporate debt, Buffett applies his same principles. A value investor
goes where the deals are.
Although Buffett is usually thought of as a long-term investor in
common stocks, he has the capability, stamina, and capital to wade into
beleaguered industries and pick out diamonds in the rough. He chooses
specific companies with honest, smart managers and cash-generating
products. He also chooses the instruments that make the most sense at
the time. Usually, he has been right and when he’s not, he admits it. As
it turns out, his decision to move strongly into fixed-income instruments in 2002 and 2003 was definitely right. In 2002, Berkshire’s gross
realized gain from fixed-income investments was $1 billion. In 2003,
that number almost tripled, to $2.7 billion.

10
Managing Your
Portfolio

U

p to this point, we have studied Warren Buffett’s approach to
making investment decisions, which is built on timeless principles
codified into twelve tenets. We watched over his shoulder as he
applied those principles to buy stocks and bonds, and to acquire companies. And we took the time to understand the insights from others
that helped shape his philosophy about investing.
But as every investor knows, deciding which stocks to buy is only
half the story. The other half is the ongoing process of managing the
portfolio and learning how to cope with the emotional roller coaster
that inevitably accompanies such decisions.
It is no surprise that here, too, the leadership of Warren Buffett will
show us the way.


Hollywood has given us a visual cliché of what a money manager looks
like: talking into two phones at once, frantically taking notes while trying to keep an eye on computer screens that blink and blip at him from
all directions, tearing at his hair whenever one of those computer blinks
shows a minuscule drop in stock price.
Warren Buffett is about as far from that kind of frenzy as anything
imaginable. He moves with the calm that comes of great confidence. He
157

158

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

has no need to watch a dozen computer screens at once, for the minuteby-minute changes in the market are of no interest to him. Warren
Buffett doesn’t think in minutes, days, or months, but years. He doesn’t
need to keep up with hundreds of companies, because his investments
are focused in just a select few. This approach, which he calls “focus investing,” greatly simplifies the task of portfolio management.

“We just focus on a few outstanding companies. We’re focus
investors.”1
WARREN BUFFETT, 1994

S TAT U S Q U O : A C H O I C E O F T W O
The current state of portfolio management, as practiced by everyone
else, appears to be locked into a tug-of-war between two competing
strategies—active portfolio management and index investing.
Active portfolio managers are constantly at work buying and selling
a great number of common stocks. Their job is to try to keep their
clients satisfied. That means consistently outperforming the market so
that on any given day should a client apply the obvious measuring
stick—how is my portfolio doing compared with the market overall—
the answer will be positive and the client will leave her money in the
fund. To keep on top, active managers try to predict what will happen
with stocks in the coming six months and continually churn the portfolio, hoping to take advantage of their predictions.
Index investing, on the other hand, is a buy-and-hold passive approach. It involves assembling, and then holding, a broadly diversified
portfolio of common stocks deliberately designed to mimic the behavior
of a specific benchmark index, such as the Standard & Poor’s 500. The
simplest and by far the most common way to achieve this is through an
indexed mutual fund.
Proponents of both approaches have long waged combat to prove
which one will ultimately yield the higher investment return.

M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o

159

Active portfolio managers argue that, by virtue of their superior
stock-picking skills, they can do better than any index. Index strategists, for their part, have recent history on their side. In a study that
tracked results in a twenty-year period, from 1977 through 1997, the
percentage number of equity mutual funds that have been able to beat
the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index dropped dramatically, from 50 percent in the early years to barely 25 percent in the final four years. And
as of November 1998, 90 percent of actively managed funds were underperforming the market (averaging 14 percent lower than the S&P
500), which means that only 10 percent were doing better.2
Active portfolio management as commonly practiced today stands a
very small chance of outperforming the index. For one thing, it is
grounded in a very shaky premise: Buy today whatever we predict can
be sold soon at a profit, regardless of what it is. The fatal f law in that
logic is that given the complexity of the financial universe, predictions
are impossible. Second, this high level of activity comes with transaction costs that diminish the net returns to investors. When we factor in
these costs, it becomes apparent that the active money management
business has created its own downfall.
Indexing, because it does not trigger equivalent expenses, is better
than actively managed portfolios in many respects. But even the best
index fund, operating at its peak, will only net you exactly the returns
of the overall market. Index investors can do no worse than the market,
and also no better.
Intelligent investors must ask themselves: Am I satisfied with average? Can I do better?

A NEW CHOICE
Given a choice between active and index approaches, Warren Buffett
would unhesitatingly pick indexing. This is especially true for investors
with a very low tolerance for risk, and for people who know very little
about the economics of a business but still want to participate in the
long-term benefits of investing in common stocks.
“By periodically investing in an index fund,” he says in inimitable
Buffett style, “the know-nothing investor can actually outperform most
investment professionals.”3 Buffett, however, would be quick to point

160

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

out that there is a third alternative—a very different kind of active portfolio strategy that significantly increases the odds of beating the index.
That alternative is focus investing.

FOCUS INVESTING: THE BIG PICTURE
Reduced to its essence, focus investing means this: Choose a few stocks
that are likely to produce above-average returns over the long haul,
concentrate the bulk of your investments in those stocks, and have the
fortitude to hold steady during any short-term market gyrations.
The following sections describe the separate elements in the process.

“Find Outstanding Companies”
Over the years, Warren Buffett has developed a way of determining
which companies are worthy places to put his money; it rests on a notion of great common sense: If the company is doing well and is managed by smart people, eventually its stock price will ref lect its inherent
value. Buffett thus devotes most of his attention not to tracking share
price but to analyzing the economics of the underlying business and assessing its management.
The Buffett tenets, described in earlier chapters, can be thought of as
a kind of tool belt. Each tenet is one analytical tool, and in the aggregate

THE FOCUS INVESTOR’S GOLDEN RULES
1. Concentrate your investments in outstanding companies
run by strong management.
2. Limit yourself to the number of companies you can truly
understand. Ten to twenty is good, more than twenty is
asking for trouble.
3. Pick the very best of your good companies, and put the
bulk of your investment there.
4. Think long-term: five to ten years, minimum.
5. Volatility happens. Carry on.

M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o

161

they provide a method for isolating the companies with the best chance
for high economic returns. Buffett uses his tool belt to find companies
with a long history of superior performance and a stable management,
and that stability means they have a high probability of performing in
the future as they have in the past. And that is the heart of focus investing: concentrating your investments in companies with the highest
probability of above-average performance.

“Less Is More”
Remember Buffett’s advice to a know-nothing investor—to stay with
index funds? What is more interesting for our purposes is what he
said next:
“If you are a know-something investor, able to understand business economics and to find five to ten sensibly priced companies that
possess important long-term competitive advantages, conventional
diversification ( broadly based active portfolios) makes no sense for
you.”4
What’s wrong with conventional diversification? For one thing, it
greatly increases the chances that you will buy something you don’t
know enough about. Philip Fisher, who was known for his focus portfolios, although he didn’t use the term, profoundly inf luenced Buffett’s
thinking in this area. Fisher always said he preferred owning a small
number of outstanding companies that he understood well to a large
number of average ones, many of which he understood poorly.
“Know-something” investors, applying the Buffett tenets, would
do better to focus their attention on just a few companies. How many
is a few? Even the high priests of modern finance have discovered that,
on average, just fifteen stocks gives you 85 percent diversification.5 For
the average investor, a legitimate case can be made for ten to twenty.
Focus investing falls apart if it is applied to a large portfolio with dozens
of stocks.

“Put Big Bets on High-Probability Events”
Phil Fisher’s inf luence on Buffett can also be seen in another way—his
belief that the only reasonable course when you encounter a strong opportunity is to make a large investment. Warren Buffett echoes that

162

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

thinking: “With each investment you make, you should have the courage
and the conviction to place at least ten percent of your net worth in that
stock.”6
You can see why Buffett says the ideal portfolio should contain no
more than ten stocks, if each is to receive 10 percent. Yet focus investing is not a simple matter of finding ten good stocks and dividing your
investment pool equally among them. Even though all the stocks in a
focus portfolio are high-probability events, some will inevitably be
higher than others, and they should be allocated a greater proportion of
the investment.
Blackjack players understand this intuitively: When the odds are
strongly in your favor, put down a big bet.

I can’t be involved in 50 or 75 things. That’s a Noah’s Ark
way of investing—you end up with a zoo. I like to put meaningful amounts of money in a few things.7
WARREN BUFFETT, 1987

Think back for a moment to Buffett’s decision to buy American
Express for the limited partnership, described in Chapter 1. When
threat of scandal caused the company’s share price to drop by almost
half, Buffett invested a whopping 40 percent of the partnership’s assets
in this one company. He was convinced that, despite the controversy,
the company was solid and eventually the stock price would return to
its proper level; in the meantime, he recognized a terrific opportunity.
But was it worth almost half of his total assets? It was a big bet that paid
off handsomely: Two years later, he sold the much-appreciated shares
for a profit of $20 million.

“Be Patient”
Focus investing is the antithesis of a broadly diversified high-turnover
approach. Although focus investing stands the best chance among all active strategies of outperforming an index return over time, it requires

M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o

163

investors to patiently hold their portfolio even when it appears that
other strategies are winning.
How long is long enough? As you might imagine, there is no hardand-fast rule (although Buffett would probably say that anything less
than five years is a fool’s theory). The goal is not zero turnover (never
selling anything); that’s foolish in the opposite direction, for it would
prevent you from taking advantage of something better when it comes
along. As a general rule of thumb, we should aim for a turnover rate between 20 and 10 percent, which means holding the stock for somewhere between five and ten years.

“Don’t Panic over Price Changes”
Focus investing pursues above-average results, and there is strong evidence, both in academic research and actual case histories, that the pursuit is successful. There can be no doubt, however, that the ride is
bumpy, for price volatility is a necessary by-product of the focus approach. Focus investors tolerate the bumpiness because they know that
in the long run the underlying economics of the companies will more
than compensate for any short-term price f luctuations.
Buffett is a master bump-ignorer. So is his partner, Charlie
Munger, who once calculated, using a compound interest table and lessons learned playing poker, that as long as he could handle the price
volatility, owning as few as three stocks would be plenty. “I knew I
could handle the bumps psychologically, because I was raised by people
who believe in handling bumps.”8
Maybe you also come from a long line of people who can handle
bumps. But even if you were not born so lucky, you can acquire some of
their traits. It is a matter of consciously deciding to change how you
think and behave. Acquiring new habits and thought patterns does not
happen overnight, but gradually teaching yourself not to panic and act
rashly in response to the vagaries of the market is doable—and necessary.

B U F F E T T A N D M O D E R N P O RT F O L I O T H E O RY
Warren Buffett’s faith in the fundamental ideas of focus investing puts
him at odds with many other financial gurus, and also with a package

164

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

of concepts that is collectively known as modern portfolio theory. Because this is a book about Buffett’s thinking, and because Buffett himself does not subscribe to this theory, we will not spend much time
describing it. But as you continue to learn about investing, you will
hear about this theory, and so it is important to cover its basic elements.
Then we’ll give Buffett a chance to weigh in on each.
Modern portfolio theory is a combination of three seminal ideas
about finance from three powerful minds. Harry Markowitz, a graduate
student in economics at the University of Chicago, first quantified the
relationship between return and risk. Using a mathematical tool called
covariance, he measured the combined movement of a group of stocks,
and used that to determine the riskiness of an entire portfolio.
Markowitz concluded that investment risk is not a function of how
much the price of any individual stock changes, but how much a group
of stocks changes in the same direction. If they do so, there is a good
chance that economic shifts will drive them all down at the same time.
The only reasonable protection, he said, was diversification.
About ten years later, another graduate student, Bill Sharpe from
the University of California-Los Angeles, developed a mathematical
process for measuring volatility that simplified Markowitz’s approach.
He called it the Capital Asset Pricing Model.
So in the space of one decade, two academicians had defined two
important elements of what we would later come to call modern portfolio theory: Markowitz with his idea that the proper reward/risk balance depends on diversification, and Sharpe with his definition of
risk. A third piece—the efficient market theory (EMT)—came from
a young assistant professor of finance at the University of Chicago,
Eugene Fama.
Fama began studying the changes in stock prices in the early 1960s.
An intense reader, he absorbed all the written work on stock market behavior then available and concluded that stock prices are not predictable
because the market is too efficient. In an efficient market, as information becomes available, a great many smart people aggressively apply that
information in a way that causes prices to adjust instantaneously, before
anyone can profit. At any given moment, stock prices ref lect all available
information. Predictions about the future therefore have no place in an
efficient market, because the share prices adjust too quickly.

M a n a g i n g Yo u r P o r t f o l i o

165

Buffett’s View of Risk
In modern portfolio theory, the volatility of the share price defines risk.
But throughout his career, Buffett has always perceived a drop in share
prices as an opportunity to make money. In his mind, then, a dip in price
actually reduces risk. He points out, “For owners of a business—and
that’s the way we think of shareholders—the academics’ definition of
risk is far off the mark, so much so that it produces absurdities.”9
Buffett has a different definition of risk: the possibility of harm.
And that is a factor of the intrinsic value of the business, not the price
behavior of the stock. Financial harm comes from misjudging the future profits of the business, plus the uncontrollable, unpredictable effect
of taxes and inf lation.
Furthermore, Buffett sees risk as inextricably linked to an investor’s
time horizon. If you buy a stock today, he explains, with the intention
of selling it tomorrow, then you have entered into a risky transaction.
The odds of predicting whether share prices will be up or down in a
short period are the same as the odds of predicting the toss of a coin;
you will lose half of the time. However, says Buffett, if you extend your
time horizon out to several years (always assuming that you have made
a sensible purchase), then the odds shift meaningfully in your favor.
