a brokerage commission to be taken into account.
ETFs are used to diversify a financial investment portfolio and at the
same time hedge against the risks of other instruments already present in
the portfolio. Currency ETFs are shares of a fund held by an ETF management firm, which buys and holds currencies to sell later on to the public.
You can buy them in the same way you would buy stock shares. The value
of the shares of an ETF is usually 100 times the current rate established for
the currency that is being held. For example, if the current EUR/USD rate
is 1.3320, the Euro ETF will be priced at $133.20 (1.3320 ⫻ 100 ⫽
$133.20).
Currency ETFs represent an opening to the FOREX market for
investors formerly focused on stocks and an additional level for diversification of the portfolio; they also can be used effectively by shorter-term
traders for quick profits. Most of these ETFs even have corresponding
options available.

CONTRACTS FOR DIFFERENCE (CFDs)
CFDs are transactions performed on financial assets, stocks, and indices
where the liquidation is realized by means of the difference between the
buying price or ask and the selling price or bid without a real exchange and
possession of the asset that is being negotiated. The prices of CFDs stem
from the price of the underlying assets on the traditional stock or currency
market. This means that the CFDs provide access to the same liquidity that
is registered for the underlying asset.
CFDs are derivatives that allow investors to obtain the maximum
return on trading capital. Unlike what happens with physical stocks or
securities, the laws do not usually tax CFD contracts because the transaction doesn’t involve a physical exchange of the document or underlying

250

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

asset. Additionally, no administrative or custody costs are involved. CFDs
are negotiated on margin. This is a more effective way to use the capital
because only a small portion of it is blocked to guarantee the transaction.
However, the exposure is for 100 percent of the position. This can increase
the percentage of returns on capital.
The fact that all CFD transactions are always settled in cash is a much
easier method, and investors get all the benefits and risks of owning a security without really owning it in its physical form.

COMMODITIES
Commodities are all those goods that constitute the essential raw materials
of an economy and worldwide and represent an additional alternative of
investment for various investors’ profiles. Some of them are quite convenient to acquire and add to a trader’s assets portfolio.
A commodity is any raw material that has gone through very little or
insignificant transformation. In international financial markets, commodities are classified into the following basic groups: metals (gold, silver,
copper), energy (oil, natural gas), food and supplies (sugar, cotton, cocoa,
coffee), grains (corn, wheat, chickpeas, beans), and livestock (pigs, cattle).
This definition allows us to find a relevant characteristic of these types
of goods. They are very homogeneous products, that is, very similar to each
other. Take, for example, a well-known commodity—gold. You all know
what gold is, what it is made of, and that its quality, if it is raw, should not
have much variation independent of its location. For this reason, its price
should not reflect any significant differences. This is so true that a single
price exists for commodities at an international level. For example, if you
see that today the price of gold is at $980 for 100 ounces, that would be the
price at which any buyer or seller would be transacting. Some small differences may stem from transactions costs, intermediaries, and transportation,
including insurance, but basically, the price would remain the same for
everyone.
The first question you should ask prior to including commodities in
your portfolio is if you think that a particular commodity is likely to rise
in price in the future. Maybe it would be a good idea to incorporate this
product into your trading portfolio because if you pay $5 today for a commodity and tomorrow its price is at $7.50, you will have made a 50 percent
return. This return is a capital gain. However, some commodities involve
heavy storage costs or even can be perishable, so it would be almost

CHAPTER 14

SECRETS TO FOREX DIVERSIFICATION

251

impossible to add them to an investment portfolio. If you physically buy
cattle meat because you think that the price of this commodity will rise in
the future, you have to take into consideration that this product will require
refrigeration and special maintenance conditions so that it doesn’t deteriorate. This will be very costly, and the product could perish and become
totally stale if too much time has passed.
As an alternative, there are commodities that have less storage costs
and are not perishable. The first ranked are precious metals, such as gold
and silver. It is very common to observe these kinds of commodities in the
favorite investment portfolios of either big or small investors. When the
worldwide economy is expanding, that is, when it is expected that the real
wealth will tend to increase on average in the whole world economy, this
could be a good time to acquire commodities and hold them in a portfolio.
The more industrialized countries are the biggest buyers of raw materials or
commodities, which they use as supplies for the fabrication of products
with a greater added value. If the world is getting richer, it is because it
tends to demand a greater amount of elaborated products, and consequently, there will be a greater demand for supplies for the elaboration
of those products. This logically causes the prices of commodities to rise,
and if you had some of them in your trading portfolio, you would realize
a capital gain.
Inversely, when the worldwide economy tends to slow down, the
demand for commodities decreases because the forecast is that there will
be a lesser demand for elaborated products. This would have as a consequence a decrease in the prices of those raw materials. When this happens,
it is a good moment to sell.
The main commodities exchanges include the Chicago Board of Trade,
the Kansas City Board of Trade, the New York Mercantile Exchange, the
London Metal Exchange, and other foreign commodity exchanges.

INDICES (SECURITIES)
An index is an abstract number that represents the joint movement of several financial assets of which it is composed: stocks, bonds, currencies,
commodities, and others. An index is a statistical measure of change.
Applied to the financial markets, it would represent an imaginary portfolio
of securities relative to a particular market or a portion of it.
Each one of the assets has a relative weight inside the index that is
measured based on previously set parameters from before the index was

252

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

created. At the moment when there is a change in the price of the asset, the
index also will move, and its variation will be greater or lesser depending
on the relative weight of the asset that has changed.
The most well-known indices that you normally follow in the worldwide market are the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations(NASDAQ), the Dow
Jones, the Standard and Poor’s 500, the Nikkei in Japan, the Financial
Times 100 (FTSE) in great Britain, the CAC 40 in France, and the Dax in
Germany, as well as assets such as bonds in the case of JP Morgan’s Emerging Markets Bond Index EMBI or the Commodity Research Bureau CRB
for commodities. The Standard & Poor’s 500 Index is one of the world’s
best-known indices and is the most commonly used point of reference for
the stock market, along with the Dow Jones.
You have already seen that the Dow Jones shows the joint evolution of
30 of the most representative companies on the market. The weight is usually determined by the volume of transactions, and the company that has
performed with a higher volume during the last 6 months will have a
greater influence on the index.
If a stock from one company represents a 10 percent weight of the
index and another represents 20 percent, it is obvious that if each has experienced in a given month a 1 percent variation, this will not influence the
index in the same proportion. This also explains why the index could be rising in a given period while several of the companies that compose it could
see a decline in the value of their stocks.
An index is also used as a comparative measure for investments. For
example, if an investor buys a particular stock, he or she can compare its
performance with the index to see if it is going over or under the average.
One of the characteristics of the indices is that because they are a series
of grouped assets, they represent an important diversification, and thus the
risks are lowered. Usually an index reflects less volatility than the individual assets that compose it. You couldn’t technically invest in an index
because it represents the whole sum of the companies included, but indices
traded through mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (EFTs) that are
based on indexes allow people to invest in securities that represent ample
market segments or even the complete market.

C

15

H

A

P

T

E

R

MY FAVORITE WAYS
TO TRADE
BREAKOUTS
RANGE BREAKOUT

253

254

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

The range breakout setup is quite easy to spot. The markets have been
trading in a sideways or consolidation pattern and usually in a tight range.
I usually check the setup in a short time frame, such as the 5-minute chart,
and if I see one in a higher time frame, such as, for example, the 1-hour
chart, it most often will have an inside bar being formed.
There are two times during the trading day that I use to plan a range
breakout: the Asian session or pre-Europe/pre-London range and the preU.S. session range. In the first case, I will place a horizontal line at the high
of the range and another at the low of the range that has formed between
03:00 Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) and 07:00 GMT (the times on the
chart above are GMT ⫹2; this will depend on your own broker’s server
time). A few minutes before the time span ends, I place a straddle: two
pending stop orders, a buy stop 5 pips plus spread above the high of the
range and a sell stop at the low of the range. The stop loss of each position
is placed at the entry price of the opposite position; on EUR/USD pairs,
those ranges are usually 30 or 40 points on average. I place the stop loss at
breakeven plus 1 point as soon as the price has gone 20 pips in my direction
and delete the pending order that was not triggered. I keep on trailing the
stops using parabolic stop and reverse (SAR) as a reference.
In the second case, the range I use is the time span between 5 a.m.
Eastern Time (ET) and 8 a.m. ET, placing the straddle orders a few minutes before the U.S. market open. This strategy can be used any time a
tight consolidation range is being formed.
A variation of this strategy is splitting the position into three parts (this
would be three pending stop buy orders and three pending stop sell orders),
taking profit on one of the orders as soon as 20 points have been reached and
setting the stop loss to breakeven plus 1 point on the remaining two. Then I
take profits on the second position when it reaches 40 points, leaving the third
one with the above-mentioned trailing stops until it is finally stopped out.
Symmetric, ascending, and descending triangles also can be used for
this strategy because they are also consolidation periods. In the case of an
ascending or descending triangle, the breakout expectation usually will be
in the previous direction of the trend.
Ascending and descending triangles are formed of both a diagonal support or resistance and a horizontal support or resistance. The level to watch
for a directional breakout is the horizontal line. The ascending or descending triangle is a continuation pattern that usually will resume its direction
after the consolidation pause.
It is also important to check other levels that are present, such as pivots
and Fibonacci retracements, especially when deciding about the exact entry
price. It is preferable to set the entry a few points above or below such levels

CHAPTER 15

MY FAVORITE WAYS TO TRADE

255

to prevent possible bounces off a pivot line. As a rule, I would recommend
trading only short positions if price is trading below the central pivot and only
long positions if price is trading above the central pivot. Traders always
should trade with the trend and never fight a trend.
A successful breakout also will depend on volumes. The higher the volume, the more significance the breakout will have. Volume depends on liquidity, and liquidity depends on the day and the markets that are open; it is
also important to know when holidays occur and some of the markets are
closed because when there are few participants, markets are usually choppy,
lack a definite direction, and there is very little liquidity. The currency pairs
that are most active also will depend on which markets are currently open.
The most active sessions are those where the biggest markets are active:
London, the United States, and Japan. Usually the bigger liquidity shows in
early hours of the session and decreases along the rest of the trading day. If
you are trading the yen, the best session to employ is when Japanese markets
open (at 7 p.m. ET). The euro and pound will be most active later on, when
the Frankfurt and London markets start their activities. The London session
is the most active for all the currencies involved in the FOREX market
because it regroups the bigger volumes and liquidity. It is the most important FOREX market, followed by the United States and Japan, with 10 percent of the overall trading volume.

TREND BREAKOUT

256

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

I employ this strategy whenever there is a clear break of a consolidated
trendline. I watch the price action, and as soon as the trendline has been
broken, I wait for the broken level to be retested with a definite bounce
back. When it is clear that the former support has become a resistance,
I then open a position. In the figure above, that would be a short position in
the next candle that follows the bounce from the retest. I place the stop loss
a few points above the broken line. In both examples shown, you can see
that the first one will yield fewer pips than the second one, but both trades
end in positive. Since they are countertrend trades, especially the first one,
which breaks the smaller trendline but is still contained in the greater lower
trendline, stops should be very tight and placed at breakeven plus 1 point as
soon as possible; in the first case, I exited the position when price action
bounced from the lower trendline.

SUPPORT/RESISTANCE BREAKOUT

This strategy is similar to the range breakout but at a higher level and on
higher time frames. Looking at daily and weekly time frames, I identify
strong areas of support and resistance and set a pending order, buy and sell
stop, a few points above and below the resistance and support levels.

CHAPTER 15

MY FAVORITE WAYS TO TRADE

257

If the range is wide, instead of a stop loss, I place a contrarian stop
order that will be triggered if, instead of breaking out, the price action
bounces back inside the range. The contrarian stop order is set after the first
breakout order has been triggered, or if you have access on your platform to
“If done” orders, it can be programmed to be placed at the moment the first
order is effectively in the market.

PROGRESSIVE TIME-FRAME BREAKOUT

258

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

In the first figure, you can appreciate the weekly trendline, and a steeper
daily trendline that has formed. After such a strong up move, prices most
probably will turn back for a correction.
The parameters to use are the same as for a trend breakout: waiting for
the price action to effectively break, retest, and bounce from the trendline
with support or resistance changed into its opposite.

The difference here is that the higher-time-frame trendline will give
you the possible target at which you can take profits. In the present example, I used weekly and daily charts, but this strategy can be implemented in
any sequence of time frames: daily and 4 hours, 4 hours and 1 hour, 1 hour
and 30 minutes, and even much smaller charts, always taking the higher
time frame of both and its trendline as reference for the profit target.

CHANNELING
Using price channels as a reference for swing trading is similar to trading
inside a range bound or sideways price action: You sell when prices are at
the high of the range and buy when prices are at the low of the range. The
only difference will be that, unlike the sideways market where the high
and low levels are mostly the same throughout the whole range, you will
have higher highs and lows in an uptrend and lower highs and lows in a
downtrend.

CHAPTER 15

MY FAVORITE WAYS TO TRADE

259

Depending on the time frame and style of trading, including risk management, that you decide to use, you can trade both sides of the swing or
only the directional side, that is, buying longs, or “buying on dips,” in an
uptrend and selling shorts, or “selling rallies,” in a down trend. If you trade
both sides, stop losses should be much tighter on countertrend positions.

ANDREW’S PITCHFORK

260

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Andrew’s pitchfork is a very useful tool that I employ to draw equidistant
channels with a median line. It is constructed as follows: The first point is
a previous high or low on the chart. This point is called the pivot. I then
look for both a high and a low to the right of this first pivot point (points 2
and 3 on the chart above). The pitchfork indicator exists on almost all charting software, but you also can build it up by drawing parallel lines from all
three points mentioned, in which the center or median line will be represented by the first pivot point. The other two lines serve as support and
resistance of the price action.
This channel indicator allows you to predict the target levels of a swing
entry inside the channel. When price touches and bounces from either support or resistance, the median line is the most probable target, and the
opposite trendline would be the second probable target.

FIBONACCI CHANNELS

Fibonacci channels can be used alone or in conjunction with horizontal
Fibonacci retracement and extension levels to identify probable areas that
price can reach and thus set up the sequential targets for your trades or
wait for the price action to reach one of those levels and fade the move by
trading the bounce back.

CHAPTER 15

MY FAVORITE WAYS TO TRADE

261

HEDGING
TRUE HEDGING
A hedge is an attempt to profit from the arbitrage of two or more correlated
currency pairs. Hedging has been erroneously related to opening a long and
short position on the same currency pair, but this leads nowhere because it
would end up as a neutral or zero-value position, and in addition, you
would lose the price of the respective spreads on top.
A true hedge is realized by using different currency pairs, usually in the
direction where the swap or overnight interest rate is positive for all or
almost all the currency pairs involved. The total amount earned on
overnight also will depend on each broker’s swap rates, but they are mostly
in the same range for a vast majority of firms.
Although negative correlation implies that when one pair is going up,
the other one is going down—thus if you are long on both, one of them will
end up as a losing position—there is always an arbitrage and difference in
the number of points that the price has increased in the profitable position
in relation to the points lost in the losing position.

PAIRS CORRELATIONS
A perfect hedge would imply a 100 percent inverse correlation between
opposite pairs involved. However, this is not possible, although there are
complementary currency pairs, such as EUR/USD and USD/CHF, that
have a very high correlation index, nearing 96 percent most of the time.

BASKET OF CURRENCIES
This is a hedge that attempts to obtain a positive carry interest in the overall positions, which are closed at a certain point when the total balance of
points is positive. You can use as many currency pairs as you want, but the
hedge usually performs much better with only the four majors: EUR/USD,
GBP/USD, USD/CHF, and USD/JPY.
Open a long position on all four currency pairs in the following proportion (stated here in lots):
1 lot EUR/USD
1 lot GBP/USD
1.2 lots USD/CHF
0.9 lot USD/JPY
The proportion is relative to the difference in the pip values of the currency
pairs: $1 for EUR/USD and GBP/USD, $0.85 approximately for USD/CHF,

262

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

and $1.08 approximately for USD/JPY (the pip value for pairs with USD as
the quote currency do not vary, whereas there is a slight difference when
USD is the base currency).
This is a medium- to long-term strategy. At a certain point, the overall
basket of currencies will be showing a positive increase in equity, in addition
to the swap interest accumulated throughout several days. All positions are
closed at this time, and a new hedge is set up using the same parameters.

BASIC OSCILLATOR-BASED STRATEGY

For this system, I use a break of the 50-period exponential moving average
(50 EMA) with early signal and confirmation given from relative strength
index (RSI) and moving average convergence-divergence (MACD) indicators. I plot a 50-period EMA on the chart, plus an RSI indicator with standard settings (RSI 14) and a MACD indicator also with standard settings
(12, 26, and 9).
As you can see in the chart above, several early signals will alert you to
the possible change in direction: You first have the RSI crossing above the
overbought level, indicating that the current direction might be coming to

CHAPTER 15

MY FAVORITE WAYS TO TRADE

263

an end; then you have a few candles indicating market indecision or
exhaustion and a descent on the slope of the MACD. The price crosses
down through the 50 EMA, and both the MACD and the signal MACD
have crossed the zero line. I enter a short position on the next candle following the one that has closed below the 50 EMA.
All the elements have to be in alignment and coincide in the predicted
direction to allow the decision on the entry to be made. If any of those elements is not present, I do not take the trade; rather, I wait for a much clearer
opportunity.
This strategy is quite simple and can be used in any time frame. I personally use it intraday but on longer time frames, such as the 4-hour chart.
