
information his eyes or ears perceive with the painful energy he's experiencing inside himself, which
makes it seem as if the source of his pain and fear is the dog he is seeing or hearing in that moment.
Psychologists call the dynamics of what I just described a projection because, in a sense, the boy is
projecting the pain he is experiencing in the moment onto the dog. That painful energy then gets
reflected back to him, so that he perceives a dog that is threatening, painful, and dangerous. This
process makes the second dog identical in character, properties, and traits to the one that is in the boy's
memory bank, even though the information the second dog is generating about its behavior is not
identical, or even similar, to the behavior of the dog that actually attacked the boy.
Since the two dogs, the one in the boy's mind and the one outside of the boy's mind, feel exactly the
same, it's extremely unlikely the boy will be able to make any type of distinctions in the second dog's
behavior that would suggest to him that it is any different than the one in his mind. So, instead of
perceiving this next encounter with a dog as an opportunity to experience something new about the
nature of dogs, he perceives a threatening and dangerous dog. Now, if you think about it for a moment,
what is it about this process that would indicate to the boy that his experience of the situation was not
the absolute, unquestionable truth? Certainly the pain and fear that he experienced in his body was the
absolute truth. But what about the possibilities that he perceived? Were they true? From our
perspective, they weren't.
However, from the boy's perspective, how could they be anything but the true reality of the situation?
What alternatives did he have? First, he can't perceive possibilities that he hasn't learned about yet. And
it is extremely difficult to learn anything new if you're afraid, because, as you already well know, fear
is a very debilitating form of energy. It causes us to withdraw, to get ready to protect ourselves, to run,
and to narrow our focus of attention —all of which makes it veiy difficult, if not impossible, to open
ourselves in a way that allows us to learn something new. Second, as I have already indicated, as far as
die boy is concerned, the dog is the source of his pain, and in a sense this is true.
The second dog did cause him to tap into the pain that was already in his mind, but it was not the true
source of that pain. This was a positively charged dog that got connected to the boy's negatively
charged energy by an automatic, involuntary mental process, functioning at speeds faster than it takes
to blink an eye (a process that the boy has absolutely no awareness of). So as far as he's concerned,
why would he be afraid if what he perceived about the dog wasn't the absolute truth? As you can see, it
wouldn't make any difference how the dog was acting, or what someone might say to the contrary
about why the boy shouldn't be afraid, because he will perceive whatever information the dog is
generating about itself (regardless of how positive) from a negative perspective. He will not have the
slightest notion that his experience of pain, fear, and terror was completely self-generated.
Now, if it's possible for the boy to self-generate his own pain and terror and, at the same time, be firmly
convinced that his negative experience was coming from the environment, is it also possible for traders
to self-generate their own experiences of fear and emotional pain as they interact with market
information and be thoroughly convinced that their pain and fear was completely justified by the

circumstances? The underlining psychological dynamics work in exactly the same way. One of your
basic objectives as a trader is to perceive the opportunities available, not the threat of pain. To learn
how to stay focused on the opportunities, you need to know and understand in no uncertain terms the
source of the threat. It's not the market.
The market generates information about its potential to move from a neutral perspective. At the same
time, it provides you (the observer) with an unending stream of opportunities to do something on your
own behalf. If what you perceive at any given moment causes you to feel fear, ask yourself this
question: Is the information inherently threatening, or are you simply experiencing the effect of your
own state of mind reflected back to you (as in the above illustration)? I know this is a difficult concept
to accept, so I'll give you another example to illustrate the point. Let's set up a scenario, where your last
two or three trades were losers.
You are watching the market, and the variables you use to indicate that an opportunity exists are now
present. Instead of immediately executing the trade, you hesitate. The trade feels very risky, so risky, in
fact, that you start questioning whether this is "really" a signal. As a result, you start gathering
information to support why this trade probably won't work. This is information you normally wouldn't
consider or pay attention to, and it's certainly not information that is part of your trading methodology.
In the meantime, the market is moving. Unfortunately, it is moving away from your original entry
point, the point at which you would have gotten into the trade if you hadn't hesitated. Now you are
conflicted, because you still want to get in; the thought of missing a winning trade is painful. At the
same time, as the market moves away from your entry point, the dollar value of the risk to participate
increases. The tug of war inside your mind intensifies.
You don't want to miss out, but you don't want to get whipsawed either. In the end, you do nothing,
because you are paralyzed by the conflict. You justify your state of immobility by telling yourself that
it's just too risky to chase the market, while you agonize over every tic the market moves in the
direction of what would have been a nice winning trade. If this scenario sounds familiar, I want you to
ask yourself whether, at the moment you hesitated, were you perceiving what the market was making
available, or perceiving what was in your mind reflected back to you? The market gave you a signal.
But you didn't perceive the signal from an objective or positive perspective. You didn't see it as an
opportunity to experience the positive feeling you would get from winning or making money, but that's
exactly what the market was making available to you.
Think about this for a moment: If I change the scenario so that your last two or three trades were
winners instead of losers, would you have perceived the signal any differently? Would you have
perceived it more as an opportunity to win than you did in the first scenario? If you were coming off
three winners in a row, would you have hesitated to put that trade on? Very unlikely! In fact, if you're
like most traders, you probably would have been giving very strong consideration to loading up
(putting on a position much larger than your normal size). In each situation, the market generated the
same signal. But your state of mind was negative and fear-based in the first scenario, and that caused

you to focus on the possibility of failure, which in turn caused you to hesitate. In the second scenario,
you hardly perceived any risk at all. You may even have thought the market was making a dream come
true.
That, in turn, would make it easy, if not compelling, to financially overcommit yourself. If you can
accept the fact that the market doesn't generate positively or negatively charged information as an
inherent characteristic of the way it expresses itself, then the only other way information can take on a
positive or negative charge is in your mind, and that is a function of the way the information is
processed. In other words, the market doesn't cause you to focus on failure and pain, or on winning and
pleasure. What causes the information to take on a positive or negative quality is the same unconscious
mental process that caused the boy to perceive the second dog as threatening and dangerous, when all
the dog was offering was playfulness and friendship.
Our minds constantly associate what's outside of us (information) with something that's already in our
mind (what we know), making it seem as if the outside circumstances and the memory, distinction, or
belief these circumstances are associated with are exactly the same. As a result, in the first scenario, if
you were coming off two or three losing trades, the next signal the market gives you that an
opportunity was present will feel overly risky. Your mind is automatically and unconsciously linking
the "now moment" with your most recent trading experiences. The link taps you into the pain of losing,
creating a fearful state of mind and causing you to perceive the information you're exposed to in that
moment from a negative perspective. It seems as if the market is expressing threatening information,
so, of course, your hesitation is justified. In the second scenario, the same process causes you to
perceive the situation from an overly positive perspective, because you are coming off three winners in
a row.
The association between the "now moment" and the elation of the last three trades creates an overly
positive or euphoric state of mind, making it seem as if the market is offering you a riskless
opportunity. Of course, this justifies overcommitting yourself. In Chapter 1, I said that many of the
mental patterns that cause traders to lose and make errors are so self-evident and deeply ingrained that
it would never occur to us that the reason we aren't consistently successful is because of the way we
think. Understanding, becoming consciously aware of, and then learning how to circumvent the mind's
natural propensity to associate is a big part of achieving that consistency. Developing and maintaining a
state of mind that perceives the opportunity flow of the market, without the threat of pain or the
problems caused by overconfidence, will require that you take conscious control of the association
process. CHAPTER 6

CHAPTER 6
THE MARKET'S PERSPECTIVE
For the most part, a typical traders perception of the risk in any given trading situation is a function of
the outcome of his most recent two or three trades (depending on the individual). The best traders, on
the other hand, are not impacted (either negatively or too positively) by the outcomes of their last or
even their last several trades. So their perception of the risk of any given trading situation is not
affected by this personal, psychological variable. There's a huge psychological gap here that might lead
you to believe that the best traders have inherent design qualities in their minds that account for this
gap, but I can assure you this is not the case. Every trader I've worked with over the last 18 years has
had to learn how to train his mind to stay properly focused in the "now moment opportunity flow." This
is a universal problem, and has to do both with the way our minds are wired and our common social
upbringing (meaning, this particular trading problem is not personspecific).
There are other factors relating to self-esteem that may also act as obstacles to your consistent success,
but what we are going to discuss now is the most important and fundamental building block to your
success as a trader.
THE "UNCERTAINTY" PRINCIPLE
If there is such a thing as a secret to the nature of trading, this is it: At the very core of one's ability 1)
to trade without fear or overconfidence, 2) perceive what the market is offering from its perspective, 3)
stay completely focused in the "now moment opportunity flow," and 4) spontaneously enter the "zone,"
it is a strong virtually unshakeable belief in an uncertain outcome with an edge in your favor. The best
traders have evolved to the point where they believe, without a shred of doubt or internal conflict, that
"anything can happen."
They don't just suspect that anything can happen or give lip service to the idea. Their belief in
uncertainty is so powerful that it actually prevents their minds from associating the "now moment"
situation and circumstance with the outcomes of their most recent trades.By preventing this association,
they are able to keep their minds free of unrealistic and rigid expectations about how the market will
express itself. Instead of generating the kind of unrealistic expectations that more often than not result
in both emotional and financial pain, they have learned to "make themselves available" to take
advantage of whatever opportunities the market may offer in any given moment. "Making yourself
available" is a perspective from which you understand that the framework from which you are
perceiving information is limited relative to what's being offered.

Our minds don't automatically perceive every opportunity that presents itself in any given moment.
(The "boy and the dog" illustration from Chapter 5 is a perfect example of how our own personal
versions of the truth are reflected back to us.) This same land of perceptual blindness happens all the
time in trading. We can't perceive the potential for the market to continue to move in a direction that is
already against our position if, for example, we are operating out of a fear of being wrong. The fear of
admitting we are wrong causes us to place an inordinate amount of significance on information that
tells us that we're right. This happens even if there's ample information to indicate that the market has
in fact established a trend in the opposite direction of our position.
A trending market is a distinction about the market's behavior we can ordinarily perceive, but this
distinction can easily become invisible if we are operating out of fear. The trend and the opportunity to
trade in the direction of that trend don't become visible until we are out of the trade. In addition, there
are opportunities that are invisible to us because we haven't learned to make the distinctions that would
allow us to perceive them. Recall our discussion in Chapter 5 of the first price chart you ever looked at.
What we haven't learned yet is invisible to us, and remains invisible until our minds are open to an
exchange of energy. A perspective from which you make yourself available takes into consideration
both the known and the unknown: For example, you've built a mental framework that allows you to
recognize a set of variables in the markets behavior that indicates when an opportunity to buy or sell is
present. This is your edge and something you know.
However, what you don't know is exactly how the pattern your variables identify will unfold. With the
perspective of making yourself available, you know that your edge places the odds of success in your
favor, but, at the same time, you completely accept the fact that you don't know the outcome of any
particular trade. By making yourself available, you consciously open yourself up to find out what will
happen next; instead of giving way to an automatic mental process that causes you to think you already
know. Adopting this perspective leaves your mind free of internal resistance that can prevent you from
perceiving whatever opportunity the market is making available from its perspective (its truth). Your
mind is open for an exchange of energy. Not only can you learn something about the market that you
previously didn't know, but you also set up the mental condition most conducive to entering "the zone."
The essence of what it means to be in "the zone" is that your mind and the market are in sync. As a
result, you sense what the market is about to do as if there is no separation between yourself and the
collective consciousness of everyone else participating in the market. The zone is a mental space where
you are doing more than just reading the collective mind, you are also in complete harmony with it. If
this sounds a bit strange to you, ask yourself how it is that a flock of birds or a school of fish can
change direction simultaneously. There must be a way in which they are linked to one another. If it is
possible for people to become linked in the same way, then there will be times when information from
those with whom we are linked can and will bleed through to our consciousness.
Traders who have experienced being tapped into the collective consciousness of the market can
anticipate a change in direction just as a bird in the middle of a flock or a fish in the middle of a school

will turn at the precise moment that all of the others turn. However, setting up the kind of mental
conditions most conducive to experiencing this seemingly magical synchronicity between you and the
market is no easy task. There are two mental hurdles to overcome.
The first is the focus of this chapter: learning how to keep your mind focused in the "now moment
opportunity flow." In order to experience synchronicity, your mind has to be open to the market's truth,
from its perspective. The second hurdle has to do with the division of labor between the two halves of
our brain. The left side of our brain specializes in rational thought, based on what we already know.
The right side specializes in creative thought. It is capable of tapping into an inspiration, an intuition, a
hunch, or a sense of knowing that usually can't be explained at a rational level. It can't be explained
because if the information is really creative in nature, then it is something that we wouldn't know at a
rational level. By definition, true creativity brings forth something that didn't previously exist. There's
an inherent conflict between these two modes of thought, that the rational, logical part will almost
always win, unless we take specific steps to train our minds to accept and trust creative information.
Without that training, we will usually find it very difficult to act on our hunches, intuitive impulses,
inspirations, or sense of knowing.
Acting appropriately on anything requires belief and clarity of intent, which keeps our minds and
senses focused on the purpose at hand. If the source of our actions is creative in nature, and our rational
mind hasn't been properly trained to trust this source, then at some point in the process of acting on this
information, our rational brain will flood our consciousness with conflicting and competing thoughts.
Of course, all of these thoughts will be sound and reasonable in nature, because they will be coming
from what we already know at a rational level, but they will have the effect of flipping us out of "the
zone" or any other creative state of mind. There are few things in life more frustrating than recognizing
the possibilities evident from a hunch, intuition, or an inspired idea, and not taking advantage of that
potential because we talked ourselves out of it. I realize that what I've just said is still much too abstract
to implement on a practical basis. So, I'm going to take you step-by-step through what it means to be
completely focused in the "now moment opportunity flow."
My objective is that by the time you've read this chapter and Chapter 7, you will understand without a
shred of doubt why your ultimate success as a trader cannot be realized until you develop a resolute,
unshakeable belief in uncertainty. The first step on the road toward getting your mind and the market in
sync is to understand and completely accept the psychological realities of trading. This step is where
most of the frustrations, disappointments, and mysteriousness associated with trading begin.
Very few people who decide to trade ever take the time or expend the effort to think about what it
means to be a trader. Most people who go into trading think that being a trader is synonymous with
being a good market analyst. As I have mentioned, this couldn't be further from the truth. Good market
analysis can certainly contribute to and play a supporting role in one's success, but it doesn't deserve
the attention and importance most traders mistakenly attach to it. Beneath the market behavior patterns
that are so easy to become fixated on are some very unique psychological characteristics. It's the nature

of these psychological characteristics that determines how one needs "to be" in order to operate
effectively in the market environment.
Operating effectively in an environment that has qualities, traits, or characteristics that are different
from what we're used to requires making some adjustments or changes in the way we normally think
about things. For example, if you were to travel to an exotic place with certain objectives or goals to
accomplish, the first thing you would do is familiarize yourself with the local traditions and customs.
By doing so, you would leani about the various ways in which you would have to adapt in order to
function successfully in that environment. Traders frequently ignore the fact that they may have to
adapt in order to become consistently successful traders. There are two reasons for this.
The first is that you need absolutely no skill of any kind to put on a winning trade. For most traders it
usually takes years of pain and suffering before they figure out or finally admit to themselves that
there's more to being consistent than the ability to pick an occasional winner. The second reason is that
you don't have to travel anywhere to trade. All you need is access to a phone. You don't even have to
roll out of bed in the morning. Even traders who normally trade from an office don't have to be in the
office to put on or take off their trades. Because we can access and interact with the market from
personal environments that we are intimately familiar with, it seems as if trading won't require any
special adaptations in the way we think.
To some degree, you are probably already aware of many of the fundamental truths (psychological
characteristics) about the nature of trading. But having an awareness or an understanding of some
principle, insight, or concept doesn't necessarily equate to acceptance and belief. When something has
been truly accepted, it isn't in conflict with any other component of our mental environment. When we
believe in something, we operate out of that belief as a natural function of who we are, without struggle
or extra effort. To whatever degree there is a conflict with any other component of our mental
environment, to the same degree there is a lack of acceptance. It isn't difficult, therefore, to understand
why so few people make it as traders.
They simply don't do the mental work necessary to reconcile the many conflicts that exist between
what they've already learned and believe, and how that learning contradicts and acts as a source of
resistance to implementing the various principles of successful trading. Getting into and taking
advantage of the kind of free-flowing states of mind that are ideal for trading requires that those
conflicts be thoroughly resolved.
