
190

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

You must never forget the greatest discovery of experienced traders was
that “Murphy” lives in the market. As a matter of fact, he lives in your computer and, when you trade, believe me, “if something can go wrong, it will go
wrong.” What usually happens is that the first few times you trade without a
protective stop-loss order, the market goes a little beyond where you would
have placed it, bounces, and then returns to make you whole, and you walk
away with a profit. Congratulations, you just ran your first red light without
an accident. Like any driver or trader, that is one of the worst things that can
happen to you, because you now have acquired that false sense of ability and
confidence. As a trader, your subconscious mind recorded the event in detail
and is ready to replay one of the biggest lies of a trading career: “The market
always comes back. Don’t worry, next time you run that red light at 60 miles
an hour, just look both ways and you will be alright.” Trust me, it will only be
a matter of time before you get hit and suffer major consequences.
Scientists say it only takes three repetitions to form a habit. If you trade
two or three times with a mental protective stop-loss order or even without
one, you will feel you know the market better than the market knows itself.
With pride, you will start to feel that you have now harnessed the market
and figured out how it moves. You will start to feel happy, confident, and
proud of your new trading breakthrough. A costly mistake most traders
make is that they enter the market and instead of placing an actual protective stop-loss order with the computer, they feel confident to rely on their
“mental” stop-loss order to protect them in the market.
Congratulations, you have just formed a new self-destructive habit. Why?
You have just fooled yourself into believing that if the market gets to your
mental stop-loss order, you will have the discipline and courage to get out.
Well, I am here to tell you, if you trade without a presubmitted or pre-executed
protective stop-loss order at the time of entry, it will only be a matter of time
before you get caught off-guard. The only way you avoid danger in the market
is to properly understand what the market is capable of doing to you.
The Forex can liquidate you in less than five hours. How do I know that?
Personal experience. Every trade involves risk. Risk is a part of our lives. We
drive defensively and wear seat belts to minimize our risk as we drive. Traders
learn where to place their protective stop-loss orders to minimize risk.
Should you choose to drive without a seat belt, don’t be surprised if you
end up in the hospital after you get hit, and if you trade without a stop-loss
order, don’t be surprised if you experience the following.
Excited about your newfound profession, trading at home, making
money 24 hours a day at your convenience, you enter a trade buying after
you did all your homework, and you are proud to be a bull going long in the

CHAPTER 12

EQUITY MANAGEMENT

191

market. You choose to place a mental stop-loss order for this trade, and to
your surprise the market blows by your mental protective stop-loss order. If
you do not have the courage to pull the trigger and get out now, then get
prepared for the first wild ride in your trading career.
As the market continues running in the opposite direction of your entry,
you find yourself now 75 pips in the red. That is $750 in potential losses.
You now know you are a little more exposed than you would prefer to be,
but you feel confident that bulls will show up and return the market back to
your point of entry. The market continues to dip and you are now 100 pips,
or $1,000, in the red, and you ask, “Were did all these bears come from?
You verbally commit to yourself saying, “If it goes 10 more pips against
me, I am out of here. I will have the courage to get out of the market and
take the $1,100 dollar loss.” All of a sudden bears show up in packs and the
market begins to race down droping 50 more pips in four minutes. It is now
150 pips, or $1,500, against you and your courage is now gone. Fear sets in
as the market keeps dropping. You are now 200 pips, or $2,000, in the red.
Your heart is pounding so fast you can hardly breathe. Things are now very
serious, and overwhelming, helpless fear overtakes your being.
Then boom, out of the blue, as if someone just refueled the market to
keep it going, the market drops another 100 pips and now you are 300 pips
in the red, or $3,000 down. You only have $4,000 in your trading account.
You told your wife, your family, and your fiends you were embarking on
one of the most exiting journeys of your life. And you were right, because
things are now pretty exciting!
You have no idea what is going on or what took place in the market
to create such a bearish move in the opposite direction from your entry.
All you can think about now is survival. You are in shock. You can’t believe
this is happening to you. I have learned being frightened is an experience
you can’t buy. A good scare is worth more to a person than good advice.
You sit in silence, looking at your trading screen in true disbelief. As
time passes, the market calms down. You feel stalked by the bears while
they linger as if they have been hunting you down waiting for you to succumb to satisfy their appetite.
The reality is, your pain is self-inflicted. You are in this state because
you either thought you were above the law, or you underestimated the
power of the market. Either way, you should have placed a predetermined
stop-loss order and been out of the market with a $300 to $500 loss. But no,
you were too smart and too courageous for that.
More bears appear, and the market continues to move against you. You
feel the bears are slowly devouring every last dollar in your margin trading

192

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

account. You are now just a few pips away from being completely liquidated and eaten alive by those ruthless bears. Suddenly out of nowhere, a
beautiful morning star appears on your screen and the market begins to
rally in your direction. You yell out, “Yes, somebody has listened to my
prayers.”
You kiss the screen of your computer as you fall to your knees—you
are so excited. You start following that morning star and even though you
are still 300 pips, or $3,000, in the red, you now have hope. That hope
slowly begins to overcome your feelings of fear, and as the market slowly
moves up, your fear begins to dissipate.
You are so relieved and grateful that your cries of help had been
answered. You now honor your new commitment to never trade again without a protective stop-loss order and you place a protective stop-loss order
10 pips below the low of the morning star and quantify your threshold of
pain. In doing that, you have now quantified the worst thing that can happen to you—losing on a trade. With conviction and commitment you say,
“If more bears show up and it falls any more, I am going to have to face the
music, wake up, and end this nightmare.”
You are filled with all these positive feelings of freedom, and the market drops and tests that morning star. You wonder what’s going on. Then
boom, a huge bullish engulfing candle appears and the market begins to
rally. As the market slowly starts to rally and come back in your favor, you
walk outside and breathe in fresh air to rekindle your senses. But then, as
you go back into the house and look at the charts, you discover that the market began to wave back down against you. Your emotions and brain are so
fried and you are so exhausted you can’t even think or recall what you have
been taught—that the market waves in a natural up A, B, C, D price movement as it climbs.
The reason I can describe this process in such detail is that I have been
there, done that, and can warn you about the experience.
Setbacks and failures are a part of life. What you don’t want is a
setback so devastating that it changes your life forever. When it is time to
execute a trade, you can never really quantify how much you can make in a
trade; however, you can always quantify how much you are willing to risk,
or lose, should the trade not go your way.
The rule of survival at trading is to never risk more than 5 percent of
your equity on any given trade. MTI’s trading methodologies and strategies
teach you how to find excellent trades in the market by risking no more
than 50 to 60 pips on any given trade. If you want to be a bull and go long,
you will need to place your protective stop-loss orders a little beyond the

CHAPTER 12

EQUITY MANAGEMENT

193

last low of a major level of support. If you want to be a bear and go short,
you will need to place your protective stop-loss order a little beyond the last
high or major level of resistance. Most successful money managers make it
a habit to risk only 0.5 to 2 percent of your available trading equity on any
single trade. The fact is, no one can tell you how much you should risk on
a trade, but I will share with you a formula to protect your equity or your
trading account.

THE EQUITY MANAGEMENT FORMULA
Most trades will require a 30–50 pip stop-loss order, due to the fact that
the market waves constantly, and we need to stay out of the way of the
wave. On a $100,000 regular trading account, that equates to between
$300–$500 required stop-loss needed to enter that trade. On a $1,000 mini
account that equates to between $30–$50 needed to enter the same trade.
Always use the Equity Management Formula as displayed in Figure 12-1 to
calculate your percentage risk per trade. For example, if you have a balance
of $1,000 in your $100,000 regular trading account margin and you need
$500 (a 50-pip stop-loss order), then you will risk 50 percent of your entire
trading account margin in one single trade. This could financially be disastrous. You always need to strive to remain below 5 percent risk in any trade.
In order to stay within the guidelines of effective equity management, you
FIGURE 12-1

Risk Management of Capital

All Trades Have Risk
$100,000 Account
In Margin
Risk 50 pips
% Risk to Margin

$1,000

$2,500

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$500
50%

$500
20%

$500
10%

$500
5%

$500
3%

$10,000

$15,000

$10,000 Account
In Margin
Risk 50 pips
% Risk to Margin

$1,000

$2,500

$5,000

$50
5%

$50
2%

$50
1%

$50
0.05%

$50
0.03%

Learn to trade and make your mistakes on a $10,000 account,
after you learn a successful technique,
trade and take profits on a $100,000 account,

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

194

will need a minimum balance of between $10,000 to $15,000 to open a
$100,000 regular trading account. If you do not have $15,000, you may
want to start out with a mini account where you need at least $1,000 to open
a $1,000 mini trading account. Traders have the luxury of determining their
risk before they enter the market.
Do not only stay focused on the potential gain. You need to stay focused
on the potential risk when making any trade. If you cannot afford the risk,
do not trade! Whatever you do, never overtrade your account and place
yourself at financial risk.
Financial survival is critical. If your dream is to become a successful
trader, you cannot run out of money before you accomplish your dream or
the dream is over. Do not overtrade your account. The reason you need to
risk only a certain percentage of your trading margin is so that you have
staying power in the market. Figure 12-2 points out that the more money
you start out with, and the lower the amount you risk, the more staying
power you will have in the market.
Remember, there is no such thing as the “trade of the century” or a
“sure thing” when it comes to trading. Do not move from one lot to five lots
if your equity management is not in line with this. If you do, you will lose
on the five-lot trade, incur an emotional scar, and you will be back down to
trading with single lots again on your trades to follow. Your margin account
will take a big financial hit, and it will now take you five times as long to
make up that loss. Regardless of how good a trade looks, you must maintain the discipline to trade within the rules of equity management.
FIGURE 12-2

Understanding the Term Over -Trading

Do Not Overtrade Your
100K Account
Overtrading

In Margin

$1,000

$2,500

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

Risk 50 pips
% Risk to Margin

$500
50%

$500
20%

$500
10%

$500
5%

$500
3%

No. of losses you
canendure

1

4

9

19

29

CHAPTER 12

EQUITY MANAGEMENT

195

RISK VERSUS REWARD
There is no need to ever sell the farm for any given trade. When a trader
says, “Here comes the big one. I feel it!” and tells their spouse or significant other, “Let us risk everything because this one is going to pay off,” rest
assured, it will be the one to take you down. The risk must, at minimum,
equal the reward and, in most cases, must be far less than the reward. The
rule for the risk versus reward must be a minimum of 1:1. I say minimum
because your habit of success must be 1:1.5. In other words, for every
dollar you risk, you must plan to make 1.5 times the return. When you risk
$500, your projected gain must consistently be $750.
Market participants that are long-term traders, like banks and large
financial institutions, will risk more on their trades, but their trades still
equate to 1 to 2 percent of their equity, and their targets for gain will be in
alignment with the 1 to 1.5 risk versus reward ratio.

