
Setups and Triggers

255

a pivot point support target, watch for the high close doji or the jackhammer pattern to develop. In a rising trend, once the market trades at or near
a projected pivot point resistance, watch for a low close doji or a shooting
star pattern. These specific patterns can be added to your personal toolbox
of setups or used exclusively as a day trading plan. By understanding the
current market conditions (uptrend, downtrend, or sideways), you can
heighten your awareness of specific patterns that can be applied to that
trading environment. All that is left after entering a position is risk and
trade management, which is the focus of the next chapter.

CHAPTER 9

Risk Management
Setting Stops

his chapter will walk you through the various types of stop orders
and when and where to place them. It will also provide a great deal of
important information on the reasons for stop orders, the type of
stops that should be placed at critical price levels, and identifying these specific price levels. If a trader is to maintain a degree of profitability over time,
managing risk and using a system that helps evaluate price changes are essential. When you have finished this chapter, you will understand how to select stops to limit your potential losses and how to let profits ride.
The process in selecting stop placement as a risk management tool
starts with the price of where the trade was initiated. Here are some finer
points on the rationale for using a risk method, or having a stop-loss system
in place.

T

• Predetermined stops help conquer emotional interference.
• Stops should be part of a system or included in a set of trading rules.
• The risk/reward ratio should be weighed before entering trades, and a
stop objective should be set.
• When volatility is low, stops can be placed closer to an entry level.
• When volatility is high, stops should be placed further away from entry
level.
One of my favorite bits of advice that I give students and have taught at
seminars is that the first rule of trading starts with the premise that it is
okay to form an opinion on a gut, or instinctive, feeling—just act on a trade

257

258

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

signal that substantiates that opinion. Write your rules down and have
them posted on your trading screen on your computer. Before you enter
the trade, check your rule list; and make sure you know why, where, and
what type of stop to place. As you gain more experience in the business,
you will undoubtedly get caught in a news-driven, price-shock event, that is,
if you have not already experienced one. These are unavoidable and hard to
escape unscathed. It is considered a cost of doing business and should not
reflect on your abilities as a trader. Managing risk is your job, and capturing as much profit as possible from winning trades should be your utmost
goal. The descriptions of the types of stops and the pros and cons of each
should help you make the right decision for the various circumstances or
market conditions.

PLACING STOP ORDERS
Stop orders are often referred to as a protection method against losses.
These orders can also be placed to enter positions. Specifically, a stop
order is an order that you place either through a broker or online. If the
market trades at a certain price, then the order is triggered and becomes a
market order to be filled at the next best available price. The general rules
of stop placement are:
• Buy stops are placed above the current market price.
• Sell stops are placed below the current market price.

GENERAL USES OF STOP ORDERS
This chapter will focus on protective stops used to offset a position and to
protect against losses and against accrued profits. You can also use a stop
to enter a position. There are a variety of stops that can be used depending
on your situation, the market you are trading, and what you are trying to accomplish. There are various types of available stops and several techniques
that can be used with these stops to help you manage your position and reduce your overall risk.
• Dollar Limits. Stops can be based on a dollar amount per position.
The dollar amount is categorized under money management for trading
systems. If you are risking $250 per futures contract in an e-mini–
Standard & Poor’s (S&P) contract, then your stop level would be
placed at a five-point distance from your entry price. This method is

Risk Management

259

used less frequently by professional traders because it has no relevancy
to a mechanical trading model, especially systems that are in the market all the time, such as a moving average system. However, there are
benefits to this feature with setting a daily dollar amount on a loss limit
for active day traders. Some electronic order platforms allow you to set
a daily loss limit. Rather than per trade, it sets an overall loss limit on
your account.
• Percentage Figures. Most traders hear of using a stop of a certain percentage of the overall account size. Generally speaking, that number
can be 2 percent up to as much as 5 percent of the overall account. Unfortunately for most traders in futures or foreign exchange (forex) markets, the average size trading account is $10,000, which means the stop
is $200 to $500 dollars per trade. This leaves little room for error. Normally, you want to use at least a two-to-one risk/reward ratio on your
trades. So if you risk 5 percent on a $10,000 account, you should expect
to risk $500 and make $1,000 per trade.
• Time Factors. After a specific time period, if the price does not move
in the expected direction or if the velocity of such a move does not warrant holding onto the position, then exit the trade. If you see a low
close doji (LCD) or a high close doji (HCD) signal, it is my experience
that the market generally demonstrates an immediate reaction within
two or four time periods. After a long period of the market not responding to this type of signal, liquidate the position. The timing of the
trade did not correspond with the historical tendency and did not generate the desired results in a given period.
Another consideration in the art of placing stops using a time element is the aid of a moving average. A moving average is simply a
trend line that is considered a time-driven price-directional tool. One
time factor that one can use as a stop placement method is the
crossover point of reference created when using two moving average
values. Once the shorter-term moving average crosses the longer-term
moving average, it reflects a value change in the market. In Figure 9.1,
once the market triggers a signal to go long with the high close doji,
combining a close below doji low and the crossover point (using both
the one-period pivot point and the three-period pivot point moving averages) can act as a stop placement level. Once again, you would want
to look at the point of crossover of the two moving average values; and
if the market closes below the low of the doji’s low and the moving average (M/A) values, then a trigger to exit the position would be warranted. As you can see, a bullish trend develops with the golden
sequence of events: higher highs, higher lows, and higher closing highs.
The stop-loss was placed at a critical point.
• Price Levels. Traders often use basic statistics to measure the degree

260

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 9.1
Used with permission of esignal.com.

of price volatility that can occur on a daily basis in a given market.
These measures can then be used to place a stop order or a limit order
that takes into account these natural daily price movements. Statistics
that are often used are the mean, the standard deviation, and the coefficient of variation. The best trailing-stop approach has been explored by many technicians. The various methods include placing a
stop using a set price amount, which could be as much as 50 percent of
the average true range of a given time period, either above or below the
10- or 20-day moving average.
Why is this an important method? If you place a stop near a specific
chart point of interest, such as an old high or an old low, that level is
obvious to every chart watcher. Markets do “test” and penetrate from
time to time those levels. If you set your stop too close, such as setting
a sell stop below an old low point or a buy stop above an old price high,
chances are that your order may be executed if it is too close, such as
what the jackhammer or shooting star represents. So generally, a certain factor or distance should be calculated for your stop placement.
Since most traders believe a market has reached a peak, they will place

Risk Management

261

a stop slightly above an old high or below an old low. Depending on
where you place your stop, the market may demonstrate a spike pattern that will hit your order and then proceed to move in the desired direction, without you, of course. Figure 9.2 shows an example of when
the market is at a major turning point, how a price spike occurs. You
may want to take the average daily range of the most recent 10 or more
periods and then use a factor between 20 percent and 50 percent of the
10-day average daily range. When entering a short position you would
use a protective buy stop based on a percentage above the 10-day average range. For example, if you take the average daily range for the 10
trading sessions from the low back on October 12 up to the first peak
on October 25, you have an average daily range for that 10-day period
of 174 PIPs (percentage in points), or points. The first spike top exceeded the prior high by 34 PIPs.
If you established a short position and wanted to place your stop
out of harm’s way, then using a stop of 20 percent of 174 PIPs above the
predetermined high would not have worked out, as that was 34 PIPs,
the exact amount by which the market exceeded the high. If you in-

FIGURE 9.2
Used with permission of esignal.com.

262

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

creased the stop amount by 50 percent of the 10-day average daily
range, then you would have an 87-point stop above the high; and this
would have kept you from getting stopped out. By using 120 percent of
the average of the last 10-day period range, this method would accomplish the goal of not getting stopped out. Realistically, that may be way
too much risk for an individual trader. But examine the risk/reward
ratio on that particular trade. A risk of 150 percent of the average daily
range from the most recent 10-day period would have been 261 PIPs.
The stop would be placed above the high on October 25 at 181.30. The
low was at 170.65, made nearly one month later on November 22.
Granted, depending on your risk tolerance, this may seem excessive;
but you can select and back-test any percentage variable of an average
daily range stop placement.
The key idea here is to keep your stops out of harm’s way. If a
trade is to become profitable, there should be signs, such as in the case
of selling short, that you see immediate results with lower highs, lower
lows, and lower closing lows. Even in the days where we see spike
highs or spike lows, notice where the market closes in relation to their
respective highs and lows. The price penetrates the highs but closes
back below the prior highs. The reverse is true at the spike lows. This
is a good clue that the market has exhausted a trend and is ready to reverse. Keeping a stop out of harm’s way will allow you to participate in
the move using a variation of an average daily range stop placement.
• Conditional Changes. A conditional change is defined as a higher
closing high in a downtrend or a lower closing low in an uptrend. Such
as the case with a spike top, the market does not close above an old
high. Therefore, one factor such as the stop-close-only order will be of
great use to a trader not looking to get bumped out of a position. There
is, as with any stop, the unknown risk that there is not a guaranteed
price at which your stop order will be filled. This order has a negative
connotation among traders because it spells too much risk. A buy stop
will be elected and will knock you out of a position if the market closes
above the stop price; and a sell stop will be elected and will knock you
out of your position if the close is below your selected price level. The
unknown is how far away the market will close from the selected stop
price. The key benefit in using a stop-close-only order is that it keeps
your risk defined to a conditional change and helps you from getting
knocked out of a position from intraperiod volatility. Stop-close-only
orders (SCOs) are for end-of-day trading and can be placed on most
trading platforms. The SCOs can be used for day trading; however, they
must be used manually, as most platforms do not accept intraday
SCOs. Some consider these mental stops, which are predefined risk
factors. However, many traders violate the rules once a signal calls for

Risk Management

263

an exit but they do not exit, thereby increasing their losses. A trader
needs to have a strict disciplinary approach.
The challenge in selecting the right stop is to reduce risk while not
being shaken out of the trade by market volatility. It is important to try
to maximize your trading results and to stay in profitable trades as long
as possible. Employing random stop-losses and profit targets can ruin
a trading strategy, making it perform significantly worse than it would
have otherwise. One successful method is to use trailing stops that
adapt to market volatility so that the stop is placed far enough away,
which combines enough sensitivity to price changes with flexibility to
fit your risk/reward parameters. Using this combination may provide
profitable consistency from a stop-placement aspect for the intermediate-term trader. The trailing stop is used as an attempt to lock in some
of the paper profits that could accrue should the market move in the direction desired. Like an ordinary stop, the trailing stop is started at
some initial value but then is moved up (in a long trade) or down (in a
short trade) as the market moves in your favor.
Testing has demonstrated that a proper combination of even simple
exit methods, such as placing a stop below the low of the prior past two
trading sessions, can substantially improve the behavior of a trading
strategy, even turning a random, losing strategy into a profitable one!
Another less complicated method to use for a bullish trending market condition is placing a stop below the lowest low from the most recent 10-day period. Another method is a trailing stop method using the
lowest low from the last conditional change. I define the last conditional change as a higher closing high. This is a much more important
event than a higher high. Buyers who stepped in on the open have a
strong conviction that price should expand to new higher territory
once the market established a new high ground. Therefore, if the lows
are violated, then the market is demonstrating weakness. In Figure 9.3,
we are looking at the daily chart on gold. Starting from the low on November 4 near 465, the market does not make a lower closing low. On
December 1, we see a close at a doji low but not below the low of the
doji. The trend then continues higher with a sequence of higher highs,
higher lows, and higher closing highs.
It is not until the shooting star develops that the intermediate top
is made. A stop placed beneath the low of the candle prior to the star
would be the last conditional change or the last higher closing high
that occurred. That would be where you would want to place a sell
stop. Using the two-period lowest-low method, you would have been
stopped out at 528. If you used a stop-close-only below that low, your
fill was the next time period’s close; and that was not as friendly or as
profitable, as the market closed at 514. However, using the lowest low

264

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 9.3
Used with permission of esignal.com.

for the most recent 10 periods, your stop-out point was all the way
down at 497.
Let’s examine this method with a day trade using a chart example
on the spot forex British pound market from 2/6/2006 using a 15-minute
time frame. Figure 9.4 shows a low close doji trigger to sell short at
176.07. The initial stop per the LCD trigger states to use a stop-closeonly above the doji high. That would be 176.28. As you can see, the market stalls in a traditional sideways channel, as forex markets are known
to do. But, sticking with your trading rules, as the market starts to deteriorate, you would change the stop from a stop-close-only to a regular stop one tick above the high of the second conditional lower closing
low candle. You now have the option to move stops above the highs
of the last reactionary high points; and if you follow the trail of the
market, you will notice the high from the last conditional lower closing
low. This failed reactionary high was the perfect spot to move your
stop down to just one PIP above that high point. At the end of the run,
you want to trail the stop to the point one PIP above the high of the

Risk Management

265

FIGURE 9.4
Used with permission of esignal.com.

second-to-last candle that made a conditional change, which would be
a lower closing low.
Let’s explore this method further for day traders in the stock index
futures. Figure 9.5 shows a 15-minute candle pattern showing another
low close doji trigger to sell short. The fill would be 1279.25, and the initial stop would be a mental stop-close-only above the doji high at
1283.5. As we want to see when short, immediate results materialize
with the sequence of events such as lower highs, lower lows, and, best
of all, lower closing lows. We now have the option to change and trail
a hard stop above the high of the second conditional change candle.
Here, a conditional change is a candle that makes a lower closing low.
Prices now decline to 1270.75; we have over an eight-point gain, or $400
per contract. We can do several things, such as taking profits on half of
our positions, because the market has reached a move equal to the average daily range from the most recent 10 trading days, or moving stops
down to lock in profits and letting our winners ride. We should now
place a trailing stop above the high of the last conditional change or an
SCO to exit the balance of positions.

266

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

FIGURE 9.5
Used with permission of esignal.com.

In this example, you would not have been able to sell the high or
buy the low using a set of trading rules. However, a solid chunk of middle of that trading session was captured with having little-to-no risk
pressure. The trailing stop method would allow you to stay with the
trade until the bearish conditions changed. The chart in Figure 9.5 is
also a great illustration of how a market moves from a trending condition to a consolidation phase. Once you have captured the profit, it is
time to wait for another trade setup.
There are many different variations to placing stops. The key is
watching for conditional changes; for example, in a declining market,
you should watch for the last reactionary high as the peak at which to
place a trailing stop once you are in a short position. You should use a
stop-close-only above a conditional change candle especially on a twoperiod time count. These methods will help you limit losses, prevent
you from being prematurely knocked out of a trade, and reduce emotional stress, while capitalizing on letting your winning trades ride.

Risk Management

267

THE BOTTOM LINE
The bottom line is this: Stops are not for sissies. You just need to know
when changes in a market’s condition occur to help determine when to exit
a trade. If you are in a trending condition for too long, chances are that you
may be overextending your welcome; therefore, tightening stops is a good
way to protect profits. After all, it really counts most when you get out of
the trade. All traders struggle with stop placements. There is no one single
best method. The concept is to develop a consistent method that helps you
define cutting your losses and letting winners ride.

CHAPTER 10

Projecting Entry
and Exit Points
Learn to Scale Out

W

hat are some of the most important things that successful traders
do? They have:

• A system or a method that provides an accurate daily market forecast,
helping them define where the market might go each day.
• A set of rules for when to get in and out of the market and a bit of discipline to follow these rules.
• A set of timing indicators to help them pull the trigger at the key areas.
The legendary basketball coach Bob Knight often says, “Most people
have the will to win; few people have the will to prepare to win.” This is true
in many aspects of a person’s life, be it in athletics, academics, business, a
profession, or trading.
Trading is about making money, not about being correct in market
analysis or being a great prognosticator. Traders must be consistent in their
approach and strive to completely remove emotion from trading decisions.
This is often best achieved by having and sticking to a plan for every trade.
We trade in the future markets, not in the past markets. Hindsight is always
20/20. Keep in mind that you will never trade as well in real time with real
money as you will by looking at or trading in the past. Trading in the past is
an exercise in futility that will only harm your psyche going forward. You
should view every trade you make as the best trade you could make at the
time with the information available. That is why I like to scale out of my positions as a short-term trader at market points that signal when a trend has
269

270

CANDLESTICK AND PIVOT POINT TRADING TRIGGERS

a loss in momentum. The reason I like to keep a portion of positions on is
simple: As good as my triggers can be, I cannot predict the future. I do not
know if a market will develop into a consolidation phase or if it is simply
pausing before continuing the trend or getting ready to reverse the trend entirely. Therefore, it is crucial to take money off the table when given the opportunity, while letting a trade mature and potentially develop into a larger
profit. There is only one way I know to manage such a feat, and that is by
scaling out of partial positions. The question some traders ask is, “What is
the formula or percentage that I use to take positions off?” I normally use
the 50 percent rule, but at times the one-third rule works as well. In order
to define what the percentage figure is, I need to judge what condition the
market is in. I do that by using the diagnosis described in this book. In the
trade process, there are three critical stages:
1. Gathering information on which to make decisions.
