
1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

79

vestment-one that indeed has a significant possibility of causing
loss or injury-if you believe that your gain, weighted for
probabilities, considerably exceeds your loss, comparably
weighted, and if you can commit to a number of similar, but unrelated opportunities. Most venture capitalists employ this strategy.
Should you choose to pursue this course, you should adopt the outlook of the casino that owns a roulette wheel, which will want to
see lots of action because it is favored by probabilities; but will
refuse to accept a single, huge bet.
Another situation requiring wide diversification occurs when
an investor who does not understand the economics of specific
businesses nevertheless believes it in his interest to be a long-term
owner of American industry. That investor should both own a
large number of equities and space out his purchases. By periodically investing in an index fund, for example, the know-nothing investor can actually out-perform most investment professionals.
Paradoxically, when "dumb" money acknowledges its limitations, it
ceases to be dumb.
On the other hand, if you are a know-something investor, able
to understand business economics and to find five to ten sensiblypriced companies that possess important long-term competitive advantages, conventional diversification makes no sense for you. It is
apt simply to hurt your results and increase your risk. I cannot
understand why an investor of that sort elects to put money into a
business that is his 20th favorite rather than simply adding that
money to his top choices-the businesses he understands best and
that present the least risk, along with the greatest profit potential.
In the words of the prophet Mae West: "Too much of a good thing
can be wonderful."
We should note that we expect to keep permanently our three
primary holdings, Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., GEICO Corporation,
and The Washington Post. Even if these securities were to appear
significantly overpriced, we would not anticipate selling them, just
as we would not sell See's or Buffalo Evening News if someone
were to offer us a price far above what we believe those businesses
are worth.
This attitude may seem old-fashioned in a corporate world in
which activity has become the order of the day. The modern manager refers to his "portfolio" of businesses-meaning that all of
them are candidates for "restructuring" whenever such a move is
dictated by Wall Street preferences, operating conditions or a new

80

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

corporate "concept." (Restructuring is defined narrowly, however:
it extends only to dumping offending businesses, not to dumping
the officers and directors who bought the businesses in the first
place. "Hate the sin but love the sinner" is a theology as popular
with the Fortune 500 as it is with the Salvation Army.)
Investment managers are even more hyperkinetic: their behavior during trading hours makes whirling dervishes appear sedated by comparison. Indeed, the term "institutional investor" is
becoming one of those self-contradictions called an oxymoron,
comparable to "jumbo shrimp," "lady mudwrestler" and "inexpensive lawyer."
Despite the enthusiasm for activity that has swept business
and financial America, we will stick with our 'til-death-do-us-part
policy. It's the only one with which Charlie and I are comfortable,
it produces decent results, and it lets our managers and those of
our investees run their businesses free of distractions.
Our stay-put behavior reflects our view that the stock market
serves as a relocation center at which money is moved from the
active to the patient. (With tongue only partly in check, I suggest
that recent events indicate that the much-maligned "idle rich" have
received a bad rap: They have maintained or increased their wealth
while many of the "energetic rich"-aggressive real estate operators, corporate acquirers, oil drillers, etc.-have seen their fortunes
disappear.)
We continually search for large businesses with understandable, enduring and mouth-watering economics that are run by able
and shareholder-oriented managements. This focus doesn't guarantee results: We both have to buy at a sensible price and get business performance from our companies that validates our
assessment. But this investment approach-searching for the
superstars-offers us our only chance for real success. Charlie and
I are simply not smart enough, considering the large sums we work
with, to get great results by adroitly buying and selling portions of
far-from-great businesses. Nor do we think many others can
achieve long-term investment success by flitting from flower to
flower. Indeed, we believe that according the name "investors" to
institutions that trade actively is like calling someone who repeatedly engages in one-night stands a romantic.
If my universe of business possibilities was limited, say, to private companies in Omaha, I would, first, try to assess the long-term

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

81

economic characteristics of each business; second, assess the quality of the people in charge of running it; and, third, try to buy into a
few of the best operations at a sensible price. I certainly would not
wish to own an equal part of every business in town. Why, then,
should Berkshire take a different tack when dealing with the larger
universe of public companies? And since finding great businesses
and outstanding managers is so difficult, why should we discard
proven products? (I was tempted to say "the real thing.") Our
motto is: "If at first you do succeed, quit trying."
John Maynard Keynes, whose brilliance as a practicing investor matched his brilliance in thought, wrote a letter to a business
associate, F.e. Scott, on August 15, 1934 that says it all: "As time
goes on, 1 get more and more convinced that the right method in
investment is to put fairly large sums into enterprises which one
thinks one knows something about and in the management of
which one thoroughly believes. It is a mistake to think that one
limits one's risk by spreading too much between enterprises about
which one knows little and has no reason for special confidence
.... One's knowledge and experience are definitely limited and
there are seldom more than two or three enterprises at any given
time in which 1 personally feel myself entitled to put full
confidence. "
During 1987 the stock market was an area of much excitement
but little net movement: The Dow advanced 2.3 % for the year.
You are aware, of course, of the roller coaster ride that produced
this minor change. Mr. Market was on a manic rampage until October and then experienced a sudden, massive seizure.
We have "professional" investors, those who manage many
billions, to thank for most of this turmoil. Instead of focusing on
what businesses will do in the years ahead, many prestigious money
managers now focus on what they expect other money managers to
do in the days ahead. For them, stocks are merely tokens in a
game, like the thimble and flatiron in Monopoly.
An extreme example of what their attitude leads to is "portfolio insurance," a money-management strategy that many leading
investment advisors embraced in 1986-1987. This strategy-which
is simply an exotically-labeled version of the small speculator's
stop-loss order-dictates that ever-increasing portions of a stock
portfolio, or their index-future equivalents, be sold as prices decline. The strategy says nothing else matters: A downtick of a
given magnitude automatically produces a huge sell order. Ac-

82

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

cording to the Brady Report, $60 billion to $90 billion of equities
were poised on this hair trigger in mid-October of 1987.
If you've thought that investment advisors were hired to invest, you may be bewildered by this technique. After buying a
farm, would a rational owner next order his real estate agent to
start selling off pieces of it whenever a neighboring property was
sold at a lower price? Or would you sell your house to whatever
bidder was available at 9:31 on some morning merely because at
9:30 a similar house sold for less than it would have brought on the
previous day?
Moves like that, however, are what portfolio insurance tells a
pension fund or university to make when it owns a portion of enterprises such as Ford or General Electric. The less these companies are being valued at, says this approach, the more vigorously
they should be sold. As a "logical" corollary, the approach commands the institutions to repurchase these companies-I'm not
making this up-once their prices have rebounded significantly.
Considering that huge sums are controlled by managers following
such Alice-in-Wonderland practices, is it any surprise that markets
sometimes behave in aberrational fashion?
Many commentators, however, have drawn an incorrect conclusion upon observing recent events: They are fond of saying that
the small investor has no chance in a market now dominated by the
erratic behavior of the big boys. This conclusion is dead wrong:
Such markets are ideal for any investor-small or large-so long as
he sticks to his investment knitting. Volatility caused by money
managers who speculate irrationally with huge sums will offer the
true investor more chances to make intelligent investment moves.
He can be hurt by such volatility only if he is forced, by either
financial or psychological pressures, to sell at untoward times.
D.

"Value" Investing: A Redundancy 20

We really don't see many fundamental differences between
the purchase of a controlled business and the purchase of marketable holdings . . .. In each case we try to buy into businesses with
favorable long-term economics. Our goal is to find an outstanding
business at a sensible price, not a mediocre business at a bargain
price. Charlie and I have found that making silk purses out of silk
is the best that we can do; with sow's ears, we fail.
20

[Divided by hash lines: 1987; 1992; 1985.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

83

(It must be noted that your Chairman, always a quick study,
required only 20 years to recognize how important it was to buy
good businesses. In the interim, I searched for "bargains"-and
had the misfortune to find some. My punishment was an education
in the economics of short-line farm implement manufacturers,
third-place department stores, and New England textile
manufacturers.)
Of course, Charlie and I may misread the fundamental economics of a business. When that happens, we will encounter
problems whether that business is a wholly-owned subsidiary or a
marketable security, although it is usually far easier to exit from
the latter. (Indeed, businesses can be misread: Witness the European reporter who, after being sent to this country to profile Andrew Carnegie, cabled his editor, "My God, you'll never believe
the sort of money there is in running libraries.") .
In making both control purchases and stock purchases, we try
to buy not only good businesses, but ones run by high-grade, talented and likeable managers. If we make a mistake about the
managers we link up with, the controlled company offers a certain
advantage because we have the power to effect change. In practice, however, this advantage is somewhat illusory: Management
changes, like marital changes, are painful, time-consuming and
chancy. In any event, at our three marketable-but-permanent
holdings, this point is moot: With Tom Murphy and Dan Burke at
Cap Cities, Bill Snyder and Lou Simpson at GEleO, and Kay Graham and Dick Simmons at The Washington Post, we simply
couldn't be in better hands.
I would say that the controlled company offers two main advantages. First, when we control a company we get to allocate capital, whereas we are likely to have little or nothing to say about this
process with marketable holdings. This point can be important because the heads of many companies are not skilled in capital allocation. Their inadequacy is not surprising. Most bosses rise to the
top because they have excelled in an area such as marketing, production, engineering, administration-or, sometimes, institutional
politics.
Once they become CEOs, they face new responsibilities. They
now must make capital allocation decisions, a critical job that they
may have never tackled and that is not easily mastered. To stretch
the point, it's as if the final step for a highly-talented musician was
not to perform at Carnegie Hall but, instead, to be named Chairman of the Federal Reserve.

84

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

The lack of skill that many CEOs have at capital allocation is
no small matter: After ten years on the job, a CEO whose company
annually retains earnings equal to 10% of net worth will have been
responsible for the deployment of more than 60% of all the capital
at work in the business.
CEOs who recognize their lack of capital-allocation skills
(which not all do) will often try to compensate by turning to their
staffs, management consultants, or investment bankers. Charlie
and I have frequently observed the consequences of such "help."
On balance, we feel it is more likely to accentuate the capital-allocation problem than to solve it.
In the end, plenty of unintelligent capital allocation takes
place in corporate America. (That's why you hear so much about
"restructuring.") Berkshire, however, has been fortunate. At the
companies that are our major non-controlled holdings, capital has
generally been well-deployed and, in some cases, brilliantly so.
The second advantage of a controlled company over a marketable security has to do with taxes. Berkshire, as a corporate
holder, absorbs some significant tax costs through the ownership of
partial positions that we do not when our ownership is 80% or
greater. Such tax disadvantages have long been with us, but
changes in the tax code caused them to increase significantly during [1986]. As a consequence, a given business result can now deliver Berkshire financial results that are as much as 50% better if
they come from an 80%-or-greater holding rather than from a
lesser holding.
The disadvantages of owning marketable securities are sometimes offset by a huge advantage: Occasionally the stock market
offers us the chance to buy non-controlling pieces of extraordinary
businesses at truly ridiculous prices-dramatically below those
commanded in negotiated transactions that transfer control. For
example, we purchased our Washington Post stock in 1973 at $5.63
per share, and per-share operating earnings in 1987 after taxes
were $10.30. Similarly, our GElCO stock was purchased in 1976,
1979 and 1980 at an average of $6.67 per share, and after-tax operating earnings per share last year were $9.01. In cases such as these,
Mr. Market has proven to be a mighty good friend.
Our equity-investing strategy remains little changed from what
it was ... when we said in the 1977 annual report: "We select our
marketable equity securities in much the way we would evaluate a
business for acquisition in its entirety. We want the business to be

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

85

one (a) that we can understand; (b) with favorable long-term prospects; (c) operated by honest and competent people; and (d) available at a very attractive price." We have seen cause to make only
one change in this creed: Because of both market conditions and
our size, we now substitute "an attractive price" for "a very attractive price."
But how, you will ask, does one decide what's "attractive"? In
answering this question, most analysts feel they must choose between two approaches customarily thought to be in opposition:
"value" and "growth." Indeed, many investment professionals see
any mixing of the two terms as a form of intellectual cross-dressing.
We view that as fuzzy thinking (in which, it must be confessed,
I myself engaged some years ago). In our opinion, the two approaches are joined at the hip: Growth is always a component in
the calculation of value, constituting a variable whose importance
can range from negligible to enormous and whose impact can be
negative as well as positive.
In addition, we think the very term "value investing" is redundant. What is "investing" if it is not the act of seeking value at least
sufficient to justify the amount paid? Consciously paying more for
a stock than its calculated value-in the hope that it can soon be
sold for a still-higher price-should be labeled speculation (which
is neither illegal, immoral nor-in our view-financially fattening).
Whether appropriate or not, the term "value investing" is
widely used. Typically, it connotes the purchase of stocks having
attributes such as a low ratio of price to book value, a low priceearnings ratio, or a high dividend yield. Unfortunately, such characteristics, even if they appear in combination, are far from determinative as to whether an investor is indeed buying something for
what it is worth and is therefore truly operating on the principle of
obtaining value in his investments. Correspondingly, opposite
characteristics-a high ratio of price to book value, a high priceearnings ratio, and a low dividend yield-are in no way inconsistent with a "value" purchase.
Similarly, business growth, per se, tells us little about value.
It's true that growth often has a positive impact on value, sometimes one of spectacular proportions. But such an effect is far from
certain. For example, investors have regularly poured money into
the domestic airline business to finance profitless (or worse)
growth. For these investors, it would have been far better if Orville
had failed to get off the ground at Kitty H a w k : The m o r e the indus-

try has grown, the worse the disaster for owners.

86

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Growth benefits investors only when the business in point can
invest at incremental returns that are enticing-in other words,
only when each dollar used to finance the growth creates over a
dollar of long-term market value. In the case of a low-return business requiring incremental funds, growth hurts the investor.
In The Theory of Investment Value, written over 50 years ago,
John Burr Williams set forth the equation for value, which we condense here: The value of any stock, bond or business today is determined by the cash inflows and outflows-discounted at an
appropriate interest rate-that can be expected to occur during the
remaining life of the asset. Note that the formula is the same for
stocks as for bonds. Even so, there is an important, and difficult to
deal with, difference between the two: A bond has a coupon and
maturity date that define future cash flows; but in the case of equities, the investment analyst must himself estimate the future "coupons." Furthermore, the quality of management affects the bond
coupon only rarely-chiefly when management is so inept or dishonest that payment of interest is suspended. In contrast, the ability of management can dramatically affect the equity "coupons."
The investment shown by the discounted-flows-of-cash calculation to be the cheapest is the one that the investor should
purchase-irrespective of whether the business grows or doesn't,
displays volatility or smoothness in its earnings, or carries a high
price or low in relation to its current earnings and book value.
Moreover, though the value equation has usually shown equities to
be cheaper than bonds, that result is not inevitable: When bonds
are calculated to be the more attractive investment, they should be
bought.
Leaving the question of price aside, the best business to own is
one that over an extended period can employ large amounts of incremental capital at very high rates of return. The worst business
to own is one that must, or will, do the opposite-that is, consistently employ ever-greater amounts of capital at very low rates of
return. Unfortunately, the first type of business is very hard to
find: Most high-return businesses need relatively little capital.
Shareholders of such a business usually will benefit if it pays out
most of its earnings in dividends or makes significant stock
repurchases.
Though the mathematical calculations required to evaluate equities are not difficult, an analyst-even one who is experienced
and intelligent-can easily go wrong in estimating future "coupons." At Berkshire, we attempt to deal with this problem in two

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

87

ways. First, we try to stick to businesses we believe we understand.
That means they must be relatively simple and stable in character.
If a business is complex or subject to constant change, we're not
smart enough to predict future cash flows. Incidentally, that shortcoming doesn't bother us. What counts for most people in investing is not how much they know, but rather how realistically they
define what they don't know. An investor needs to do very few
things right as long as he or she avoids big mistakes.
Second, and equally important, we insist on a margin of safety
in our purchase price. If we calculate the value of a common stock
to be only slightly higher than its price, we're not interested in buying. We believe this margin-of-safety principle, so strongly emphasized by Ben Graham, to be the cornerstone of investment success.
. . . [A]n intelligent investor in common stocks will do better in
the secondary market than he will do buying new issues . . . . The
reason has to do with the way prices are set in each instance. The
secondary market, which is periodically ruled by mass folly, is constantly setting a "clearing" price. No matter how foolish that price
may be, it's what counts for the holder of a stock or bond who
needs or wishes to sell, of whom there are always going to be a few
at any moment. In many instances, shares worth x in business
value have sold in the market for Ih.x or less.
The new-issue market, on the other hand, is ruled by controlling stockholders and corporations, who can usually select the timing of offerings or, if the market looks unfavorable, can avoid an
offering altogether. Understandably, these sellers are not going to
offer any bargains, either by way of a public offering or in a negotiated transaction: It's rare you'll find x for ½ x here. Indeed, in the
case of common-stock offerings, selling shareholders are often motivated to unload only when they feel the market is overpaying.
(These sellers, of course, would state that proposition somewhat
differently, averring instead that they simply resist selling when the
market is underpaying for their goods.)
Right after yearend, Berkshire purchased 3 million shares of
Capital Cities/ABC, Inc. ("Cap Cities") at $172.50 per share, the
market price of such shares at the time the commitment was made
early in March, 1985. I've been on record for many years about the
management of Cap Cities: I think it is the best of any publiclyowned company in the country. And Tom Murphy and Dan Burke
are not only great managers, they are precisely the sort of fellows
