
Bottom Buyers’ Bliss
Many institutions buy stocks on the way down, but bottom fishing isn’t
always the best way to achieve superior performance. It can place decision
makers in the position of buying stocks that are slowly deteriorating or
whose growth is decelerating.
Other money management organizations use valuation models that restrict
investments to stocks in the lower end of their historical P/E ranges. This
approach works for a number of unusually capable, conservative professionals, but over time, it rarely produces truly superior results. Several major Midwest banks that use this approach have continually lagged in performance.
Entirely too many analysts have a P/E hang-up. They want to sell a stock
with a P/E that’s up and looks high and buy one when it’s P/E comes off.
Fifty years of models of the most successful stocks show that low or “reasonable” P/Es are not a cause of huge increases in price. Those who were
faithful to low P/Es probably missed almost every major stock market winner of the last half century.
Most of those who concentrate on the undervalued theory of stock selection may lag today’s better managers. Sometimes these undervalued situations get more undervalued or lag the market for a long time. In the market
free-fall in late 2008 and early 2009, I noticed several value funds that were
down about as much as some of the growth funds, which is unusual.

Comparing Growth versus Value Results
Over the previous 12 business cycles, it’s been my experience that the very
best money managers during a cycle produced average annual compounded
total returns of 25% to, in a few rare cases, 30%. This small group consisted
of either growth-stock managers or managers whose most successful invest-

411

412 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
ments were in growth stocks plus a few big turnaround situations.
The best undervalued-type managers in the same period averaged only
15% to 20%. A few had gains of over 20%, but they were in the minority.
Most individual investors haven’t prepared themselves well enough to average 25% or more per year, regardless of the method used.
Value funds will do better in down or poor market periods. Their stocks
typically haven’t gone up a large amount during the prior bull market periods, and so they typically will correct less. Therefore, most people who are
trying to prove the value case will pick a market top as the beginning point
of a 10-or-more-year period during which to compare value with growth
investing. This leads to an unfair comparison in which value investing may
“prove” more successful than growth-stock investing. The reality is that if
you look at the situation fairly, growth-stock investing usually outperforms
value investing over most periods.

Value Line Dumps the Undervalued System
From the 1930s up to the early 1960s, the Value Line service rated the
stocks it followed as undervalued or overvalued. The company’s results were
mediocre until it dumped the system in the 1960s and began rating stocks
based on earnings increases and relative market action. After the switch,
Value Line’s performance improved.

Overweighting and Underweighting Relative to the S&P
Many institutions invest primarily in stocks that are in the S&P 500 and try
to overweight or underweight their positions in certain sectors. This practice ensures they’ll never do much better or much worse than the S&P 500.
However, an outstanding small-cap or mid-cap growth-stock manager
should potentially be able to average about 1¼ to 1½ times the S&P 500
over a period of several years. The S&P 500 is a tough index for a mutual
fund to materially beat because the S&P is really a managed portfolio that
continues to add newer, better companies and discard laggards. Another
way to outperform the S&P is to buy superior new growth stocks or stocks
that are not in the S&P.

Weaknesses of the Industry Analyst System
Another widely used but expensive and ineffective practice is to hire a
large number of analysts and then divvy up coverage by industry. Some of
this is done for the investment banking side in order to develop and main-

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

tain client relationships. Thus, at a minimum, analysts have in the past had
split loyalties.
The typical securities research department has an auto analyst, an electronics analyst, an oil analyst, a retail analyst, a drug analyst, and on and on.
But this setup is not efficient and tends to perpetuate mediocre performance. What does an analyst who is assigned two or three out-of-favor
groups do? Recommend the least bad of all the poor stocks she follows?
On the other hand, the analyst who happens to follow the year’s best-performing group may recommend only two or three winners, missing many
others. When the oil stocks boomed in 1979 and 1980, all of them doubled
or tripled. The best shot up five times or more.
The theory behind dividing up research is that this allows a person to be
an expert on a particular industry. In fact, Wall Street firms will go so far as
to hire a chemist from a chemical company to be their chemical analyst and
a Detroit auto specialist to be their automotive analyst. These individuals
may know the nuts and bolts of their industries, but in many cases, they have
little understanding of the general market and what makes leading stocks go
up and down. Maybe this explains why virtually every analyst appearing on
CNBC after September 2000 continued to recommend buying high-tech
stocks as they were on their way to 80% to 90% declines. People lost a lot of
money if they followed this free advice on TV. A similar repeat performance
occurred in 2008, when fundamental analysts recommended buying oils
and banks on their way down because they looked very cheap. They then got
a lot cheaper.
Firms also like to advertise they have more analysts, the largest department, or more top-ranked “all-star” analysts. I’d rather have five good analysts who are generalists than 50, 60, or 70 who are confined to limited
specialties. What are your chances of finding 50 or more analysts who are all
outstanding at making money in the market or coming up with moneymaking ideas?
The shortcomings of Wall Street analysts were never made plainer to
institutional and individual investors than during the 2000 bear market.
While the market continued to sell off in what would at the time become the
worst bear market since 1929 as measured by the percentage decline in the
Nasdaq index, and while many former high-flying tech and Internet stocks
were being decimated, Wall Street analysts continued to issue “buy” or
“strong buy” recommendations on these stocks.
In October 2000, one major Wall Street firm was running full-page ads
calling the market environment at that time “One of the Ten Best Times to
Own Stocks” in history. As we now know, the market continued to plummet
well into 2001 and 2002, making that period one of the worst times in his-

413

414 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
tory to own stocks! It was not until many of the tech and Internet high-flyers were down 90% or more from their peaks that these analysts finally
changed their tune—many days late and many dollars short!
A December 31, 2000, New York Times article on analysts’ recommendations quoted Zacks Investment Research as follows: “Of the 8,000 recommendations made by analysts covering the companies in the Standard &
Poor’s 500 Stock Index, only 29 now are sells.” In the same article, Arthur
Levitt, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, stated: “The
competition for investing banking business is so keen that analysts’ sell recommendations on stocks of banking clients are very rare.” A mutual fund
manager quoted by the Times said: “What passes for research on Wall Street
today is shocking to me. Instead of providing investors with the kind of
analysis that would have kept them from marching over the cliff, analysts
prodded them forward by inventing new valuation criteria for stocks that
had no basis in reality and no standards of good practice.” Vanity Fair also
ran an interesting article on the analytical community in August 2001.
Clearly, at no time in the history of the markets has the phrase caveat emptor had more meaning for investors, both institutional and individual alike.
The implementation of SEC Rule FD, governing the fair disclosure of
material company information to both institutional and individual investors,
in 2000 has restricted the ability of major brokerage research analysts to
receive inside information from a company before it is released to the rest
of the Street. This has further reduced any advantage that can be gained by
listening to most Wall Street analysts. We prefer to deal only with facts and
historical models rather than opinions about supposed values. Many
research analysts in 2000 and 2001 had not been in the business for 10 years
or longer and therefore had never experienced the terrible bear markets of
1987, 1974–1975, and 1962.
On still another subject, many large money-management groups probably deal with entirely too many research firms. For one thing, there aren’t
that many strong research inputs, and dealing with 20 or 30 firms dilutes the
value and impact of the few good ones. Confusion, doubt, and fear created
by conflicting advice at critical junctures can prove to be expensive. It would
be interesting to know how many analysts have been highly successful in
their own investments. This is the ultimate test.

Financial World’s Startling Survey of Top Analysts
A Financial World magazine article dated November 1, 1980, also found
that the analysts selected by Institutional Investor magazine as the best on
Wall Street were overrated and overpaid, and that they materially under-

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

performed the S&P averages. As a group, the “superstar” analysts failed on
two out of three stock picks to match either the market as a whole or their
own industry averages. They also seldom provided sell recommendations,
limiting most of their advice to buys or holds. The Financial World study
confirmed research we performed in the early 1970s. We found that only a
minority of Wall Street recommendations were successful. We also concluded that during a period in which many sell opinions were in order, just
1 in 10 reports made a sell suggestion.
One problem is that a lot of the research on Wall Street is done on the
wrong companies. Every industry analyst has to turn out a certain amount of
product, but only a few industry groups lead a typical market cycle. There’s
insufficient front-end screening or control to determine the superior companies on which research reports should actually be written.

Database Power and Efficiency
On any given day, most institutional money managers receive a stack of
research reports a foot high. Trudging through them in search of a good
stock is usually a waste of time. If they’re lucky, they may spot 1 in 20 that’s
really right to buy.
In contrast, those with access to WONDA can rapidly screen all the companies in our database. If the defense industry pops up as one of the leading
industries, they can call up 84 different corporations whose primary business is in that area. The typical institution might look at Boeing, Raytheon,
United Technologies, and two or three other big, well-known names. Since
WONDA provides more than 3,000 technical and fundamental variables on
each of the 84 companies stretching back a number of years, as well as the
ability to display these variables quickly on identical graphic displays, it’s
possible for an institutional money manager to identify in 20 minutes the 5
or 10 companies in the entire group that have outstanding characteristics
and are worthy of more detailed research. It’s a vital time-saver some of
America’s very best money managers relentlessly use.
In other words, there are ways for an institution’s analysts to spend their
time far more productively. Yet few research departments are organized to
take advantage of such advanced and disciplined procedures.
How well has this approach worked? In 1977, we introduced an institutional service called New Stock Market Ideas and Past Leaders to Avoid
(NSMI). Now titled New Leaders and Laggards Review, it is published every
week, and its documented, 30-year long-term performance record is shown
on the accompanying graph. These performance returns were audited and
verified by one of the top independent accounting firms in America.

415

O’NEIL NEW LEADERS & LAGGARDS REVIEW LONG-TERM RECORD
MARCH 2009

10635 LEADER IDEAS AND 5089 LAGGARD IDEAS

LEADER IDEAS = 32895
( + 32795%)
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
25000
20000
15000
12000
10000
8000
6000
5000

S&P 500 INDEX = 837
( + 737%)

4000
3500
3000
2500

1500
1200
1000
800

500
400
300
© 2009 Investor’s Business Daily, Inc.

416

2000

200
150
100

LAGGARD IDEAS = 122
( + 22%)

50

30

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

Performance computations reflect a weekly compounded rate of return. Dividends and commissions were not considered in any computations. All holdings are rebalanced to equal dollar amounts at the beginning of the week.
Percent gains and losses are calculated for all issues that remain on the “LEADER IDEAS” or “LAGGARD IDEAS” at the end of the week.
Performance results do not represent actual trading, and they may not reflect the impact that material economic and market factors might have had on the investment decision-making process if actually managing client money.
The above does not imply comparable future performance. It should be recognized there is substantial speculative risk in most common stocks.

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

Over the last 30 years, positive selections have outperformed avoids more
than 307 to 1, and the positive picks over 30 years outran the S&P 500 stocks
more than 41-fold. The compounding over the 30 years’ time helps make a
superior long-term record like this possible. For the 30 years ended 2008,
stocks listed as stocks to avoid made a teeny 19% gain for the entire 30 years.
Institutions could have dramatically improved their performance just by
staying out of all the stocks on our avoid list. As a service to our institutional
clients, we provide them with computerized quarterly performance reports
for every buy and avoid suggestion made in the New Stock Market Ideas
service. How many competing firms provide the actual percent performance of all their ideas over an extended period.
By having a massive amount of factual data on every firm and proven historical precedent chart models over more than 100 years, we’re able to discover a stock that’s beginning to improve or get in trouble much
earlier—without ever visiting or talking to the company. It may be naïve to
believe companies are always going to tell you when they are beginning to
have problems. By using our own factual data and historical research, we
also discourage any reliance on tips, rumors, and analysts’ personal opinions.
We just don’t need such information. We also do not have investment banking clients or market-making activities. Nor do we manage money for other
people or hire any research analysts to prepare written research reports. So
those areas of potential bias or underperformance are nonexistent.

The 1982 and 1978 Full-Page Bullish Ads
We usually don’t try to call every short-term or intermediate correction. For
institutional investors, this would be a little foolish and shortsighted. Our
primary focus is on recognizing and acting upon the early stages of each new
bull and bear market. This work includes searching for the market sectors
and groups that should be bought and those that should be avoided.
In early 1982, we placed a full-page ad in the Wall Street Journal stating
that the back of inflation had been broken and the important stocks had
already made their lows. That May, we mailed out two wall charts to our
institutional clients: one of defense electronics stocks, and the other of 20
consumer growth stocks we thought might be attractive for the bull market
ahead. We also made a point of going to New York and Chicago to meet with
several large institutions. In these meetings, we stated our bullish posture
and provided a list of names that could be purchased after these organizations did their due diligence.
The stance we took was diametrically opposed to the position of most
institutional research firms at that time, as well as to the negative news

417

February 1982 bull market ad

418

Improving the Management of Pension and Institutional Portfolios

flooding out of the national media each day. Most investment firms were
downright bearish. They anticipated another big down leg in the market.
They also projected that interest rates and inflation were going to soar back
to new highs as a result of massive government borrowing that would crowd
the private sector out of the marketplace.
The fear and confusion created by these questionable judgments frightened
large investors so much that they hesitated. As a result, they did not fully capitalize on the fact that we had already identified the two leading groups for the
coming bull market. It appeared professional managers had been bombarded
with so much negative “expert” Wall Street input that they found our positive
findings hard to believe. As for us, we invested fully on margin in the summer
of 1982 and enjoyed our best performance ever up to that time. From 1978 to
1991, our account increased 20-fold. From the beginning of 1998 through
2000, our firm’s account, run out of our separate holding company, increased
1,500%. Results such as this remind us it may be an advantage not to be headquartered in rumor-filled and emotion-packed Wall Street. I have never
worked one day on Wall Street in my entire time in the investment field.
As a savvy individual investor, you have a gigantic advantage in not having
to listen to 50 different, strongly held opinions. You can see from this example that majority opinions seldom work in the market and that stocks seem to
require doubt and disbelief—the proverbial “wall of worry”—to make meaningful progress. The market generally moves to disappoint the majority.
Our first full-page ad in the Wall Street Journal was placed in March 1978.
It predicted a new bull market in small- to medium-sized growth stocks. We
had written the ad weeks ahead of time and waited to run it until we felt the
time was right. The right time came when the market was making new lows,
which caught investors by surprise. Our only reason for placing the ad was to
document in print exactly what our position was at that juncture, so that institutional investors could have no question about it later on.
It is at these extremely difficult market turning points that an institutional
firm can be of most value. At such times, many people are either petrified
with fear or carried away with excessive fundamental information.
Our institutional historical precedent firm has more than 500 leading
institutional accounts in the United States and around the world. We were
one of the few firms to tell its accounts they should avoid or sell tech stocks
and raise cash in March, April, and September 2000.

Institutional Investors Are Human
If you don’t think fear and emotion can ride high among professional
investors after a prolonged decline, think again. I remember meeting with

419

420 INVESTING LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
the top three or four money managers of one important bank at the bottom
of the market in 1974. They were as shell-shocked, demoralized, and confused as anyone could possibly be. (They deserved to be: the ordinary stock
in the market at that time was down 75%.) About the same time, I recall visiting with another top manager. He too was thoroughly worn out and, judging from the peculiar color of his face, suffering from market sickness. Yet
another top fund manager in Boston looked as if he’d been run over by a
train. (Of course, all of this is preferable to 1929, when some people jumped
out of office buildings in response to the devastating market collapse.)
I also recall a high-tech seminar given in 1983 in San Francisco, attended
by 2,000 highly educated analysts and portfolio managers. Everyone was
there, and everyone was ebullient and self-confident, and that marked the
exact top for high-tech stocks.
I also remember a presentation we gave to a bank in another large city. All
its analysts were brought in and sat around an impressive table in the boardroom, but not one analyst or portfolio manager asked any questions during
or after the presentation. It was the strangest situation I’ve ever been in.
Needless to say, this institution consistently performed in the lower quartiles compared to its more alert and venturesome competitors. It’s important to communicate and be open to new ideas.
Years ago, one medium-sized bank for which we did consulting work
insisted we give them recommendations only from among the stocks it carried on its limited approved list. After consulting with the bank’s managers
each month for three months and telling them that there was nothing on
their approved list that met our qualifications, we had to honorably part company. A few months later, we learned that key officials in that trust department had been relieved of their jobs as a result of their laggard performance.
We provided product to another Midwest institution, but it was of doubtful value because the institution had a cast-in-concrete belief that any
potential investment had to be screened to see if it passed an undervalued
model. The best investments rarely show up on any undervalued model, and
there’s probably no way this institution will ever produce first-rate results
until it throws out the model. This isn’t easy for large organizations to do. It’s
like asking a Baptist to become a Catholic or vice versa.
Some large money-management organizations with average records tend
to fire the head of the investment department and then look for a replacement who invests pretty much the same way. Naturally, this doesn’t solve the
problem of deficient investment methods and philosophy. Security Pacific
Bank in Los Angeles was an exception to this rule. In July 1981, it made a
change in its top investment management. It brought in an individual with
a completely different approach, a superior investment philosophy, and an
