
45
Call the Tow Truck
Omaha • 1982–1989

Once disembarked from the QE II, Susie Buffett listened to her husband’s tales of Mrs. B or whatever his
latest fixation might be from a distance, just like everybody else. She and Warren talked nearly every day on
a special “hotline” installed in her apartment. When the phone rang, she jumped up instantly. “That’s
Warren!” she would say, and run away from whatever conversation she was having with a friend to answer
it. He was still her number one obligation. But unless he needed her, her life was under her own control.
Susie had moved out of her minuscule apartment at Gramercy Tower and into another cubbyhole on the
Washington Street cable-car line with a splendid view over the bay. She chose the building because Peter was
living there with his wife, Mary, and her two daughters. He was still pursuing his musical career and had
started renting out studio time to pay the bills, while writing music for anyone who would pay him—student
films, the production company Video West. 1
In the past few years, Susie had lost both of her parents. Doc Thompson had died in July 1981; Dorothy
Thompson followed only thirteen months later. Susie was so close to her parents that their deaths left a
wrenching hole in her life. Afterward, her hyperkinetic tendencies did not abate; if anything, they increased.
Warren had stopped taking her for granted, and his desire to please the woman he now idolized more than
ever found expression partly through the money he gave her. In her younger days, Susie’s idea of a shopping
spree had been buying a basketful of greeting cards.2 That had gradually expanded to an annual attack on
Bergdorf’s shoe department. Warren’s tightfistedness began to let up in light of the unspoken but inexorable
reality that he now controlled the money by Susie’s grace and favor. At any time she could take it back and
use the money herself. Torn between two fur coats, she wanted to know, “Why do I have to choose?” The
answer was, she didn’t.
But mostly the looser purse strings fueled Susie’s penchant for generosity to a ragtag collection of colorful
friends that grew and grew. Nobody ever left the beguiling Buffetts. Even Peter’s college girlfriend had gone
to work for Susie as a secretary several years earlier, despite Susie having been the one to break off the
relationship before it became an engagement after Peter started having second thoughts. The rising tide of old
friends, family dependents, and her new San Franciscan entourage would have overwhelmed almost anyone,
but Susie Buffett was not just anyone. Unleashed from the confines of Omaha, with buckets of money at her
disposal, she sprang to life as if powered by magic, like the Sorcerer’s Apprentice’s broom. How much do
you need for Christmas? Warren said. Oh, seventy-five thousand would do it, Susie replied.3 He wrote the
check.
Her special cause was artists, creative types, anyone who had potential or whose talents she felt were not
being recognized. She became the sponsor of artist Edward Mordak, who painted the kind of brightly colored
contemporary canvases she preferred and wove brilliant feathery wall hangings. But of all the people she
aided, her nephew Billy Rogers was her greatest challenge. A brilliant jazz guitarist, Rogers had played with
different groups, backing up B. B. King and achieving his greatest success performing as one of the
Crusaders. He was married, with a son, and living in Los Angeles. But he had bounced around the West
Coast for several years, never staying clean for long before relapsing. Susie remained an optimist and refused
to give up on him. No matter how squalid his life when he acted out his addiction, she always treated him like
another son.
By 1984, when AIDS had claimed over two thousand American victims and infected two thousand more,
Susie had found her next great cause among the gay men of San Francisco. With the disease’s transmission
poorly understood and badly communicated, gay-bashing turned to hysteria,4 AIDS was referred to as the
“gay cancer” people said that God must be punishing gays for their sexual deviancy.5 Already a mother
figure to many men whose families had rejected them, Susie now once again dared to cross a social line, as a
rich married woman who acted as a refuge for gay men during the early years of the AIDS crisis.6
Susie’s own life in San Francisco was something of a high-wire act, requiring a sure sense of balance. She had
remained Mrs. Warren Buffett publicly for six years now while privately teetering on the fence of divorce
and remarriage. Some who were aware of her situation thought Susie chose to stay in this limbo as a way to
please everyone else and avoid having to figure out what she herself wanted. Susie, they thought, was a

woman who could never speak her own truth. Yet her life history suggests otherwise: that she preferred never
to give all of herself to anyone, that she would rather divide her attention among more than one relationship.
Susie—who had reason to be confident in her ability to manage people—on occasion could be overconfident.
As the circle of those who knew Susie’s secrets grew, it became harder for her to control what the two main
men in her life knew themselves about the state of their relationships with her.
Susie and her former tennis coach spent part of 1983 and early 1984 traveling in Europe, where she made
new friends, but also ran into people she knew from Omaha. Suddenly, her two lives had collided on the
Continent. In March 1984, she came to Omaha for Leila’s eightieth birthday party; during her visit she
admitted to Warren for the first time that part of the reason she had moved to San Francisco involved another
man. Somehow, however, Warren wound up with the impression that this relationship was in the past, and
that it involved someone she had met after she left Omaha.7
Even while confessing, therefore, Susie kept her secrets. Yet she had finally committed herself to one course.
By telling Warren, she had chosen his side of the fence. She would never leave him. They would stay
married.
And Warren did not kill himself when he found out—as if that had ever been likely. But he did lose what
appeared to be ten pounds almost overnight. Among the several shocks he had to absorb, he now knew that
Susie had been spending some of the money he had dispensed to her with such a liberal hand in ways he
would never have approved—had he known. His fondness for the Laguna house, never strong to begin with,
also diminished noticeably.
At Leila’s birthday party, he looked thin, but behaved as he always did with the family gathered around. At
home, there was no change in his relationship with Astrid, who knew nothing of what had transpired. At
Berkshire headquarters, he sealed himself inside his office, protected by Gladys, and immersed himself in
work. He never told anyone what he felt about the end of the beautiful illusion that had been his marriage.
Instead, the bathtub memory went to work.
***
The dream of sustaining some remnant of Berkshire Hathaway was also dying, even though the ancient
spinning frames still puffed and wheezed. Looms that looked like they were made from salvaged scrap metal,
antique sewing machines, and old locomotive wheels creaked wearily in the weaving room. Only four
hundred workers remained. Most were of Portuguese descent, with specialized skills, many in their fifties or
older, some speaking limited English, some deaf from the roar of the machines. Buffett could not squeeze
another ounce of rayon out of the equipment without buying new spinning frames and looms. That was the
end; in 1985 he pulled the plug on Berkshire’s life support.8 The equipment would have cost as much as $50
million to replace. Put to the auction block, it sold for $163,122.9
The workers asked for severance above their contract guarantee and got a couple of months’ extra pay. They
wanted to see Buffett to discuss it with him. He said no. They thought he was heartless. Probably, he couldn’t
face them.
“Through no fault of their own, they were in a position of being a horse when the tractor arrived. The free
market did them in. If you’re fifty-five and you speak Portuguese, and you’ve been working on a loom for
thirty years and your hearing is shot, you’ve had it. And there wasn’t any answer. When you talk about
retraining people—it’s not like they’ll all go become computer technicians by taking junior-college courses
or something like that.
“But you’ve also got to deal with the people that are displaced. The free market does all kinds of good
things in this country, but we need a safety net. Society is getting the benefits, and it should pick up the
tab.” Warren, of course, was not going to pick up the tab because society lacked a proper safety net.
Whatever pension the workers were entitled to under their terms of employment, that was exactly what they

would get. “The market isn’t perfect. You can’t rely on the market to give every single person a decent
living.”
By the time he shut it down, the textile business had become a flyspeck on the holding company that bore the
Berkshire Hathaway name. Buffett’s plan was that insurance would drive that Berkshire Hathaway—the one
that swallowed up whole businesses like the Nebraska Furniture Mart. During the 1970s, he had cobbled
together a diverse group of insurance companies and loaded them onto the back of National Indemnity to
give it an extra kick. It was a brilliant strategy, but for a number of years, they had mostly been going wrong.
First, Jet Jack Ringwalt had retired. Then, the “Omni affair,” when National Indemnity was swindled by a
crooked agent, had threatened to explode into losses that could have cost the company $10 million or more.
Although the final tab had settled into a couple of miserable millions, this was only the first of a series of
problems with the insurance companies. Buffett had bought a small home-and auto-insurance company in the
early 1970s that promptly skidded into a ditch, until a new manager towed it out. That was to be the pattern
with all the rest of Buffett’s insurance investments—straight into the ditch, then call the tow truck. It would
take a mighty winch and a heavy engine to dig some of them out of the muck. Berkshire had gotten involved
in California workers’ compensation insurance—coverage that pays for lost wages and health benefits when
people are injured on the job. By 1977, one of its two workers’ comp companies was in a full-blown
“disaster,” with its manager taking kickbacks from brokers.10 Buffett’s protégé Dan Grossman, sent to L.A.
to save it, quickly realized that he did not understand insurance, a complex business that is rougher than it
sounds. (Verne McKenzie, for example, had once led a trip to personally repossess an agent’s house and
car.11) Turning your controller into a repo man was not the typical CEO’s management style, but in Buffett’s
world, after all, a smart person could do anything. Faced with a wrecked company to salvage, Grossman’s
solution, therefore, was to call the tow truck and hire an experienced manager, Frank DeNardo, who began to
straighten things out. Buffett larded praise on DeNardo in Berkshire’s annual report.
Buffett had also started a reinsurer—a company that insures other insurers—as a sort of experiment. He
hired George Young, a gentle, professorial man, to run it. Young seemed to know what he was doing, and
money came in the door, but too many losses flowed back out. Buffett tried to work with Young to solve the
problem, then Hail-Maryed Grossman to New York on a rescue mission. It was “kind of vague,” says
Grossman. “He said, go talk to Lloyd’s of London, go find some reinsurance deals that you can do.”
Grossman figured out fast that reinsurance was a business for specialists. Given no instructions, he camped
out at Ruane, Cunniff and started to learn investing.
Another of Buffett’s insurance ventures was the creation of the Homestate Companies—a batch of little
insurers scattered among a number of different states. The idea here was that somebody wearing the title of
president would make customers feel better served than the same person as branch manager of a big national
insurance company. In 1978, Buffett wrote that these companies had done a “disappointing” job. The
customers liked doing business with a president, but the big national companies had certain other advantages,
such as experience. The Homestate Companies needed new management. Buffett had no plans to solve this
problem himself. Nor did his standard management technique of taking out all the cash and raising prices
release a flood of profits in insurance (although it was a good starting point). His friend Tom Murphy liked to
tell him that he “delegated to the point of abdication.”12 Now he put Verne McKenzie in charge of one of
these companies, until McKenzie, recognizing that he did not understand insurance either, threw up his hands
and backed out.13 Meanwhile Frank DeNardo, at age thirty-seven, had died tragically from a heart attack.
Now the workers’ compensation business in California was rudderless again. Buffett snatched Grossman
back from New York to run it.
Grossman found himself a company president at age twenty-six, in a business where fraud prevention is more
important than sales. He faced customers with decades of experience cheating insurers. His calls for help
only splattered against Buffett’s Teflon pleasantries, adding to the already considerable mess. Grossman was
one of many who learned that it was his job to figure it out. Bright and hardworking, he felt “totally
unqualified” to run an insurer at his age and level of experience, and explained that he was in over his head.
Buffett said he had confidence in him and was sure that he could rise to the occasion. Instead, the stress
overwhelmed him, and his marriage fell apart. Finally, he told Buffett he simply couldn’t handle it, moved to

the San Francisco Bay Area, and began to manage investments on his own.14
Buffett, who hated to let anyone go, urged him to remain in the Buffett Group. Grossman was well liked, and
various members of the group called to try to dissuade him from leaving. But he felt he was not strong
enough to maintain his autonomy within the entanglements that bound people to the Buffetts—Susie with her
crowd of dependent worshippers, Warren with his network of supportive protectors. Knowing what he was
giving up, he cut everyone off. “He divorced the Buffetts,” said one former friend, who understood why but
thought it was too bad.
Now headquarters had one fewer person to support the growing insurance empire. Verne McKenzie was so
overworked figuring out how to slide the Furniture Mart into Berkshire’s numbers without showing Mrs. B’s
financial underwear that he rarely saw Buffett. During Grossman’s peripatetics, Buffett had installed Mike
Goldberg, a former McKinsey consultant who had once worked with Rickershauser at the Pacific Coast
Stock Exchange, in Grossman’s onetime office. A wiry Brooklynite of sardonic intensity and the subtlest
humor, Goldberg turned out to have the so-called insurance gene, which is made up of one part knack for
handicapping mixed with two parts dark skepticism about human nature. Thus he was able to teach himself
the business—just as well, since it had been out of character for Buffett to spend time on one protégé, let
alone two.
With Goldberg’s arrival, the polite, restrained Midwestern way of doing things at headquarters changed
abruptly. Managers that Goldberg decided were only ninety percent of grade were swiftly sent packing. As
the packing cases flew out the doors of the failing Homestate Companies, Goldberg gained a fearsome
reputation. He brought in new people for workers’ compensation and reinsurance. Some survived, some
wearied of the high-amp atmosphere and left, and others didn’t make the cut.
Goldberg’s method was to call his managers and talk to them at length every day, quizzing them mercilessly
to understand their attitudes and to reinforce how they should think about the business. The value of
Goldberg’s hands-on approach in an atmosphere of chaos was hard to overstate. One former manager
referred to it as working in a “Socratic wind tunnel.” People learned a lot from Goldberg if they could
withstand the stress. He was the type, an ex-employee said, who “yelled when hailing a cab.”
Throughout the early 1980s, Goldberg worked against the tide to right the ship. Unlike the disappointing
Hochschild-Kohn or the pathetic Berkshire Hathaway—businesses that Buffett simply should not have
bought—for the first time, perfectly decent businesses were unaccountably floundering on Buffett’s watch.
He had confidence that Goldberg would do what was necessary. However, the pleasant but unskeptical
George Young, who ran the reinsurance division, had been taken by unscrupulous brokers, a problem
endemic to the industry.15 Buffett by now had a clear-cut pattern: He rationalized to avoid the confrontation
of firing losing managers. He gave criticism to his managers indirectly, often by withholding, sometimes
resources, but especially by withholding praise. As the number of things he owned expanded, he used that
technique ever more frequently. Trying to parse his shareholder letters for news about the insurance
companies, one had to be Sherlock Holmes attending to the curious incident of the dog in the night-time—the
dog that didn’t bark.16 Having lavished individual insurance managers with praise in the 1970s, Buffett
gradually ceased to cite by name any of the insurers or their managers, except the superbly performing
GEICO and National Indemnity.
Buffett did not stop writing about the insurance industry, however. In fact, in the 1984 letter he wrote about
it more than ever. But he lumped all of Berkshire’s insurance companies together and took the blame for
their poor performance himself, without naming a single company or a single manager who had been
responsible for the hemorrhage of losses. He went on like this for an excruciating seven pages, citing the
“walking dead” competition and the losses coming back to haunt him like bill collections for the man who
was “buried in a rented suit.” Although it was appropriate for him, as CEO, to feel accountable, he seemed
almost to be trying to forestall criticism through self-flagellation.
And he was writing these things even as he knew that, underlying the terrible numbers, substantial
improvements were already taking place. By the next year, the insurers began coming together into the

powerful engine that Buffett had envisioned. They started to produce the cash flows that would be the raw
material to fuel the rest of his career.
By 1985 the unique business model that Buffett had designed began rising to its potential. No other business
resembled it, and this structure would enable the dramatic compounding effect that propelled the
shareholders’ wealth.
Then there came the moment when Goldberg found the capstone to the structure. Afterward, the numbers
would gush blacker than an oil well.
One day, says Buffett, “I was down here on a Saturday, and Mike Goldberg walked in with Ajit.”
Ajit Jain, born in 1951, had an engineering degree from the prestigious Indian Institute of Technology in
Kharagpur and had worked for IBM in India for three years before getting his business degree from Harvard.
Ajit was skeptical and hard-nosed like Buffett and Munger. Nobody would ever put one over on Ajit. Buffett
saw himself in Ajit, who quickly rose in his esteem to share Mrs. B’s pinnacle. “He had no background in
insurance. I just liked the guy. I would love to glue myself to Ajit. You can argue that Ajit was when we
discovered the electric light. It was huge. It was huge compared to anything we’d ever done at Berkshire.”
Buffett claimed that he “added nothing” to the quality of Ajit’s decisions. But he was far from a passive
participant in those phone conversations, and if there was any job at Berkshire Hathaway he would have
liked to do himself, it was Jain’s. He loved the handicapping aspect of the deals, the tough negotiating in
which temperament mattered and huge sums of money were won or lost based on pure intellect and will. This
supremely rational business in which psychology gave the right person an edge drew together all of Buffett’s
skills. Buffetting by proxy through Ajit was as close to the old “under-the-counter” market way of trading as
he could get these days, and he loved doing it.
With Buffett glued to Ajit, and the chaos sorted out, Goldberg’s job was finished. He soon moved over to
start a credit and real estate business for Berkshire.
Ajit did not seem to need much sleep; when he got up around five or six a.m., he apparently asked himself,
“Who’s awake? Who can I call?” His colleagues learned to be prepared for lengthy predawn talks about
reinsurance deals on Saturdays and Sundays. He and Buffett followed a routine of nightly ten o’clock phone
calls, which Ajit maintained in every time zone throughout a ceaseless routine of globe-trotting.
Ajit had arrived at an opportune time. Insurance prices were peaking. He took an ad in Business Insurance
magazine: “We are looking for more—more casualty risks where the premium exceeds one million.” The ad
combined the showmanship and sharp thinking that were Buffett hallmarks. “We didn’t have a reputation,
we didn’t have the distribution system,” says Buffett. But business came pouring in the door after that ad,
and Ajit did deals, deals, deals.17

46
Rubicon
Omaha • 1982–1987

The 1980s would be an era of deals, deals, deals—most financed with debt, debt, debt. The Dow hadn’t
budged in seventeen years.1 Grinding inflation had decimated corporate profits, yet companies had
eiderdowned their payrolls so that every white-collar worker but the lowliest rested on a comfy cushion
stuffed with flunkies. Executives treated themselves and their employees to golf courses and hunting lodges.

They dribbled away much of their earnings in sloppy operations, loose engineering, and unthinking
bureaucracy.2 By the early 1980s, stocks were on sale like polyester suits. Then, under Federal Reserve
Chairman Paul Volcker, interest rates, recently an astronomical fifteen percent, started to fall as inflation
came under control. Astute money men noticed the bloated state of American business. With debt now
cheap, would-be buyers of a company could use the company’s own assets as collateral for a lender to
finance its purchase—like getting a hundred percent mortgage on a house. The buyer didn’t have to put up
any cash; it cost no more to buy a huge company than to set up a lemonade stand.3 A rush of financiers
returned to Wall Street, intent on slaughtering the fatted calves using the carving knife of borrowed money.
The merger boom had begun.
“We were taking earnings or value that should’ve gone to the shareholders and bringing it unto ourselves,”
said Jerome Kohlberg, one of the first buyout financiers. “Corporate America was responsible for a lot of
this. You have to ask the question, Why didn’t they do it [cost-cutting] themselves?”4
In 1984, the burner under managements turned up another notch when “junk bonds” became respectable.
More politely called “fallen angels,” these were the bonds of companies like the Penn Central Railroad that
were climbing out of the bankruptcy dustbin or teetering on its edge.5 Only occasionally did a company issue
junk bonds on purpose, paying a high interest rate because it was considered a dicey credit risk. Junk bonds
were sort of shady, a little desperate.
The people who worked in the junk-bond departments on Wall Street were junk peddlers or ragpickers—the
few bankers who scouted for hag-ridden executives willing to issue junk bonds, and “distressed debt”
analysts who spent their careers grading papers in the gloomy school of hard knocks, looking over
picked-clean balance sheets and scuttlebutting bankruptcy lawyers, angry investors, and desperate
managements.
Everything changed when Michael Milken, chief junk peddler of the upstart investment bank Drexel
Burnham Lambert, rose to become the most influential man on Wall Street through a simple proposition: that
while individual “fallen angel” junk bonds were risky, buying a bushel of them was not, because on average,
the higher interest rate more than compensated for the risk. In other words, junk bonds in the aggregate had a
margin of safety—like cigar butts.
Soon, money managers no longer looked as though they were playing roulette with investors’ money by
putting high-paying junk bonds in their portfolios. Indeed, it quickly became more respectable to issue new
junk bonds—quite a different thing. Another short hop and takeovers of strong, well-financed companies
could be financed with junk, turning formerly sound balance sheets into debt-riddled Swiss cheese. Corporate
raiders armed with junk bonds, intent on “hostile takeovers” whose goal was to pluck a company clean,
suddenly stalked companies that had been waddling along complacently. Their targets lunged toward any
buyer who might conceivably be more friendly; in the end the target company was usually sold to someone or
another and financially gutted. The bankers’ fees became so staggering that, instead of waiting for deals to
present themselves, the bankers went a-huntin’ on their own, flipping through the ranks of the S&P 1000 the
way Buffett had once used his Moody’s Manuals to find cigar-butt stocks. This orgy of mergers that often
took place with the consent of only one party riveted the public; the clashes of titanic egos filled the daily
papers. Michael Milken’s annual junk-bond conference, the Predators’ Ball,6 lent its name to the entire era.
Buffett scorned the way these deals transferred riches from shareholders to managers and corporate raiders,
helped by a long, long line of toll-taking bankers, brokers, and lawyers.7 “We don’t do hostile takeovers,” he
said. The deals of the 1980s repelled him above all because they were loaded with debt. To those reared
during the Depression, debt was something to be used only with a careful eye for the worst-case scenario. In
the 1980s, however, debt became mere “leverage,” a way of boosting profits using borrowed money.
“Leverage” arrived at the same time that the U.S. government began running large deficits courtesy of
“Reaganomics”—the “supply-side” idea that cutting taxes would ultimately increase tax revenues by stoking
the economy. Fierce debates raged among economists over whether tax cuts could actually pay for
themselves and, if so, by how much. The economy was heating up at the time from consumer spending, also
fueled by debt; John and Jane Q. Public had gradually been accustoming themselves to buying everything
