
Trading Premise

In Figure 5.36, we observe the following market conditions:
r The market is trending higher and VAP Map exhibits a narrow proﬁle in

the upper portion of the map.

r Current Dynamic VAP has clearly deﬁned range.
r The top of the Dynamic VAP (at 1255.75) has been broken to the upside

with a wide-range bar that closes near its high.
Our trading plan for these market conditions is:
1. Using support and resistance levels on shorter-term timeframes, in this
case both a 60- and a 15-minute timeframe (not shown), is suggested for
entry.
2. We will be looking exclusively for one of the following events and taking
the following action with respect to the current support and resistance on
60-minute chart (not shown).
r Long entry is taken at the bottom of the current 60-minute Dynamic
VAP, as long as price is also equal to or higher than the POC on VAP
Map.

279

Sep 15

Sep 15

Oct 15
Oct 29
2010

Nov 15

Nov 30

A break above the Unfair High of the Dynamic
VAP after a period of consolidation

Dec 15

TAS PRO VAP Map and TAS PRO Dynamic VAP on Daily Chart of E-Mini S&P

Aug 31

FIGURE 5.36

Dec 31

Jan 14
2011

1289.90

1150

1200

1260.90
1252.29

1277.00

280

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

r Long entry can be taken on breakout of current 60-minute Dynamic

VAP, mindful that this approach will require a larger stop.

r Long entry can be taken immediately if price is already above current

60-minute Dynamic VAP using 15-minute timeframe or lower.
We can further reﬁne our trade to the long side in this case by using a
shorter-timeframe Dynamic VAP and VAP MAP when the daily timeframe
is trading vertical to the current Dynamic VAP and current POC on the VAP
Map.
Initial stops on trade should be just below the top of the daily Dynamic
VAP. Sixty-minute timeframes should be used to move stops as price moves
more in favor of the trade.
Long trade targets to the upside can be considered at previous VAP Map
Points of Control to the left in the chart. However, a new Dynamic VAP will
appear when price is turning into a horizontal or consolidating state from a
trending or vertical state. When this occurs at a previous VAP Map’s POC, it
is a very suitable area to observe how the market deals with this prior area of
supply and then consider taking proﬁts accordingly.

Conclusion

Our prop traders undergo rigorous training under high academic standards.
We supplement the training with mentoring, a lot of hands-on coaching, daily
post-trade analysis, and a team trading approach. Our trading technology
solutions include the indicators discussed here (and several others) and go
beyond that into real-time, rules-based signal-generation and decision-support
tools.
But at the end of the day, it comes down to this: we have rules that we
trade by—as all traders should—and our traders work from written trading
plans that they are required to develop, write, review, and regularly update in
their trading journals as part of their training regimen.
For our prop traders, our core set of trading rules is:
r Contrary to the saying, rules were not made to be broken. In the trading

realm, rules exist to mitigate disaster, preserve proﬁts, and minimize losses.
Rule Number 1 is: follow the rules.
r Know what not to do—ﬁrst—by eliminating one side of the market from
consideration and getting your back against the wall. This is a mind-set. In

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

281

other words, our thinking is: you can go long, short, or do nothing. Looking
too intently for what to do is a major cause for the perceptual blindness
mentioned earlier (the clinical research on how we “get what we’re looking
for” substantiates this). Instead, we train our traders to ﬁrst determine what
not to do by eliminating from consideration one side of the market. For
example: “The market is in an uptrend in this timeframe, do not get short.”
That leaves only two choices: get long or do nothing. You may miss an
occasional short trade but when you can clearly and objectively say “no”
to one side, then the other side starts looking pretty good. This is clearly
a mind-set that needs cultivating but that has dramatic results, especially
for newer traders. (More experienced traders are so used to just doing and
doing that they have a hard time with this at ﬁrst. But the logic behind it is
irrefutable. If you’re looking to get long, you will eventually ﬁnd something,
but often it will be a substandard trade.)
r Measure the technical reward to risk from the charts and do not take any
trades that are less than 4:1 reward-to-risk ratio (R:R). If you need to trade
and can’t ﬁnd a 4:1 R:R trade in the timeframe under consideration, drop
down a timeframe or two until you ﬁnd a 4:1 R:R opportunity.
r Know what to do and what the relative probabilities of success are in taking
a trade; that is, don’t short uptrends and don’t buy downtrends. This applies
to countertrend trading, as well. If you are considering a countertrend trade
during a broad market uptrend, you have to ask yourself: “Is this the best
possible trade opportunity at the moment—or just another opportunity
that looks tradable?” This will help keep you honest and objective when
considering trade selection.
r Trade the fast movements of the market, not the slow. If you need to trade
the slow, drop down to a small enough timeframe and ﬁnd the up or down
trend that corresponds to the rotation in the larger timeframe.
r Trade the speed-up to-slow-down portion of the market but be ready for
the speed-up portion near the end of the slow-down.
r Know when to execute—if at all—and consider smaller-timeframe setups
to reﬁne entries.
r Stay with your positions as the market remains fast or is getting faster
(skinnier proﬁles).
r Tighten stops on fast positions as the market slows down (increasingly fatter
proﬁles).
r Deploy strict money management disciplines, from pretrade reward-to-risk
assessment combined with tight but realistic stop-loss and proﬁt preservation levels throughout the life of a trade.

282

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

While the challenges in developing new discretionary traders’ and seasoned market professionals’ calls will always be there, we feel that our approach
to being prepared for and trading the fast side of the market, supplemented
by accurate and timely trading tools, is a method that will give us a continued
edge in the markets.
Happy trading.

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis: Effective Tools
and Strategies for Trading and Investing
by Paul Ciana
Copyright © 2011 Paul Ciana

CHAPTER 6

Advanced
Trading Methods
Rick Knox
Capital Markets Research, LLC

Throughout this book, you’ve been presented with some of today’s most
popular indicators and new groups of indicators that capitalize on the existing
body of knowledge in technical analysis. In my experience, Market Proﬁle,
Candlestick Charting, and the DeMark IndicatorsTM are some of the tools
that offer the most potential for success in trading. Over the years, I’ve come to
discover that traders need additional assistance with interpretation, methods
to measure time at risk, and tools to navigate trades. I use what I call Advanced
Trading Methods (ATMs) to spot opportunities in the markets, and in this
chapter I tell you all about them.
From the CBOT to the Charts

I remember the day that I walked onto the ﬂoor of the Chicago Board of
Trade (CBOT) for the ﬁrst time as an associated member with the privilege
to trade any ﬁnancial instrument. Before this day, my attitude had been that
if others could do something, then so could I. I have always liked a challenge.
But the challenge I was facing at the CBOT was serious, much more
serious than a sporting event or a card game, and it was a competition in
which the unprepared were soon gone. Before the end of my ﬁrst day, I would
ﬁnd out just how unprepared I was.
283

284

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Basically, I had some money, but had never traded a futures contract,
which in hindsight was rather arrogant on my part. Nor did I have any
knowledge of market making (the job of the local). On top of this, I did not
have a game plan for how to speculate. I thought I would be able to ﬁgure it
out as I went. Yes, I knew I would probably lose a couple of times, but most
of my experiences were of things that came easily to me. I felt that I would
prevail.
I wanted to trade in the Bond Pit, which was adjacent to the main ﬂoor
in an area called the South Room. The South Room and the Bond Pit were
small compared to the main ﬂoor, where the soybean, corn, and wheat futures
traded. Nonetheless, traders would ﬂock in, jamming shoulder-to-shoulder,
producing a unique scent of fear and greed that ﬁlled the room.
Before this day, I had never seen the South Room nor experienced the
excitement of being there. Yes, the CBOE CBOT had mandated that new
members pass a test on exchange rules, required us to understand the mechanics of the hand gestures essential to signal “buy” and “sell,” and provided
us with a walkthrough of the grain ﬂoor. However, the member who provided our ﬂoor tour only pointed to the South Room and never took us
inside. If I remember correctly, his comment was “those wishing to make
their fortunes in our latest experiment, the bonds, go through that open area
over there.”
So with the previous day of instructions, I headed straight for that opening. My ﬁrst order of business was securing a place to stand. Without any
knowledge of how important these spots were, I attempted to stand on the
top step so I could see all the actions. Notice that I use the word attempted .
The top step is reserved for the main brokers and certain big locals. I was
immediately and forcefully ejected by almost everyone within reach. Some
shouted at me, a few pushed me off the step, and others just laughed. Turns
out the only place I could stand was at the bottom of the pit, where the rest
of the new guys were standing. By the way, there is not much of a view from
down there.
Now that my place was secured, my next step was to start trading. I had
been through a mock trading session as part of my indoctrination by the
CBOE CBOT, so I knew what I had to do. With some trepidation, but still
showing conﬁdence, I raised my hand in the air (which means I was willing to
buy or sell, depending on the direction of my hand, up to ﬁve contracts) and
began to shout “sell one at” just like everyone else in the bottom of the pit. No
one would even look my way. So I shouted louder—still no one would trade
with me. This went on for what seemed like hours and I began to wonder
how I was going to make any money doing this.

Advanced Trading Methods

285

Quickly I formulated a new plan of attack. I decided that in order for
people to trade with me, I must increase my size. So on my ﬁrst day—without
ever trading a single futures contract in my life—I increased the number of
contracts I was willing to trade. Big mistake! Then, to compound this blunder,
I created a two-sided market where I was willing to buy or sell. An even bigger
mistake! Almost immediately, I was hit by traders on the steps above me.
They swarmed me like locusts demanding that I accept their trade. I was so
confused by the time I had written down all the trades that I did not even
know my count (the number of contracts I currently owned). And worse, the
market had moved away from my position and I was staring at losses.
I began to panic as I tried to unload my positions. Again, no one would
trade with me. The losses were growing by the moment and I was getting
more frantic by the tick. All of a sudden, a trader from the top step decided
to take my offer. After all was said and done, I was down a considerable
percentage of my account size—all in a manner of seconds. “Welcome to the
Pit,” someone next to me muttered. Throughout the remainder of the ﬁrst
day and several others that followed, I lost money on almost every trade. And
by the end of the ﬁrst week, I was pretty much demoralized. It was very clear
to me I did not know what I was doing and that I did not have a plan.
The next Monday arrived and I found myself reluctant to even go to the
ﬂoor. However, fortunately for me I did go to work. That morning, I was
standing outside the pit, questioning my ability to understand when to buy
and sell, how to recognize an opportunity, and how I would get out without
losing. Basically I still had no plan or knowledge of how to succeed. Then an
older gentleman who was a full member of the exchange walked up and started
talking to me. He began the conversation with a question. “Struggling?” he
asked. I answered, “Yes, very much so.” He then began sharing his insights,
thoughts, and observations on how to win. He concluded by saying, “There
are people willing to help you. Just look for them.” He then turned and walked
out into the grain room.
He was right; there were other traders who were willing to help. And he
was right in understanding that I needed more information before jumping
in with both hands waving. From that chance meeting, I began a quest to
meet and observe people who trade and discover what makes them successful.
It has taken me on a journey that most would enjoy.
First, I stepped back and simply observed which members (or locals as
they were called) traded effortlessly. Finally, I approached a few and asked for
their help. Some did indeed help me, and with their guidance, I was ﬁnally
able to make money. I stayed trading bonds for a while, but later followed
one of the locals willing to help me over to the Chicago Mercantile, where I

286

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

traded in the Treasury Bill pit, which at the time was the most active on their
ﬂoor. Eventually the bills were surpassed by the Eurodollar and S&P, which
opened a year or so after I became a member.
After achieving moderate success as a local, I began having conversations
with potential clients. Eventually I moved off the ﬂoor to work for a bond
broker who wanted to start a Futures Commission Merchant (FCM) through
Chase Manhattan. My customers were mostly foreign trading banks operating out of New York, London, and Tokyo. The change was a challenge, as
the information that can be found on the ﬂoor was no longer available. The
low cost to trade was gone. And the approach to making money was completely different. Thankfully, I was still on the quest to learn more, and Pete
Steidlmayer—along with the Board of Trade—was introducing the Market
Proﬁle trading concept. Without hesitation I knew he could help me, and I
attended his ﬁrst class, where to my surprise there were only ﬁve attendees.
During the early years with the FCM, I used the Proﬁle to interpret the
market. As it gained popularity, many of my clients wanted to learn how to
incorporate it into their trading process. So I began sending them through
Pete’s classes. I must have sent him 200-plus traders in all. It was during
this time that I met Tim Mather, owner of CQG, as this company was the
ﬁrst vendor to program the Market Proﬁle and supplied Pete’s classes with its
product. After a few years, I accepted an offer from Tim to work at CQG as
vice president of Global Sales and Marketing. My tenure lasted over nine years
and sent me down a path of meeting some of the world’s most interesting
traders and developers.
Tim placed me in charge of several areas other than global sales and
marketing, two of which were third-party services, and meeting with CQG’s
largest customers to discover their needs. This gave me carte blanche to travel
the world and seek out the great traders and indicator developers of the time,
a number of whom are in the Market Wizards books.
The responsibilities of the third-party services allowed me to help several
people get started with their visions or indicators. I had already seen ﬁrsthand
how a new vision (Market Proﬁle) could improve one’s understanding of
markets. So I was eager to ﬁnd others who could help. One such person was
Steve Nison, who, while working for Merrill Lynch in Tokyo in the late 1980s,
learned a new charting method unknown in the United States and Europe. It
was called Candlesticks Charting. Steve could not ﬁnd any chart vendor who
would embrace this new approach. He eventually contacted CQG (me), and
I found the candlesticks and their patterns to be very descriptive. So in early
1990, a decision was made that CQG would spend the programming time to
introduce them. No other vendor in North America had them, but from this

Advanced Trading Methods

287

effort, others had to follow. Within a few years, because of Steve’s efforts and
CQG, Candlestick Charting was on the menu of every quote vendor who
published charts.
In 1994, Tom DeMark contacted me. Tom had made a decision to
introduce his indicators to the world and was seeking a vendor. His ﬁrst
choice was CQG. Only a few days before Tom contacted me, Tim Mather
had called and asked if I had read the article in Futures magazine about Tom
DeMark and his indicators. I answered yes and we both agreed that this was
someone we wanted as one of our third-party vendors, but neither of us knew
how to reach him. Surprisingly, within a day of Tim’s call, Tom contacted me,
and we agreed to meet in Chicago where he could present his work. Before
the meeting even began, I knew I was going to work out a deal with Tom,
and within days of that meeting, CQG began programming his indicators.
While other indicators and charting methods have been introduced
over the years, only a handful have changed the way people look at markets. These three—Market Proﬁle, Candlestick Charting, and the DeMark
IndicatorsTM —have accomplished what some others could not, and I feel
fortunate to have been involved with all of them. And in many ways, I believe
that the effort I have put into Advanced Trading Methods (ATM) and its data
visualization tools will help change the way people look at markets as it tells
a present-tense story of a market’s condition across all timeframes.

Trading by Gut Feeling

When it came to the successful traders whom I sought out, some were open
to talking, as most of them used CQG. They were interested in what we
were building and I was fascinated with how they made money. When I
ﬁrst sat down with each one, I was expecting to see a clear-cut way that they
entered and exited the market. I actually thought that each would see the same
opportunity and all would act at the same time. What became apparent was
that they each had their own unique way of entering the market (which did
not necessarily coincide with other traders). And interestingly, many times
their exits involved a gut feel for when the trade was over for them: most
would say something like, “Time is running out on this trade.” Hardly a
trader could explain the how or the why of this exit due to time, but the
ability to use the concept certainly separated them from traders who were
solely focused on the entries. On top of this quality, they each had enormous
control over their emotions during the trade. They could sit through some
terrible equity drawdowns without it affecting their overall performance.

288

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Beginning with the Proﬁle and later emphasized with the DeMark Indicators, it became apparent that just the output of a line or bar was not enough.
Traders needed additional assistance with their interpretation, methods to
measure time at risk, and tools to handle the trade throughout its life. From
all these experiences, meetings, and circumstances, I have been able to either
develop, partner, or purchase the needed assets that could help answer these
issues. I call these tools ATMs. Currently there are 14 such studies. They
work in conjunction with one another, each with their own strengths. But
used collectively and properly, they are a powerful combination.
What I learned from my experiences and how ATM deals with my
observations is illustrated and explained in the sections following.
Understanding the Background of an Opportunity

Understanding is a key to success, and that knowledge refers to what is
happening at that moment and provides you the ability to maneuver, adjust,
and remain calm. You solve your problems or adjust to current circumstances
with an understanding of the background or the overall condition of each
timeframe, projecting forward, and realizing its contrast to the present.
Traditional bar or line charts provide a good deal of information about
price but nothing about the conditions that surround it. Most charts are
simply produced as light bars on a dark background or dark bars on a lighter
background. Consequently, the question becomes how you interpret the
action.
The ATM studies tell a story of the backdrop of the market by drawing
a picture. The studies change the dark or light chart into a roadmap that
helps you monitor the market’s transition from bullish to bearish and back
so you can easily integrate the studies, charts, and interpretation into your
workﬂow. The picture begins with three studies used to determine the overall
market conditions and trend identiﬁcation. They are ATM Trend Bars, ATM
Trend Lines, and ATM Trigger TSB (Trend Strength Bar) Line, the last
of which is the most important. All three of these math models are used
to deﬁne the condition of the current trend. With them, you can determine
whether the current price activity is bullish or bearish and whether the current
trend is about to start or end. With ATM, and its use of color, markets can
be described objectively by their behavior instead of subjectively based on
one’s interpretation. And during volatile markets, the studies will help you
instill rational behavior when fear can overtake you. Let’s take a look at
each one.

Advanced Trading Methods

289

ATM Trend Bars
ATM Trend Bars are used to help deﬁne market conditions. Most charting programs use green bars to show a bullish condition, red bars for a
bearish condition, and a default color (usually black) for a neutral—or
undeﬁned—condition. In Figure 6.1, you can see that trend bars were
bullish from the start of the chart through the beginning of September and
mostly bullish from mid-September to mid-November. From mid-November
through to the end of the chart, trend bars showed bearish conditions with
three short neutral periods. Figures 6.2–6.8 use this same data set.

ATM Trend Lines
ATM Trend Lines together with ATM Trend Bars further deﬁne a market’s
condition. Blue ATM Trend Lines represent a bullish market condition. Red
ATM Trend Lines represent a bearish market condition. In addition, standard
deviation bands, defaulted to the 3rd std deviation, can be added to the
ATM Trend Line to help determine areas of temporary price exhaustion. The
deviation value can be changed within the study’s settings. I’m aware of some
who prefer a lower setting and use price activity above/below the line as a
breakout conﬁrmation. See Figure 6.2.
