
P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

8

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

FIGURE I.1 Price Action Has Not Changed over Time

There just won’t be enough traders doing it well enough, all at the same time, to
have any significant influence over time on the patterns. Just look at Edwards and
Magee. The best traders in the world have been using those ideas for decades and
they continue to work, again for the same reason—charts look the way they do because that is the unchangeable fingerprint of an efficient market filled with a huge
number of smart people using a huge number of approaches and time frames, all
trying to make the most money that they can. For example, Tiger Woods is not hiding anything that he does in golf, and anyone is free to copy him. However, very few
people can play golf well enough to make a living at it. The same is true of trading.
A trader can know just about everything there is to know and still lose money because applying all that knowledge in a way that consistently makes money is very
difficult to do.
Why do so many business schools continue to recommend Edwards and Magee
when their book is essentially simplistic, largely using trend lines, breakouts, and
pullbacks as the basis for trading? It is because it works and it always has and it
always will. Now that just about all traders have computers with access to intraday
data, many of those techniques can be adapted to day trading. Also, candle charts
give additional information about who is controlling the market, which results in a
more timely entry with smaller risk. Edwards and Magee’s focus is on the overall

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

9

trend. I use those same basic techniques but pay much closer attention to the individual bars on the chart to improve the risk/reward ratio, and I devote considerable
attention to intraday charts.
It seemed obvious to me that if one could simply read the charts well enough
to be able to enter at the exact times when the move would take off and not come
back, then that trader would have a huge advantage. The trader would have a high
winning percentage, and the few losses would be small. I decided that this would
be my starting point, and what I discovered was that nothing had to be added. In
fact, any additions are distractions that result in lower profitability. This sounds so
obvious and easy that it is difficult for most people to believe.
I am a day trader who relies entirely on price action on the intraday Emini S&P
500 Futures charts, and I believe that reading price action well is an invaluable skill
for all traders. Beginners often instead have a deep-seated belief that something
more is required, that maybe some complex mathematical formula that very few
use would give them just the edge that they need. Goldman Sachs is so rich and
sophisticated that its traders must have a supercomputer and high-powered software that gives them an advantage that ensures that all the individual traders are
doomed to failure. They start looking at all kinds of indicators and playing with the
inputs to customize the indicators to make them just right. Every indicator works
some of the time, but for me, they obfuscate instead of elucidate. In fact, without
even looking at a chart, you can place a buy order and have a 50 percent chance of
being right!
I am not dismissing indicators and systems out of ignorance of their subtleties.
I have spent over 10,000 hours writing and testing indicators and systems over the
years, and that probably is far more experience than most have. This extensive experience with indicators and systems was an essential part of my becoming a successful trader. Indicators work well for many traders, but the best success comes
once a trader finds an approach that is compatible with his or her personality. My
single biggest problem with indicators and systems was that I never fully trusted
them. At every setup, I saw exceptions that needed to be tested. I always wanted
every last penny out of the market and was never satisfied with a return from a system if I could incorporate a new twist that would make it better. You can optimize
constantly, but, since the market is always changing from strong trends to tight
trading ranges and then back again and your optimizations are based on what has
recently happened, they will soon fail as the market transitions into a new phase. I
am simply too controlling, compulsive, restless, observant, and untrusting to make
money in the long term off indicators or automated systems, but I am at the extreme
in many ways and most people don’t have these same issues.
Many traders, especially beginners, are drawn to indicators (or any other higher
power, guru, TV pundit, or newsletter that they want to believe will protect them
and show their love and approval of them as human beings by giving them lots

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

10

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

of money), hoping that an indicator will show them when to enter a trade. What
they don’t realize is that the vast majority of indicators are based on simple price
action, and when I am placing trades, I simply cannot think fast enough to process
what several indicators might be telling me. If there is a bull trend, a pullback, and
then a rally to a new high, but the rally has lots of overlapping bars, many bear
bodies, a couple of small pullbacks, and prominent tails on the tops of the bars,
any experienced trader would see that it is a weak test of the trend high and that
this should not be happening if the bull trend was still strong. The market is almost
certainly transitioning into a trading range and possibly into a bear trend. Traders
don’t need an oscillator to tell them this. Also, oscillators tend to make traders
look for reversals and focus less on price charts. These can be effective tools on
most days when the market has two or three reversals lasting an hour or more.
The problem comes when the market is trending strongly. If you focus too much
on your indicators, you will see that they are forming divergences all day long and
you might find yourself repeatedly entering countertrend and losing money. By the
time you come to accept that the market is trending, you will not have enough time
left in the day to recoup your losses. Instead, if you were simply looking at a bar or
candle chart, you would see that the market is clearly trending and you would not
be tempted by indicators to look for trend reversals. The most common successful
reversals first break a trend line with strong momentum and then pull back to test
the extreme, and if traders focus too much on divergences, they will often overlook
this fundamental fact. Placing a trade because of a divergence in the absence of a
prior countertrend momentum surge that breaks a trend line is a losing strategy.
Wait for the trend line break and then see if the test of the old extreme reverses
or if the old trend resumes. You do not need an indicator to tell you that a strong
reversal here is a high-probability trade, at least for a scalp, and there will almost
certainly be a divergence, so why complicate your thinking by adding the indicator
to your calculus?
Some pundits recommend a combination of time frames, indicators, wave
counting, and Fibonacci retracements and extensions, but when it comes time to
place the trade, they will do it only if there is a good price action setup. Also, when
they see a good price action setup, they start looking for indicators that show divergences, different time frames for moving average tests, wave counts, or Fibonacci
setups to confirm what is in front of them. In reality, they are price action traders
who are trading exclusively off price action on only one chart but don’t feel comfortable admitting it. They are complicating their trading to the point that they certainly are missing many, many trades because their overanalysis takes too much
time for them to place their orders and they are forced to wait for the next setup.
The logic just isn’t there for making the simple so complicated. Obviously, adding
any information can lead to better decision making and many people might be able
to process lots of inputs when deciding whether to place a trade. Ignoring data

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

11

because of a simplistic ideology alone is foolish. The goal is to make money, and
traders should do everything they can to maximize their profits. I simply cannot
process multiple indicators and time frames well in the time needed to place my orders accurately, and I find that carefully reading a single chart is far more profitable
for me. Also, if I rely on indicators, I find that I get lazy in my price action reading
and often miss the obvious. Price action is far more important than any other information, and if you sacrifice some of what it is telling you to gain information from
something else, you are likely making a bad decision.
One of the most frustrating things for traders when they are starting out is that
everything is so subjective. They want to find a clear set of rules that guarantee a
profit, and they hate how a pattern works on one day but fails on another. Markets
are very efficient because you have countless very smart people playing a zero-sum
game. For a trader to make money, he has to be consistently better than about half
of the other traders out there. Since most of the competitors are profitable institutions, a trader has to be very good. Whenever an edge exists, it is quickly discovered
and it disappears. Remember, someone has to be taking the opposite side of your
trade. It won’t take them long to figure out your magical system, and once they do,
they will stop giving you money. Part of the appeal of trading is that it is a zerosum game with very small edges, and it is intellectually satisfying and financially
rewarding to be able to spot and capitalize on these small, fleeting opportunities. It
can be done, but it is very hard work and it requires relentless discipline. Discipline
simply means doing what you do not want to do. We are all intellectually curious
and we have a natural tendency to try new or different things, but the very best
traders resist the temptation. You have to stick to your rules and avoid emotion,
and you have to patiently wait to take only the best trades. This all appears easy to
do when you look at a printed chart at the end of the day, but it is very difficult in
real time as you wait bar by bar, and sometimes hour by hour. Once a great setup
appears, if you are distracted or lulled into complacency, you will miss it and you
will then be forced to wait even longer. But if you can develop the patience and the
discipline to follow a sound system, the profit potential is huge.
There are countless ways to make money trading stocks and Eminis, but all require movement (well, except for shorting options). If you learn to read the charts,
you will catch a great number of these profitable trades every day without ever
knowing why some institution started the trend and without ever knowing what
any indicator is showing. You don’t need these institutions’ software or analysts
because they will show you what they are doing. All you have to do is piggyback
onto their trades and you will make a profit. Price action will tell you what they are
doing and allow you an early entry with a tight stop.
I have found that I consistently make far more money by minimizing what I
have to consider when placing a trade. All I need is a single chart on my laptop
computer with no indicators except a 20-bar exponential moving average (EMA),

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

12

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

which does not require too much analysis and clarifies many good setups each day.
Some traders might also look at volume because an unusually large volume spike
sometimes comes near the end of a bear trend, and the next new swing low or two
often provide profitable long scalps. Volume spikes also sometimes occur on daily
charts when a sell-off is overdone. However, it is not reliable enough to warrant
my attention.
Many traders consider price action only when trading divergences and trend
pullbacks. In fact, most traders using indicators won’t take a trade unless there is
a strong signal bar, and many would enter on a strong signal bar if the context was
right, even if there was no divergence. They like to see a strong close on a large
reversal bar, but in reality this is a fairly rare occurrence. The most useful tools
for understanding price action are trend lines and trend channel lines, prior highs
and lows, breakouts and failed breakouts, the sizes of bodies and tails on candles,
and relationships between the current bar to the prior several bars. In particular,
how the open, high, low, and close of the current bar compare to the action of
the prior several bars tells a lot about what will happen next. Charts provide far
more information about who is in control of the market than most traders realize.
Almost every bar offers important clues as to where the market is going, and a
trader who dismisses any activity as noise is passing up many profitable trades
each day. Most of the observations in these books are directly related to placing
trades, but a few have to do with simple curious price action tendencies without
sufficient dependability to be the basis for a trade.
I personally rely mainly on candle charts for my Emini, futures, and stock trading, but most signals are also visible on any type of chart and many are even evident
on simple line charts. I focus primarily on 5 minute candle charts to illustrate basic principles but also discuss daily and weekly charts as well. Since I also trade
stocks, forex, Treasury note futures, and options, I discuss how price action can be
used as the basis for this type of trading.
As a trader, I see everything in shades of gray and am constantly thinking in
terms of probabilities. If a pattern is setting up and is not perfect but is reasonably
similar to a reliable setup, it will likely behave similarly as well. Close is usually
close enough. If something resembles a textbook setup, the trade will likely unfold
in a way that is similar to the trade from the textbook setup. This is the art of
trading and it takes years to become good at trading in the gray zone. Everyone
wants concrete, clear rules or indicators, and chat rooms, newsletters, hotlines,
or tutors that will tell them when exactly to get in to minimize risk and maximize
profit, but none of it works in the long run. You have to take responsibility for your
decisions, but you first have to learn how to make them and that means that you
have to get used to operating in the gray fog. Nothing is ever as clear as black and
white, and I have been doing this long enough to appreciate that anything, no matter
how unlikely, can and will happen. It’s like quantum physics. Every conceivable

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

13

event has a probability, and so do events that you have yet to consider. It is not
emotional, and the reasons why something happens are irrelevant. Watching to see
if the Federal Reserve cuts rates today is a waste of time because there is both a
bullish and bearish interpretation of anything that the Fed does. What is key is to
see what the market does, not what the Fed does.
If you think about it, trading is a zero-sum game and it is impossible to have a
zero-sum game where rules consistently work. If they worked, everyone would use
them and then there would be no one on the other side of the trade. Therefore, the
trade could not exist. Guidelines are very helpful but reliable rules cannot exist,
and this is usually very troubling to a trader starting out who wants to believe that
trading is a game that can be very profitable if only you can come up with just the
right set of rules. All rules work some of the time, and usually just often enough
to fool you into believing that you just need to tweak them a little to get them to
work all of the time. You are trying to create a trading god who will protect you,
but you are fooling yourself and looking for an easy solution to a game where only
hard solutions work. You are competing against the smartest people in the world,
and if you are smart enough to come up with a foolproof rule set, so are they, and
then everyone is faced with the zero-sum game dilemma. You cannot make money
trading unless you are flexible, because you need to go where the market is going,
and the market is extremely flexible. It can bend in every direction and for much
longer than most would ever imagine. It can also reverse repeatedly every few bars
for a long, long time. Finally, it can and will do everything in between. Never get
upset by this, and just accept it as reality and admire it as part of the beauty of
the game.
The market gravitates toward uncertainty. During most of the day, every market has a directional probability of 50–50 of an equidistant move up or down. By
that I mean that if you don’t even look at a chart and you buy any stock and then
place a one cancels the other (OCO) order to exit on a profit-taking limit order X
cents above your entry or on a protective stop at X cents below your entry, you
have about a 50 percent chance of being right. Likewise, if you sell any stock at any
point in the day without looking at a chart and then place a profit-taking limit order
X cents lower and a protective stop X cents higher, you have about a 50 percent
chance of winning and about a 50 percent chance of losing. There is the obvious
exception of X being too large relative the price of the stock. You can’t have X be
$60 in a $50 stock, because you would have a 0 percent chance of losing $60. You
also can’t have X be $49, because the odds of losing $49 would also be minuscule.
But if you pick a value for X that is within reasonable reach on your time frame, this
is generally true. When the market is 50–50, it is uncertain and you cannot rationally
have an opinion about its direction. This is the hallmark of a trading range, so whenever you are uncertain, assume that the market is in a trading range. There are brief
times on a chart when the directional probability is higher. During a strong trend,

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

14

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

it might be 60 or even 70 percent, but that cannot last long because it will gravitate
toward uncertainty and a 50–50 market where both the bulls and bears feel there is
value. When there is a trend and some level of directional certainty, the market will
also gravitate toward areas of support and resistance, which are usually some type
of measured move away, and those areas are invariably where uncertainty returns
and a trading range develops, at least briefly.
Never watch the news during the trading day. If you want to know what a news
event means, the chart in front of you will tell you. Reporters believe that the news
is the most important thing in the world, and that everything that happens has to
be caused by their biggest news story of the day. Since reporters are in the news
business, news must be the center of the universe and the cause of everything that
happens in the financial markets. When the stock market sold off in mid-March
2011, they attributed it to the earthquake in Japan. It did not matter to them that the
market began to sell off three weeks earlier, after a buy climax. I told the members
of my chat room in late February that the odds were good that the market was
going to have a significant correction when I saw 15 consecutive bull trend bars on
the daily chart after a protracted bull run. This was an unusually strong buy climax,
and an important statement by the market. I had no idea that an earthquake was
going to happen in a few weeks, and did not need to know that, anyway. The chart
was telling me what traders were doing; they were getting ready to exit their longs
and initiate shorts.
Television experts are also useless. Invariably when the market makes a huge
move, the reporter will find some confident, convincing expert who predicted it
and interview him or her, leading the viewers to believe that this pundit has an uncanny ability to predict the market, despite the untold reality that this same pundit
has been wrong in his last 10 predictions. The pundit then makes some future prediction and naı̈ve viewers will attach significance to it and let it affect their trading.
What the viewers may not realize is that some pundits are bullish 100 percent of the
time and others are bearish 100 percent of the time, and still others just swing for
the fences all the time and make outrageous predictions. The reporter just rushes
to the one who is consistent with the day’s news, which is totally useless to traders
and in fact it is destructive because it can influence their trading and make them
question and deviate from their own methods. No one is ever consistently right
more than 60 percent of the time on these major predictions, and just because pundits are convincing does not make them reliable. There are equally smart and convincing people who believe the opposite but are not being heard. This is the same
as watching a trial and listening to only the defense side of the argument. Hearing
only one side is always convincing and always misleading, and rarely better than 50
percent reliable.
Institutional bulls and bears are placing trades all the time, and that is why
there is constant uncertainty about the direction of the market. Even in the

P1: OTA
JWBT576-cintro

JWBT576-Brooks

October 18, 2011

1:30

Printer: Donnelly

INTRODUCTION

15

absence of breaking news, the business channels air interviews all day long and
each reporter gets to pick one pundit for her report. What you have to realize is
that she has a 50–50 chance of picking the right one in terms of the market’s direction over the next hour or so. If you decide to rely on the pundit to make a trading
decision and he says that the market will sell off after midday and instead it just
keeps going up, are you going to look to short? Should you believe this very convincing head trader at one of Wall Street’s top firms? He obviously is making over
a million dollars a year and they would not pay him that much unless he was able
to correctly and consistently predict the market’s direction. In fact, he probably
can and he is probably a good stock picker, but he almost certainly is not a day
trader. It is foolish to believe that just because he can make 15 percent annually
managing money he can correctly predict the market’s direction over the next hour
or two. Do the math. If he had that ability, he would be making 1 percent two or
three times a day and maybe 1,000 percent a year. Since he is not, you know that
he does not have that ability. His time frame is months and yours is minutes. Since
he is unable to make money by day trading, why would you ever want to make a
trade based on someone who is a proven failure as a day trader? He has shown
you that he cannot make money by day trading by the simple fact that he is not
a successful day trader. That immediately tells you that if he day trades, he loses
money because if he was successful at it, that is what he would choose to do and he
would make far more than he is currently making. Even if you are holding trades
for months at a time in an attempt to duplicate the results of his fund, it is still
foolish to take his advice, because he might change his mind next week and you
would never know it. Managing a trade once you are in is just as important as placing the trade. If you are following the pundit and hope to make 15 percent a year
like he does, you need to follow his management, but you have no ability to do so
and you will lose over time employing this strategy. Yes, you will make an occasional great trade, but you can simply do that by randomly buying any stock. The
key is whether the approach makes money over 100 trades, not over the first one
or two. Follow the advice that you give your kids: don’t fool yourself into believing
that what you see on television is real, no matter how polished and convincing it
appears to be.
As I said, there will be pundits who will see the news as bullish and others who
will see it as bearish, and the reporter gets to pick one for her report. Are you going
to let a reporter make trading decisions for you? That’s insane! If that reporter could
trade, she would be a trader and make hundreds of times more money than she
is making as a reporter. Why would you ever allow her to influence your decision
making? You might do so only out of a lack of confidence in your ability, or perhaps
you are searching for a father figure who will love and protect you. If you are prone
to be influenced by a reporter’s decision, you should not take the trade. The pundit
she chooses is not your father, and he will not protect you or your money. Even if
