
Market Gurus Again
These concerns lead into another discussion regarding my disdain for so-called market gurus.
Anyone who purports to be a market guru must be cautiously regarded. Simply stated, there

6

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

are no market gurus. Let me repeat: There are no market gurus! In fact, many of these gurus
are just people who have failed to be successful traders and have resorted to selling products
to make their living. It’s such a shame. It is so easy to believe these people and their hype. My
question is if they were really making money trading the markets with their methodology, why
would they spend the majority of their time selling products? In addition, it’s amazing to me that
these guys have so much time to dedicate to the marketing of their financial products when the
market consumes so much time as a full-time trader. It can be difficult to know the real deal
from the jokers selling their products just to make money. In my experience, after thoroughly
investigating many of these professionals—either going to their seminars or reading their books
and talking with them personally—you quickly realize who’s really trading and who is not. It’s
unbelievable that many of these individuals get so much exposure in the media yet they rarely
trade and derive most of their income from selling products. If you want to find the most
pertinent material on successfully trading the markets, you must seek out the people who
have been or are in the business of trading.
Even more incredulous is the number of people who have come to me after spending
thousands—if not tens of thousands of dollars—trying to learn how to trade from selfproclaimed gurus like these. Many of these people have been swindled out of their money while
not learning any meaningful trading strategies. I believe that this is one of the greatest pitfalls
as a beginner. Engulfed in a sea of (mis)information, it is easy to bounce from one system to
the next looking for the answers to the financial markets. I have been there—searching for the
answers to the market. Years ago, I struggled to find the best systems, spent thousands of
dollars on books and software, and lost even more money attempting to trade these fantastic
systems that held no real trading value. Sitting in front of my computer screen, I spent
countless hours researching the best techniques. I was willing to look at any approach that
proclaimed to have the answers to the market. Unfortunately, most of this research yielded
strategies that failed to be reliable techniques in real trading situations.
From a general perspective, I must emphasize that searching for the Holy Grail to the
financial markets is just not a realistic approach to achieve consistent success. What is realistic
is discovering the order within the chaos in the financial markets, defining that order and being
willing to take some risk in return for financial reward. I’ve dedicated a substantial portion of my
life to the intensive study of the financial markets in an attempt to discover the best techniques
that are consistently profitable. Through my years of research, I have put together a series of
books and a software program that is sufficient to help anyone learn the dynamics of harmonic
price action and provide a comprehensive method for effectively trading the financial markets.
Whether you are a hedge fund manager with a billion in assets, a retiree trying to maximize
your IRA, or a novice trader just beginning, I’m confident that these tools will help you decipher
price action better than any other system. In my opinion, the Harmonic Trading methodology
offers some of the most reliable and pertinent technical information to identify profitable
opportunities and interpret price action.

Introduction

7

Then Why Give It Away?
Why give it away? I could simply retain these techniques for my own research and trading.
However, I firmly believe that knowledge not shared is worthless. It does not matter that I have
taken the necessary legal precautions to protect my intellectual property. Although I am
bothered by blatant plagiarism, it is my greatest desire to encourage an open and frank
discussion of this material, while freely sharing this information with the public. The most
important reason why I’m releasing this book is that I truly want to set Harmonic Trading apart
from all of the other Fibonacci-related strategies that have sprouted up in recent years. I believe
that the advanced concepts within Volume Two demonstrate that Harmonic Trading is one of
the most effective and reliable methods to understand the complex dynamics of the financial
markets. The material in this book advances the entire system to a new level of accuracy and
provides even more effective trading strategies to achieve consistent success.

It’s Still Up to You…
I can share these strategies, but the overall success is still dependent upon your dedication and
determination to work diligently to follow the markets, analyze price action, and adhere to this
methodology. You must be willing to do the work. Although it can be easier to relinquish control
to an advisor or professional money management outfit, the ultimate responsibility for success
in the financial markets is still up to each individual. The pursuit of market knowledge can be
daunting. But it is essential to refuse to allow anyone to deter you from the success that you
seek.
The ability to succeed in trading is 100% self-directed. You must find the opportunities,
determine which trades to execute, and remain focused on your goals, as no outside element
can distract you from your objective. Although this can seem overwhelming at first, Harmonic
Trading does possess a comprehensive, start-to-finish methodology to successfully guide you
throughout the decision-making process. Despite sharing my most advanced research, it is still
entirely up to you to dedicate yourself to this endeavor to realize success.
Although trading can be a solitary pursuit, it is important to remember that you know what’s
best for yourself—regardless of your level of experience. Many experts and their “immensely
successful systems” can be intimidating at first. It can be easy during the early stages of
learning any trading system to relinquish control of your own decision-making process to others
because they seemingly have better answers or appear to know more than you. Again, the truth
is that only you know what’s best for yourself, and you must make your own assessments
regarding any trading methodology. I encourage questions and welcome any comments and/or
criticism to extend an open debate regarding this material. Despite my own beliefs and
personal success, I truly encourage you to evaluate this material for yourself.

8

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

The Benefits of Advanced Harmonic Trading
Techniques
I have always said that Harmonic Trading and the pattern identification techniques in particular
within this approach are merely a starting point. These techniques serve as a comprehensive
framework that accurately measures and analyzes price action. The ultimate objective of this
book attempts to outline specific technical situations within the course of trading that will yield a
high degree of reward while minimizing risk. Advanced Harmonic Trading techniques can offer
information regarding the potential state of price action unlike any other methodology. When
combined with other technical studies and analyzed within the predominant trend, Harmonic
Trading strategies can pinpoint the potential “hot spots” where reversals may complete or
important continuations of the prevailing direction may develop.
The combination of pattern identification techniques and the utilization of Fibonacci ratios to
quantify price action is the greatest asset within the Harmonic Trading approach. As this
methodology has become more refined, I’ve realized that there are many other technical
indicators that form repetitive patterns in the same manner as price action. In the past, I tended
to be exclusive in the application of other technical measurement tools with harmonic price
patterns. However, I began to notice over time how frequently many of these indicators were
acting as valid confirmation signals in conjunction with the basic pattern recognition techniques.
Although many of these integrative strategies are simple applications of standard indicators, the
combination of these existing measures with the Harmonic Trading approach yielded more
accurate technical information.
The advanced Harmonic Trading strategies offer immense confirmation signals, and they
have led to more precise executions within a pattern’s Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ).
Essentially, the integration of other measures has resulted in even more accurate projected
reversal points for trade executions and hence, more reliable technical information regarding
the state of potential price action. At first, the simple integration of many of these indicator
readings was generally beneficial. However, as I expanded the use of other technical indicators,
I noticed many similar harmonic traits that formed in the indicator readings as did in the actual
price action itself. Once I began to see these relationships, I thoroughly explored a variety of
indicators to find those that correlated best with the Harmonic Trading techniques and provided
the most accurate confirmation signals to validate patterns.

The Best of the Best
This book like the others has been years in the making, and it represents a collection of my
best ideas. I’m proud of this book because the techniques that I present in this material are
truly original within the field of Technical Analysis. While combining the basic approach of
several established technical methodologies, I believe the new ideas in this material integrate
the existing unprecedented strategies of Harmonic Trading to create one of the most
comprehensive and effective trading systems available today.

Introduction

9

It is important to note that I only release strategies that I have tested thoroughly in real
trading situations that have produced consistently successful results for me. In my opinion,
successful strategies must stand up in real market conditions that reflect the realities of trading
and not just shine in well-chosen examples at a weekend trading seminar. I understand that
many products and services, especially Fibonacci-related ones, make absurd claims of fortune
and success if you spend “only 15 minutes a day.” NO! I make no false promises of quick
riches. I offer effective trading tools that help those people who are looking for the answers to
the financial markets, as long as they are willing to study and apply themselves through diligent
work to achieve consistent success.
My goal in this book is to present a significant advancement of the Harmonic Trading
approach that integrates new applications of existing technical measures beyond their standard
interpretation. In fact, the extent of new ideas and concepts practically doubles the existing
amount of material on the subject. The advanced techniques outlined in this book incorporate
only the most pertinent technical measures that substantially increase the accuracy of
harmonic patterns to identify the critical turning points in the financial markets. In particular, the
RSI BAMM exemplifies the effectiveness of these advanced techniques to identify unique
technical situations where the completion of harmonic patterns has even greater importance
and serves to filter the more meaningful setups from those that possess less significance.
In closing, I want to thank you for taking time to read my material. I want you to know that
I’m using these techniques every day to make financial decisions for my clients and myself. I
have a responsibility to serve their best interests to the best of my ability. I extend this level of
dedication and commitment to all career endeavors. This book reflects such dedication and
commitment. I just want you to know that you are getting the real deal here and that I’m grateful
to share this information with you. Let’s get started!

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 1

Contemporary Market Case
Studies from a Harmonic Trading
Perspective
Since the inception of my website, HarmonicTrader.com, I have released a variety of reports
that have assessed critical long-term turning points in the markets. Specifically, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average, the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (S&P 500), and the NASDAQ Composite
Index have experienced a wide variety of market extremes in the past two decades. Despite
such extreme volatile long-term price action, Harmonic Trading effectively and accurately
provided reliable analysis of the most critical turning points and outlined precise possibilities of
probable future action that these markets were facing. In fact, the challenging environment of
the past two decades has proven to be a comprehensive test for Harmonic Trading techniques.
For example, the Dow Jones Industrials and the S&P 500 have both experienced multi-year bull
and bear markets since 2000. This era compares on par with some of the most volatile market
environments in history. Notwithstanding, these markets pale in comparison to the incredulous
tech bubble in NASDAQ Composite Index at the turn of the century. This index rallied several
hundred percent at the end of the 1990s only to lose 80% of those gains in less than three
years. These long-term situations challenged the measurement strategies of this approach to
decipher the most critical levels of support and resistance and to determine the overall future
direction of the markets. The ability of the Harmonic Trading methodology to define the critical
long-term market turning points has tremendously validated this approach. For example, the
bear market of 2008-2009 possessed a substantial weekly 5-0 pattern that defined the clear
make-or-break support zone for the index. Although I no longer operated an advisory service, I
posted an initial report of the long-term possibilities outlining the situation earlier in 2008 before
the dramatic decline. Since the market environment has changed drastically from the 1990s, it
is important to review some historical developments that were a crucial element in the evolution
of this approach.
Harmonic Trading was conceived during a particularly bullish era for the markets. Stocks
were traded mostly, as currencies and commodities experienced far less public participation
than today. Despite the entrenched bullish trend of the 1990s, the market manifested evidence
of trouble soon after the decade ended. Although the “pre-9/11” market climate seems as if
it is ancient history, these events hold tremendous significance for today and the future.
The technical significance of the price action in these markets impacts long-term structural
considerations and serves as the established price limits for Harmonic Trading measurements
going forward.
11

12

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

The following analysis of these major U.S. indices has two purposes. First, the review
of such historic action underscores the importance of these techniques to be analyzed in
long-term cases with the same considerations as intra-day situations. The primary difference is
that instead of minutes to react as is the case for intra-day opportunities, these markets
involved days and weeks of analysis to accurately assess their validity. Second, these markets
distinguished the Harmonic Trading approach more than any other situation. At each turn, the
reports posted on the website and in related Internet articles accurately outlined the reason for
the change in trend based upon distinct harmonic pattern completions and other technical
considerations.
The bear market of 2000 and subsequent low in 2003 impacted this approach
immensely. The importance of pattern failures during this time was one of the discoveries that
expanded the scope of Harmonic Trading. The price action of 2008 reinforced this principle
further and engendered an even more vigilant monitoring of the markets in general. Unlike the
decisive bullish trend of prior decades, the long-term structure of these indices has vast
implications for the future direction and influence on other markets, such as commodities and
currencies. The following case studies review these historic patterns and illustrate the clear
signals outlined by the Harmonic Trading approach that defined each situation. Starting with
actual market reports from my original advisory service from the early 2000s, this review
represents a live assessment of the action as it happened. Furthermore, my ability to predict
the bear decline of 2008 was directly influenced by the lessons learned from those early days.

The Bear Market of 2000—Same Patterns,
Different Day
The true challenge of these changing market environments required a thorough assessment of
weekly and monthly harmonic price levels to offer relevant information—let alone pinpoint exact
lows and highs of multiyear trends. It is important to remember that Harmonic Trading concepts
were relatively new in 2000. The strategies were yielding tremendous success in short-term
situations, but the question that loomed in my mind as I refined the approach was whether
weekly, monthly, and even yearly Harmonic Trading measurements would be as reliable.
The other dilemma that preceded the turn of the century was the predominant bullish bias of
the 1980s and 1990s. The incredible advancement of the Internet in particular opened financial
markets to a generation of new online traders. This bullish fervor was the backdrop for
unrealistic aspirations and distorted long-term realities. As the bull market of the late 1990s
waned, many were locked into a one-sided bias and were unable to adapt to the impending
changes. Although bullish harmonic patterns were accurately defining significant opportunities
in those early years, the powerful bear market of 2000 overwhelmed many substantial setups.
The failure of daily and weekly bullish patterns forced me to step back and take a hard look at
the flexibility of this methodology. It became apparent that I had to adjust the approach, employ
a more balanced system of pattern analysis, and interpret price action from a more neutral
perspective. Although bearish patterns were yielding success, there was a period of time—at
least for me—where the major bear market scenario was still not clear and required time to be

Chapter 1 Contemporary Market Case Studies from a Harmonic Trading Perspective

13

entirely confirmed. After 13 years, was a major correction at hand? But, an entire meltdown of
the preceding bull market still required a violation of many harmonic support levels before I
would consider an official bear position. I found myself locked into a bullish mode until enough
patterns failed that the information—like a brick being slammed over my head—was indicating
significantly more downside than a minor correction. The predominance of the strong uptrend of
the prior decades created an inherent bullish bias that favored trading these setups more than
bearish patterns. Although the bearish patterns were still effective in determining excellent
selling opportunities, the lasting bias of the prior bull market needed to be overcome. As more
bullish patterns failed, the technical evidence mounted to respect the severity of the price
action. Not to mention, the information provided by this analysis was accurately pinpointing that
the overall market direction had changed to a bearish bias. The trend was clearly reversing and
heading lower.

The Importance of Pattern Violations
The bear markets of 2000 and 2008 possessed critical long-term harmonic setups that clearly
defined the most relevant technical levels within their overall respective trends. Critical longterm support levels and distinct harmonic patterns consistently marked important turning points
and clearly signified the extent of the trouble at hand in each case. The recognition of such
price action led to a greater understanding of the importance of these formations as significant
technical signals. Within the context of the primary bearish trend, especially in 2000, the
repeated pattern failures provided the evidence needed to effectively validate the state of the
market. Also, this helped me to focus mostly on bearish patterns for my trading and favor the
short side until the major market indices stabilized in both cases.
I must emphasize the importance of this adjustment as a critical advancement in my thinking
regarding the entire Harmonic Trading methodology. Instead of staying locked into a bullish
mentality, I was able to reassess the current environment of the financial markets at this time
and make the adjustments necessary to adapt to the changing environment. Regardless of
whether a particular setup was valid, the price action at the completion of many harmonic
patterns in the major U.S. indices provided accurate information regarding their future direction.
If a pattern was a valid opportunity, the price action typically reversed at the completion point.
However, price action that exceeded the completion point for a critical pattern normally resulted
in a further extension of the primary trend. In the case of both markets in 2000 and 2008, the
failure of long-term bullish patterns led to a substantial downside continuation.

“A Signpost for Future Price Action”
Another result of these bear markets was a reinforcement of the fact that a pattern is more a
signpost of potential future action and not an “end all, be all” signal for trading. I have discussed
this principle in each of my three books. In fact, in The Harmonic Trader, I discussed this
concept as a critical first step to enable an unbiased perspective and not get locked into one
side of the market or the other. Throughout early 2000, a problem quickly emerged when many

14

Harmonic Trading: Volume Two

of the people who initially embraced the Harmonic Trading concepts became disparaged as the
bear market progressed. In fact, I received e-mails from people who claimed that harmonic
price patterns no longer worked. The problem was not the failure of harmonic patterns, rather
their interpretation and analysis of the technical information provided by such failures was
flawed. Instead of getting locked in to this mentality, I realized that the overwhelming pattern
failures of the time were indicating a further substantial decline in the financial markets.
Furthermore, the bullish pattern violations were in fact frequently providing clear trading
opportunities, as each breakdown in price action below the projected harmonic support area
typically accelerated after failing the setup. In this manner, particular patterns did serve to
pinpoint the continuation areas of the major reversal at hand, time and time again.
At a minimum, the price levels determined by Harmonic Trading measurement techniques
were consistently identifying the key areas within the primary trend to examine for clues of
potential future price action. Distinct long-term Potential Reversal Zones (PRZ) were defining
the make-or-break support and resistance levels. Furthermore, the effectiveness of long-term
harmonic ratios to gauge price action was particularly impressive. Regardless of the type of
setup, the effectiveness of this methodology was consistently accurate in pinpointing the most
critical technical levels throughout these volatile times.
