
EVOLVING AN ENTRY MODEL
In this exercise, a population of three-rule entry models are evolved using
OptEvolve, a C+ + genetic optimizer (Scientific Consultant Services, 516-696.
3333). Each gene corresponds to a block of four numbers and to a rule, via the
one-to-one mapping of sets of numbers to sets of rules. Each chromosome contains three genes. A chromosome, as generated by the GA, therefore consists of 12
numbers: The first four numbers correspond to the first gene (or rule), the next
four correspond to the second gene (or rule), and the last four correspond to the
third gene (or rule). The GA itself has to be informed of the gene size so it does
not break up intrinsic genes when performing crossover. Crossover should only
occur at the boundaries of genes, i.e., four number blocks. In the current example,

this will be achieved by setting the “chunk size,” a property of the genetic optimizer component, to four.
As mentioned, each gene is composed of four numbers. The first number is
nothing more than an index into a table of possible rule templates. For example, if
that number is 1, a price-comparison template in which the difference between two
closing prices is compared with a threshold (see code) is selected. The remaining
three numbers in the gene then control the two lookback periods for the prices being
compared and the threshold. If the first number of the four-number block is 2, a
price-to-moving-average comparison template would be selected. In that case, two
of the remaining three numbers would control the period of the moving average and
the direction of the comparison (whether the price should be above or below the
moving average). In general, if the first number in the block of four numbers that
represents a gene is n, then the n&rule template is used, and any required parameters are determined by reference to the remaining three numbers in the four-number
block. This decoding scheme makes it easy to maintain an expandable database of
rule templates. Each of the three blocks of four numbers is mapped to a corresponding rule. For any 12-number chromosome, a 3-rule entry model is produced.
The

Rule

Templates

The first rule template (case I in function Rules) defines a comparison between
two prices and a threshold: The rule takes on a value of TRUE if the closing price
lb1 bars ago is greater than some threshold factor (thr) plus the closing price lb2
bars ago. Otherwise, the rule takes on the value of FALSE. The unknowns (Ibl,
lb2, and thr) are left as the blanks to be tilled in during instantiation. This template
has been included because the kind of rule it represents was useful in previous
investigations.
The second rule template (case 2) involves simple moving averages, which
are often used to determine trend. Usually the market is thought to be trending up
if the price is above its moving average and trending down if the price is below its
moving average. There are only two unknowns in this template: The first (per)
controls the number of bars in the moving average, and the second (~4) controls
the direction of comparison (above or below).
The third rule template (case 3) is identical to the second (cuse 2), except that
an exponential moving average is used rather than a simple moving average.
Much discussion has occurred regarding the importance of open interest.
Larry Williams (1979) mentioned that a decline in total open interest, during a
period when the market has been moving sideways, indicates potential for a strong
rally. A shrinking of open interest may be interpreted as a decline in available contracts, producing a condition where demand may outweigh supply. The fourth rule
template (case 4) simply computes the percentage decline in open interest from
161 bars ago to 1 bar ago (open interest is generally not available for the current

CHAPTER

12 Ge”&

7.61

Algorithms

bar) and compares it with a threshold (thr). If the percentage decline is greater than
the threshold, the rule takes on the value TRUE. Otherwise it evaluates to FALSE.
The threshold and the lookback (Ibl) are the unknowns to be tilled in at the time
of instantiation.
The fifth rule template (use 5) is similar to the fourth template, but a rise,
rather than fall, in total open interest is being sought. If the increase, as a percentage, is greater than a threshold, then the rule evaluates to TRUE. Otherwise it evaluates to FALSE. As previously, the lookback and the threshold are unknowns that
must he supplied to instantiate the rule.
The sixth rule template (case 6) can be called a “new high” condition: The
template asks whether an &l-bar new high has occurred within the last lb2 bars.
A particular instance of the rule might read: “If a new 50-day high has occurred
within the last 10 days, then TRUE, else FALSE.” This rule attempts to capture a
simple breakout condition, allowing for breakouts that may have occurred several
bars ago (perhaps followed by a pull-back to the previous resistance-turned-support that another rule has detected as a good entry point). There are two blanks to
be tilled in to instantiate this template: Zbl and lb2.
The seventh rule template (case 7) is identical to the sixth rule template,
except that new lows, rather than new highs, are being detected.
The eighth rule template (case 8) examines the average directional movement index with respect to two thresholds (thrl and rhr2). This is a measure of
trendiness, as discussed in the chapter on breakouts. If the average directional
movement (ADX) is above a lower threshold and below an upper threshold, the
rule evaluates to TRUE. Otherwise, the rule evaluates to FALSE.
The ninth rule template (case 9) performs a threshold comparison on the
Stochastic oscillator that is similar to that performed in Rule 8.
The tenth rule template (case 10) evaluates the direction of the slope of the
MACD oscillator. The lengths (Zbl and lb2) of the two moving averages that compose the MACD, and the direction of the slope (~4) required for the role to evaluate to TRUE, are specified as parameters.
TEST

METHODOLOGY

Below are the steps involved in evolving an entry model based on the rule templates being used in this study:
1. Retrieve a 12-element chromosome from the genetic optimizer component. This represents a potential solution, one that initially will be random and probably not very good.
2. Instantiate the rule templates to obtain three fully defined rules (one for
each gene), and compote their TRUE/FALSE values for all bars in the
data series, based upon the decoding of the genes/chromosome.

3. Proceed bar by bar through the data. If, on a given bar, all three instantiated rules evaluate to TRUE, and if there is no current long (or short)
position, then post an order to the simulator component to buy (or sell)
at tomorrow’s open.
4. If a position is being held, use the standard exit strategy to handle the
exit.
5. Evaluate the trading performance of the potential solution. For this exercise, the basic “goodness” of a solution is defined as the annualized riskto-reward ratio, a figure that is actually a resealed t-statistic.
6. Tell the genetic optimizer how fit (in the above sense) the potential solution (the chromosome it provided) was. This allows the genetic optimizer component to update the population of chromosomes it maintains.
7. If the solution meets certain criteria, generate performance summaries
and other information, and save this data to a file for later perusal.
8. Repeat the above steps again and again until a sufficient number of
“generations” have passed.
As the above steps are repeated, the solutions, i.e., the “guesses” (actually, “offspring”), provided by the genetic optimizer, will get better and better, on average.
Because of the way the genetic process works, large numbers of distinct, yet effective, solutions will emerge during the evolutionary process. Most of the solutions
will have been recorded in a tile generated in the course of repeatedly performing
the first seven computational steps. In the “Code” section of this chapter, a discussion can be found of some of the C++ code that actually implements the
above steps, including the instantiation and computation of the rules.
Because of the nature of the rules, asymmetries are likely. Consequently,
long entry models are evolved and tested separately from short entry models.
Model performance is evaluated on the entire portfolio. The goal is to find a set of
rules that, when applied in the same way to every tradable, produce the best overall portfolio performance. The procedure being used here differs from the one in
our earlier investigation (Katz and McCormick, February 1997) where sets of
rules, specific to each of several markets, were evolved, an approach that was
much more subject to the effects of curve-fitting. As observed with several other
models that were originally tested on individual tradables, some performance may
be lost when requiring a common model across all markets without market-specific optimization or tuning. In the tests that follow, the standard C+ + software
platform, as well as the standard entry orders and exit strategy, are used.
EventPresent Cint *es. int m, int cb) (
// Used by the Rules function to simplify coding
int i ;
forti=cb-m+l; ic=cb; i++)

static int

CHAPTER

12 Genetic

Algorithma:

266

,, instruct Simulator to employ standard exit strategy
tmp = exitatr[cbl ;

tS.StdeXitdSC'X',

ptlim*tmp,

mmstp*tmp,

maxholdi ;

) /I process next bar
1
The Cf + code implements the rule templates and system trading strategy. The
function Rules implements the rule templates. Arguments vl, ~2, ~3, and v4
(which correspond to the four numbers that comprise any one of the three genes)
provide all the information required to instantiate a rule template. Argument vl is
used to select, via a “switch statement,” the required rule template from the 10 that
are available; arguments ~2, ~3, and ~4, are used to till in the blanks (required
parameters, desired directions of comparison, etc.) to yield a fully defined rule.
The rule is then immediately evaluated for all bars, and the evaluations (1 for
TRUE, 0 for FALSE) are placed in ans, a floating-point vector used to return the
results to the caller.
The macro, BiasedPosScaZe(x,n),
is used to map numbers ranging from 0 to
1,000 to a range of 0 to a, with more numbers mapping to smaller values than
larger ones. The macro is used to compute such things as lookbacks and movingaverage periods from ~2, ~3, or ~4, the values of which are ultimately derived
from the genetic algorithm and scaled to range from 0 to 1,000. The macro is nonlinear (Biased) so that a finer-grained exploration occurs for smaller periods or
lookbacks than for larger ones. For example, suppose there is a moving average,
with a period that ranges from 2 to 100 bars. The intention is to search as much
between periods 2, 3, and 4 as between 30, 50, and 90; i.e., the scale should be
spread for small numbers. This is desired because, in terms of trading results, the
change from a 2.bar moving average to a 5-bar moving average is likely to be
much greater than the change from a 50-bar to a 60.bar moving average.
The macro, LinearScnle(x,a,b), performs a linear mapping of the range 0
1,000 to the range a b. The macro is usually used when calculating
thresholds or deviations. In the rule template code, all parameters are scaled
inside Rules, rather than inside the GA as is the usual practice. The GA has
been instructed to produce numbers between 0 and 1,000, except for chromosome elements 1, 5, and 9, which are the first numbers in each gene, and which
serve as rule template selectors. The reason for local scaling is that templates
for different kinds of rules require parameter and control values having different ranges to be properly instantiated.
The process of evolving trading systems involves asking the genetic optimizer to provide a “guess” as to a chromosome. The genetic optimizer then ran
domly picks two members of the population and mates them (as specified by the
crossover, mutation rate, and chunk-size properties). The resultant offspring is
then returned as a potential solution. When the GA component is told the fitness

of the solution it has just provided, it compares that fitness with that of the leastfit member of the population it maintains. If the fitness of the offspring is greater
than the fitness of the least-fit member, the GA replaces the least-fit member with
the offspring solution. This process is repeated generation after generation, and is
handled by the shell code (not shown), which, in turn, makes repeated calls to
function Model to simulate the trading and evaluate the system’s fitness.
The code for function Model is almost identical to that used in earlier chapters. Prior to the bar indexing loop in which trading orders are generated, the function R&s is invoked three times (once for each gene), with the results being
placed in time series rulel, ruZe2, and n&3. A 50.bar average true range is also
calculated, as it is necessary for the standard exit and for rule evaluation. Inside
the loop, the rule evaluations are checked for the current bar (ndel[cb], rule2[cb],
ruZe3[cb]), and if all evaluations are TRUE, a buy (or a sell, if the short side is
being examined) is generated. Entries are programmed in the standard manner for
each of the three orders tested. Only the in-sample data is used to in the evolutionary process.
The output produced by the shell program permits the selection of desirable
solutions that may be traded on their own or as a group. The solutions may be easily translated into understandable rules to see if they make sense and to use as elements in other systems.
TEST RESULTS
Six tests were performed. The evolutionary process was used to evolve optimal
entry rules for the long and short sides with each of the three entry orders: at open,
on stop, and on limit. In all cases, a maximum of 2,500 generations of genetic processing was specified. The task of computing all the solutions and saving them to
tiles took only a few hours on a fast Pentium, which demonstrates the practicality
of this technique. For each test, the genetic process produced a tabular file (GFiles
1 through 6) consisting of lines corresponding to each of the generations; i.e., each
line represents a specific solution. Most of the early solutions were close to random and not very good, but the quality of the solutions improved as generations
progressed; this is normal for a GA. Each line contains information regarding the
performance of the particular solution that corresponds to the line, as well as to the
complete chromosome, i.e., the set of parameters that represents the gene, which,
in turn, corresponds to the solution expressed in the line.
The best solutions for the long entry at open and for the short entry at open
were selected. These solutions were used to generate the six tests conducted
below. More specifically, the solution that provided the best long entry at open was
tested and its performance was evaluated in the usual way on both samples. The
same solution was also tested and evaluated with entry on stop and on limit. The
same procedure was followed for the short side: The best evolved solution for a

270

short entry at open was determined. It was then tested on both samples with each
of the other two order types, The optimal solution for each order type was not
selected separately from our genetic runs because doing so would not allow comparability across orders. For example, the optimal entry at open might involve a
breakout, while the optimal entry for a stop might involve countertrend momentum-totally different models. By assuming that the entry-at-open model (in
which all trades generated by the model are taken) represents a good, overall
model, the normal course of evaluating that model with the other orders was followed. Since the model is kept constant, this approach permits meaningful comparisons to be made across orders.
Solutions

Evolved

for

Long

Entries

Table 12-I furnishes some of the performance data for the top 20 solutions for
long entries at the open (GFile 1). Each line represents a different trading model.
The parameters are not shown, but the line or generation number (LINE), the
probability or statistical significance (PROB, the decimal point is omitted but
implied in the formatting of these numbers), the average dollars-per-trade
($TRD), the total number of trades taken (TRDS), the profit factor (PFAC’), the
annualized return-on-account (%ROA), and the net profit or loss (NET) in raw
numbers are provided.

The Top 20 Solutions Evolved for Long Entries at the Open

The performance of most of these models is nothing short of impressive. The
better models are statistically significant beyond the 0.00007 level, which means
these solutions have a very high probability of being real and holding up in the
future. Many of the returns were greater than 50% annualized. In some cases, they
reached much higher levels. While the limit order had many of the best solutions,
all orders had many good, if not great, solutions. As in OUT earlier study, the GA
succeeded admirably in finding many tradable models.
Solutions

Evolved

for

Short

Entries

Table 12-2 provides a small proportion of GFtile 4, the file for evolved models
generated for short entries at the open. As in Test 1, the top 20 solutions, in terms
of statistical significance or risk-to-reward ratio, are presented. Again, it can be
seen that there were many good solutions. However, they were not as good as
those for the longs. The solutions were not as statistically significant as for the
longs, and the return-on-account numbers were somewhat smaller. A somewhat
more distressing difference is that, in most cases, the number of trades was very
small; the models appear to have been picking rare events. All else aside, the evolutionary process was able to find numerous, profitable rule sets for the short
entries.

T A B L E

12-E

The Top 20 Solutions Generated for Short Entries at the Open

Test Results for the Standard Portfolio
The best solution shown in Table 12-1 (long trades) and the best solution from
Table 12-2 (short trades) were run with all three entry orders. Tests 1 through 3
represent the best evolved model for long entry at the open tested with entry at
open, on limit, and on stop (respectively). Tests 4 through 6 represent the best
evolved model for short entry over all three orders. Table 12-3 contains the performance data for the best evolved entry-at-open models, both long and short, on
the optimization and verification samples using each of the three entry orders. In
the table, SAMP = whether the test was on the optimization sample (IN or OUT);
ROA% = the annualized return-on-account; ARRR = the annualized risk-toreward ratio: PROB = the associated probability or statistical significance; TRDS
= the number of trades taken across all commodities in the portfolio; WZN% = the
percentage of winning trades; $TRD = average profit/loss per trade; BARS = the

T A B L E

12-S

Performance of the Best Evolved Entry-at-Open Model on the
$Jeyzation
and Verification Samples with Each of the Three Entry

I
I
I
I
Test 03 Short entry-at-open model, entry on stop
IN
/ 23.11
0.6oI
0.0311
OUT
1 -13.01
-0.251
0.W
131

30

average number of days a trade was held, NETL = the total net profit on long
trades, in thousands of dollars; and NETS = the total net profit on short trades, in
thousands of dollars.

Tests 1 through 3: Long-Entry-At-Open Model Tested with Entry at Open, on
Limit, and on Stop. As can be seen in Table 12-3, the entry model produced by
the evolutionary process was profitable across all three order types, both in-sample (as would be expected given the optimization power of GAS) and out-of-sample. In-sample, no return was less than 42% (annualized) for any order. The
dollars-per-trade figures were all greater than $14,000, and not one system had
less than 60% wins! Out-of-sample, there was more variation. With entry at open
and on limit, performance continued to be stellar, with the average trade above
$10,000 and the return on account above 60%. With a stop order, performance was
not quite as good: The return on account was only 11%, and the average trade
yielded $4,246. The only distressing aspect of the results is the small number of
trades taken. For example, in-sample, with entry at open, there were only 43 trades
taken over a lo-year span on a portfolio of 36 commodities. Out-of-sample, there
were only 17 trades over a 5-year period; the trading frequency was roughly constant at approximately 4 trades per year.
The rules were apparently detecting unusual (but tradable) market events; the
model engaged in what might be termed “rare event trading,” which is not necessarily a bad thing. An assortment of systems, each trading different rare events,
could yield excellent profits. When working with a system such as this, trading a
portfolio of systems, as well as a portfolio of commodities, would be suggested.
In the current situation, however, few trades would place the statistical reliability
of the findings in question. The entire problem can be dealt with by using a somewhat more complex way of handling larger combinations of rules.

Tests 4 through 6: Short-Entry-at-Open Model Tested on Entry at Open, on
Limit, and on Stop. In all cases, the performance of the best evolved short entry
at open model, when tested over the three order types, was poorer on the in-sample
data than the long model. Out-of-sample, the results deteriorated significantly and
losses occurred. Unlike the long model, this one did not hold up. It should be noted,
however, that if both the long and short models had been traded together on out-ofsample data, the profits from the long side would have vastly outweighed the losses from the short side; i.e., the complete system would have been profitable. The
pattern of longs trading better than shorts is a theme that has been recurrent
throughout the tests in this book. Perhaps the pattern is caused by the presence of
a few markets in the standard portfolio that have been in extreme bullish mode for
a long time. The way commodities markets respond to excess supply, as contrasted
to the way they respond to shortages, may also help explain the tendency.

Market-by-Market

Test

Results

Table 12-4 contains the market-by-market results for the best evolved entry-atopen models, both long and short, tested on the optimization and verification
samples using each of the three entry orders. Given the small number of trades
taken, many of the empty cells in this table simply reflect the absence of trades.
The SYM column represents the market being studied. The center and rightmost
columns (CO(/NT) contain the number of profitable tests for a given market. The
numbers in the first row represent test identifiers: 01, 02, and 03 represent tests
with entry at open, on limit, and on stop, respectively, for the long side; 04, 05,
and 06 represent corresponding tests for the short side. The last row (COtrAV’)
contains the number of markets on which a given model was profitable. The data
in this table provides relatively detailed information about which markets are and
are not profitable when traded by each of the models: One dash (-) indicates a
moderate loss per trade, i.e., $2,000 to $4,000; two dashes (--) represent a large
loss per trade, i.e., $4,000 or more; one plus sign (+) means a moderate profit per
trade, i.e., $1,000 to $2,ooO; two pluses (+ +) indicate a large gain per trade, i.e.,
$2,000 or more; and a blank cell means that the loss was between $0 and $1,999
or the profit was between $0 and $1,000 per trade. (For information about the various markets and their symbols, see Table II-1 in the “Introduction” to Part II.)
