
Finally, an explosion of volume occurred in early April, well above that
seen previously, thereby hinting at a selling climax. The next rally was asso-
cated with a volume decline, which again would have been consistent with
aclimax. However, the chart leaves us in doubt as to what actually happened
next. The requirement for a change in trend signal would be a violation of
the dashed down trendline and expanding volume.

Chart 22-2 features Adolf Coors. Note the distinct divergence between the
two tops and the extraordinary expansion of volume on the downside break-
out. These negative signs were confirmed by a violation of the dashed trend-
line, which really marked the lower part of a small broadening formation
with a flat bottom. This example also demonstrates the deadly power of
these formations.

The subsequent January-February rally was associated with a trend of
declining volume, so it was not surprising that the price went on to make a
new 2001 low.

Chart 22-3 indicates a parabolic blowoff for Newmont Mining in 1987.
Normally, the price fluctuations would be greater as it reaches its peak.
However, there is no doubt that this situation reflected the flavor of a blowoff
with the parabolic run-up in both the volume and the price trend.

Finally, Chart 22-4 shows Air Products with a double bottom formation in
1987. Note how the volume shrank at the second low registered in Decem-
ber. Generally speaking, the greater the volume contrast between the two

Chart 22-3 Newmont Mining, 1986-1987, parabolic blowoff. (From www.pring.com.)



408 Part Il: Market Structure

Chart 22-4 Air Products, 1987-1988. (From www.pring.com.)

13] by et, ts
a+" mag hey,

14 | mm
J recipes 27 sptnet y

4 fh ae eee

a flit

TY

Meee
"

Hey it
‘|

3006 =
2500 3 |

sil ly ili ll ali Hl alt m it MM MM

1800 3

——

ugust_ [September [October __ {November [December

lows, the more positive the situation, once the price has confirmed with a
breakout above the rally separating the two lows. Some doubt would have
crept into the situation during the decline at A, since volume started to
expand. However, it then exploded on the outside day (B) when the price
rallied above the small dotted trendline. Once again volume fell off as the
price reached the horizontal dashed trendline, but it would have been hard
to top the huge increase in volume associated with the outside day and the
sessions following it. This was actually the neckline of a reverse head-and-
shoulders pattern. The volume decline was therefore associated with the
initial rally off the head and the formation of that very narrow right shoul-
der. However, there was no doubt about the validity of the breakout, which
once again developed on heavy volume.

Summary

* It is normal for volume to go with the trend.

* Ina rising market volume usually leads price.

* When volume contracts as prices rally, it is bearish; when volume expands
when prices fall, it is also bearish.

© Climactic volume, both on the upside and downside, usually indicates
exhaustion and the likelihood that the prevailing trend will reverse.

23

Volume Oscillators

In this chapter we will explore several volume indicators that can be used
for any form of security, finishing up this discussion on volume indicators
used to analyze stock markets.

Rate of Change of Volume

Normally, volume is displayed as a histogram underneath the price. A quick
glance at any chart usually reveals a noticeable increase in the size of the
volume bars that are associated with breakouts, selling climaxes, and so
forth. This is all well and good, but occasionally there are subtle shifts in
the level of volume that are not easily detectable by this method. By mas-
saging the volume data with a rate of change (ROC) calculation it is possi-
ble to get some new insights into the dynamics of volume interpretation.

Monitoring Short-Term Trends

Chart 23-1 shows a 10-day ROC of volume together with a regular volume
histogram for Northern Trust. A 10-day ROC is being used in this example,
but of course it is possible to use any time span you wish. The price peak at
Alooks quite normal under the histogram method, but the ROC technique
indicates a dramatic surge commensurate with an exhaustion move.

Peaks in the ROC indicator, then, can often signal exhaustion moves in
volume that are not readily apparent with the histogram. In Chart 23-2, fea-
turing T. Rowe Price, the initial peak at A is dramatically signaled by the
ROG, but not in the histogram in the bottom panel. The peak at Bis indi-
cated by an expansion in the histogram levels, but the rise is nowhere near
that of the volume ROC, which was close to a record for the period covered
.in the chart. At G, the histogram rallies to a record level, but this is not

409



410

Part I: Market Structure

Chart 23-1 Northern Trust, 2000-2001. (From www.pring.com.)

904
ood Nenter. Tryst eh oO hres

60 a NS

600 { 10-day voiume ROC
odah ra iA ana AAD AMM ACA a Apafhean maa

Chart 23-2 T. Rowe Price, 2000-2001. (From www.pring.com.)

604

454 T. Rowe Price
4o4
384 yr

soo] 10-day volume ROC

whale ty den Lb an fe L whe oul, byt tn | he

Volume Oscillators 411

picked up by the ROC. In this instance, the day of the high volume followed
the initial peak by 2 days and appears to be an isolated affair, totally unim-
portant from an analytical point of view. Finally, at D both series flag the sell-
ing climax at the first bottom, but the comparison is far more dramatic for
the ROC.

The ROC sometimes flags divergences. In Chart 23-3, for instance, the
two dashed arrows point up the series of declining volume momentum peaks
and rising price highs. This indicated serious potential weakness, and sure
enough, the price did experience a decline once it had been confirmed by
violating its uptrendline at C.

In Chart 23-4, we see a breakout in volume at A. Since this was also con-
firmed by the price, a nice rally followed. Rising volume can also be a bear-
ish factor. Later in Chart 23-4, the volume curve rallies above a small up
trendline. This indicated a trend of rising volume, but told us nothing about
the price. A couple of days later we get a vital clue since the price violated
an up trendline. Whenever, after a rally, prices decline on expanding vol-
ume, this is a bearish sign. It was not surprising therefore that the sell-off
continued until the right-hand part of the chart.

It is fairly evident by now that a simple ROC of volume can be a pretty
jagged indicator suitable only for pointing up exhaustion moves and diver-
gences, and, on a limited basis, for constructing trendlines. Sometimes, it
makes sense to run a moving average (MA) through a volume ROC because
it smoothes out the jagged nature of the raw data.

Chart 23-3 Stanley Works, 1999-2000, and a volume ROC. (From www.pring.com.)

Vv otto Cc 1
4 Stanley Works ot dun oh thphast! “Abed
shel Ty hadtel .
25 hep tay, “ut a
“ur We

Tye pauses
wi hay

10-day volume ROC

cal heh Al AMAA.
v POTS TOW

bof jis fo ara i We Bs fh Bs fe eo lis 20 br ad

[September (October ‘November _ [December



412

Chart 23-4 Stanley Works, 1999, and a volume ROC. (From www.pring.com.)

Part Il: Market Structure

44
a4 Stanley Works {un} ’ 4, =
" Jugal } we \,
shel yet Ny
asqrr” ie rte i 7 I
ny
10-day volume ROC

LA ay v4 eas
13 ia fie a 5 3

[September [October [November [December 2004

In Chart 23-5, this has been taken one step further by taking a 10-day MA
of a 25-day volume ROC. This series is a lot smoother than the previous
examples. It is fairly evident from the chart that this calculation lends itself
more readily to price pattern and trendline analysis. First note that the over-
bought and oversold lines are not drawn on an equidistant basis. This is
because this approach treats the ROC as a percentage. Volume can expand,
even on a smoothed basis, by 200 or 300 percent quite easily, yet can only
fall by a maximum of 100 percent. This means that downside action is far
more limited than upside potential. Later we will look at an alternative form
of calculating a smoothed ROC of volume. There are two principal events
on the chart. The first is a head-and-shoulders (H&S) top. The head rep-
resented a buying crescendo, which indicated a change of trend. Once the
neckline had been violated, this merely represented a confirmation that the
volume trend was down. Since the price also violated an up trendline, both
price and volume were now in gear on the downside and it was reasonable
to anticipate an extended correction.

The end of the sell-off was signaled as both series violated important
downtrend lines. Since they were now in gear on the upside, this provided
a nice confirmation that the uptrend was healthy. In this instance, a dow?
trendline for volume actually represents the neckline of a reverse H&S pat"

= ume Oscilators 413

E Chart 23-5 Snap-on Inc., 1993-1994, and a smoothed volume ROC. (From
© + wuw.pring.com.)

ri Snap-on Inc. _
25 3 oe
ee Ea :
H .
4 M00 + ----------- <2 -- 0-0 ooo --- f+ -------------f -----------4
laa Volume ROC (10/25) s
4: NO SFM AMP PAS fo N > MF Mp

tern. I did not display the H and S letters because the left shoulder was also
the right shoulder of the previous upward sloping H&S top and this would
have complicated things.
We discovered earlier that the volume ROC indicator, when calculated
___ With a percent method, does not indicate oversold volume conditions very
~~ well. A solution is to calculate the ROC using subtraction as a basis for the
“~~ calculation in place of the division technique. This is represented in the
lower panel of Chart 23-6. An oversold condition is signaled at A for the sub-
traction method, but not for the division calculation. The disadvantage of
~ thesubtraction calculation is that volume momentum cannot be compared
over long periods of time if the security being monitored experiences a sub-
stantial increase in average daily volume. For charts covering less than 2
years, the subtraction technique is probably a better approach, though it’s
important to remember that because the volume level for individual stocks
and markets can vary tremendously, the overbought and oversold lines will
to be adjusted accordingly. In Chart 23-6, the horizontal line represents
_ 80 overbought reading in both volume indicators. Since the price had been
declining, the high level at B was a selling climax. Since the subtraction-
based momentum indicator was deeply oversold at A, the next slightly lower
a bottom indicated a classic double bottom characteristic.



414

Chart 23-6 Snap-on Inc., 1994-1995, and two-volume ROC calculations. (From

www.pring.com.)

Volume ROC (10/25) division

> LS

Monitoring Primary Trends

Annual (12-month) ROGs are a useful way of measuring primary-trend price
momentum, but since volume trends are more random in nature, such indi-
cators tend to be quite jagged in nature. Chart 23-7 shows the annual ROC
price for the Standard & Poor’s Composite and NYSE volume. However it
order to overcome the jagged nature of the volume data, both series have
been smoothed with a 6-month MA. When used together, the two series can
be extremely instructive.

415

360 4 +P donc TE|
300
20 4

190 =

120 “he nae

| 4 - 240

lee RONTH MA 12) OC HYVO i BO
60 4 1 | | ip 60
40 44 1 40
20 - | 20
' At | (; 2
-40 : et! -40

69 70 73 72 73 74 7S 76 77 78 78 BO Bi E2 BY B4 OS B6 BT BB BF 40

There are several observations that can be made:

© * The volume curve has an almost consistent tendency to peak out ahead

'_ of price during both bull and bear phases.

* In most instances, fairly reliable indications of a potential trend reversal
can be obtained when the volume momentum crosses price.

~ * When the price index is above its zero reference line and is falling, but
volume is rising (such as late 1976, 1981, and late 1987), the expanding
activity represents distribution and should be interpreted as a very bear-
ish factor once the rally has terminated.

* A reversal in volume at a market bottom should be confirmed by a rever-

sal in price momentum as well.

Very high readings in the volume indicator are usually followed by strong

bull markets.

* When volume crosses below zero, it is normally, but not always, a nega-

tive sign. The most bearish situations seem to arise when the price indi-

cator is well above zero. In 1988, for instance, price momentum was well

below zero when volume moved into negative territory, but the market
tallied. On the other hand, in 1973 and 1977 volume crossed below zero



416

just after price momentum had started to roll over from an overbought 3,

level, and this was followed by a major decline.
¢ During the initial stages of a bull move, volume momentum is
above price. (The 1988-1989 rally represents the only exception.)

Chart 23-7 also shows that a reversal in one curve unaccompanied bya
reversal in the other at market bottoms often gives a premature signal. For
example, volume turned up ahead of price at the end of 1973 and 1977,
Consequently, it is wiser to await a signal from both, even though it may
occur at a slightly higher price level.

Volume Oscillator

The volume oscillator is an alternative method of presenting volume ina
momentum format. It is calculated by dividing a short-term measure of the
volume trend by a longer-term one and plotting the result as an oscillator.
It is also possible to divide the close by a measure of trend. In effect, the
calculation is identical as that for price under the trend deviation section
in Chapter 11. The only difference is that volume is substituted for price.
An example is shown in Fig. 23-1. The resulting indicator is an oscillator that
revolves around a zero reference line. A zero reading in the indicator occurs
when both MAs are at identical levels. Positive readings develop when the
shorter-term (10-day in the figure) MA is above its longer-term (25-day)
counterpart, and vice versa.

An example is shown in Chart 23-8 featuring Humana. Here we can see
that the volume oscillator breaks above a small down trendline in March of
1999. This upside breakout merely indicated that the trend of volume
momentum was up. It said nothing about the course of prices. In this
instance, the price violated a horizontal trendline, signaling a bearish com-
bination of declining prices and expanding volume. This was then followed
by an overbought reading in the oscillator, which indicated a selling climax.
That could have proved to be the final bottom. However, the oscillator broke
above a trendline in July 2000, and the price violated one on the downside,
indicating an almost exact replay of the 1999 price action. This just goes to
show that a selling climax often represents the final low, but this is certainly not the
case every time. Z

Chart 23-9 features a 15/45 volume oscillator for Columbia Energy. This
longer-term relationship offers more deliberate and less jagged price action.
The most obvious thing to note is the late 1999 summer reverse H&S in the
oscillator. Once again an increase in volume was indicated, but this time the
price broke to the upside. We see another example later in November. It's

Part I: Market Structure

<3

417

Volume Oscillators

10-day MA

25-day MAS
’
7

Daily volume

TAN ATA

Step |

Step 2

Price

Volume oscillator
(10-day MA + 25-day MA)

fh y' $55 au “
LEN
f Mt a thay

Steo3

Figure 23-1 Calculating a volume oscillator.

F Tare when these oscillators are able to trace out price patterns, but when
* they do, the signals tend to be very reliable. The chart also shows a buying

_¢limax in early November, which was later confirmed by a trend break in

: the price itself. Finally, a selling climax developed in the following March.
so, lis fairly obvious by now that volume oscillators move between bands of
hea

&xtremes, just as price momentum does, but with one important difference.
then a price oscillator is overextended on the upside, it usually indicates



418

Part fl: Market Structive Volume Oscillators

Chart 23
-8 Humana, 1998-1999, and a vohmme oscillator. (From www.pring.com.)

204

Sy

105

Selling climax

Volume ROC (10/25)

poe Woe Bec HSS Fl War “Apr.” May Mun” Dut "Tava |

Chart 23-9 Columbia Energy,

os]

Columbia Energy

Selling
climax

1999-2000, and a volume oscillator. (From www.pring.com) :

419

an overbought market, with the implication that a reversal to the downside
jsdue. With a volume oscillator, an unusual rise in activity is also associated
3 with an imminent trend reversal, but we only learn of the direction with ref-
» erence to the price. Apart from this important difference, volume oscilla-
tors should be interpreted in the same way as price oscillators.

If an exhaustion reversal can be observed in a volume indicator, other
indicators should then be consulted to make sure that the volume action is
being confirmed. One possibility is the use of a volume with a price oscil-
lator. This relationship is not always exact. If volume and price changes are
not closely related for the security being followed, this approach should not
be used.

Chart 23:10 of Compaq compares a price and volume oscillator of dif-
ferent time spans. At points B and D we see selling climaxes. Point B is

, Chart 23-10 Compaq, 1999-2001, with a volume versus a price oscillator. (From
www.pring.com.) :

Price oscillator (10/25)

so) Volume oscillator (1 wus)

AA Laon =
a ae ee Wn,

afoot
ELrwrD AS fo Nb boo

Techni Principle Reversals from overbought readings in
e thomentum indicators usually signal exhaustion, either from the
stion is usually a sign that the prevailing trend

:



420 Part II: Market Structure

particularly interesting because both the price and the price oscillator vio-
late down trendlines. Notice how both oscillators almost touch at D. This
oversold reading in the price oscillator and overbought volume oscillator is
what I term the double whammy effect, since each oscillator is telling us in its
own way that a climax is in the air.

In July 1999 at A, we see a quite different effect. The volume oscillator
becomes extremely oversold, thereby indicating a complete lack of interest.
Then it rallies and crosses above the oversold level, indicating an expansion
of volume. This could go either way, but the break in the two down trend-
lines for the moderately oversold price oscillator and the price itself indi-
cated an upside resolution.

Finally, at Cit’s possible to observe a break in the volume oscillator’s up
trendline. This indicated that a declining wend of volume had begun. You
can also see a small negative divergence between the volume oscillator and
price. Under such circumstances it would be normal to expect the price to
consolidate or decline. Of course, the price could also rise, but with declin-
ing volume the trend would be very suspect. As it turned out, the price con-
firmed with a small trendline break, and the price oscillator reversed to the
downside from a moderately overbought condition.

The main rules for interpreting the volume oscillator are summarized here:

© When the oscillator reaches an extreme and starts to reverse, it is indi-
cating the potential for a reversal of the prevailing trend.

* Volume oscillators occasionally lend themselves to trendline and pattern
construction.

* Expansion in price, associated with a contraction in the volume oscilla-
tor, is bearish.

* An expansion in the oscillator, associated with a contraction in price, is
bearish, except when volume reaches an extreme, in which case a selling
climax is usually signaled.

* The volume oscillator usually leads the price oscillator.

Remember, this is by no means a perfect indicator; therefore, you should

first make sure that it bears a resemblance to the price trend being measured,
and subsequently look for corroborating evidence from other indicators.

The Demand Index

The Demand Index was developed by Jim Sibbet as a method of simulating .
upside and downside volume for markets and stocks where such data afe

not generally available. It combines price and volume into one indicatot

421
Volume Oscillators

with the objective of leading market turning points. The Demand index is
based on the premise that volume leads price. It is included in many c ae
ing packages. Unlike the volume ROC and volume oscillator, the Deman
Index always moves in the same direction as the price. High Demand imac
readings always indicate overbought conditions, and vice versa. I find this
to be a very useful indicator when applied in the following ways:

* Divergences between the indicator and the price indicate an underlying
strength or weakness, depending on whether it is a positive or negative
one. ;

- © Overbought and oversold crossovers often generate good buy and sell sig-
nals in some markets. Since the level of the Demand Index is affected by
the volatility of the security being monitored, optimum overbought and
oversold levels will vary, and should be determined on a case-by-case
approach. However, the + and —25 levels appear to be a good compro-
mise for most securities. , ; ;

* The index sometimes forms price patterns and experiences trendline vio-
lations. They normally represent a reliable advance warning ofan impend-
ing price trend reversal.

Chart 23-11 shows some interesting features. First, at A, both the price and
Demand Index break trendlines for a good sell signal. Later on the process

Chart 23-11 Citrix Systems, 2000-2001, and a Demand Index. (From www.pring.com.)

100

~~ 18) Citrix Systerns

ot

—_ Pet

Demand index

“Teac Feb’ Tar [apr’ [May [un Wut [aug [Sep Jct [Noy [bec [2001 [Feb lwvarl



422 Part Il: Market Structure

is reversed as the Demand Index completes a base along with the price. The
subsequent rally can only be described as a whipsaw. Does this mean that
the Demand Index is no good? No, this is a normal phenomenon in a bear
market. What looks to be a very valid breakout tums out to be a whipsaw.
This type of disappointing action can happen with any indicator. The rem-
edy is to try to identify the direction of the main trend before doing any
short-term analysis. Point C shows a positive divergence between the
Demand Index and the price, and Da small double trendline break devel
ops. Finally, at E, we see a breakout by the Demand Index from a reverse
H&S pattern, but it fails. Once again we need to use some common sense,
because in this case, the breakout came from an overbought condition. As
we learned in the momentum section, breakouts from such high levels typ-
ically result in whipsaws.
