
Trading alongside EUR/USD, but with a lot more zip!
Cable is similar to the EUR/USD in that it trades inversely to the overall USD. But while
EUR/USD frequently gets bogged down in tremendous two-way liquidity, cable exhibits much
more abrupt volatility and more extreme overall price movements. If U.S. economic news
disappoints, for instance, both sterling and EUR/USD will move higher. But if EUR/USD sees a
60-point rally on the day, cable may see a 100+ point rally.
This goes back to liquidity and a generally lower level of market interest in cable. In terms of
daily global trading sessions, cable volume is at its peak during the UK/European trading day, but
that level of liquidity shrinks considerably in the New York afternoon and Asian trading sessions.
During those off-peak times, cable can see significant short-term price moves simply on the basis
of positioning (for example, shorts getting squeezed out).

Another important difference between cable and EUR/USD comes in their different
reactions to domestic economic/news developments. Cable tends to display more explosive

reactions to unexpected UK news/data than EUR/USD does to similar Eurozone news/data.
For example, if better than expected Eurozone data comes out, EUR/USD may only politely
acknowledge the data and move marginally higher. But if surprisingly strong UK data is
reported, GBP/USD can take off on a moonshot.

Important UK data reports
Cable tends to react sharply to UK economic reports, especially when the data is in the
opposite direction of expectations, or when the data is contrary to current monetary policy
speculation. For example, if the market is expecting that the next rate move by the Bank of
England (BOE) will be higher, and a monthly inflation report is released indicating a drop in
price pressures, then GBP/USD is likely to drop quickly as interest rate bets are unwound.
Key UK data reports to watch for are:
BOE Monetary Policy Committed (MPC) rate decisions, speeches by MPC members and
the BOE governor
BOE MPC minutes (released two weeks after each MPC meeting)
Inflation gauges, such as CPI, PPI, and the British Retailers Consortium (BRC) shop price
index
Retail sales and the BRC retail sales monitor
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) house price balance
Industrial and manufacturing production
BOE quarterly inflation report

Safe haven or panic button: USD/CHF
The Swiss franc is frequently referred to as a safe-haven currency, meaning investors flock to it
during times of geo-political tensions or uncertainty. That reputation is largely a relic of the Cold
War. More recently, however, in the aftermath of the GFC and the Eurozone debt crisis of 2009–
2010, the Swiss franc has emerged as a perceived safer alternative to the other major currencies
(USD, EUR, GBP, and JPY), all of which are burdened by troubled economic outlooks and high
debt levels. But there’s nothing magically safe about CHF, as other currencies like AUD and CAD
have similarly outperformed the beleaguered majors.

Trading fundamentals of USD/CHF

In terms of overall market volume, USD/CHF only accounts for 4 percent of global daily trading
volume according to the 2010 BIS survey (and was eclipsed by AUD/USD [6 percent] and
USD/CAD [5 percent]). With such a small share of market turnover, you’d be right in wondering
why it’s considered a major pair in the first place. And that’s probably the key takeaway from this
section: In terms of liquidity, Swissy is not a major.

Trading USD/CHF by the numbers
USD/CHF is quoted in terms of the number of CHF per USD. At a USD/CHF rate of 0.9800, it
costs CHF 0.9800 to buy $1. USD/CHF trades in the overall direction of the U.S. dollar and
inversely to the CHF. If the USD/CHF rate moves higher, the USD is strengthening and the CHF is
weakening. The USD is the primary currency in the pairing, and the CHF is the secondary
currency. That means
USD/CHF is traded in amounts denominated in USD. In online currency trading
platforms, standard lot sizes are $100,000, and minilot sizes are $10,000.
The pip value, or minimum price fluctuation, is denominated in CHF.
Profit and loss accrues in CHF. For one standard lot position size, each pip is worth
CHF 10; for one minilot position size, each pip is worth CHF 1. To convert those amounts
to USD, divide the CHF amount by the USD/CHF rate. Using 0.9800 as the rate, CHF 10
= $10.20 and CHF 1 = $1.02. The pip value will change over time as the level of the
USD/CHF exchange rate fluctuates, with a lower USD/CHF rate giving a higher pip value
in USD terms, and vice versa.
Margin calculations are typically calculated in USD. So it’s a straightforward
calculation using the leverage rate to see how much margin is required to hold a position
in USD/CHF. At 50:1 leverage, $200 of available margin is needed to open a minilot
position of 10,000 USD/CHF.

Keeping the focus on Europe
When looking at economic fundamentals, its worth remembering that Switzerland conducts
the vast share (about 80 percent) of its foreign trade with the Eurozone and remaining EU
countries. So when it comes to the value of the CHF, the Swiss are most concerned with its
level against the EUR as opposed to the USD.
The Swiss National Bank (SNB), the Swiss central bank, tends to get involved in the forex market
only when the Swiss franc is either too strong or too weak against the euro. If the CHF is too
weak, it can import inflation (higher CHF prices for the same goods), upsetting the SNB’s
carefully laid plans to tame inflation. If the CHF is too strong, it can hurt Swiss exports (more
euros needed to buy the same Swiss goods) and undermine the economic outlook. More recently in

2010, CHF strength was also seen as contributing to the risks of deflation (negative inflation
rates), potentially destabilizing the longer-term economic outlook.
The European debt crisis came to the fore in late 2009 and the EUR began to weaken sharply
against CHF, falling below the key 1.5000 EUR/CHF level. The SNB began ratcheting up its
rhetoric opposing CHF strength relative to the EUR, but the market forces were simply too great
— the EUR was being dumped and CHF embraced. The SNB felt compelled to undertake
unilateral intervention to stem CHF strength, but was ultimately overwhelmed and EUR/CHF fell
to below 1.2500 despite nearly $200 bio being spent on intervention. This is another example of
unilateral intervention proving ineffective, at least in the medium term. A longer-term shift in
EUR/CHF will require a more positive outcome to the European debt crisis. Still, the SNB is
unlikely to ever completely relent on efforts to limit CHF strength.

Important Swiss economic reports
Swiss data tends to get lost in the mix of data reports out of the United States and the Eurozone,
with many in the market looking at Switzerland as a de facto Eurozone member. In that sense,
market reactions to Swiss data and events primarily show up in EUR/CHF cross rates. The
important Swiss data to keep an eye on are
SNB rate decisions and speeches by directorate members
KOF Leading Economic Indicator
Retail sales
Trade balance
PPI and CPI
Unemployment rate

Price action behavior in GBP/USD and USD/CHF
I group these two currency pairs together because they share similar market liquidity and trading
interest, which are the main drivers of price action. The more liquid a market is, the more
smoothly prices will move; the thinner the market, the more erratically prices will move. In both
pairs, liquidity and market interest tend to be the thinnest among the majors, especially outside of
European trading hours. As a result, both pairs typically trade with wider 3- to 5-pip prices
relative to narrower spreads in EUR/USD and USD/JPY.
The most important trading characteristics of sterling and Swissy are as follows:
Price action tends to be jumpy, even in normal markets. Cable and Swissy are like
long-tailed cats in a room full of rocking chairs — extremely nervous. In a relatively calm

market, you can see prices in these two pairs jump around by routine 2- to 3-pip
increments (say, from 20/25 to 22/27 or 23/28, back to 21/26, and then 24/29).
When prices are moving in response to news or data, those price jumps can be even
more pronounced, frequently changing by 3 to 5 pips between prices. Online traders are
also likely to get more “rates changed” responses when trying to deal on the current
market price. That response means the price changed by the time your trade request was
received and the attempted trade was not completed. The subsequent price may be 2 to 3
pips higher or lower than where you first tried to deal.
Price action tends to see one-way traffic in highly directional markets. When news or
data move the market, the price changes in Swissy and cable are apt to be the most abrupt.
If a data report sends EUR/USD higher by a quick 20 to 30 pips, cable and Swissy are
likely to see prices move by 30 to 40 pips or more. On top of that, cable and Swissy will
remain highly directional and tend to see minimal pullbacks or backing and filling.
Look at cable and Swissy as leading indicators for EUR/USD. One of the ways
that experienced traders judge the level of buying or selling interest, how bid or offered a
market is, during a directional move is by looking at how cable and Swissy are trading.
For example, if bids in USD/CHF keep appearing in a relatively orderly fashion, say
every 1 to 2 pips on a downswing, it’s a sign that the move is not especially extreme. On
the other hand, if the prices are dropping by larger increments and displaying very few
bounces, it’s a strong indication that a larger move is unfolding.
False breaks of technical levels occur frequently. Cable and Swissy also have a nasty
habit of breaking beyond technical support and resistance levels, only to reverse course
and then trade in the opposite direction. And I’m not talking about just a few points
beyond the level here, but more like 25 to 30 pips in many cases. The frequency of false
breaks is a result of the relatively lower level of liquidity and market interest in these
pairs. Instead of having a selling order at technical resistance, which you may reasonably
expect in EUR/USD or USD/JPY, there may only be a stop-loss buying order beyond the
resistance in cable and Swissy.
Spike reversals are very common. The tendency of cable and Swissy to overshoot
in extreme directional moves and to generate false breaks of technical levels means that
spike reversals appear frequently on short-term charts. Though the size of the spikes will
vary depending on the market circumstances and current events, spike reversals of more
than 30 to 40 points on an hourly closing basis should alert you to a potentially larger
reversal taking place. The bigger the spike reversal (and it’s not uncommon to see 50- to
70-pip spikes in cable and Swissy), the more significance it holds for the future direction.

Tactical trading considerations in GBP/USD and
USD/CHF
The routine short-term volatility of cable and Swissy suggest several important tactical trading
refinements. The overarching idea here is to adjust your trading strategies to weather the erratic
price action and higher overall volatility in these pairs in comparison to the larger EUR/USD.
It may help to think of sailing a boat on a lake. When the wind is calm, you need to tighten up the
sails to catch all the wind you can. But when the wind starts gusting, you need to let the sails out or
you’re liable to get blown over. The same is true when trading cable and Swissy.

Reducing position size relative to margin
This first consideration is especially important in cable, due to its higher relative value to
the USD. With GBP/USD trading around 1.60 to the dollar (£1 = $1.60), a single minilot
position (£10,000) eats up $320 in required margin at 50:1 leverage. A similar-size position
in EUR/USD (at 1.30) requires only $260 in margin. If you’re going to trade in cable, you’ll
need more margin than if you stayed with EUR/USD, USD/JPY, or Swissy.
Cable and Swissy’s higher volatility also argue for overall smaller position sizes. A smaller
position will allow you to better withstand their short-term volatility and give you greater staying
power relative to margin. If you’re willing to risk $500 in capital on a particular trade, that
equates to 50 pips in EUR/USD and GBP/USD. But the chances of an adverse move of 50 pips in
GBP/USD are greater than a 50-pip move in EUR/USD.

Allowing a greater margin of error on technical breaks
If you’re basing your trades on technical levels of support and resistance, you need to anticipate
that those levels will be tested at the minimum. In sterling and Swissy, tests of technical levels
frequently result in false breaks as stops are triggered. If your stop loss is too close to the
technical level, it’s ripe for the picking by the market. Factoring in a margin of error when placing
stop-loss orders can help — it allows you to withstand any short-term false break. Using a margin
of error may also require you to reduce your position size to give you greater flexibility and
margin staying-power. For a guide, I use a 25 to 30 pip margin of error in cable and Swissy versus
10 to 15 pips in EUR/USD.

Anticipating overshoots and false breaks for position entry
When you’re looking to enter a position by selling on rallies or buying on dips, you’re

probably focused on selling at resistance and buying on support. You can take advantage of
cable and Swissy’s tendency to overshoot or make false breaks of technical levels by placing
your limit order behind the technical level (above resistance, below support). If cable and
Swissy break through the level, you’d be able to enter at a better price than you would have if
you’d adhered to the technical level alone.
Alternatively, you can enter a portion of your desired position at the technical level and enter the
rest at better prices if the level is breached, improving the average rate of your position. Worstcase scenario, the market only fills you for half of your desired position and then reverses. Bestcase scenario, you establish your full desired position at a better rate than you expected and the
market reverses. If the market keeps going against you, your average position rate is still better
than if you’d stuck to the technical level alone.

Being quick on the trigger
Cable and Swissy tend to move very quickly and may not spend a lot of time around key
price levels. This favors traders who are decisive and quick on the trigger in terms of
entering and exiting positions. That’s why it helps to have a disciplined trading plan in place
before you enter the market. Above all, avoid being distracted from your plan by the sharper
price movements.
Another way you can take advantage of the short-term volatility of cable and Swissy is by using
resting orders to get in and out. You may not be in front of your trading screen, or your click-anddeal trade may not have made it through on a rapid price fluctuation. A standing limit order will
accomplish the same trade — only automatically and instantly if the price deals. Trailing stops are
especially useful when you have a position that’s moving the right way.

Resisting the contrarian urge following large directional moves
After an extended directional price move, many traders may feel inclined to trade in the
opposite direction, if only for a short-term correction. Maybe you missed the big move and
think it’s ripe for a pullback. Or maybe it looks like the move has gone too far, too fast.
Resist that urge in cable and Swissy.
On days with large directional price moves of more than 100 pips, cable and Swissy often finish
out the trading day at the extremes of the price move (meaning at the highs on an up-move and at
the lows on a decline). So even if you sell the high of a move up, you’re unlikely to get any joy on
the day.

Picking your spots wisely

Instead of simply jumping into sterling or Swissy, the way you may in EUR/USD, you’re going to
need to do a fair amount of watching and studying to get a handle on where appropriate entry
points may be. Short-term volatility in cable and Swissy make for treacherous short-term trading
conditions. You’ll greatly improve your chances of catching a favorable move if you step back and
look at the medium and longer-term pictures (four-hour and daily) instead of getting caught up in
the short-term volatility.

Chapter 9

Minor Currency Pairs and Cross-Currency
Trading
In This Chapter
Branching out beyond the majors
Getting to know the minor dollar pairs and the Scandies
Finding opportunities in cross-currency trading
Understanding how cross-currency trading affects the overall market
Trading in the major currency pairs accounts for the lion’s share of overall currency market
volume, but speculative trading opportunities extend well beyond just the four major dollar pairs
(currency pairs that include the USD). For starters, three other currency pairs — commonly known
as the minor or small dollar pairs — round out the primary trading pairs that include the U.S.
dollar. Still more trading options are available in the currencies of Scandinavian nations that
haven’t adopted the EUR, referred to as the Scandies. Then there are the cross-currency pairs, or
crosses for short, which pit two non-USD currencies against each other.
In this chapter, I take a closer look at the minor currency pairs, Scandies, and cross-currency pairs
to see how they fit into the overall market and offer an additional array of speculative trading
opportunities. Although the USD is frequently the focus of the currency market, you’re going to
want to know where the opportunities are when the spotlight isn’t on the greenback.

Trading the Minor Pairs
The minor dollar pairs are USD/CAD (the U.S. dollar versus the Canadian dollar), AUD/USD
(the Australian dollar versus the U.S. dollar), and NZD/USD (the New Zealand dollar versus the
U.S. dollar). The minor currency pairs are also commonly referred to as commodity currencies.
The commodity currencies reference stems from the key role that oil, metals, agricultural and
mining industries play in the national economies of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. See the
nearby sidebar “The (not just) commodity currencies” for important qualifications about the
commodity relationship. USD/CAD and AUD/USD account for 5 and 6 percent of global daily
trading volume, respectively, according to the 2010 Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
survey of forex market volumes. NZD/USD accounts for less than 2 percent each of spot trading
volume. But these three pairs offer more than ample liquidity to be actively traded and can offer

significant trading opportunities, both for short-term traders and medium- to longer-term
speculators.

Trading fundamentals of USD/CAD
The Canadian dollar (nicknamed the Loonie after the local bird pictured on the dollar coins)
trades according to the same macroeconomic fundamentals as most other major currencies. That
means you’ll need to closely follow Bank of Canada (BOC) monetary-policy developments,
current economic data, inflation readings, and political goings-on, just as you would any of the
other majors.

A key element to keep in mind when looking at USD/CAD is that the trajectory of the
Canadian economy is closely linked to the overall direction of the U.S. economy. The United
States and Canada are still each other’s largest commercial trading partners, and the vast
majority of Canadians live within 100 miles of the U.S./Canadian border. Even the BOC
regularly refers to the U.S. economic outlook in its economic outlooks. So I don’t think it’s an
overgeneralization to say that as goes the U.S. economy, so goes the Canadian economy. But
it’s a long-term dynamic, making for plenty of short-term trading opportunities, especially
when U.S. and Canadian outlooks diverge.

The sharp rise in commodity demand from China and other rapidly developing economies
in recent years has heightened the sensitivity of CAD to overall commodity price
developments. In this light, be sure to factor in the global economic outlook when evaluating
the Canadian outlook.

Geography also plays a role when it comes to U.S. and Canadian economic data, because
both countries issue economic data reports around the same time each morning or only a few
hours apart. At one extreme, the result can be a negative USD report paired with strong
Canadian data, leading to a sharp drop in USD/CAD (selling USD and buying CAD). At the
other end, strong U.S. data and weak Canadian numbers can see USD/CAD rally sharply.
Mixed readings can see a stalemate, but it always depends on the bigger picture.

The (not just) commodity currencies
I don’t want to leave you with the impression that the so-called commodity currencies’ trading
behavior is strictly a function of what’s happening to commodity prices. To be sure, recent years’
price movements in those pairs are generally highly correlated to movements in underlying
commodities, like gold, silver and oil. But correlation is not causation. What that means is that just
because two assets may move together in a statistically significant relationship, the movement of

one is not necessarily causing movement in the other.
More typically, they may both be responding to broader fundamental developments that affect each
similarly, such as the strength of global demand as seen in Chinese growth data. China is a
tremendous consumer of raw materials, and Australia is a leading exporter of metals, coal, and
grains. Market perceptions of strong demand could see prices move higher for such commodities.
Gains in commodity prices may improve profitability at Australian mining and agricultural firms,
attracting global investors who need AUD to buy such Australian stocks. In this scenario, it would
not be surprising to see the AUD gain alongside commodity prices.
But there are also plenty of scenarios that could see such relationships break down, especially in
the short run, and see prices diverge. Carrying on with the previously mentioned China/Australia
relationship, strong growth and commodity demand could see the Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA), the Australian central bank, indicate that interest rates may need to be raised, reinforcing
the positive correlation and tending to support AUD. But if the RBA later postpones raising rates
due to unforeseen events, such as happened after massive floods in early 2011, currency market
expectations may be disappointed and the AUD could weaken, even as commodity prices maintain
gains, but now on production disruptions. I hope you get the idea that correlations between
currencies and commodities are not carved in stone.
To give you a more concrete picture, the following tables show the historical correlations
(correlation coefficients) between these currencies and individual commodities over a two-year
and ten-year period ending in February 2011, respectively, based on weekly data and percentage
changes. A correlation coefficient is a statistical measure of how closely two securities values
change relative to each other. Coefficients can range from +1.00 to –1.00, with a coefficient of
+1.00 meaning the two assets are perfectly positively correlated (meaning, a 1 percent gain in one
would see a 1 percent gain in the other). A coefficient of –1.00 would mean the two are perfectly
negatively correlated (meaning, a rise of 1 percent in the first would see a decline of 1 percent in
the second). A coefficient of zero means there is no statistically identifiable relationship, and the
two are said to be non-correlated. As a rough benchmark, a correlation of +0.7/–0.7 or more is
considered a pretty strong relationship. But remember, correlations exist over time. What’s closely
correlated today may not be so closely correlated tomorrow, or next month. Medium and longerterm traders may find such correlations more useful than short-term, intraday traders, where
individual market news is more likely to cause a breakdown in the observed relationship.
