
BOX 20.1 GOLDEN RATIO (1.618) FROM ARBITRARY WHOLE NUMBERS
Pick any two whole numbers. For this example, we picked 14 and 285, but it will
work for any two numbers. Add the two numbers together. In the following example,
14 + 285 equals 299. Calculate the ratio of the sum and the second addend; in our
example, this is 299/285 = 1.049. Repeat the process adding the second addend (e.g.,
285) to the resulting sum (e.g., 299). As you progress through the iterations, notice
how the ratio approaches 1.618.
Iteration
1. Add the two numbers together: 14 + 285
2. Add the result to the highest previous: 285 + 299
3. Add the result to the highest previous: 299 + 584
4. Add the result to the highest previous: 584 + 883
5. Add the result to the highest previous: 883 + 1467
6. Add the result to the highest previous: 1467 + 2350
7. Add the result to the highest previous: 2350 + 3817
8. Add the result to the highest previous: 3817 + 6167
9. Add the result to the highest previous: 6167 + 9984

Result
299
584
883
1467
2350
3817
6167
9984
16151

Ratio
1.049
1.953
1.512
1.661
1.602
1.624
1.616
1.619
1.618

Plato considered the golden ratio to be the “most binding of all mathematical relations, and
considered it the key to the physics of the cosmos” (Frost and Prechter, 2000, p. 101). Germanborn, seventeenth-century mathematician, astronomer, and astrologer, Johannes Kepler likened
the golden ratio to a fine jewel and claimed that it described all creation. The reason for this adoration is that the ratio appears in innumerable natural phenomena. For example, consider a spiral
that has its arc length to its diameter at a ratio of 1.618; this spiral occurs in nature in comet tails,
galaxy spirals, spider webs, pine cones, snail shells, ocean waves, and even the human finger
when curled. It is universal. It is a growth pattern in nature, and Elliott hypothesized that it
occurred in the stock market as well.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

495

Look back at Figure 20.1; see how the number of waves, as the pattern becomes more complex, follows a Fibonacci sequence. The first waves are corrective and impulse, one and one,
totaling to two. Then there are three corrective waves and five impulse waves, totaling eight
waves. Each of these numbers is part of the Fibonacci sequence. If we take the progression further and include smaller and smaller waves, the number of waves continues in a Fibonacci
sequence. Although this relation to Fibonacci numbers is interesting, it is portraying the ideal.
But remember if you take any two whole numbers and add them together, then add to the sum the
previous highest number, eventually you will arrive at phi, the Fibonacci ratio (1.618), between
the highest number and the previous highest number. (See the example in Box 20.1.) Thus, the
ratio is the universal relation rather than the numbers themselves. It is the ratio and derivatives of
it that are applied to stock markets.

Price and Time Targets
Elliott wave enthusiasts, to predict retracements and price targets, as we have already seen, and
to project the timing of the next series of waves, use Fibonacci ratios. For example, Prechter
notes that corrective waves tend to correct approximately 61.8%, or its complement 38.2%
(100%–61.8%), of their corresponding impulse waves. Prechter is quick to point out, however,
that this is a tendency, not even a guideline, and is not dependable. He found that more reliable
relations exist in projecting target prices for alternating waves. For example, in percentage terms,
impulse waves tend to be related in some manner by 2.618, 1.618, 0.618, or 0.382. As an example, he noted that the rise in the Dow Jones Industrial from the low in 1932 to 1937, wave 1,
gained 371.6%, while wave 3 from 1942 to 1966 gained 971.7%, 2.618 times as much. This relationship is pictured in Figure 20.11.
Numerous other examples of relations between waves can be cited. One common occurrence is when wave 1 and wave 5 are the same length, wave 3 is often either 1.618 or 2.681 times
wave 1. In addition, in a fifth wave extension, the length of the fifth wave is frequently 1.618
times the length from the beginning to the end of wave 3. Many times in an extended wave 1, the
remaining four waves end at 0.618 the length of the extended first wave. In corrective waves,
wave C is often related to wave A in some Fibonacci ratio, and the wave 4 length is often related
by a Fibonacci ratio or by equality to the length of wave 2.
In addition to the extent of price movements in waves being related by Fibonacci numbers,
times in stock market data have also been related to the Fibonacci ratio. However, this exercise is
spurious at best. Tables are often used to show the time differences between important peaks and
valleys in market prices that occurred in a Fibonacci number of years, months, or days. Elliott
himself used the example of the 34 months between the peak in September 1929 and the bottom

Download at www.wowebook.com

496

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

in July 1932 and the 13 years between the peak in 1929 and the low in 1942 (see Figure 20.12).
Although others also have seen a relation between Fibonacci time counts and important events,
Hamilton Bolton, a contemporary of and correspondent with Elliott, and publisher of the Bank
Credit Analyst, stated, “Permutations tend to become infinite” (Frost and Prechter, 2000, p. 141).
One of the tenets of any technical theory is that the principles must make sense. In the case of
time, which is determined somewhat arbitrarily by humans and differently over the ages, the
likelihood of there being a consistent series of time intervals that follow Fibonacci sequence
numbers is a little far fetched. Indeed, a comprehensive study by Herbert Riedel, PhD (1989) on
182 days of the Dow Jones Industrial Average in 1985 demonstrated that no evidence of
Fibonacci ratios was present either in retracements or in timing.

Wave 3
785

Dow Jones Industrial Average
583

(Showing How Wave 3 Is a Fibonacci
Ratio to Wave 1)

433

322

1942–1966 (Wave 3)
971.7%
(2.618 Wave 1)

239

Wave 1
178

132

98

Wave 2
73

1932–1937 (Wave 1)

371.6%

54

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 20.11 Prechter interpretation of Fibonacci ratio between wave 1 and wave 3 in period
1932–1966 (monthly: 1930–1970)

Download at www.wowebook.com

497

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

34 Months
13 Years
301.00

226.00

Elliott’s Use of Fibonacci Numbers for Time

170.00

127.00

96.00

72.00

Dow Jones Industrial Average

54.00

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 20.12 Elliott’s example of Fibonacci numbers in time (monthly: January 1929–December 1942)

Although there is perhaps a far-too-often coincidence of waves being related to other
waves by some variations of the Fibonacci ratio, the practical problem is that the relations, even
if valid, are not usually known until after the fact. Thus, the relations are interesting but generally
unproductive. To some extent, the same can be said about wave structure. One of the great problems with Elliott wave analysis is that the proper sequence of impulse and corrective waves is not
often recognized until after the price action has completed. Even then, analysts—even those with
considerable experience—will argue over whether the configuration is one type or another. For
the technical analyst, especially one starting out, the concept of the Elliott Wave Theory must be
understood in general terms, but the likelihood of being a seasoned practitioner is remote without considerable study, analysis, memorization of the rules and guidelines, and inspection of
many long- and short-term price charts.

W. D. Gann
William Delbert Gann, born in Texas in 1878, roughly at the same time as Elliott, left his formal
schooling at the age of 16 to begin his career as an itinerant salesman. Legend suggests that he

Download at www.wowebook.com

498

Part VI Other Technical Methods and Rules

made several fortunes in the commodities markets, married a number of younger women, and
spent huge sums on planes, yachts, real estate, and gambling in Cuba (Costa, 2000). Some
believe he was a scoundrel, that his courses on trading were full of generalities and astrology, and
that he sold his advisory service several times (Williams, www.ireallytrade.com/asiseeit.htm).
We do know that he died with very few assets. Nevertheless, Gann was a prolific writer, both of
novels and advisory books. He published articles and sold courses on trading. Richard Wyckoff
wrote an article on his trading, and Gann received considerable notoriety in his time for trading,
especially in cotton. He was a superb trader, as witnessed by several independent observers.
Whether or not he used the methods he proposed is uncertain.
Gann’s published concept of market structure, specifically in commodity markets, encompassed time as well as price. He is known for such things as circles, squares, and triangles, all
having to do with the angles of a circle. For example, he strongly believed in the seasonal cycle
of approximately 360 days, the same as the number of degrees in a circle, the circle of the earth
traveling around the sun. Thus, portions of a circle were important, such as 90, for 90 degrees, a
quarter year, and 180, a half year; he expected that lows to highs or highs to lows would generally occur within those time periods or divisions of them. He preached that the range between
tops and bottoms could be divided into zones that would project retracement levels, and he used
angles drawn from tops and bottoms that when crossed, especially at the same level as his support and resistance zones, were important predictors of time and price for retracements. His concept of squares and rectangular shapes, not mathematical formulas, defined where in time and
price future price motion should occur. Gann also discovered the strength of the fifth year of each
decade, which since 1905 has been an up year. He claimed incorrectly to have invented swing
charts, but he did successfully promote them as a method of trend following. His square of 52 is
based on the 52 weeks in a year, or in a circle. His square of 144 is 12312, or the number of
months in a circle. He devised spiral calculators such as the square of nine, the square of four, the
360-degree circle chart, and the hexagon chart. Gann also published a summary of 28 trading
rules, all of which are still valid today.
There is no question that Gann was an inventive person. Whether his discoveries are hocuspocus to sell his courses and books we do not know, because his methods are too vague to properly test, but even today a few analysts follow his numerological methods and claim success.

CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we have discussed the resemblance of stock market cycles to cycles seen occurring in nature. The basis for much of this theory goes back to the work of Ralph Elliott in the late
1930s. Elliott’s work focuses on the waves in the stock market, especially how these waves are
related to Fibonacci numbers and the golden ratio. His work has been thoroughly studied by subsequent analysts, especially by Robert Prechter.
The mathematical relationships and tie to nature found by these analysts can be fascinating. A basic knowledge of wave theory is a great aid to the technical analyst. However, making
profitable trading decisions based primarily on wave theory is difficult. The theory is complex,
requiring a great deal of study. Often waves can be found, in retrospect, which amazingly adhere

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 20 Elliott, Fibonacci, and Gann

499

to some variation of the Fibonacci sequence. However, it is often impossible to recognize these
patterns and waves as they are occurring, making it difficult to use them for trading decisions.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain the following Elliott Wave Theory terms:
a. Motive wave
b. Corrective wave
c. Impulse wave
d. Subwave
e. Truncation
f. Equality
g. Alternation
h. Rule
2. The EWT pattern is often said to be like “three steps forward and two steps back.” Explain
this phrase as it relates to EWT.
3. Explain what a Fibonacci number is.
4. Explain the difference between a zigzag and a flat in EWT.
5. Choose any two numbers, and go through the method shown in Box 20.1 to demonstrate
how you will arrive at the golden ratio.
6. Explain why using EWT can be difficult for the average analyst.

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

P A R T

V I I

SELECTION
C HAPTER 21 S ELECTION OF M ARKETS AND I SSUES :
T RADING AND I NVESTING

501

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

2 1

SELECTION OF MARKETS AND ISSUES:
TRADING AND INVESTING

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
By the end of this chapter, you should be familiar with

• The major factors to consider when choosing a security to trade
• The major factors to consider when choosing an investment security
• The relationship between hard asset and soft asset markets
• The basics of intermarket analysis
• The concept of relative strength among different investment vehicles and its implications for investors

• The basic methods of determining an individual stock’s relative strength
We have now reached the stage in technical analysis where we become more practical. After
learning how to analyze the long-term stock market and how to use various technical tools to
determine the best entry and exit points in individual issues, we now focus on exactly what issues
to consider for trading or investment goals. Those interested in using technical methods in markets must determine whether they have the time, inclination, and facilities to trade issues, or
whether they want to consume less time and utilize technical methods for investing over longer
periods.

WHICH ISSUES SHOULD I SELECT FOR TRADING?
Trading requires a complete commitment to the markets. It requires time every day and night,
even if swing trading from day to day. Intraday trading requires constant attention, excellent execution abilities, and high-speed price reporting. It is not for everyone, and it is not advisable for
people who have other jobs and limited time to commit. Trading can be accomplished through

503

Download at www.wowebook.com

504

Part VII Selection

mechanical systems that are developed for that purpose, but even then, a heavy time commitment
is necessary to perform the executions, to monitor the system, and perhaps to develop new systems.
The wise trader will select more than one issue to trade. In the stock market and the futures
market, diversification is a necessity for many reasons. First, when a single issue becomes dormant in a small trading range and is difficult to trade, other issues with which the trader is
already familiar can take its place. Second, following more than one issue increases the odds that
a profitable trend will not be missed. Third, diversification, especially in issues that are not correlated, reduces risk. Thus, when screening markets with the criteria discussed next, anywhere
from three to ten issues should be selected, watched, and traded. In Chapter 23, “Money and Risk
Management,” we will see that only a minimum commitment should be made to any one issue.
Trading only one issue, and using more than the suggested initial capital in that one issue, substantially increases risk of failure.
Some traders, rather than concentrating on just a few issues, would prefer to screen
through the entire marketplace for issues showing signs of an impending trend change. They program their computers to search for new highs and lows, gaps, one- and two-day reversal patterns,
range and volatility changes, volume changes, moving average crossovers, and any number of
other short-term indicators of possible trend change in individual stocks and contracts. From this
information, they glean issues to trade over short periods and then go on to the next selected
issues.

Choosing Between Futures Markets and Stock Markets
A trader must also make a choice about whether to trade in the stock market or the futures market or both. This choice is a personal one. The trader must consider a number of factors when
making this decision. These factors include costs, personal risk preferences, preferred time horizon for trading, familiarity with each market, access to the proper equipment, and execution
capability. Let us look at these factors in a little more detail.
Costs
Trading is a grueling, time-consuming process. It is not as glamorous as some recent movies
make it out to be. Aside from the emotional strain of having to make instant decisions and instant
executions, trading has many hidden costs that add up because of the many transactions necessary to profit. These transaction costs go beyond the commissions paid to the executing broker.
The first cost is the initial setup of equipment. To trade, you must have not only a high-speed
computer, excellent data feeds, and reliable, quick execution capability, but you must also have a
backup. You cannot afford to have your system go down during a short-term, especially intraday,
trade. Other costs are commissions, slippage, missing the intended price during a fast market,
limit days, and unexpected events, seemingly always occurring at a critical juncture. (The dog
pulls the wires out of the computer, the cat walks across the keyboard and executes several
orders, and so on.)

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 21 Selection of Markets and Issues: Trading and Investing

505

Risk
Each trader must determine his or her own level of risk tolerance. Futures are considerably more
risky than stocks because they are usually traded with high leverage. Leverage is the amount of
capital that can be borrowed to initiate and carry a position. Because futures can be entered into
with a relatively small amount of personal capital, a trade can lose all its capital with a small
adverse move. With futures, the danger always exists that an adverse move will eliminate the
trader’s protective margin, requiring the trader to come up with more funds or be “stopped out.”
We investigate this leverage risk more thoroughly in Chapter 23. Stocks can also be leveraged, but usually not to the degree that futures can, and are, thus, not as risky to capital. This is
not to say, however, that a stock trader cannot go broke as quickly as a futures trader can. Capital
risk depends on many other factors than just leverage.
Suitability
Your experience in the markets determines the issues with which you are most comfortable. For
beginners in technical trading, the slowest and least risky markets are the best. Once your trading
experience provides enough confidence, you can enter other faster and more risky issues. Suitability also encompasses time available, how much should be invested in fancy quote and execution equipment, and so on. It is based on personal choice and preference.
Time Horizon
Three types of trading are done by nonmarket makers—scalping, day trading, and swing trading.
Scalping is taking very small profits between the bid and ask prices of a stock. It requires very
close attention, excellent execution, fast-feed charting equipment, and communications, in addition to considerable experience. The competition is fierce between the scalper and the market
makers, specialists, floor traders, and those others very closely connected with the issues being
traded. This type of trading is not for amateurs.
Day trading is trading an issue and closing all positions by the end of the day. It has an
advantage in that there is no overnight risk because no position is held overnight. A variation of
day trading is called screen trading. Screen trading uses technical analysis intraday shown on a
computer screen to give signals. The bar lengths are determined by the trader’s ability to react
quickly and accurately. Most commercial intraday technical analysis software divides trading
into anywhere from single tick-by-tick, to 5-, 10-, 15-, and 60-minute bar lengths. From this data
and software, almost any indicator or pattern can be programmed and used to identify opportunities. Again, however, it requires the time to watch positions all day and the equipment necessary
to execute and watch entries and exits. Nevertheless, day trading has become very popular. The
new automated electronic exchanges where trades are executed immediately against the trading
book have revolutionized day trading and made markets more accessible to nonprofessionals.
The advent of the e-mini S&P 500 futures at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is an excellent
example of a futures contract that is executed almost instantly and has a margin requirement considerably less than its earlier, larger version.
Swing trading, the third type of trading, is more easily accomplished by amateurs. It is the
holding of positions over several days or weeks, attempting to catch the small trends accompanying or counter to a longer trend. The swing trader can determine entry and exit prices during non-

Download at www.wowebook.com

506

Part VII Selection

trading hours and can judiciously place orders for the next trading day to enter or exit positions.
Many swing traders watch the market throughout the day, but it is often not necessary.
Of course, professional traders are active in all the preceding trading methods because they
are intimately in tune with the markets.
Volatility
As we saw in some of the short-term trading patterns, low volatility is a difficult world in which
to make profits. The breakout from low volatility to high volatility is where most of the profit is
derived. Therefore, futures or stocks with low volatility are generally not good choices for trading. The transaction costs of exit and entry, the possible mistakes in execution, and other costs
demand that the issue traded has enough price change to make a profit despite these problems.
Liquidity
Volatility, however, must be accompanied by liquidity. Price changes may be large (high volatility), but if no size is available for trading, this volatility is of no use to the trader. Liquidity is the
ability to transact a meaningful number of shares or contracts easily and without bringing about
a large price change. Even volatility with heavy volume may be deceiving if the volume only
occurs sporadically within the trading horizon or is the product of high-speed trading systems
buying and selling the spread for large investment firms. For stocks, volatility can be measured
using the ATR14. A more complicated formula is necessary for futures because of the different
dollar value of point moves and the different margin requirements for each market contract.
Volatility usually is related to the size of the bid and ask and the spread between bid and
ask. A narrow spread does not guarantee liquidity because the bid and ask may be small. For easy
entry and exit, high liquidity is a requirement. Trading is difficult enough without having to
worry about whether an order will be executed close to the desired price. Each month, a section
of Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities called “Futures Liquidity” shows a list of the
most popular futures markets with their respective relative liquidity. These figures are based on
the number of contract expirations that are traded, the total open interest, and volume. The list
also displays the margin and effective margin for each contract series.
Volume
Issues with constant heavy volume are usually issues that have liquidity, but they might not have
sufficient volatility to profit. Volume is, therefore, a requirement for a trading issue, but it is not
the final determinant. Liquidity and volatility are also required.
