
Third, an important corollary to the notion that markets trend is the technical analyst’s
belief that prices are nonrandom. As we address further in Chapter 4, if prices are nonrandom,
past prices potentially can be used to predict future price trends. Technical analysts reject the
notion that stock prices are random.
Fourth, technical analysis assumes that history, in principle, will repeat itself (or as Mark
Twain said, “History rhymes: It does not repeat”), and that humans will behave similarly to how
they have in the past in similar circumstances. This similar behavior tends to form into patterns
that have predictable results. These patterns are almost never identical and are, thus, subject to
interpretation, with all its own bias problems, by the technical analyst. This is the most controversial aspect of technical analysis, as well as its most long-standing, and it is only recently being
investigated with sophisticated statistical methods (see Chapter 4).
Fifth, technical analysts also believe that, like trend lines, these patterns are fractal (see
Figure 2.4). Each investor or trader has a specific time frame in which he or she operates. Interestingly, regardless of period, patterns occur with very similar, though not identical, shapes and
characteristics. Thus, an analyst who is watching five-minute bar charts will observe the same
patterns that an analyst watching monthly bar charts will see. These patterns suggest that the
behavior that produces them is dependent also on the participants’ period of interest. A pattern in
a five-minute bar chart, for example, is the result of other traders with a five-minute bar chart
time horizon. Monthly investors would have very little effect on the five-minute bar chart, as
five-minute traders would have almost no effect on the monthly bar chart. Thus, each group of
participants, as defined by their investment horizon, has its own world of patterns that might or
might not affect each other but will be similar in shape. Pattern analysis is, therefore, universal
and independent of time.

Download at www.wowebook.com

19

Chapter 2 The Basic Principle of Technical Analysis—The Trend
Daily CNET–CNET Networks (NASDAQ)

Hourly CNET–CNET Networks (NASDAQ)

16.00
15.00

15.50
14.75

15.00

14.50

14.25
14.50

14.00

14.00
13.75

2006

Feb.

11:30

2/03

12:30 2/06

2/07

2/08 11:30

2/09

12:30

Created using TradeStation

Notice that the patterns are almost identical, yet they occur over different time intervals, one with
daily bars and the other with hourly bars. The development of the pattern, the shape of the pattern,
and the final breakdown are very similar. These patterns are said to be “fractal” in that they occur
irrespective of time.

FIGURE 2.4 Daily and hourly charts in the same stock over different periods

Sixth, technical analysis is also based on the notion that emotions are affected by earlier
emotions through emotional feedback. If I buy a stock today and its price rises, I am happy and
tell others to buy the stock, or others see its price rising and also buy it, thus causing the price to
rise farther. Action in the markets, therefore, is not independent but is related instead to how the
market itself is behaving. Excessive feedback can cause “bubbles” when price behavior rises far
out of proportion to value and can cause panics when price behavior declines sharply. Technical
analysis presumes that prices will expand beyond equilibrium for emotional reasons and eventually will revert to the mean and then expand beyond the mean in the opposite direction, constantly oscillating back and forth with excessive investor sentiment.

CONCLUSION
The focus of this chapter has been on the importance of understanding price trends to the practice of technical analysis. We have introduced some of the basic assumptions and beliefs of technical analysts. As we go through the next few chapters, we address each of these assumptions in

Download at www.wowebook.com

20

Part I Introduction

more detail. Some of the basic beliefs that technical analysis is built on and that we build upon
throughout this book are as follows:
• The interaction of supply and demand determine price.
• Supply and demand are affected by investors’ emotions and biases particularly fear
and greed.
• Price discounts everything.
• Prices trend.
• Recognizable patterns form within trends.
• Patterns are fractal.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain why the notion that prices trend is central to the practice of technical analysis.
2. The earlier an uptrend can be spotted, the more money an investor can make by “riding the
trend.” Explain why recognizing a trend too late reduces potential profits for the investor.
3. The sooner an investor recognizes that a trend has changed, the more profitable the
investor’s trading will be. Explain why early recognition of trend reversals influences the
investor’s profitability.
4. Newton’s first law of motion is inertia—an object in motion will remain in motion in the
same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force. How does this physics principle
serve as an analogy for the notion of trends in technical analysis?
5. Define primary, secondary, short-term, and intraday trends.
6. Gather monthly closing prices for the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) from 1965
until the present. One publicly available source for this data can be found electronically at
http://finance.yahoo.com using the ticker symbol ^DJI. Under “quotes,” choose the “historical prices” option. At this point, you will be able to choose a monthly data option and
download the data into a spreadsheet.
a. Graph the monthly data for the DJIA for the 1965 through 1980 time period. Was the
market in an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways trend during that time? Explain your
answer.
b. Graph the monthly data for the DJIA for the 1980 through 1990 time period. Was the
market in an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways trend during that time? Explain your
answer.
c. Graph the monthly data for the DJIA for the 1990 through 2000 time period. Was the
market in an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways trend during that time? Explain your
answer.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 2 The Basic Principle of Technical Analysis—The Trend

21

d. Graph the monthly data for the DJIA from 2000 until the present. Has the market been
in an uptrend, downtrend, or sideways trend? Explain your answer.
e. Comparing the four charts that you have generated, what conclusions do you draw
about historical market trends?
7. Choose a one-year period during each of the 1965–1980, 1980–1990, 1990–2000, and
2000–present periods. Download daily DJIA closes from the Yahoo! Finance Web site for
each of these four one-year periods. Graph the daily data for each of these four periods.
What types of trends do you see in these daily data graphs? Comparing these daily graphs
with the monthly graphs during the same time periods, what similarities and what differences do you find?

Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

3

HISTORY OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
In this chapter, you will gain knowledge about

• The history of financial markets and exchanges
• The creation of market indices by Charles Dow
• The development of technical analysis in the United States over the past century
• The impact that academic theory and fundamental stock market analysis have had on
the development and use of technical analysis

• The impact that data availability and computer power have had on the development of
technical analysis

EARLY FINANCIAL MARKETS AND EXCHANGES
Though technical analysis is thought to be an ancient method of analyzing markets and prices, its
history has been poorly recorded. We do not have recorded evidence of technical analysis being
used in ancient times, but it is conceivable that technical analysis, in some form, was used in the
distant past in freely traded markets.
Markets in one form or another have existed for centuries. For instance, we know that
notes and checks between traders and bankers existed in Babylon by 2000 BC (Braudel, 1981).
Currency exchange, commodities, and participations in mercantile voyages were traded in Ostia,
the seaport of Rome, in the second century AD (Braudel, 1982). In the Middle Ages, wheat,
bean, oat, and barley prices were available from 1160 on in Angevin, England (Farmer, 1956);
and a large grain market existed in Toulouse as early as 1203 (Braudel, 1982). Publicly available
evidence suggests that as early as the twelfth century, markets existed in most towns and cities
and were linked in a network of arbitrage (Braudel, 1982).
23

Download at www.wowebook.com

24

Part 1 Introduction

Exchanges were developed later where more complicated negotiable instruments, such as
state loan stocks, were invented, accepted, and traded. The earliest exchanges appeared in the
fourteenth century, mostly in the Mediterranean cities of Pisa, Venice, Florence, Genoa, Valencia, and Barcelona. In fact, the Lonja, the first building constructed as an exchange, was built in
1393 in Barcelona (Carriere, 1973). The Lonja has been described as
…a whole squadron of brokers [could be seen] moving in and out of its pillars, and
the people standing in little groups were corridors d’orella, the “brokers by ear”
whose job was to listen, report, and put interested parties in touch. (Carriere, 1973)
The statutes of Verona confirm the existence of the settlement or forward market (mercato
a termine), and a jurist named Bartolomo de Bosco is recorded as protesting against a sale of forward loca in Genoa in 1428 (Braudel, 1981). As early as the fifteenth century, Kuxen shares in
German mines were quoted at the Liepzig fairs (Maschke) and stocks traded in Hanseatic towns
(Sprandel, 1971). A trading market for municipal stocks known as renes sur L’Hotel existed in
France as early as 1522 (Schnapper, 1957).
Can we assume that traders would record prices in these sophisticated markets and would
attempt to derive ways to profit from those recordings? It seems very likely. Even if prices were
not recorded using pencil and paper, traders mentally remembering past prices and using these
memories to predict future price movements would be using a form of technical analysis.
By 1585, public quotes of over 339 items were reported as traded on the streets and in the
coffee houses in Amsterdam (Boxer, 1965). Commodities had been traded there as early as 1530
(Stringham, 2003). The greatest of the early exchanges, the Amsterdam Exchange, called “The
Beurs” or “Bourse,” was founded in 1608. The building housing the exchange was built in 1611
and was modeled after the Antwerp Bourse of 1531 (Munro, 2005). This exchange is famous for
the “Tulip Bulb Mania” of 1621. By 1722, the Amsterdam Exchange provided trading space for
over 4,500 traders every day between noon and two o’clock (Ricard, 1722). Dealers, brokers, and
the public traded and speculated on short sales, forwards, commodities, currencies, shares of
ventures, and maritime insurance, as well as other financial instruments, such as notes, bonds,
loans, and stocks. They traded grain, herring, spices, whale oil, and, of course, tulips (Kellenbenz, 1957, 1996). The principal stock traded was in the Dutch East India Company. (See Figure
3.1, which is an example of one of the oldest stock shares.) It seems likely that prices for these
items were also recorded and analyzed.
In the eighteenth century, as the Dutch empire declined, the London and Paris Exchanges
gradually surpassed the Amsterdam Exchange in activity and offerings. In other parts of the
world, specifically in Japan, cash-only commodity markets in rice and silver were developing,
usually at the docks of major seacoast cities. It is in these markets we first read about a wealthy
trader who used technical analysis and trading discipline to amass a fortune.
His name was Sokyo Honma. Born in 1716 as Kosaku Kato in Sakata, Yamagata Prefecture, during the Tokugawa period, he was adopted by the Honma family and took their name. A
coastal city, Sakata was a distribution center for rice. Honma became very wealthy by trading
rice and was known throughout Osaka, Kyoto, and Tokyo. He was promoted to Samurai (not bad
for a technical trader) and died in Tokyo at the age of 87.

Download at www.wowebook.com

25

Chapter 3 History of Technical Analysis

Source: www.oldest-share.com
Dutch Vereinigte Oostindische Compaignie (VOC) share certificate # 6, down-payment on a share;
issued by the Camere Amsterdam 27th September 1606. Original signatures: Arent ten Grotenhuys
and Dirck van Os, company founder van Verre and after 1602 Directors of VOC Kammer Amsterdam.
Source: Private collection

FIGURE 3.1 Oldest stock certificate—Dutch United East India Company (1606)

Honma’s rules are recorded as the “Sakata constitution.” These rules include methods of
analyzing one day’s price record to predict the next day’s price, three days of rice prices to predict the fourth day’s price, and rate of change analysis (Shimizu, 1986). None of this information
was recorded on charts—they came later in Japan. Honma’s rules might also be considered
“trading rules” rather than “technical rules” because they had much to do with how to limit loss
and when to step away from markets. Nevertheless, his methods were based on prices and, thus,
largely technical, were successful, and, most important, were recorded.
Because Japan is the first place in which recorded technical rules have been found, many
historians have suggested that technical analysis began in the rice markets in Japan. However, it
seems inconceivable that technical analysis was not used in the more sophisticated and earlier
markets and exchanges in Medieval Europe. Indeed, even in Japan, it is thought that charts were
introduced first in the silver market around 1870 by an “English man” (Shimizu, 1986). Thus,
technical analysis has a poorly recorded history but by inference is a very old method of analyzing trading markets and prices.

Download at www.wowebook.com

26

Part I Introduction

MODERN TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
Although the practice of technical analysis in some forms likely dates back many centuries,
Charles Dow (1851–1902) was the first to reintroduce and comment on it in recent times. He is
considered the father of “modern” technical analysis. Dow’s introduction of stock indexes to
measure the performance of the stock market allowed for a major advance in the sophistication
of stock market participants.
Dow was a lifelong newspaper journalist. His specialization in covering financial news
began with a mining story he wrote when working for the Providence Journal (Rhode Island) in
1879. In 1880, Dow relocated to New York, where he continued covering the mining industry. In
1882, Dow joined with Edward Jones and Charles Bergstresser to form Dow, Jones & Company.
The company offices were located behind a soda shop that was located next door to the entrance
of the New York Stock Exchange. The company wrote handwritten news bulletins and distributed
them by messenger to customers in the Wall Street vicinity.
On July 3, 1884, Dow published his first version of a stock index in the company’s “Customer’s Afternoon Newsletter.” Dow calculated this price-weighted average simply by summing
the prices of the stocks in the index and dividing by the number of stocks. This index included a
total of 11 stocks—9 railroads and 2 industrials.
Table 3.1 shows the companies that Dow included in this first index. Although this might
seem to be an odd combination by today’s standards, the index was consistent with the important
role the railway companies played in the economy of the 1880s. In February 1885, Dow began
publishing a daily index of actively traded, highly capitalized stocks. This index contained 12
railways and 2 industrial stocks. By January 1886, Dow replaced the 14-stock index with a 12stock index, containing 10 railroads and 2 industrials. By May 1896, Dow recognized the
increasing role the emerging industrial sector was playing in the U.S. economy and altered his
index so that it consisted entirely of indusTABLE 3.1 “Customer’s Afternoon Newsletter”
trial stocks. The first version of the Dow
(Forerunner to the Wall Street Journal)
Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) appeared in
the Wall Street Journal on May 26, 1896, and
July 3, 1884
included the 12 stocks listed in Table 3.2.
List of “Representative” Stocks
Although all of these companies survive in
some form today, only General Electric
Chicago & North Western
remains a component of the DJIA.
D. L. & W.
Dow’s initial index of rail stocks was
Lake Shore
renamed
the Railroad Average. The Railroad
New York Central
Average
developed into the modern-day
St. Paul
Dow
Transportation
Average on January 2,
Northern Pacific pfd.
1970,
when
it
included
nonrailroad stocks
Union Pacific
such
as
airlines
and
truckers.
As of today, of
Missouri Pacific
the
20
stocks
in
the
Transportation
Average,
Louisville & Nashville
only
four
are
railroad
stocks—Burlington
Pacific Mail
Northern Santa Fe Corp., CSX Corp., NorWestern Union
folk Southern Corp., and Union Pacific

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 3 History of Technical Analysis

TABLE 3.2

27

Corp. Indeed, reflecting the changes in transportation since its composition, the TransMay 26, 1896
portation Average now includes two shipping
Original Dow Jones Industrial Average
companies, five airlines, three trucking companies, two leasing companies, and four air
American Cotton Oil
delivery and freight services.
American Sugar
In 1916, 14 years after Charles Dow’s
American Tobacco
death, the DJIA expanded to 20 stocks. It
Chicago Gas
was not until 1928 that the index further
Distilling & Cattle Feeding
expanded to 30 stocks. Though the average
General Electric
has been updated to reflect the changing
Laclede Gas
composition of trading-market conditions,
National Lead
market capitalization, and industrial compoNorth American
sition, the practice of including 30 stocks
Tennessee Coal & Iron
continues today.
U. S. Leather pfd.
Dow’s original intent was to use these
U. S. Rubber
averages as predictors of the economy, but
his analysis took a life of its own, and his theories became known as the “Dow Theory.”
(See Chapter 6, “Dow Theory.”) They are the foundation for modern technical analysis. The principles that Dow established are still valid today, albeit in a different form.
However, Dow’s contribution to the field of technical analysis goes beyond the creation of
indexes. The Dow Jones Company was the first in the United States to publicly report stock
prices. Private subscription letters with stock prices had existed earlier but were available only to
the few who paid directly for them. The reporting of prices on a consistent basis provided the
“meat” for technical analysis. Motivation came from the many wide swings in prices both from
legitimate news and information as well as from manipulation. By watching prices, investors and
traders hoped to gather information on who was buying and selling shares and, thus, what the
prospects for future prices might be. Technical analysis is a means for the uninformed to become
informed.
With recording of prices and the calculation of averages, analysts began to see that prices
often traded with certain repetitive patterns. They also noticed that market dynamics are complicated and influenced by people and their own way of looking at investments, their own time horizons, their own information, and their own emotions. Patterns in market averages, specifically
the “line” and the “double” top or bottom, were first mentioned by Charles Dow and his subsequent followers, William Peter Hamilton, S. A. Nelson, and Robert Rhea, in the 1920s. Richard
D. Wyckoff offered a successful correspondence course in trading and investing, principally
using technical analysis theories, in 1931. Earlier, in the 1920s, he published a technical newsletter that reached over 200,000 subscribers.
Also in the 1920s and 1930s, classic indicators such as the advance-decline line (A/D line)
were created. Colonel Leonard P. Ayers (1944) developed an early measure of business confidence and is considered the originator of the A/D line. Ayers ran a company called Standard Statistics. In 1941, Standard Statistics merged with a company headed by Henry Poor; this new
entity became Standard and Poor’s.
Wall Street Journal

Download at www.wowebook.com

28

Part I Introduction

Richard W. Schabacker, the financial editor of Forbes magazine and of the New York Times,
began to recognize individual stock patterns and observed many common characteristics
between different issues. He is probably the first person to use the words “triangle,” “pennant,”
and “head-and-shoulders” to describe chart formations we consider in future chapters. Schabacker authored Stock Market Theory and Practice (1930), Technical Analysis and Market
Profits (1932), and Stock Market Profits (1934). The commodity markets, which had long
depended on price action for their speculative activity, also evolved their share of special technical theories such as those by William Delbert Gann. This was the age of speculation, inside information, and manipulation with little regulation. Those outside the information loop were at a
disadvantage. Technical analysis made the difference by using price action as a predictive tool.
During the late 1930s and much of the 1940s, little was written about stock market analysis. If we consider the business and economic climate at that time, it is not surprising that there is
a void in the literature. After the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,
Graham and Dodd published one of the few pieces of security analysis of the period. In their
book, Security Analysis (1934), Graham and Dodd established the fundamental analysis side of
investment analysis, which is concerned with economic conditions and company value. Although
this book provides the groundwork for the development of fundamental analysis, a closer reading
of it reveals that Graham and Dodd did not believe that fundamental analysis alone determined
stock prices. For example, consider the following passage from their book:
The influence of what we call analytical factors over the market price is both partial
and indirect—partial, because it frequently competes with purely speculative factors
which influence the price in the opposite direction; and indirect, because it acts
through the intermediary of people’s sentiments and decisions. In other words, the
market is not a weighing machine, on which the value of each issue is recorded by an
exact and impersonal mechanism, in accordance with its specific qualities. Rather
we should say that the market is a voting machine, whereon countless individuals
register choices which are the product of and partly of emotion. (p. 28)
It was not until 1948 that Robert Edwards (son-in-law to Schabacker) and John Magee (see
Figure 3.2) published the first edition of Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. Edwards and Magee
demonstrated the technical patterns observed in hundreds of stocks. Their interpretations are still
used to this day, and technicians know their book as the “bible of technical analysis.” In fact, the
ninth edition of the book was published in 2009.
At first, prices were recorded and then plotted by hand. Indeed, even today, strict followers
of point-and-figure technique plot their charts by hand, as do many specialists and traders who
want to get the “feel” of the stocks they are trading. Chart services published books of hand-plotted charts for those who could not afford the time to check for accuracy and plot their own charts.
As technical analysts became increasingly comfortable with more complex mathematical
tools, they focused on more than just the chart patterns of their predecessors. Analysts began
using more advanced mathematics to describe price action. The most prominent technical analyst of the 1950s was Joseph Granville, who worked for E. F. Hutton and published a short article on the Barron’s Confidence Index in Barron’s in 1959. After this article, Granville wrote two
books in which he covered on-balance volume, the 200-day moving average, and other tools and
