
8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 220

• 220 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

FIGURE 11.5 Cisco Systems, Inc., July 15, 1997 to July 15, 1999.
(Courtesy of Nirvana Systems)

1,000 shares in 1994 would have cost $2,000; five years later, in
1999, that investment would be worth $70,000.
Livermore told his son Paul, “Every stock is like a human being:
it has a personality, a distinctive personality. Aggressive, reserved,
hyper, high-strung, volatile, boring, direct, logical, predictable,
unpredictable. I often studied stocks like I would study people;
after a while their reactions to certain circumstances become more
predictable.
“I am not the first to observe this. I know people who have
made a lot of money in the stock market by analyzing the personality of a stock, and following that personality, reacting to it by
buying and selling it according to its personality traits. But beware,
not often, but sometimes, personalities change.

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 221

WHEN TO HOLD AND WHEN TO FOLD

• 221 •

“I firmly believe that as long as a stock is acting properly, progressing with normal reactions such as consolidations and corrections, and proceeding in the direction of the trend, there is
nothing to fear, no reason for a speculator to be concerned. And
the fact that a stock is selling in new high territory should only
encourage the speculator.
“On the other hand, a speculator must never become so complacent or relaxed as to miss the clues that the stock has ‘topped
out’ and is creating a pivotal point that will set it off in a new direction, perhaps a reversal in trend. My motto son, is: ‘Be ever vigilant for the danger signs.’ ”
Livermore traded to beat the game, and a big part was having
the right timing. His quest was never-ending. His theories of pivotal points, his approach to new highs, his industry leaders and
industry-group theories, were all new at the time, and they remain
controversial. But it was the mental challenge they presented that
was his passion.
But like anyone else, Livermore also liked what the money
could do. Having money was fun.
It was 1931, and Paul Livermore was about to turn 8 years old. As
a surprise, his parents decided to bring the Barnum and Bailey
Circus to the 13-acre grounds at Evermore.
Tents were built during the night, and bleachers were erected.
Trucks brought in the elephants and other animals during the
night. At dawn the performers arrived, 100 clowns, the trapeze
artists, the lion tamers, the Big Top master of ceremonies, the tumblers, the horse trainers, and the high-wire act. The neighbors
started to arrive at 10 A.M. When Paul awoke, the entire grounds
had been transformed into a major performing circus.
He walked the grounds wide-eyed in amazement. The
overnight transformation had changed his private and solitary

8467_Smitten_11_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 222

• 222 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

playground into a land of clowns, funny cars, elephants, lions,
tigers, monkeys, trapeze artists, beautiful horses with magic riders,
and huge striped tents with people hustling and bustling everywhere. He held onto his parents’ hands as they strolled the grounds.
The performance began at noon. The guest cars lined the driveway, all the way out onto the road. The chauffeur was transporting
people in Livermore’s three-seat electric car, which he and the
boys usually used to roam the estate.
The circus went on all afternoon, and there was a big party in
the Livermore house when it was done, with a giant 6-foot birthday cake and food and drink for everyone. It was emblazoned forever in Paul’s mind. It was his biggest day.
Later, when he got older, he thought that his parents might have
felt guilty for all the attention they lavished on his brother, Jesse,
who was openly the favorite of both his parents. He knew this
from a very early age and was able to cope with it, happy in his
own world.
Neither of the boys saw much of their parents. They went to
boarding school in the winter, camping in the summer. When
they were young, they always had their own individual nannies,
who were later replaced by maids, chauffeurs, private detectives,
and the imposing, protective presence of Harry Edgar Dache, their
favorite, who sometimes tutored them in math, languages, and life.
The servants all spoke French. Mousie thought it gave them
culture to speak French in the house. Both Jesse and Paul could
speak French. Paul was the best. He spoke perfect French. Their
father never even tried; he stuck to English.
He was too busy with the market.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 223

*

chapter twelve

*

Livermore’s MoneyManagement Rules

Rule number one is don’t lose money.
Rule number two is don’t forget rule number one!
Warren Buffett

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 224

• 224 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

ONE AFTERNOON AT BRADLEY’S BEACH CLUB IN PALM

Beach, Livermore sat around a table in the gaming room playing
high-stakes bridge with Walter Chrysler; Ed Kelley, the head of
United Fruit; and T. Coleman Du Pont. They took a break from
their game to enjoy a lobster lunch, a specialty at Bradley’s.
The Florida lobster is different from the Maine lobster. It is
really more like a giant crawfish than a true lobster. It was Bradley
who introduced this crustacean to the palates of the American
rich. The lobster salad was famous—large pieces of lobster on a
bed of greens, covered with a mustard sauce whose exact components were the chef ’s most prized secret. The bridge players all
ordered the same thing, with two bottles of vintage Rogert champagne. Green turtle soup, another specialty of the house at $1 per
cup (a very high price for soup at the time), preceded the salad.
“You hear what happened last year with these lobsters?”
Chrysler asked.
“What?” Kelley replied.
“Bradley liked them so much he said he would take the whole
Bahamian crop. He didn’t know that it could be as high as 10,000
lobsters. The Bahamians went nuts and were going to fish the hell
out of them, because they had a firm order to buy them all from
some crazy American.”
Chrysler paused as the green turtle soup was served from a large
silver tureen.
“So?” Du Pont asked.
“So when Bradley realized he had made a giant blunder, he told
them he would still go through with the purchase anyway—you
know how he is about honoring a commitment—although he had
no idea what the hell he would do with that many lobsters.”
“Don’t tell me that he sold them to Flagler and had them
shipped to New York and made a fortune,” Livermore said.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 225

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 225 •

“No, the hurricane last year wiped out the Bahamas and the
lobster fishing, so he skated out of the whole problem,” Chrysler
replied.
“What luck!” Kelley said with a smile. “He’s got lucky horseshoes hidden somewhere.”
They all laughed.
“Just like you, J.L., in your latest wheat trade. I’ve been hearing
rumors on the Street about you. Tell us about it, entertain us at
lunch.”
“Nothing entertaining to tell. I just felt the demand for wheat
in America was underestimated and the price was going to rise. I
waited for what I call my pivotal point and stepped in and bought
five million bushels of wheat, about seven million dollars worth.
“I watched the market closely after the purchase. It lagged. It
was a dull market, but it never declined below where I bought it.
Then one morning the market started upward, and after a few days
the rise consolidated, forming another of my pivotal points. It lay
around in there for a little while, and then one day it popped out
on the upside with heavy volume.
“A good signal, so I put in an order for another five million
bushels. This order was filled at higher and higher prices. This was
good news to me, because it clearly indicated that the market line
of least resistance was upwards.
“I liked the fact that it was much more difficult to acquire the
second lot of five million bushels. I then had filled out my predetermined target position of ten million bushels, so I stepped back
and kept my eye on the market. It formed a strong bull market and
rose steadily for several months.
“When wheat rose 25 cents above my average price, I cashed in.
This was a bad mistake.” Livermore paused as the lobster salads
were served and the second bottle of champagne was opened.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 226

• 226 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“J. L., how the hell could it be a bad mistake to make a profit of
two and a half million dollars?” asked Chrysler.
“Because Walter, I sat back and watched wheat rise another 20
cents in price in three days.”
“I still don’t get it,” Chrysler said.
“Why was I afraid? There was no good reason to sell the wheat.
I simply wanted to take my profit.”
“It still looks like a pretty good trade to me. I’m afraid you lost
me, J.L.,” Kelley added.
“All right, let me explain myself better. You remember that old
joke about the guy who goes to the race track and bets on the daily
double and wins, then takes all his winnings and bets it on the third
race and wins. He does the same on all the other races, and wins.
Then, on the eighth and final race, he takes his hundred thousand
dollars in winnings and bets it all to win on a horse, and the horse
loses.”
“Yeah.” Chrysler nodded.
“Well, he’s walking out of the track and he meets a pal of his,
who says, ‘How’d you do today?’
“ ‘Not bad,’ he answers, smiling. ‘I lost two bucks.’ ”
They laughed. “That’s a good story, J.L., but how does it apply
to you and wheat?” Chrysler asked.
“Simple. Why was I afraid of losing the track’s money? When I
sold, I was simply acting out of fear. I was in too big a hurry to
convert a paper profit into a cash profit. I had no other reason for
selling out that wheat, except that I was afraid to lose the profit I
had made.”
“What’s wrong with being afraid? These days it seems like the
safest bet,” Du Pont commented.
“So what did you do, J.L.?” Kelley asked.
“After I booked my profit in the wheat, I realized I had made a

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 227

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 227 •

great mistake. I had not had the courage to play the deal out to the
end until I got a signal to sell, a real definitive sell signal.”
“So?”
“I reentered the market and went back at an average price 25
cents higher than where I had sold out my original position. It rose
another 30 cents, and then it gave a danger signal, a real strong
danger signal. I sold out near the high of $2.06 a bushel. About a
week later, it sold at $1.77 a bushel.”
“Well, you have more guts than me, J.L., and it sounds a little
like greed to me.”
“That’s because you sell fruit, Ed. The way you know how to
diagnose the market on fruit is the way I am supposed to know how
to diagnose the stock and commodities markets, and the wheat
futures market had shown no signs of weakness when I first sold it.
“The next time I sold the wheat it was different; I could see definite symptoms of weakness. It gave the clues, the hints, the telltale
signs of topping out. The tape always gives plenty of warning time
for the savvy speculator to heed.”
“J.L., I like your story, but sometimes I think maybe you got a
set of those lucky horseshoes too, just like Bradley,” Chrysler
added.
“Walter, a little luck never hurt anyone,” Livermore paused and
looked around at the group. “I’d say we all had our share of luck at
one time or another.”
They all laughed.
Money management was one of the three pieces of the financial
puzzle that fascinated Livermore: timing, money management, and
emotional control. Livermore had five main rules in managing his
money. He attempted over the years to explain his entire trading
theory to his sons, money management was a big part of it.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 228

• 228 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

One day he called his two sons into the library at Evermore. He
sat behind the massive desk; the two boys sat down in front of him.
He leaned forward and took a wad of cash out of his pocket. He
peeled off 10 $1 bills. He did this twice, then folded the bills and
handed each boy a pack of 10 ones.
The boys sat looking at him, each holding their money. “Boys,
always carry your money folded and in your left pocket. Go ahead,
do it. You can keep the money.”
The boys did as they were told and put the folded money in
their left pockets. “You see, pickpockets always go for a person’s
wallet, usually in their back pocket. Or they will come up behind
you and go for your right front pocket, because most people are
right-handed. You all right with this so far, boys?” he asked.
The boys nodded.
He continued, “All right, that’s why you keep your paper
money folded in your left pocket. See, if a pickpocket gets into
your left pocket, and he gets that close to your balls, you’re going
to know about it.”
The boys looked at each other.
Their father continued, “Don’t ever lose your cash, boys. That’s
the moral of this story. Keep it close to your balls, and don’t let
anyone near it.”
Livermore had several other money-management tips.
Rule 1: Don’t lose money.
Don’t lose your stake. A speculator without cash is like a storeowner with no inventory. Cash is your inventory, your lifeline, and
your best friend. Without cash, you are out of business. Don’t lose
your line.
“It is wrong and dangerous to establish your full stock position
at only one price. Rather, you must first decide how many shares
you want to trade. For example, if you want to purchase 1,000

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 229

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 229 •

shares as the full final position, do it like this: “Start with a 200share purchase on the pivot point. If the price goes up, then buy
an additional 200 shares, still within the pivot point range. If it
keeps rising, buy another 200 shares. See how it reacts; if it keeps
on rising or corrects and then rises, you can go ahead and purchase
the final 400 shares.
“It is very important to note that each additional purchase must
be at a higher price. The same rules, of course, would apply to selling short, only each short sale would be at a lower price than the
preceding sale.
“The basic logic is simple and concise: Each trade, as it is established toward the total 1,000-share position, must always show the
speculator a profit. The fact that each trade shows a profit is living
proof, hard evidence, that your basic judgment was correct in
making the trade. It is all the proof you need. Conversely, if you
lose money, you know immediately that your judgment was
wrong.
“The tough part for the inexperienced speculator is paying
more for each position. Why? Because everyone wants a bargain.
The psychological battle is not to fight the facts, not to hope, not
to argue with the tape, for the tape is always correct. There is no
place in speculating for hoping, for guessing, for fear, for greed, for
emotions. The tape tells the truth, but often there is a lie buried in
the human interpretation.
“Finally, the speculator may choose a different ratio of purchasing the stock than I use. You could, for instance, purchase 30 percent as the first position, 30 as the second, and 40 for the final
purchase. It is up to individual speculators to decide the ratio that
works best for them. I have simply outlined what works best for
me. The main rule is, do not take your entire position all at once;
wait for confirmation of your judgment. Pay more for each lot you
buy. This goes against most traders’ natural instincts.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 230

• 230 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

“And remember to establish in your mind the total amount of
shares you want to purchase before you begin the trade.”
Rule 2: Always establish a stop.
“Just as you should decide the number of shares you want to
buy, what percentage of your portfolio you will invest in any play,
and your general upside price target, you should always have a
clear price at which to sell if the stock moves against you.
“And you must obey your rules, no cheating by waiting! My
basic rule was never to take a capital loss of more than 10 percent.
Losses are twice as expensive to make up. “I learned this in the
bucket shops, where I worked with 10 percent margin. I was automatically sold out if the loss exceeded the 10 percent limit. The 10
percent loss rule became my most important rule for managing
money. It is also a key timing rule.
“Remember, a successful speculator must set a firm stop before
making a trade and must never sustain a loss of more than 10 percent of invested capital. If you lose 50 percent, you must make 100
percent to get even.*
“I have also learned that when your broker calls you and tells
you he needs more money for a margin requirement on a stock
that is declining, tell him to sell out his position. When you buy a
stock at fifty and it goes to forty-five, do not buy more in order to
average out your price. The stock has not done what you predicted; that is enough of an indication that your judgment was
wrong. Take your losses quickly and get out.
“Remember, never meet a margin call, and never average losses.
“Many times I would close out a position before suffering a 10
percent loss. I did this simply because the stock was not acting
right from the start. Often my instincts would whisper to me:
‘J.L., this stock has a malaise, it is a lagging dullard. It just does
*Table 12.1 shows an example.

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 231

• 231 •

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

TABLE 12.1 Livermore’s 10 Percent Loss Table
Starting
Position

Amount
Lost

Remainder

Loss, %

Gain Needed to
Recover Loss, %

$1,000

$80

$920

8.0

8.7

100

900

10.0

11.1

200

800

20.0

25.0

300

700

30.0

42.8

400

600

40.0

66.6

500

500

50.0

100.0

not feel right,’ and I would sell out my position in the blink of
an eye.
“Perhaps this was my inner mind working, distilling things I had
seen thousands of times before and sending subconscious signals,
registering repeated patterns that were stored in my memory and
then subliminally remembered. Whatever it was, I have learned
over the years, through many market experiences, to trust these
instincts.
“I absolutely believe that price movement patterns are repeated
and appear over and over, with slight variations. This is because
humans drive the stocks, and human nature never changes.
“I have observed many times that people often become involuntary investors. They buy a stock that goes down, and they refuse to
sell and take their losses. They prefer to hold onto the stock and
hope that it will rally eventually and climb back up. This is why the
10 percent rule is essential. Don’t ever become an involuntary
investor. Take your losses quickly. Easy to say, but hard to do.”
Rule 3: Keep cash in reserve.
“The successful speculator must always have cash in reserve, like a
good general who keeps troops in reserve for exactly the right

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 232

• 232 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

moment and then moves with great conviction, committing the
reserves for final victory after waiting until all the odds are favorable.
“There is a never-ending stream of opportunities in the stock
market and, if you miss a good opportunity, wait a little while, be
patient, and another one will come along. Don’t reach for a trade,
all the conditions for a good trade must be on your side. Remember, you do not have to be in the market all the time.”
Livermore used the analogy of playing cards—in his case, gin,
poker, and bridge—where it is only human nature to want to play
every hand. This desire to always be in the game is one of the speculator’s greatest hazards, and eventually will bring about disaster, as
it did to Livermore several times in his early career.
“When playing the stock market, there are times when your
money should be waiting on the sidelines in cash, waiting to come
into play. Time is not money—time is time, and money is money.
“Often money that is just sitting can later be moved into the
right situation at the right time and make a fast fortune. Patience is
the key to success, not speed. Time is a cunning speculator’s best
friend if it is used wisely.
“Remember, the clever speculator is always patient and always
has a reserve of cash.”
Rule 4: Let the position ride.
“As long as the stock is behaving normally, do not be in a hurry
to take a profit. You must know you are right in your basic judgment, or you would have no profit at all. If there is nothing basically negative, then let it ride. It may grow into a very large profit.
As long as the action of the overall market and the stock do not
give you cause to worry, have the courage of your convictions, and
stay with it.
“When I was in profit on a trade, I was never nervous. I could
have a line of 100,000 shares out on a single stock play and sleep

8467_Smitten_12_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:34 PM Page 233

LIVERMORE ’ S MONEY- MANAGEMENT RULES

• 233 •

like a baby. Why? Because I was in profit on that trade. I was simply ‘using the house’s money’—that is, using the stock market’s
money. If I lost all that profit—well, then I simply lost money I
never had in the first place.
“Of course, the opposite is true as well. If I bought a stock and
it went against me I would sell it immediately. You can’t stop and
try to figure out why a stock is going in the wrong direction.
The fact is that it is going in the wrong direction, and that is
enough evidence for an experienced speculator to close the
trade.
“Profits take care of themselves, losses never do.
“Never confuse this approach of letting the position ride with
the buy-and-hold-forever strategy. I do not, and never have, blindly
bought and held a stock. How can anyone know that far into the
future? Things change: Life changes, relationships change, health
changes, seasons change, and people change—why shouldn’t the
basic conditions that caused you to buy a stock change? To buy and
hold blindly on the basis that a stock is in a great company or a
strong industry, or that the economy is generally healthy, is, to me,
the equivalent of stock market suicide.
“Stick with the winners. Let them ride until you have a clear
reason to sell.”
Rule 5: Take the profits in cash.
“I recommend parking fifty percent of the profits from a successful trade, especially when the trade doubled the original capital. Set this money aside, put it in the bank, hold it in reserve, or
lock it up in a safe-deposit box.
“Like winning in the casino, it’s a good idea, now and then, to
take your winnings off the table and turn them into cash. There is
no better time than after a large win on a stock. Cash is the bullet
in the chamber; always keep a cash reserve.
