
Testing Methods and Tools
Fortunately, the wheel need not be reinvented when it comes to testing software. Many trading
software products include a testing section. Some are reliable; however, some are not. Before
purchasing any such software, you should understand the testing methods and resulting reports
of the software. Almost all such programs leave out crucial analysis data and may often define
terms and formulas differently from others. For example, the term “drawdown” has different
meanings, depending on intraday data, closing data, trade close data, and so forth. You must
understand the meaning of all terms in any software program to correctly interpret tests performed by it. With this in mind, the systems analyst must establish exactly what information is
desired, what evaluation criteria would be useful, and how the results should be presented.

Test Parameter Ranges
The initial test of a system is run to see if the system has any value and, if so, where the problem
areas might lie. When the testing program is run, the parameters selected initially should be
tested to see if they fall in a range or are independent spikes that might or might not occur in the
future. A parameter range, called the parameter set, that gives roughly the same results bolsters
confidence in the appropriateness of the parameter value. If, when the parameter value is
changed slightly, the performance results deteriorate rapidly, the parameter will not likely work
in the future. It is just an aberration. When the results remain the same, or similar, the parameter
set is said to be stable—obviously a desirable characteristic.

Download at www.wowebook.com

541

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

BOX 22.1 DESIGNING A SYSTEM—THE “NERVES OF STEEL SYSTEM”
Let us look at a simple case study of how to develop a trading system. Suppose we
decide that we will trade U.S. Steel Corporation common stock (X), traditionally a
less volatile blue chip. We also decide that we will start with a simple Donchian
channel breakout system on weekly highs and lows data.
Looking at the monthly chart of X (see Figure 22.1) from 2000 through mid2010, we see many periods of upward and downward trends and trading ranges. This
is an ideal history to analyze and test because it includes the three possible trends in
any market: up, down, and sideways. It also covers a period more than nine years,
roughly 500 weeks, enough to give us plenty of signals.
180.00
160.00
140.00

X - U.S. Steel

120.00
100.00
80.00

60.00

40.00

20.00

'02

'03

'04

'05

'06

'07

'08

'09

'10

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 22.1 U.S. Steel Corporation common stock price (monthly: January 2000–July 2010)
continues

Download at www.wowebook.com

542

Part VIII System Testing and Management

continued

The Donchian channel breakout system gives a buy signal when the weekly closing
price breaks above the highest price over the past 4 weeks. The sell signal occurs when the
weekly closing price breaks below the lowest price over the past 4 weeks. Some public
systems use 20 trading days, an approximation of 4 weeks, but we will be more conservative and wait for the weekly signals. We will use 4 weeks initially, the standard starting
point in this system. We will trade 100 shares of stock in each entry and exit. There will
initially be no stops or any other exit criteria other than the opposite signal. This is called a
“Stop and Reverse” (SAR) system, and funds are invested at all times, either long or short.
The equity curve for this system is shown in Figure 22.2. An equity curve is a chart
of the equity in the account (vertical axis) versus time measured either by trade number
or by time (horizontal axis). In Figure 22.2, time is along the horizontal axis. Looking at
the chart, we can see that system was unsuccessful for many years and only caught on in
2007 when the equity curve rose to the right as the theoretical portfolio gained from the
signals. It was not a steady ride, however, as several large drawdowns occurred, and a
majority of the profits came from one relatively short series of trades in 2008. We would
like to develop a variation of this method that gives us less drawdowns, perhaps more
profit, and a steady climb in profits over time. One of the difficulties of a widely swinging equity curve is that the investor doesn’t know if the adverse swing is temporary or an
indication that something is wrong with the system. It is preferable, therefore, to dampen
the swings using various methods of capital risk control.
Equity Curve Detailed - X Weekly(01/07/00 16:00-07/30/10 16:00)
18000
16000
14000
12000

Equity($)

10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
-2000
-4000

12/7/01

11/7/03

10/7/05

9/14/07

8/14/09

12/22/2000-7/30/2010

FIGURE 22.2 Equity curve for trading X using Donchian 4-week channel breakout (January
2000–July 2010)

Download at www.wowebook.com

543

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

Some tabulated data from the initial test is shown in Table 22.1.
TABLE 22.1

Nerves-of-Steel System Initial Test Statistics

Trades

All

Long

Short

Net profit
Gross profit
Gross loss
Profit factor
Number of trades
Percent profitable
Average trade net profit
Largest winner as a % of gross profit
Largest loser as a % of gross loss
Maximum consecutive losing trades
Average weeks in winning position
Average weeks in losing position
Buy-and-hold return
Return on account
Monthly average return
Standard deviation of monthly return
Sharpe ratio
Maximum drawdown (intraday)
Maximum trade drawdown
Net profit as a % of drawdown

$15,529.00
$35,578.00
($20,049.00)
1.77
74
39.2%
$209.85
35.75%
10.90%
6
12.6
4.6
154.27%
275.63%
$404.75
$1,986.58
(0.3)
($6,832.00)
($2,186.00)
275.63%

$9,205.00
$17,378.00
($8,173.00)
2.13
37
51.35%
$248.78
30.36%
26.75%
3
12.7
4.9

$6,324.00
$18,200.00
($11,876.00)
1.53
37
27.03%
$170.92
69.88%
16.71%
1
12.4
4.4

($5,832.00)
($2,186.00)
605.01%

($8,115.00)
($1,985.00)
88.11%

Source: TradeStation

Let’s look at some of these statistics and learn what they tell us about the Nervesof-Steel system so far:
• Net profit is the difference between gross profit and gross loss. It is positive
for this system and gives the impression that the system has some merit.

• Gross profit and gross loss are the totals under each category for each trade.
Gross profit is the total profit from profitable trades; gross loss is the total from
all losing trades.

• The profit factor is the absolute value of the ratio of gross profit to gross loss.
It shows the profitability of the system. In this case, for every dollar of loss,
1.77 dollars of profit are generated. If the profit factor is less than one, the system is losing (and net profit would be negative).
continues

Download at www.wowebook.com

544

Part VIII System Testing and Management

continued

• Looking at the number of trades, this system generated 74 trades: 37 long
trades and 37 short trades. This is a large enough number of trades for reliable
statistics. Generally, at least 30 to 50 trades are required to test a system.

• Percent profitable is the percent of all trades that were profitable. In our
example, only 39.2% of the trades were profitable. It is typical for a trend-following system to have less than 50% of the trades profitable. When a low percentage of the trades is profitable, it suggests many small losses and large
drawdowns—in other words, high risk. If we can increase the percentage of
profitable trades, we can lower the risk profile and reduce the risk of ruin.

• Average trade net profit is the average profit received per trade. If this is particularly small, it suggests that the system is vulnerable to transaction costs. In
this system, the average profit should cover any incidental costs.

• The largest winner or loser versus gross profit or gross loss figure gives a
hint as to whether the gain or loss was accounted for by only one trade. In this
case, the largest winning trade accounted for 36% of the total gross profit. On
the short side, the largest winner accounted for almost 70% of the gross profit.
Although this is characteristic of trend-following systems, which tend to make
profits in large but few clumps, it suggests that the system is highly dependent
on finding that one or two hugely profitable trades. Over a period of nine
years, it means that a lot of waiting will be done by the system user.

• The maximum consecutive losing trades is important because a long string
of consecutive losses invariably causes a large drawdown and, thus, a high
potential risk for the system. In this case, the number of successive losses is six
trades in a row. In trend-following systems, the number of successive losses is
usually high and is one reason that the systems user must have complete confidence in the system.

• Considering the average weeks in winning and losing positions, there is not
much question that the Nerves-of-Steel system has produced many profits and
short-term losses but most likely for less than a year. From a capital gains tax
standpoint, this could cause an extra tax burden.

• Buy-and-hold return (154%) is the return gained if the investor bought the
stock on the first day and held it for the entire time period through all its gyrations.

• Return on account (276%) is the total return on the minimum account size as
determined by the maximum drawdown. It should be compared to the buyand-hold return to see if the system outperforms a do-nothing approach. In this

Download at www.wowebook.com

545

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

case, the system exceeded the do-nothing approach, which is a favorable sign.
Of course, such comparisons are not as easy as they look because the concept
of risk has not been introduced to either method. The buy-and-hold method has
infinite risk because the drawdown can be 100%, while the risk of the system
has been limited to a much smaller percentage.

• Average monthly return and standard deviation of the monthly return are
used to determine the volatility of returns. The average monthly return for this
system is $404.75, but it is highly volatile with a standard deviation of
$1,986.58. Ideally, a system should have a standard deviation less than five
times the monthly return. In this case, it is 4.90 times, just under the limit.

• The Sharpe ratio is a common measure of the return versus risk of a portfolio
or system. As we saw in Chapter 21, it is a ratio of return—in this case,
adjusted for the risk-free return of T-bills, to the standard deviation of return, a
proxy for risk. As we stated earlier, however, risk is not just variability, but is
also the risk of capital loss. The Sharpe ratio fails to account for drawdown and
fails to account for skewed deviations of return. An investment that deviates
more to the upside, for example, will not be fairly represented by the Sharpe
ratio, which assumes a normal distribution. These problems are why system
designers shy away from the Sharpe ratio and have designed other ratios of
return to risk that are more realistic. In this system, the Sharpe ratio is close to
zero, suggesting that the return does not exceed the risk-free return of T-bills.

• Maximum drawdown is the maximum amount that the equity curve corrected
from a peak. Assuming the future returns remain similar to the period tested, it
is the likely maximum risk of capital loss from the system.

• Naturally, one wants a system that has no drawdown, but barring that, one
wants a system that has profits considerably higher than any drawdown potential. The current case has a percentage of 276%, a particularly favorable ratio
considering that this is the first try at the system. The standard is anything
above 200%, depending on the length of the period studied. In the current case,
the period is particularly long, and a higher net profit to maximum drawdown
should be expected. It, thus, becomes a gauge for comparing systems, and a
common ratio for that is the Net Profit as Percentage of Maximum Intraday
Drawdown (see Table 22.1).
The Nerves-of-Steel system shows promise. It has returned, in its raw state, over
1.8 times the buy-and-hold. However, it also has some problems, namely that took a
long time to get going, and once it did it was volatile and suffered from some large
drawdowns. We look next at ways to improve this system.

Download at www.wowebook.com

546

Part VIII System Testing and Management

OPTIMIZATION
Once you determine that the parameters in your system are valid, you may optimize the system.
Optimizing is simply changing the parameters of a system to achieve the best results. The most
important benefit of optimization is that the designer may find parameters that do not work under
any circumstances. If parameters do not work with the past data, it is highly likely they will not
work in the future. Thus, optimizing can eliminate useless rules and parameters.
Optimizing is also useful in determining whether certain types of stops are useful. Often
the designer finds that there is a limit—for example, to a protective stop—beyond which the stop
does not add to the system performance. Often, the distance of trailing stops is too close to the
last price, causing premature exits. These determinations can be analyzed more closely with optimization.
Although it can be beneficial, optimization does come with hazards. With modern computers and sophisticated software, we can take any series of prices and find the best parameters for
any predefined system. The problem is that by doing such an optimization, we are just fitting the
data to a curve of results and have no idea whether the parameters we have derived will perform
in the future. Because the future is what we are attempting to control, most optimization is useless and even dangerous because it gives us a false sense of confidence.
The principal concern with optimization is the tendency to “curve-fit.” Curve-fitting occurs
when the optimization program finds the absolute best set of parameters. What the program is
really doing is fitting the parameters to the data that is being tested. Thus, it is forming a mathematical model of that data and fitting parameters to that particular time in history. The only way
that the parameters will work in the future is if the future exactly duplicates the history that was
optimized. Of course, we know this will never happen and, thus, the parameters determined by
optimization will be useless in the future. Any system could be made to look profitable if optimized; this is a problem that buyers of systems must face when considering purchasing an existing system for investing or trading. The trick is to optimize over a certain period and then test the
parameters derived through optimization on a period in which no optimization has been conducted. This is called out-of-sample (OOS) testing. Invariably we will find that the results in the
optimization will overstate the results in the out-of-sample period and, thus, the optimized
parameters should never be used to evaluate the system’s usefulness. Optimization should be
kept simple. Fine-tuning the system just increases the level of false confidence that eventually
will be dashed in real time when the system fails.
There is, thus, some controversy about the use of optimization in arriving at workable
mechanical systems. The basic principles of realistic optimization are to keep it simple, test outof-sample data against in-sample optimization results, preferably use baskets of securities, determine parameter sets instead of single parameters, understand that the best results are high profits
with minimal risk, and do not expect to find the Holy Grail. Next, we discuss some optimization
methods and some tests for statistical significance to perform after the most realistic parameter
sets have been determined.

Methods of Optimizing
As a general rule, an optimization should be done over a considerable period of price data and
include those periods when the prices are in trends and in trading ranges. We do not know ahead

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

547

of time whether the future will be similar, but we do know that there will be trends and trading
ranges. Any system must be able to deal with both of these situations and have developed
adjustable parameter sets or rules that will account for them. Parameters determined in this manner should be suitable for future conditions.
Whole Sample
One method of optimizing is to take the entire price sample and run an optimization of the
parameters. This is usually frowned upon because it is the closest to curve-fitting. To avoid this,
the optimization is on a basket of securities—either futures or stocks—rather than a market average or single issue and over a long enough period to generate a large number of trades. The diversification of securities reduces the likelihood that any results are solely the result of peculiarities
in a particular security, and the large number of signals increases the statistical significance of
the results. After determining the optimal parameter sets, those that are consistent and give
decent results (but not necessarily the best results), the next step is to divide the optimization
period roughly into tenths and run a test on each period using the derived parameter sets. The
results from these ten different periods then can be analyzed for consistency to see if the system
generated similar results under all conditions. Things to look for are the amount of drawdowns,
the number of signals, the number of consecutive losses, the net profit as a percentage of maximum drawdown, and so on. The actual amount of net profit is less important for each stage than
are the determinants of risk and the consistency of results (Ruggiero, 2005). If the results are not
consistent, the system has a major problem and should be optimized using other means or discarded.
Out-of-Sample Optimization (OOS)
This is a method most often used in neural network and regression studies. We do not cover these
particular methods because they are more useful with other data series. They can be used in market analysis, and some people, such as Lou Mendleson (www.profittaker.com), claim to have
successfully been able to correlate different markets using neural network patterns. However, for
purposes of this study of optimization, we ignore neural networks, multiple regressions, and others such as genetic algorithms, expert systems, and artificial intelligence. Instead, we focus on
the most common and productive methods, those used by the majority of systems designers.
One variation of OOS that is commonly used is to take the entire price data series to be
optimized and divide it into sections, one of 70%–80% of the data to be used to develop the system called the “in-sample” data, and one of 20%–30% called the “out-of-sample” data. The outof-sample data can include the first small portion of the total period and the last, or just the last,
most recent data. As with all other test methods, the sample must include bull, bear, and consolidation periods. The total amount of data necessary is large in all optimization processes. This is
especially true for daily data since the beginning of the stock market rise in the early 1980s to
2000. The trend then was so strongly upward that systems designed using that data for optimizing often fell apart during the decline from 2000 to 2002. This was because the tested data did
not include many examples of declining or trading markets. All must be included so that the system can learn to adjust to any future change in direction or habit.

Download at www.wowebook.com

548

Part VIII System Testing and Management

This method of OOS optimizes the in-sample data and then tests it on the out-of-sample
data. The out-of-sample results are theoretically what the system should expect in real time.
Invariably, the out-of-sample performance will be considerably less than the performance generated in the optimization. If the out-of-sample results are unsatisfactory, the method can be
repeated, but the more that the out-of-sample results are used as the determinant of parameter
sets, the more that the objectivity of the optimization is compromised and the closer to curve-fitting the process becomes. Eventually, if continued in this manner, the out-of-sample data
becomes the same as the sample data, and the optimization is just curve-fitting. One other
method of reducing the effect of curve-fitting is to use more than one market as the out-of-sample test. It is difficult to have the same parameter set in different markets and at the same time
curve-fit. This appears counterintuitive because most analysts would think that each market is
different, has its own personality, and requires different parameters. Indeed, when looking at
publicly available systems for sale, one method of eliminating a system from consideration is if
it has different parameters for different markets. This usually indicates that the results are from
curve-fitting, not real-time performance. A reliable system should work in most markets.
Walk Forward Optimization
Walk forward optimization is also an OOS method that uses roughly the same kind of price data
series as the one described previously. In the walk forward method, the in-sample data is also
70% to 80% of the entire series but is usually the first portion of the series, and the more recent
20% to 30% is the out-of-sample data. Although there are many variations of this method, the
most common procedure is to optimize the in-sample data and then test it on a small period of the
out-of-sample date—for example, in daily data anywhere from one month to one year. The
results of this test are recorded, and another window of data is optimized—this time, the in-sample data used earlier less the amount of time taken for the test, a month up to a year, plus the data
used in the test. Again, the results are recorded, and the window moved forward another period
until the test reaches the most recent data and a series of test recordings is available. Each optimization, thus, has an out-of-sample test. The results from all the recordings are then analyzed
for consistency, profit, and risk. If some parameter set during the walk forward process suddenly
changes, the system is unlikely to work in the future. The final decision about parameter sets is
determined from the list of test results.
Optimization and Screening for Parameters
We look next at all the different summaries and ratios that a system designer considers in measuring robustness (the ability of the system to adjust to changing circumstances), but first we must
mention those that are used to screen out the better systems during optimization.
When optimization is conducted on a price series, the results will show a number of different parameter sets and a number of results from each parameter set. We can look at the net profit,
the maximum drawdown, and any of the other statistics shown in Box 22.1. Many analysts
screen for net profit, return on account, or profit factor as a beginning. They look at the average
net profit per trade to see if the system generates trades that will not be adversely affected by
transaction costs, and, most important, they look at the net profit as a percentage of the maximum
drawdown. The means of profiting from a system, any system of investing, are determined by the
