JAPANESE CANDLESTICK
CHARTING TECHNIQUES

~-Y?~L&B~E!%
L?ABWt

"Candles Exhaust Themselves to Give Light to Men"

JAPANESE
CANDLESTICK
CHARTING
TECHNIQUES
A Contemporary Guide to the Ancient
Investment Techniques of the Far East

STEVE NISON

NEW YORK INSTITUTE OF FINANCE
NewYork

London

Toronto

Sydney

Tokyo

Singapore

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Nison, Steve.
Japanese candlestick charting techniques : a contemporary guide to
the ancient investment technique of the Far East I Steve Nison.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-13-931650-7
1. Stocks-Charts, diagrams, etc. 2. Investment analysis.
I. Title.
HG4638.N57 1991
90-22736
332.63'22-dc20
CIP
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional
person should be sought.

From a Declaration of Principles Jointly Adopted by
a Committee of the American Bar Association
and a Committee of Publishers and Associations
01991 by Steve Nison
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form or by any means without permission in writing from the publisher.
New York Institute of Finance
Simon & Schuster
Printed in the United States of America
1 0 9 8 7

Acknowledgements
Like having ice cream after a tonsillectomy, this section is my treat after
the book's completion.
Some of those who deserve recognition for their help are addressed
in Chapter 1 in my discussion of my candlestick education. There are
many others whom I would like to thank for their help along my candlestick path. Candles might help light the way, but without the assistance
and insights of many others it would have been almost impossible to do
this book. There were so many who contributed in one way or another
to this project that if I have forgotten to mention anyone I apologize for
this oversight.
The Market Technicians Association (MTA) deserves special mention.
It was at the MTAfs library that I first discovered candlestick material
written in English. This material, albeit scant, was extremely difficult to
obtain, but the marvelously complete MTA library had it. This information provided the scaffolding for the rest of my candlestick endeavors.
Besides the two English references on candlesticks I mention in
Chapter 1, I also obtained a wealth of information from books published
in Japanese. I would like to thank the following Japanese publishers and
authors for these books that I used as references:

Kabushikisouba no Technical Bunseki (Stock Market Technical Analysis) by
Gappo Ikutaro, published by Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha
Kabuka Chato no Tashikana Yomikata ( A Sure W a y to Read Stock Charts) by
Katsutoshi Ishii, published by Jiyukokuminsha
Keisen Kyoshitsu Part 1 (Chart Classroom Part I ) , published by Toshi Rader
Hajimete Kabuka Chato w o Yomu Hito no Hon ( A Book for Those Reading Stock
Charts for the First Time) by Kazutaka Hoshii, published by Asukashuppansha

vi

Acknowledgements

Nihon Keisenshi (The History of Japanese Charts), Chapter 2 by Kenji
Oyama, published by Nihon Keisai Shimbunsha
Shinpan Jissen Kabushiki Chart Nyumon (Introduction to Stock Charts) by
Okasan Keisai Kenkyusho, published by Diamond-sha
Sakata Goho Wa Furinkazan (Sakata's Five Rules are Wind, Forest, Fire and
Mountain), published by Nihon Shoken Shimbunsha
Yoshimi Toshihiko no Chato Kyoshitsu (Toshihiko Yoshimi's Chart Classroom) by
Toshihiko Yoshimi, published by Nihon Chart
Then there's the team at Merrill Lynch who were so helpful in looking over the manuscript, making suggestions, and providing ideas. John
Gambino, one of the best colleagues anyone can work with provided all
the Elliott Wave counts in this book. Chris Stewart, Manager of Futures
Research, not only read the entire manuscript but provided valuable
suggestions and finely dissected the many, many charts I used. I also
want to thank Jack Kavanagh in compliance who also read the manuscript. Yuko Song provided extra insights by conveying some of my candlestick questions to her Japanese customers who use candlesticks.
I have included hundreds of charts in this book from various services.
Before I thank all the services that have generously provided use of their
candlestick charts, I want to give plaudits to Bloomberg L.P. and CQG
(Commodity Quote Graphics).
Bloomberg L.P. was among the first on-line services to provide candlestick charts on the American markets. It's too bad I didn't discover
this earlier. I was drawing candlestick charts on my own for years before
I found out about Bloomberg. CQG, an on-line futures charting service,
was also among the first to see the potential of candlestick charts. Within
a few weeks of my first candlestick article, they sent me an alpha test
(this is a high-tech term for the very early stages of software prototype
testing) of their candlestick software for my CQG System One T". Once I
had this software, my candlestick research progressed exponentially.
Most of the charts in this book are courtesy of CQG.
Besides Bloomberg L.P. and CQG, other services that were kind
enough to provide charts are:
T

Commodity Trend Service Charts (North Palm Beach, FL), CompuTrac "
(New Orleans, LA), Ensign Software (Idaho Falls, ID), FutureSource " (Lombard, Ill), and Quick 10-E Financial Information System
(New York, N.Y.).
T

I want to thank those who took time from their busy schedules to
review the introductions for Part Two of the book. These are: Dan

--

-

Acknowledgements

Gramza for the chapter on Market Profile@;Jeff Korzenik for the chapters
on options and hedging; John Murphy for the chapter on volume and
open interest; once again, John Gambino for the chapter on Elliott Wave;
Charles LeBeau for the chapter on oscillators; Gerard Sanfilippo and
Judy Ganes for the chapter on hedging; and Bruce Kamich for the
English language glossary.
The Nippon Technical Analysts Association (NTAA) deserves utmost
praise for their assistance. Mr. Kojiiro Watanabe at the Tokyo Investment
Information Center helped me to contact NTAA members who have
been especially helpful. They are: Mr. Minoru Eda, Manager, Quantative
Research, Kokusai Securities Co.; Mr. Yasushi Hayashi, Senior Foreign
Exchange Trader at Sumitomo Life Insurance; and Mr. Nori Hayashi,
Senior Analyst, Fidelity Management and Research (Far East). When I
asked them questions via fax I expected just brief answers. But these
three NTAA members took their valuable time to write pages of explanations, complete with drawings. They were wonderful about sharing their
candlestick experiences and insights with me. I also want to thank them
for reading over and providing information for Chapter 2 on the history
of Japanese technical analysis. If there are any mistakes that remain, they
are those that I failed to correct.
I want to thank again "idea a day" Bruce Kamich. Bruce is a friend
and a fellow futures technician. Throughout our 15-year friendship he
has provided me with many valuable ideas and suggestions. Probably
two of the most important were his suggestion that I join the MTA and
his constant haranguing until I agreed to write a book about candlesticks.
Then there's the publishing staff of the New York Institute of
Finance. They were all great, but those with whom I worked most
closely deserve extra praise. Susan Barry and Sheck Cho patiently, skillfully and affably guided a neophyte author through the labyrinth of the
book publishing business.
Of course there is my family. At the time that I was writing this book,
our newborn son Evan entered the picture (with all the excitement about
candlesticks, I came close to calling him Candlesticks Nison). Try writing a
book with a newborn and a rambunctious four-year-old daughter, Rebecca, and you start to get an idea of how much my wife, Bonnie, contributed
to this book. She cared for the children while I maladroitly pummeled away
at the keyboard. Obviously, she had the harder job.
For each chapter's heading, and throughout the book, I used Japanese proverbs or sayings. Many times proverbs in the United States are
considered trite and are rarely used. This is not so in Japan where proverbs are respected. Besides being enjoyable to read, the Japanese proverbs offer insights into Japanese beliefs and perspectives. I would like to

vii

viii

Acknowledgements

thank the following publishers for the use of their material for the proverbs and sayings used in this book: University of Oklahoma Press,
Charles E. Tuttle, and Kenkyusha Ltd.
Finally, I must give proper and legal acknowledgements to many of
the services I relied upon during my writing and research. Tick Volume
Profile " is a registered trademark of CQG. Market Profile@and Liquidity Data Bank@are registered trademarks of the Chicago Board of Trade.
The CBOT holds exclusive copyrights to the Market ProfileB and Liquidity Data Bank@graphics. Graphics reproduced herein under the permission of the Chicago Board of Trade. The views expressed in this
publication are solely those of the author and are not to be construed as
the views of the Chicago Board of Trade nor is the Chicago Board of
Trade in any way responsible for the contents thereof.
T

PREFACE
" A clever hawk hides his claws"

W o u l d you like to learn a technical system refined by centuries of use,
but virtually unknown here? A system so versatile that it can be fused
with any Western technical tool? A system as pleasurable to use as it is
powerful? If so, this book on Japanese candlestick charting techniques is
for you. You should find it valuable no matter what your background in
technical analysis.
Japanese candlestick charts are older than bar charts and point and
figure charts. Candlesticks are exciting, powerful, and fun. Using candlesticks will help improve your market analysis. My focus will be
mainly on the U.S. markets, but the tools and techniques in this book
should be applicable to almost any market.
Candlestick techniques can be used for speculation and hedging.
They can be used for futures, equities, options, or anywhere technical
analysis is applied. By reading this book you will discover how candlesticks will add another dimension of analysis.
Do not worry if you have never seen a candlestick chart. The assumption of this book is that they are new to you. Indeed, they are new to the
vast majority of the American and European trading and investing community.
If you are a seasoned technician, you will discover how joining Japanese candlesticks with your other technical tools can create a powerful
synergy of techniques. The chapters on joining Japanese candlestick
techniques with Western technical tools will be of strong interest to you.
If you are an amateur technician, you will find how effective candlestick charts are as a stand alone charting method. To help guide you, I

x

Preface

have included a glossary of all the western and Japanese candlestick
terms used.
The Japanese technicals are honed by hundreds of years of evolution.
Yet, amazingly, we do not know how the Japanese analyze our markets
with their traditional technical tool called candlesticks. This is disconcerting if you consider that they are among the biggest players in the financial markets. The Japanese are big technical traders. Knowing how the
Japanese use candlestick charts to analyze both our markets and theirs
may help you answer the question "What are the Japanese going to do?"
The Japanese use a combination of western chart and candlestick
techniques to analyze the markets. Why shouldn't we do the same? If
you do not learn about Japanese candlestick charts, your competition
will!
If you like reading about colorful terminology like "hanging-man
lines," "dark-cloud covers," and "evening stars" then this book is for
you. If you subscribe to one of the multitude of services now providing
candlestick charts and would like to learn how to use these charts, then
this book is for you.
In the first part of the book, you learn how to draw and interpret over
50 candlestick lines and formations. This will slowly and clearly lay a
solid foundation for the second part where you will learn to use candlesticks in combination with Western technical techniques.
This book will not give you market omniscience. It will, however,
open new avenues of analysis and will show how Japanese candlesticks
can "enlighten" your trading.

Contents
Preface
Chapter

1 INTRODUCTION
Some background, 1
How I learned about candlestick charts, 1
Why have candlestick charting techniques captured
the attention of traders and investors around the world?, 4
What is in this book, 5
Some limitations, 7
The importance of technical analysis, 8

Chapter

2

A HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

PART ONE: THE BASICS
Chapter

3

CONSTRUCTING THE CANDLESTICKS
Drawing the candlestick lines, 21

Chapter

4

REVERSAL PATTERNS
Hammer and hanging-man lines, 28
Engulfing pattern, 38
Dark-cloud cover, 43
Piercing pattern, 48

ix
1

xii

Contents

Chapter

5 STARS

55

The morning star, 56
The evening star, 59
The morning and evening doji stars, 64
The shooting star and the inverted hammer, 70
The inverted hammer, 75

Chapter

6

MORE REVERSAL PATTERNS
The harami pattern, 79
Harami Cross, 85
Tweezers tops and bottoms, 88
Belt-hold lines, 94
Upside-gap two crows, 98
Three black crows, 101
The counterattack lines, 103
Three mountains and three rivers, 107
The importance of the number three in candlesticks, 112
Dumpling tops and fry pan bottoms, 113
Tower tops and tower bottoms, 115

Chapter

7 CONTINUATION PATTERNS
Windows, 119
Upward- and downward-gap tasuki, 129
High-price and low-price gapping plays, 131
Gapping side-by-side white lines, 134
Rising and falling three methods, 135
Three advancing white soldiers, 143
Separating lines, 147

Chapter

8

THE MAGIC DOJI
The importance of the doji, 149
Doji at tops, 150
Doji after a long white candlestick, 154
The long-legged doji and the rickshaw man, 154
The gravestone doji, 159
Doji as support and resistance, 161
The tri-star, 162

Chapter

9 PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER .

165

xiv

Contents

Chapter

16 CANDLESTICKS WITH ELLIOTT WAVE
Elliott wave basics, 253
Elliott wave with candlesticks, 254

Chapter

17 CANDLESTICKS WITH MARKET PROFILE"
Market profile" with candlesticks, 261

Chapter

18 CANDLESTICKS WITH OPTIONS
Options basics, 268
Options with candlesticks, 269

Chapter

19 HEDGING WITH CANDLESTICKS

Chapter

20 HOW I HAVE USED CANDLESTICKS
CONCLUSION

Glossary

A CANDLESTICK TERMS AND VISUAL GLOSSARY

Glossary

B AMERICAN TECHNICAL TERMS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

Contents

xiii

PART TWO: THE RULE OF MULTIPLE
TECHNICAL TECHNIQUES
Chapter

10 A CONFLUENCE OF CANDLESTICKS

Chapter

11 CANDLESTICKS WITH TRENDLINES
Support and resistance lines with candlesticks, 185
Springs and upthrusts, 193
The change of polarity principle, 201

Chapter

12 CANDLESTICKS WITH RETRACEMENT LEVELS

Chapter

13 CANDLESTICKS WITH MOVING AVERAGES
The simple moving average, 215
The weighted moving average, 216
The exponential moving average and the MACD, 216
How to use moving averages, 217
Dual moving averages, 220

Chapter

14 CANDLESTICKS WITH OSCILLATORS
Oscillators, 227
The relative strength index, 228
How to Compute the RSI, 228
How to Use RSI, 229
Stochastics, 232
How to Compute Stochastics, 232
How to Use Stochastics, 233
Momentum, 236

Chapter

15 CANDLESTICKS WITH VOLUME AND OPEN INTEREST
Volume with candlesticks, 242
On balance volume (OBV), 244
OBV with candlesticks, 245
Tick volume '"
, 245
Tick Volume '"with candlesticks, 246
Open interest, 248
Open interest with candlesticks, 249

241

CHAPTER

1

INTRODUCTION
li A S
"The beginning is most important"

SOME BACKGROUND
Some of you may have already heard of candlecharts. Probably, many
more of you have not. In December 1989, I wrote an introductory article
on candlesticks that precipitated an immediate groundswell of interest.
It turned out that I was one of the few Americans familiar with this
centuries-old Japanese technique. I wrote follow-up articles, gave
numerous presentations, taught classes, and was interviewed on television and by newspapers across the country. In early 1990, I wrote a short
reference piece for my Chartered Market Technician thesis about candlestick charts. It contained very basic introductory material, but it was the
only readily available information on candlestick charts in the United
States. This handout became very popular. Within a few months, Merrill
Lynch, the publisher of the booklet, received over 10,000 requests.

HOW I LEARNED ABOUT CANDLESTICK CHARTS
"Why," I have often asked myself, "has a system which has been
around so long almost completely unknown in the West?" Were the Japanese trying to keep it secret? Was it the lack of information in the
United States? I don't know the answer, but it has taken years of
research to fit all the pieces together. I was fortunate in several ways.

2

Introduction

Perhaps my perseverance and serendipity were the unique combination
needed that others did not have.
In 1987, I became acquainted with a Japanese broker. One day, while
I was with her in her office, she was looking at one of her Japanese stock
chart books (Japanese chart books are in candlestick form). She
exclaimed, "look, a window." I asked what she was talking about. She
told me a window was the same as a gap in Western technicals. She went
on to explain that while Western technicians use the expression "filling
in the gap" the Japanese would say "closing the window." She then
used other expresions like, "doji" and "dark-cloud cover." I was
hooked. I spent the next few years exploring, researching, and analyzing anything I could about candlestick charts.
It was not easy. There are scant English publications on the subject.
My initial education was with the help of a Japanese broker and through
drawing and analyzing candlestick charts on my own. Then, thanks to
the Market Technicians Association (MTA) library, I came across a booklet published by the Nippon Technical Analysts Association called Analysis of Stock Price i n Japan. It was a Japanese booklet which had been
translated into English. Unfortunately, there were just ten pages on
interpreting candlestick charts. Nonetheless, I finally had some English
candlestick material.
A few months later, I borrowed a book that has had a major influence
on my professional life. The MTA office manager, Shelley Lebeck,
brought a book entitled The Japanese Chart of Charts by Seiki Shimizu and
translated by Greg Nicholson (published by the Tokyo Futures Trading
Publishing Co.) back from Japan. It contains about 70 pages on candlestick charts and is written in English. Reading it was like finding an oasis
in a desert.
As I discovered, while the book yielded a harvest of information, it
took some effort and time to get comfortable with its concepts. They
were all so new. I also had to become comfortable with the Japanese terminology. The writing style was sometimes obscure. Part of this might
have resulted from the translation. The book was originally written in
Japanese about 25 years ago for a Japanese audience. I also found out,
when I had my own material translated, that it is dreadfully difficult to
translate such a specialized subject from Japanese to English. Nonetheless, I had some written reference material. This book became my
"Rosetta Stone."
I carried the book with me for months, reading and rereading, taking
copious notes, applying the candlestick methods to the scores of my
hand-drawn candlestick charts. I chewed and grinded away at the new
ideas and terminology. I was fortunate in another sense. I had the help

Introduction

of the author, Seiki Shimizu, to answer my many questions. Although
Mr. Shimizu does not speak English, the translator of the book, Greg
Nicholson, graciously acted as our intermediary via fax messages. The
Japanese Chart of Charts provided the foundation for the rest of my investigation into candlesticks. Without that book, this book would not have
been possible.
In order to continually develop my abilities in candlestick charting
techniques, I sought out Japanese candlestick practitioners who would
have the time and inclination to speak with me about the subject. I met
a Japanese trader, Morihiko Goto who had been using candlestick charts
and who was willing to share his valuable time and insights. This was
exciting enough! Then he told me that his family had been using candlestick charts for generations! We spent many hours discussing the history
and the uses of candlestick charts. He was an invaluable storehouse of
knowledge.
I also had an extensive amount of Japanese candlestick literature
translated. Obtaining the original Japanese candlestick information was
one problem. Getting it translated was another. Based on one estimate
there are probably fewer than 400 full-time Japanese-to-English translators in America (this includes part-time translators)' I had to find a translator who could not only translate routine material, but also the highly
specialized subject of technical analysis. In this regard I was lucky to
have the help of Languages Services Unlimited in New York. The director, Richard Solberg, provided indispensable help to this project. He was
a rarity. He was an American fluent in Japanese who understood, and
used, technical analysis. Not only did Richard do a wonderful job of
translating, but he helped me hunt down and obtain Japanese candlestick literature. Thanks to his help I might have the largest collection of
Japanese books on candlesticks in the country. Without Richard this book
would have been much less extensive.
Before my introductory article on candlestick charts appeared in late
1989, there were few services offering candlestick charts in the United
States. Now a plethora of services offer these charts. These include:
Bloomberg L.P. (New York, NY);
Commodity Trend Service Charts (North Palm Beach, FL);
CompuTrac '"(New Orleans, LA);
CQG (Glenwood Springs, CO);
Ensign Software (Idaho Falls, ID);
Futuresource '"(Lombard, IL); and
Knight Ridder-Commodity Perspective (Chicago, L).

3

4

Introduction

By the time you read this book, there probably will be additional services
providing candlestick charts. Their popularity grows stronger every day.
The profusion of services offering the candlestick charts attests to both
their popularity and their usefulness.

WHY HAVE CANDLESTICK CHARTING TECHNIQUES
CAPTURED THE ATTENTION OF TRADERS
AND INVESTORS AROUND THE WORLD?
I have had calls and faxs from around the world requesting more information about candlestick techniques. Why the extensive interest? There
are many reasons and a few are:
1. Candlestick charts are flexible. Users run the spectrum from first-time
