
we have a five-wave pattern in place, there is going to be a move

the far right. If you are just learning, you will likely mark the entire

I had to jump ahead, so let's back up and fill in the gap. Once

The last market in Figure 10.4 is a 40-minute DMK/$ chart on

next corner.

is that you did not need that level of expertise to make money from
the pattern.

both directions correctly begin with an immediate left turn at the

catalog and connect perfect patterns endlessly together. The point

McDonald's restaurant." The scale is entirely different, although

into trouble toiling over every little squiggle with an objective to

"Turn left at the next corner and go straight until you reach the next

is why some of the strongest textbook Elliotticians get themselves

and go straight until you reach California" as opposed to stating,

moment as I know I jumped ahead of you. Stay with me.) But this

were giving us directions by stating, "Turn left at the next corner

new, note that I'll explain the "previous fourth" comment in a

larger road map that we can turn to as a guide. It is as if someone

a major rally. So stick with a view of the total picture. (If you are

from the Elliott Wave Principle that we gain a sense that there is a

right to the previous fourth wave target zone and then produced

cators. It is only after we have added new information obtained

When the first five-wave pattern concluded, the market declined

those market corrections from just observing divergence in the indi-

subdivide into 5s or 3s. Who cares about the internals in this chart?

In Figure 10.1 we were unable to determine the magnitude of

that you are unable to see clearly if any structure has internals that

We said markets move in five-wave patterns in the direction of a

of the correction that will follow from any indicator signal that

Let's go back to the NASDAQ chart in the middle of Figure 10.4.

to know in long-horizon charts as we now have a sense of the size

Extending 5 Wave Pattern

larger trend. This chart shows two five-wave advances in a clearly

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle

270

• CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

• 271

defined bullish trend. The total picture is not a complete five-wave
pattern, and the second pattern of five waves is clearly stronger
than the first. What is happening? This market is extending, which
means that once another five-wave pattern forms over the first two in
this chart, we will then have a larger five-wave pattern. The reason
is that the impulsive waves in positions 1, 3, and 5 are themselves
constructed from smaller five-wave units. So three sets of five-wave
patterns that still abide by the three rules stated for the simplest fivewave pattern in Figure 10.2 will become a larger five-wave pattern.
Let's take a closer look at an extending five-wave pattern in Figure 10.5, and then we can start our day-to-day tracking of the DJIA.
Take a look at the last five-wave cycle in Figure 10.5. Each wave
is labeled I through 5 into the price bottom. The start of the last
five-wave cycle is marked wave (4) at the top and the bottom is

Figure 10.5 Aerodynamic Investments Inc., © 1996-2011,
www.aeroinvest.com

marked wave (5). As you look up the data and then study the whole

and below it.

price decline is so strong, however, that we already know that it is

bar or swing and counter-balance corrections and rallies above

ture is present as more price bars become available for study. The

edition has been removed. Start i n the middle of the strongest

shorter time horizon so that we can confirm that a five-wave struc-

tion. So the quick reference people found confusing in the first

the completion of wave (3). That is why we drop down to the next

trends in the new Elliott Wave books that just went to produc-

be subdivided into five distinct waves from the top of wave (2) to

I go great length to describe how to start in the middle of larger

ful that it is nearly a straight line, and it is hard to see that it can

in the middle of the chart. I know, this one sounds screwy at first.

within a larger five-wave cycle. Wave (3) in the middle is so force-

A market that is extending is much easier to count if you start

structure, you can see that this last move down is the fifth wave

pattern, and we may have to use this technique at some point. It is

smaller five-wave patterns that are complete.

midpoint. Our DJIA scenario could create a lengthy extending

this third wave down, it must have internal building blocks that form

have to make an adjustment and use the stronger move as the new

through ignorance. Regardless of the time horizon we use to view

stronger than the first that defined our midpoint? We would then

ent time horizons to pick a pattern that best fits your view is wrong

What i f the next five-wave pattern that the market forms is even

a third-wave decline. The assertion that you should look at differ-

272 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 273

always balance, rhythm, and proportion that should be given the
greatest thought for any chart.
There are three asterisks marked at 50 percent Fibonacci retracement levels in Figure 10.5. The first asterisk is the fourth wave up
within thefirstfive-wavepattern down that completes wave (1). The
second asterisk marks a 50 percent retracement for all of wave (3)
and becomes the area of resistance for wave (4) up. Once the entire
extendingfive-wavepattern is complete, the first bounce up is to
a 50 percent retracement relative to the lastfive-wavecycle in the
sequence or the fifth wave. You would now want to know the Fibonacci retracement ratios relative to the entire decline as well. These
repeating ratios show the market is extending, but not expanding,
its scale. Proportions remain about the same. If the decline were
accelerating, the corrective rallies would begin to fall short of the

Figure 10.6

Source: TradeStation. © TradeStation Technologies

50 percent retracement levels marked in this chart. We covered
considered so a new chart had to be constructed.

not venture down that same road twice. But the internal Fibonacci

it is not the best interpretation when balance and proportion are

this topic in great detail within the Fibonacci chapter so we will

five-wave patterns that follow one after another. It takes three sets

balance.

subdivided into three individual sets of complete, though smaller,

tant. Figure 10.5 gives us an overall picture that has symmetry and

In Figure 10.5 we saw how a larger five-wave pattern can be

ratios and resulting math grids on the screen are extremely impor-

is true even when our supporting indicators offer major signals to

writing style in an effort to make my task a little easier.

knowledge that the market has reached an important pivot. This

time market patterns that develop. Permit me to switch to a journal

that meet minimum requirements and sit back, content with the

use within the Wave Principle so that we can keep up with the real-

Figure 10.2. However, it is not enough to simply find five waves

building our knowledge about the basic building blocks that we

and they cannot break the first three rules that were defined for

the remainder of this chapter. The challenge will be to continue

of completefive-wavecycles to construct a largerfive-wavepattern,

Let's begin to study the DJIA real-time and track it through

It is now July 24, 1998. In Figure 10.6 we have a seven-minute

complement our view that thefive-wavecycle is now complete.
rules and guidelines of the Elliott Wave Principle. First locate the

so that it could be used in my evening market report. However,

In Figure 10.6 the five-wave pattern labeled will meet all the

chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average. The chart was labeled

274

• C A L C U L A T I N G M A R K E T PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle

• 275

i to v for Minute, and finally i to 5 for Minuette.

nity to do so now. The high in this DJIA chart at 9,367.8 was made

Degree uses (1) to (5), Minor Degree uses the numbers I to 5, then

discussed how to label subdivided waves, we can take this opportu-

which follow are the more common ones you will see; Intermediate

pivot levels labeled 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 in Figure 10.6. As we have not

follow your interpretations.

V. Beneath wave v we put the number 1 to show where we think

Just know you have to be consistent so that others might be able to

that we refer to as one lesser degree should be marked i , i i , i i i , iv, and

faxed, but the method I have been using is not a whole lot better.

confusion with the larger structure unfolding. So the smaller subset

..1 to ..5. The dots are very hard to read, particularly if the chart is

be labeled with something other than numbers 1 through 5 to avoid

electronic word processing. But others have used .1 to .5 and then

sions within wave 1 are marked with only an asterisk. They need to

ters. I will use r to 5', then 1" to 5< as the primes easily work within

five-wave decline that forms wave 1 down. The individual subdivi-

short time horizon, it is very easy to run out of conventional charac-

of July 24. Start from the price high in this chart and follow the first

When you subdivide wave structure all the way down to a very

on July 20, 1998, and the chart shows the correction into the close

on their screen or chart. This interpretation would be the best fit.

sions in the chart next time.

as most people try to find the best fit for only the data that is present

number when we run out of ways to differentiate additional subdivi-

plete? That is how most analysts will end their wave interpretation

the strongest part of any market move. We will use an underlined

an extending five-wave pattern that is now complete. Or is it com-

wave because it is wave i i i within 3. This wave position is always

the price low. That's it. We have just labeled every twist and turn in

wave iii) and the end of wave i i i is what we call the third-of-third

then we have an extending pattern that creates wave 5 down into

with asterisks between the end of wave i i (better said, the start of

if you need a quick recap. The correction becomes wave 4 up, and

small five-wave pattern. The small five-wave cycle that is marked

covered this phrase eariier, and you may want to turn to Figure 10.2

run out of labels, as wave iii itself subdivides further into another

then see a correction unfold back to the previous fourth wave. We

wave 2 up that leads to wave (3) down. Within wave (3) we again

We left off where wave 3 down was complete in Figure 10.6. We

the first five-wave cycle ended. Then there is a correction marked

the Composite Index is diverging with RSI.

R.N. Elliott's, although we keep running out of ways to subdivide

wave cycle even though there is a buy signal at the price low where

as one lesser degree. Bob Prechter's labels make more sense than

However, I do not think that this chart represents a completed five-

As the patterns subdivide into smaller portions, we refer to each

bined. D i d I make an error in my identification of wave 3 itself?

1 to 5 within circles are used for Primary Degree. The degrees

distance of the price decline that unfolded i n waves 1 and 3 com-

cycle Degree, I to V denotes Cycle Degree, and then numbers

is that the distance traveled in wave 5 is greater than the total

Elliott Wave International. Waves (I) to (V) are reserved for Super-

others will view their analytic task as complete. The first problem

in the book Elliott Wave Principle: Key To Market Behavior from

We must now take the chart in Figure 10.6 past the point where

intraday data. The following labels are described in more detail

276

• CALCULATING MARKET TRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle

• 277

invaluable technical i n f o r m a t i o n for constructing wave counts.)

plete structure w i t h really b e a u t i f u l proportions and ratios w i t h i n

to go back to pick this i n f o r m a t i o n up first as the RSI reversals offer

N o , I do not believe so. T h e reason is that wave 3 is clearly a c o m -

the true t i m i n g signal.

these market turns.

deliberately set up as an early w a r n i n g . T h e crossover i n the RSI is

is divergence between the RSI and Composite Index to w a r n us of

the crossover i n the Composite Index that occurs earlier has been

nificant pivots that mark the end of waves 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. There

or below the longer m o v i n g average on the oscillator. I n this chart

sell signals w i t h i n m y indicators to see i f they align w i t h the sig-

near the intersection where the short m o v i n g average crosses above

market's data. I t h e n need to study the c o m p l e m e n t a r y buy and

tor pattern relative to the m o v i n g averages is a signal that coincides

wave 3 d o w n . There must be something else going on w i t h i n this

4 up. W e previously demonstrated that the most significant oscilla-

can see the tremendous symmetry w i t h i n the segment defined as

Finally, the buy signal of greatest significance produces wave

this u n i t . I have added some visual guides o n the chart so that you

extended, b u t it d i d not rescale its symmetrical proportions. T h e

without

Fibonacci price projections. I n Figure 10.5 the five-wave pattern

tant relationship between oscillator versus price movement. You are

W h e n this indicator pattern develops, I k n o w to adjust all m y future

very weak. W e had charts i n prior chapters to h i g h l i g h t this impor-

eruption to a larger mathematical grid for future internal structure.

only m o v i n g a relatively small distance upward. T h e bounces are

wave position or a market c o i l i n g i n preparation for an expansion

indicator. However, the Composite Index advances while prices are

Composite Index is a characteristic pattern f o u n d w i t h i n a t h i r d

bounce each t i m e the Composite Index tests the trend line for that

W h a t d i d we just find? T h e channel that you see developing i n the

the July 22 date correctly warns that the market w i l l attempt to

evidence that we have been t r y i n g to find. " I t is?" you may ask.

w i t h each new oscillator peak that develops. T h e divergence near

horizontal channel o f resistance. T h i s is the significant piece of

the RSI are developing negative reversal price projection signals

to a series of four S labels denoting sell signals that align w i t h i n a

early. It is not. L o o k more closely. B o t h the Composite Index and

At the top of wave 4 i n Figure 10.6 we have a sell signal that leads

T h e buy signal that forms into the b o t t o m of wave 3 appears

on the wrong side of the market if the oscillators
prices

can move

retracements a l l challenged a 50 percent ratio of a p o r t i o n o f its

following.

the buy signal leads to an indicator pop into the last bar o n the right

the RSI signals that I a m referring to very difficult. You m i g h t want

quake occurs. N o w follow the indicators past this channel where

RSI. ( I f you skipped the RSI price projection chapter, you w i l l find

as a seismograph recording of a m i n o r tremor before a larger earth-

the RSI that meets the amplitude requirements we defined for the

that f o r m a horizontal channel i n the Composite Index is the same

up w i t h i n wave 3 d o w n . There is also a negative reversal signal i n

wave structure. T h i s indicator pattern of consecutive sell signals

pared to prior oscillator peaks. T h i s signal marks the end of wave iv

have a five-wave pattern that w i l l likely develop into a larger five-

where the oscillator makes a new h i g h at a lower price level c o m -

larger movement, and the decline was orderly. I n Figure 10.6 we

W e t h e n see the Composite Index forms a negative reversal

278 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 279

So we now know the market is going down further after it attempts

Lane. The indicator screams SELL.

travel any displacement above or below zero that it may want to go.

of this chart. The term "an indicator pop" was coined by George

have to think of a wave count that fits this additional evidence.

diverging peaks within a close proximity to one another. This is

a back-and-fill pattern from nearby levels. The next step is that we

The oscillators are overbought, and the two indicators have

of technical evidence within our current puzzle.

with the most recent data. Both the RSI and Composite Index are

finding a revised wave count that might compliment all the pieces

cal information available from the final indicator positions aligned

to a new proportion with the next move. Here is how I go about

tors display this strong signal. However, this is not the only techni-

series of horizontal sell signals that warn us the market will rescale

should be considered very strong signals. In this chart both indica-

the oscillators and work with the information we gained from the

that form divergences within a spread less than nine periods apart

We also have to factor in the negative reversal signal present in

exceedingly bearish. The chapter on the RSI revealed that peaks

decline from the high, rotated that segment of data 180 degrees,

reversal signal. Reversal signals develop only in bear markets.

Figure 10.6, except that I have made a copy of the first part of the

pared to other oscillator peaks which we now know is a negative

The chart in Figure 10.7 is the exact same chart we saw in

overbought at oscillator highs that form at lower price levels com-

extend into a larger structure. We knew that from the oscillator

It is making a peak at a level (compared to the indicator's y axis)

tern that displayed symmetry because it in fact was still trying to

Composite Index peaking in the most current data of Figure 10.6.

to see that the market had not formed a completed five-wave pat-

few bars of Figure 10.6. How do we know this? Look closely at the

and pasted them to the last bar in Figure 10.6, it was very easy

will not make a major decline from the market levels in the last

When I copied the beginning cycles within our five-wave pattern

mation warning us not to "bet the farm" immediately. The market

ing data. Why? We know markets create symmetrical patterns.

market will decline further. But it is also giving us more subtle infor-

and then pasted the copied segment onto the back end of our exist-

All right then, we know the chart is clearly telling us that the

that is higher than any other peak that this indicator created within
this chart. Recall a prior discussion that stated, when an oscillator
successfully creates a new high or low by breaking through a former
horizontal range of resistance support for that indicator, the market
will have sufficient punch to come back and test the former indica-

2
1

1

li

1

Rotated 180 degfrees

j

Copied

tor range after the new indicator extreme has been alleviated. In
my experience the oscillator nearly always returns to test the former
3

range of resistance support for that indicator. That is why I use
the Composite Index, because it has not been normalized and can

5

Figure 10.7

280 • CALCULATING MARKET PRICE OBJECTIVES

Using Oscillators with the Elliott Wave Principle • 2 8 1

warning us that an expansion may form.

but not the exact puzzle piece that we need.

tion now because of the series of horizontal sell signals in the chart

tern is what we need. OK, so the pattern in Figure 10.7 is helpful

choppy pattern into its conclusion. We cannot make that assump-

not be an immediate breakdown. A down up and then down pat-

start might be how the market's move ends by repeating a slow

that the oscillator position into a new high is telling us there will

will look like as it nears a resolution. In other words, a slow choppy

in Figure 10.7 helps us see an extending pattern, but do not forget

you to identify price targets and also what the character of the move

iii within wave 3 down. The graphically manipulated interpretation

between the first part of a market's move and the latter will enable

this. What had been labeled wave v of 5 down is now marked wave

the Wave Principle. Knowing that proportional balances may occur

rotated. Use the thumbnail method if you have difficulties seeing

will be able to do in your mind very quickly after you start to utilize

are still present, though upside down, because the data has been

onstrated in Figure 10.7 before we move on. This is something you

Figure 10.7, you will see that the original labels from Figure 10.6

One last note about the graphic cut-and-paste technique dem-

signals. If you look at the pasted segment added to the right side of

which we will cover later in this chapter.

nicely.

are price projections within corrective patterns and from triangles,

versa. So the guideline of alternation fits our present scenario really

will produce the correct objectives. What we have yet to discuss

you have a simple wave 2, you can expect a tricky wave 4 and vice

you need to learn as the prior techniques in the Fibonacci chapter

the amount of time each takes to complete their corrections. If

in the Fibonacci chapter. So there are very few new relationships

at Figure 10.2 again, you will see that waves 2 and 4 alternate in

tionship by applying the techniques we discussed at great length

of patterns that form within wave positions 2 and 4. If you look

because you already know how to calculate every Fibonacci rela-

the Wave Principle has a guideline for alternating the character

will not spend a lot of time on price projections for Elliott waves
