
FIGURE 5.2 Shorter Swings into Support or Resistance Often Set Up Good Breakouts

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

125

FIGURE 5.3 A Tighter Range Near the Edge of a Larger Range Often Precedes a Good Breakout
of That Edge

Prebreakout Accumulation At this point, you should realize that we are starting to
see the same patterns over and over. This is not rocket science; the patterns of the market
are subtle, but they are also logical and, at their core, they are simple. Earlier, we looked
at the classic Wyckoff springs and upthrusts as signs of accumulation and distribution.
If large players are positioning themselves in the range in anticipation of a breakout, it is
very likely that we will see these springs and upthrusts in the prebreakout ranges. Much
accumulation and distribution is invisible; institutions spend a lot of money on salaries
for skilled execution traders and in the development of execution algorithms. All of this
subterfuge is designed to hide the execution of these large orders. However, there are
points in the market where they cannot really hide their hands, and, if we know exactly
what to look for, we can sometimes get clues as to their intentions. Violations of support
and resistance in well-defined ranges are important areas to watch. If excursions beyond
the range are short-lived, printing springs and upthrusts at the edges of the range, this
becomes strong evidence that large traders are positioning in the market, and often sets
up good breakout trades.

Characteristic Patterns at Good Breakouts
Again, a good breakout is driven by institutional interest that eventually garners the interest of the public and results in a feedback loop that propels the market far from the
breakout point. It is overly optimistic to assume that prices will trade cleanly through
the breakout level and never come back. (This, incidentally, is the absolute best-case
scenario for breakout traders, and trades like this are rare.) However, there are some
common patterns at the actual breakout point that can separate the best breakout trades
from the rest.
High Volatility A breakout should be a clearly visible event. If a market approaches
a breakout point, trades tightly below the point with significant signs of accumulation,
and then very politely and gently lifts through resistance to trade higher, this is probably
not a good sign. Good breakouts are driven by unusual order flow, so we need to see

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

126

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

increased volume, activity, and interest associated with the actual breakout. In general,
the ranges of individual bars should expand, and they almost always will expand on
lower time frames. Breakouts from less significant levels may not always see this
increased volatility, but a good breakout that marks a transition to an extended trend
is almost always a volatile event. Note that it may be difficult to measure this volatility
with traditional measures, but the quantitative measures that will be most useful will
be instantaneous measures of volatility such as the ratio of the current bar’s range to a
window of previous bars.
Slippage Is Good The difference between the intended and actual execution prices
in a trade is called slippage. If a trader is planning on paying a breakout above $20.00
and receives fills at $20.20, this is 20 cents of slippage and can be a significant cost of
trading. Most traders think of slippage as only that: a bad thing, a cost to be avoided.
However, around breakout points, slippage is actually desirable. It should be difficult to
buy a market making a good breakout. You should have to pay higher prices to get in if
the market is really moving.
Many traders panic when they receive significant slippage. A bad fill is seen as increasing risk and cutting into profits, and it is hard to argue with this logic, at least on the
surface. Think deeper, though, and consider the possible reasons for the bad fill. Sometimes it may be the trader’s fault, in which case it should probably be treated as an error
and is subject to the error rule (i.e., fix it immediately). However, slippage is a fact of life
in breakout trades. In fact, positive slippage, where you receive a better than expected
price, is often the killer here. Imagine you are looking to pay a breakout above $50.00 in
a fairly volatile market, expecting that you will be slipped and have to pay $50.05, $50.10,
or even $50.20. What if you execute your order and discover that you are filled for your
full size at $49.98? This is not a good thing. Someone was willing to sell this market to you
at a great price, and caveat emptor—the selling pressure, against your potential breakout, was stronger than expected. Positive slippage is often a sign of an impending failed
breakout trade.
Immediate Satisfaction The logical extension of all of these factors, and one of the
reasons that certain personality types are drawn to this kind of trading, is that the breakout trader should receive immediate feedback on whether the trade is right or wrong.
As always, immediate must be taken in context. If trading intraday, then confirmation
should come within seconds, but a trader trading on the weekly time frame might demand some confirmation of the trade within a few days. Immediate satisfaction does not
mean an instant win, and it does not mean an easy trade. A very short-term trader might
pay $20.15 for a breakout, only to see the stock trade to $20.30 in the next few seconds
and immediately be offered at $20.10. This is nothing more than extra volatility and order flow around the breakout level, which is to be expected, and the trader can now
begin the process of managing the trade. On the other hand, a breakout trade that is paid
for at $20.15 and then immediately begins to slowly grind lower is no breakout at all.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

127

Especially for short-term traders, breakout trading can be exciting, and the immediate
feedback allows for rapid learning and skill development.

Patterns Following Good Breakouts
In a good breakout, the extra volatility and one-sided liquidity lead to a sharp move above
the breakout level. Nothing in the market continues indefinitely, though, and eventually
this initial thrust gives way to a pause and a pullback. This is a critical point because,
if the breakout is the beginning of a new trend, this first pullback after the breakout is
the optimal time to establish positions for the new trend. If the breakout is going to fail,
it is going to fail at this first pullback. In addition, the character of the price action in
this first pullback can communicate a lot of information about the conviction behind the
move and the character of the market.
Pullback Holds Outside the Breakout Level This is probably the most intuitive
example, and the one that many traders focus most of their efforts on. The market breaks
through the level, trades sharply beyond the level, and then makes a clean pullback that
holds outside the breakout level. This makes sense because there should be urgency and
real order flow following the breakout. Large players should be interested in defending the breakout level, and small players should be willing—perhaps stupidly, but still
willing—to chase the market. All of this should logically result in the market being unable to come back to the breakout level. It is easy to find examples of these patterns, and
also very easy to manage these trades that never come back to the entry price. Figure 5.4
shows schematic examples of this pattern.
Pullback Violates the Level It is certainly easiest to manage trades when the pullback holds outside the breakout level, because it is simple to put a breakeven stop at
your entry price and never be at a loss on the trade. For the trader, this is the ideal situation, but think about it for a moment; ask yourself why the market should work this way.
Why should the large players who positioned inside the range, and maybe even provided
some liquidity at the breakout point, defend the level precisely or aggressively? It is safe
to assume that many of them are working from a hybrid approach that combines valuation with at least a quasi-technical approach. Though they may recognize the validity of

FIGURE 5.4 First Pullback Holds Outside Breakout Level

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

128

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

the breakout as a price structure, many of them would also be perfectly happy to add to
their positions at lower prices.
There is an important lesson here for smaller traders: we would like clean, perfect
trades where the market almost magically respects lines we draw on our charts, but there
is no reason for the world to work like this. There is no logical reason for the market to
have to hold outside the breakout level. If you are a breakout trader, an interesting exercise is to take a reasonable sample of trades in your time frames (perhaps 500 trades),
go through them methodically, and categorize them into ones that held cleanly beyond
the breakout level and those that did not. Then ask yourself, objectively, if those that
conformed to the ideal pattern of holding outside the level performed better after the
breakout (in terms of trend extension) than those that did not.
There is also probably another dynamic at work here in many of these situations.
Imagine for a minute a simplified market model with only three groups of participants:
strong-hand large players who are trading on a mixture of technical and fundamental
concepts; small, nimble, but naive short-term traders who trade only off price levels; and
noise traders whose random trades obscure what would otherwise be very clear in the
price action. Furthermore, imagine that a breakout has just occurred, in which the large
players accumulated before the breakout, the small traders entered on the breakout, but,
after the breakout, the large players were not willing to commit enough capital to propel
the trend higher. Perhaps they had not yet accumulated their full line in the prebreakout level, perhaps they sold enough at the level that they wanted to buy more at lower
prices, or perhaps they were uncertain in front of some economic report. The point is
that we do not know and can never understand the real motivations of these large players, especially since we are presenting a composite model of what would actually be
thousands of competing interests in the actual market. Regardless, the key point is that
they choose, for whatever reasons, not to support the market and it drops back through
the prebreakout level.
What do the naive short-term traders do at this point? They recognize the failed
breakout pattern and sell their positions en masse just below the breakout level. Who
is buying from them? You got it—the large players are more than happy to pick up some
extra inventory from the nervous short-term players, who are taking small losses on positions they just bought at slightly higher prices. (And who, by the way, just sold them
those positions at those slightly higher prices?) The large traders will certainly be willing
to soak up this extra inventory. Once they see the selling dry up as the short-term traders
have fully exited their positions (or, in some cases, actually established short positions),
the large players only then will resume buying aggressively. At this point, the short-term
traders recognize the error of their ways, see that the breakout was valid after all, and
rush to get back into the market, but now they are entering a moving market in the direction it is already moving. Their buying action will remove enough liquidity that the
market begins to trend in earnest.
There are a few valuable lessons here: Do not expect levels to hold cleanly. The initial breakout level failed to hold on the pullback, which triggered the short-term traders
to exit their positions. This, in turn, was actually the catalyst for the real move. Make

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

129

FIGURE 5.5 The Breakout Level Can Also Be Violated on the Pullback

sure your trading plan respects the realities of the market; any other plan is a recipe for
disaster. Figure 5.5 shows schematic examples of breakout trades violating the breakout
level on the pullback. Remember, this is not necessarily a sign of a failed breakout.

Patterns of Failed Breakouts
The preceding example is not meant to imply that every breakout trade works, nor
that short-term traders were necessarily stupid to exit their trades on a failed breakout.
Breakouts do fail, they fail frequently, and price movements following these failures can
be violent. One of the characteristics of market action is that markets will probe levels
for resting orders, seeking out levels where that will create trading volume. It is not that
difficult to figure out where these orders might be placed, since traders use previous pivots and visible support and resistance levels to define risk points for trades. Stop orders
tend to cluster just outside the day’s range, or at more or less predictable chart levels.
This may not be completely intuitive at first, but here is one way this could work.
Imagine that you are a large player who would like to sell some of your inventory in
a futures market. You can see that the market has held a resistance level cleanly (let’s
say $80.00 for this example) on several tests, and it is reasonable to assume that many
traders are short against this visible level. If so, where will those traders probably put
their stops? There is no exact level, but we can assume that they will be clustered just
beyond the resistance, probably in the range from $80.01 to $80.20. What do you do the
next time the market trades up to $79.98? Remember, you actually are holding more of a
long position than you are comfortable with and you want to sell some, but you want to
sell as high as possible. Paradoxically, one good way to accomplish that goal might be to
actually buy more at $79.98, $79.99, and eventually to try to buy enough that your buying
pushes the market to $80.01. Even though you need to sell, the most effective way for
you to sell actually begins with you buying more.
If you are correct and shorts have their stop orders clustered there, those stops will
trigger and a rush of additional buying will come into the market. As soon as those stops
fire off, you can stop your buying (which is a good thing, because now you are even
more long than you were before), and you will be more than happy to sell some of your
position to those stop orders. If this campaign is successful, you will be able to sell a
significant portion of your position into the volatility resulting from those orders, and, if
you continue selling the rest of your inventory after the burst of stop orders is completed,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

130

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

you will most likely roll the market over into a strong sell-off. This is a highly simplified
model, but this type of action happens constantly in all markets and all time frames.
It is relatively easy for even moderately sized players to probe most markets, and thin
markets can be probed with very small size. There are plenty of inactive stocks in which
a few hundred shares could push prices through support and resistance at critical points,
so the capital and risk required to execute these campaigns is often much smaller than
you might expect. Failed breakouts like this are very common. Fortunately, they set up
some exceptional trading opportunities for the traders who know the patterns and who
are prepared to trade them.
Failure Test of Breakout Level Again, we encounter inconsistent terminology,
as different traders will call this trade by different names. What I call a failure test is
the simple case just described, where a market trades beyond a significant level just far
enough to trigger stops without any significant follow-through beyond the level. As a pure
price pattern, a failure test is a brief excursion beyond a level, followed by an immediate
reversal. “Immediate” in this case is dependent on time frame; intraday traders might be
looking for a reversal within seconds to minutes while very long-term traders might consider any action reversed within a few weeks to be a failure test. As a working definition,
a rule of thumb might be that you want to see no more than two or three bars on your
time frame outside the breakout level and then strong momentum reversing the move.
This is one case where the close of the bar on your time frame can be very important.
The reason for this is that lower time frame price action is the key to judging the
probabilities around this trade. Conceptually, in the case of an upside breakout, buyers are swept into the market by the breakout, and then they will sell their positions
if the breakout fails. These exits are usually accompanied by some degree of urgency,
ranging from mild to outright panic, and this order flow creates downside momentum.
It is extremely unlikely to have this kind of action and not to have a close back below
the breakout level. Old-school chartists sometimes referred to this kind of action as a
“turkey shoot”—the turkey would poke its head above the level (perhaps a fencerow),
and would immediately have its head shot off. This actually describes the price action in
the best examples of these failures very well.
In Figure 5.6, compare the price action on the two or three bars following the two
points marked A to the same time period following B. In the first two cases, once a bar
closes back on the other side of the breakout level, strong momentum steps in and we
see good price rejection from the breakout level. Remember, this price rejection is the
fundamental pattern of support or resistance holding; in this case the level is holding
after being broken, but the same concepts still apply. Even though the trade marked B
would have also been a successful fade of the breakout level, the action following B
is not typical of the action following the best trades. The market spent too much time
consolidating too closely to the level.
At the risk of confusing the issue slightly, it is important to consider that there is
another variation on this pattern in which the reversal bar actually does not show strong
reversal momentum. In this case, the close of that bar may occur very close to the level,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

Interfaces between Trends and Ranges

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

131

FIGURE 5.6 Points A Show Good Examples of Breakout Failures; B is More Typical of Continuation
Below the Level

either inside, outside, or perhaps right at the breakout level. However, lower time frame
price action shows a lack of conviction beyond the breakout level. For instance, in the
case of an upside breakout, bounces would be slow and reluctant on the lower time
frame, and the market might be seen to move down with much less resistance than
when it moves up; we would say that such a market “goes down a lot easier than it
goes up”—this is typical of a market that may be holding at higher levels without strong
underlying conviction. If this type of action is seen, sharp failure momentum back inside
the level is likely to emerge within the next several bars.
If this does not happen, then it is more likely that a simple pullback after the breakout is underway, which, remember, does not need to hold outside the breakout level.
This is one of the most complex and subtle areas of chart analysis; there is much more
art than science involved in discerning the difference between these failed and successful breakouts. In all cases, the distinguishing feature is the lack of conviction and momentum beyond the level, both of which can be read in price action and in the chart of
lower time frames. Even so, traders who focus on these trades must be prepared to be
wrong many times and perhaps to make multiple adjustments to positions as the market

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c05

132

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:35

Printer: Hamilton Printing

MARKET STRUCTURE

structure unfolds. These are areas of great uncertainty where the market is in a state of
flux; extreme flexibility is required to successfully navigate these waters.
While there have been constant reminders that nearly everything in technical analysis is time frame dependent, one important element is not: When significant price action is anticipated at a specific price level, it should occur at that level. Whether the
trader is watching tick charts or monthly charts, the presence or absence of action at a
level is an objective criterion that cannot be ignored. For instance, imagine that a longterm investor, perhaps trading weekly or monthly bars, is expecting significant action
as a market breaks to a multiyear high. If this does not happen, if the market simply
trades beyond that new high without any increase in activity, range, or volume, then this
is more suggestive of a failed breakout and the investor might choose to adjust her position within her risk management framework. You can think that she used lower time
frame price action to inform this decision, but, in reality, she simply did not see activity
that supported the idea of an imbalance at a specific price level.
Failed Pullback Following a Breakout The pullback following a breakout is potentially the first pullback in a new trend, so any of the common trend failure patterns
associated with other pullbacks apply to this pullback—with one small exception. If the
breakout level was truly an important level, there should have been a high level of activity on the breakout and it is relatively uncommon to see breakout pullbacks fail by
going into flat ranges. It is far more common to see these pullbacks fail with very strong
momentum out of the pattern or fail on a second test of the extreme reached after the
pullback. There are usually too many competing influences and too much order flow for
the market to just go dead after a breakout, and this type of consolidation, when it does
happen, is usually indicative of a successful breakout. The fact that the market is able to
hold outside the level shows that there is real conviction behind the move, and can often
set up a sustained move in the direction of the breakout (see Figure 5.7).
For the trader looking to trade failed breakouts, the best pullback failures will see
a sharp reversal and failure out of the wrong side of the pullback formation, indicating
a complete failure of conviction outside the breakout level. For instance, assume that
