
Best Ask
S

1 tick

> 2 ticks
B
S’

1 tick

Best Bid

FIGURE 7.3 Ticking Strategy. The original spread must be greater than two ticks.

After the buy order is filled at B, we will try to sell it at S for a profit of at least one tick.
But if the sell order cannot be filled, then we will sell it at S′ at a loss of one tick.

165
INTRADAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

microstructure or high-frequency trading (Arnuk and Saluzzi, 2012; Durbin,
2010; Harris, 2003; and Sinclair, 2010). (In my descriptions that follow, I
focus on making an initial long trade, but, of course, there is a symmetrical
opportunity on the short side.)
In markets that fill orders on a pro-rata basis such as the Eurodollar futures trading on CME, the simplest way to benefit from this expectation is
just to “join the bid” immediately, so that whenever there is a fill on the bid
side, we will get allocated part of that fill. To ensure that the bid and ask
prices are more likely to move higher rather than lower after we are filled,
we join the bid only when the original bid size is much larger than the ask
size. This is called the ratio trade, because we expect the proportion of the
original order to be filled is equal to the ratio between our own order size
and the aggregate order size at the bid price. Once the buying pressure causes the bid price to move up one or more ticks, then we can sell at a profit,
or we can simply place a sell order at the best ask (if the bid-ask spread is
larger than the round trip commission per share). If the bid price doesn’t
move up or our sell limit order doesn’t get filled, we can probably still sell
at the original best bid price because of the large bid size, with the loss of
commissions only.
In markets where the bid-ask spread is bigger than two ticks, there is
another simple trade to benefit from the expectation of an uptick. Simply
place the buy order at the best bid plus one tick. If this is filled, then we
place a sell order at the best ask minus one tick and hope that it is filled. But
if it is not, we can probably still sell it at the original best bid, with the loss
of commissions plus one tick. This is called ticking or quote matching. For this
trade to be profitable, we need to make sure that the round trip commission
per share is less than the bid-ask spread minus two ticks. This strategy is illustrated in Figure 7.3.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

166

(Ticking is not a foolproof strategy, of course. The original best bid before it was front-run may be cancelled if the trader knows that he has been
front-run, leaving us with a lower bid price to unload our inventory. Or the
whole situation could be set up as a trap for us: the trader who placed the
original best bid actually wanted to sell us stocks at a price better than her
own bid. So once we bought her stocks plus one tick, she would immediately cancel the bid.)
Even when there is no preexisting buying pressure or bid-ask size imbalance, we can create the illusion of one (often called momentum ignition). This
works for markets with time priority for orders instead of using pro-rata
fills. Let’s assume we start with very similar best bid and ask sizes. We will
place a large buy limit order at the best bid to create the impression of buying pressure, and simultaneously place a small sell limit order at the best
ask. This would trick traders to buy at the ask price since they anticipate
an uptick, filling our small sell order. At this point, we immediately cancel
the large buy order. The best bid and ask sizes are now roughly equal again.
Many of those traders who bought earlier expecting a large buying pressure
may now sell back their holdings at a loss, and we can then buy them at the
original best bid. This is called flipping.
There is a danger to creating the illusion of buying pressure—somebody
just might call our bluff and actually fill our large buy order. In this case, we
might have to sell it at a loss. Conversely, if we suspect a large buy order is
due to flippers, then we can sell to the flippers and drive down the bid price.
We hope that the flippers will capitulate and sell their new inventory, driving the ask price down as well, so that we can then cover our short position
below the original bid price. How do we know that the large buy order is due
to flippers in the first place? We may have to record how often a large bid gets
canceled instead of getting filled. If you subscribe to the private data feeds
from the exchanges such as ITCH from Nasdaq, EDGX Book Feed from
Direct Edge, or the PITCH feed from BATS, you will receive the detailed
life history of an order including any modifications or partial fills (Arnuk and
Saluzzi, 2012). Such information may help you detect flippers as well.
All these strategies and their defenses, bluffs, and counterbluffs illustrate
the general point that high-frequency traders can profit only from slower
traders. If only high-frequency traders are left in the market, the net average
profit for everyone will be zero. Indeed, because of the prevalence of these
types of high-frequency strategies that “front-run” large bid or ask orders,
many traditional market makers no longer quote large sizes. This has led to
a general decrease of the NBBO sizes across many markets. For example,

167
INTRADAY MOMENTUM STRATEGIES

even in highly liquid stocks such as AAPL, the NBBO sizes are often just
a few hundred shares. And even for the most liquid ETFs such as SPY on
ARCA, the NBBO sizes are often fewer than 10,000 shares. Only after these
small orders are filled will the market maker go back to requote at the same
prices to avoid being taken advantage of by the high-frequency traders. (Of
course, there are other reasons for avoiding displaying large quotes: market
makers do not like to keep large inventories that can result from having their
large quotes filled.) Similarly, large institutional orders that were formerly
executed as block trades are now broken up into tiny child orders to be scattered around the different market venues and executed throughout the day.
Stop hunting is another favorite high-frequency momentum strategy. Research
in the currencies markets indicated that once support (resistance) levels are
breached, prices will go further down (up) for a while (Osler, 2000, 2001).
These support and resistance levels can be those reported daily by banks or
brokerages, or they can just be round numbers in the proximity of the current price levels.This short-term price momentum occurs because of the large
number of stop orders placed at or near the support and resistance levels.
To understand this further, let’s just look at the support levels, as the situation with resistance levels is symmetrical. Once the price drops enough to
breach a support level, those sell stop orders are triggered and thereby drive
the prices down further. Given this knowledge, high-frequency traders can,
of course, create artificial selling pressure by submitting large sell orders
when the price is close enough to a support level, hoping to drive the next
tick down. Once the stop orders are triggered and a downward momentum
is in force, these high-frequency traders can cover their short positions for
a quick profit.
If we have access to the order flow information of a market, then we have a
highly valuable information stream that goes beyond the usual bid/ask/last
price stream. As Lyons discussed in the context of currencies trading, “order
flow” is signed transaction volume (Lyons, 2001). If a trader buys 100 units
from a dealer/market maker/order book, the order flow is 100, and it is
−100 if the trader sells 100 units instead. What “buying” from an order book
means is that a trader buys at the ask price, or, equivalently, the trader submits
a market order to buy. Empirical research indicates that order flow information is a good predictor of price movements. This is because market makers
can distill important fundamental information from order flow information,
and set the bid-ask prices accordingly. For example, if a major hedge fund just
learns about a major piece of breaking news, their algorithms will submit large
market orders of the same sign in a split second. A market maker monitoring

the order flow will deduce, quite correctly, that such large one-directional
demands indicate the presence of informed traders, and they will immediately
adjust their bid-ask prices to protect themselves.The urgency of using market
orders indicates that the information is new and not widely known.
Since most of us are not large market makers or operators of an exchange,
how can we access such order flow information? For stocks and futures markets, we can monitor and record every tick (i.e., changes in best bid, ask, and
transaction price and size), and thus determine whether a transaction took
place at the bid (negative order flow) or at the ask (positive order flow). For
the currencies market, this is difficult because most dealers do not report
transaction prices. We may have to resort to trading currency futures for
this strategy. Once the order flow per transaction is computed, we can easily
compute the cumulative or average order flow over some look-back period
and use that to predict whether the price will move up or down.

KEY POINTS

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

168

• Intraday momentum strategies do not suffer from many of the
disadvantages of interday momentum strategies, but they retain some key
advantages.
• “Breakout” momentum strategies involve a price exceeding a trading range.
• The opening gap strategy is a breakout strategy that works for some futures
and currencies.
• Breakout momentum may be caused by the triggering of stop orders.
• Many kinds of corporate and macroeconomic news induce short-term price
momentum.
• Index composition changes induce momentum in stocks that are added to
or deleted from the index.
• Rebalancing of leveraged ETFs near the market close causes momentum
in the underlying index in the same direction as the market return from the
previous close.
• Many high-frequency momentum strategies involve imbalance between
bid and ask sizes, an imbalance that is sometimes artificially created by the
high-frequency traders themselves.
• Stop hunting is a high-frequency trading strategy that relies on triggering
stop orders that typically populate round numbers near the current market
price.
• Order flow can predict short-term price movement in the same direction.

CHAPTER 8

Risk Management

R

isk management means different things to different people. To novice traders, risk management is driven by “loss aversion”: we simply
don’t like the feeling of losing money. In fact, research has suggested
that the average human being needs to have the potential for making $2
to compensate for the risk of losing $1, which may explain why a Sharpe
ratio of 2 is so emotionally appealing (Kahneman, 2011). However, this
dislike of risk in itself is not rational. Our goal should be the maximization of long-term equity growth, and we avoid risk only insofar as it
interferes with this goal. Risk management in this chapter is based on
this objective.
The key concept in risk management is the prudent use of leverage,
which we can optimize via the Kelly formula or some numerical methods
that maximize compounded growth rate. But sometimes reality forces us
to limit the maximum drawdown of an account. One obvious way of accomplishing this is the use of stop loss, but it is often problematic. The other
way is constant proportion portfolio insurance, which tries to maximize the
upside of the account in addition to preventing large drawdowns. Both will
be discussed here. Finally, it may be wise to avoid trading altogether during
times when the risk of loss is high. We will investigate whether the use of
certain leading indicators of risk is an effective loss-avoidance technique.

169

■ Optimal Leverage

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

170

It is easy to say that we need to be prudent when using leverage, but much
harder to decide what constitutes a prudent, or optimal, leverage for a particular strategy or portfolio because, obviously, if we set leverage to zero, we
will suffer no risks but will generate no returns, either.
To some portfolio managers, especially those who are managing their own
money and answerable to no one but themselves, the sole goal of trading is the
maximization of net worth over the long term. They pay no mind to drawdowns and volatilities of returns. So the optimal leverage to them means one
that can maximize the net worth or, equivalently, the compounded growth rate.
We’ll discuss here three methods of computing the optimal leverage
that maximizes the compounded growth rate. Each method has its own assumptions and drawbacks, and we try to be agnostic as to which method
you should adopt. But, in all cases, we have to make the assumption that
the future probability distribution of returns of the market is the same as
in the past. This is usually an incorrect assumption, but this is the best that
quantitative models can do. Even more restrictive, many risk management
techniques assume further that the probability distribution of returns of the
strategy itself is the same as in the past. And finally, the most restrictive of all
assumes that the probability distribution of returns of the strategy is Gaussian. As is often the case in mathematical modeling, the most restrictive assumptions give rise to the most elegant and simple solution, so I will start
this survey with the Kelly formula under the Gaussian assumption.
If the maximum drawdown of an account with a certain leverage is −100
percent, this leverage cannot be optimal because the compounded growth
rate will also be −100 percent. So an optimal leverage implies that we must
not be ruined (equity reaching zero) at any point in history, rather selfevidently! But sometimes our risk managers (perhaps it is a spouse for independent traders) tell us that we are allowed to have a much smaller magnitude of drawdown than 1. In this case, the maximum drawdown allowed
forms an additional constraint in the leverage optimization problem.
No matter how the optimal leverage is determined, the one central
theme is that the leverage should be kept constant. This is necessary to optimize the growth rate whether or not we have the maximum drawdown constraint. Keeping a constant leverage may sound rather mundane, but can be
counterintuitive when put into action. For example, if you have a long stock
portfolio, and your profit and loss (P&L) was positive in the last trading period, the constant leverage requirement forces you to buy more stocks for

Example 8.1: The Implications of the
Constant Leverage Requirement

this period. However, if your P&L was negative in the last period, it forces
you to sell stocks into the loss. Example 8.1 illustrates this.
Many analysts believe that this “selling into losses” feature of the risk
management techniques causes contagion in financial crises. (In particular,
this was cited as a cause of the August 2007 meltdown of quant funds; see
Khandani and Lo, 2007).This is because often many funds are holding similar
positions in their portfolios. If one fund suffers losses, perhaps due to some
unrelated strategies, it is prone to liquidate positions across all its portfolios
due to the constant leverage requirement, causing losses for all other funds
that hold those positions. The losses force all these other funds to also liquidate their positions and thus exacerbate the losses for everyone: a vicious
cycle. One might think of this as a tragedy of the commons: self-preservation
(“risk management”) for one fund can lead to catastrophe for all.

171
RISK MANAGEMENT

The central requirement for all ways of optimizing leverage described
in this chapter is that the leverage be kept constant at all times. This
can have some counterintuitive consequences.
If you started with $100K equity in your account, and your
strategy’s optimal leverage was determined to be 5, then you should
have a portfolio with market value of $500K.
If, however, you lost $10K in one day and your equity was reduced
to $90K, with a portfolio market value of $490K, then you need to
liquidate a further $40K of your portfolio so that its updated market
value became 5 × $90K = $450K. This selling into the loss may make
some people uncomfortable, but it is a necessary part of many risk
management schemes.
Suppose you then gained $20K the next day. What should your
portfolio market value be? And what should you do to achieve that
market value?
The new portfolio market value should be 5 × ($90K + $20K) =
$550K. Since your current portfolio market value was just $450K +
$20K = $470K, this means you need to add $80K worth of (long or
short) securities to the portfolio. Hopefully, your broker will lend
you the cash to buy all these extra securities!

Kelly Formula
If one assumes that the probability distribution of returns is Gaussian, the
Kelly formula gives us a very simple answer for optimal leverage f:
f = m / s2 ,

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

172

(8.1)

where m is the mean excess return, and s2 is the variance of the excess
returns.
One of the best expositions of this formula can be found in Edward
Thorp’s (1997) paper, and I also devoted an entire chapter in Quantitative
Trading (Chan, 2009) to it. It can be proven that if the Gaussian assumption
is a good approximation, then the Kelly leverage f will generate the highest
compounded growth rate of equity, assuming that all profits are reinvested.
However, even if the Gaussian assumption is really valid, we will inevitably
suffer estimation errors when we try to estimate what the “true” mean and
variance of the excess return are. And no matter how good one’s estimation method is, there is no guarantee that the future mean and variance will
be the same as the historical ones. The consequence of using an overestimated mean or an underestimated variance is dire: Either case will lead to
an overestimated optimal leverage, and if this overestimated leverage is high
enough, it will eventually lead to ruin: equity going to zero. However, the
consequence of using an underestimated leverage is merely a submaximal
compounded growth rate. Many traders justifiably prefer the later scenario,
and they routinely deploy a leverage equal to half of what the Kelly formula
recommends: the so-called half-Kelly leverage.
My actual experience using Kelly’s optimal leverage is that it is best
viewed as an upper bound rather than as the leverage that must be used.
Often, the Kelly leverage given by the backtest (or a short period of walkforward test) is so high that it far exceeds the maximum leverage allowed by
our brokers. At other times, the Kelly leverage would have bankrupted us
even in backtest, due to the non-Gaussian distributions of returns. In other
words, the maximum drawdown in backtest is −1 using the Kelly leverage,
which implies setting the leverage by numerically optimizing the growth
rate using a more realistic non-Gaussian distribution might be more practical. Alternatively, we may just optimize on the empirical, historical returns.
These two methods will be discussed in the next sections.
But just using Kelly optimal leverage as an upper bound can sometimes provide interesting insights. For example, I once calculated that both
the Russell 1000 and 2000 indices have Kelly leverage at about 1.8. But

exchange-traded fund (ETF) sponsor Direxion has been marketing triple
leveraged ETFs BGU and TNA tracking these indices. By design, they have a
leverage of 3. Clearly, there is a real danger that the net asset value (NAV) of
these ETFs will go to zero. Equally clearly, no investors should buy and hold
these ETFs, as the sponsor itself readily agrees.
There is another usage of the Kelly formula besides setting the optimal
leverage: it also tells us how to optimally allocate our buying power to different portfolios or strategies. Let’s denote F as a column vector of optimal
leverages that we should apply to the different portfolios based on a common pool of equity. (For example, if we have $1 equity, then F = [3.2 1.5]T
means the first portfolio should have a market value of $3.2 while the second portfolio should have a market value of $1.5. The T signifies matrix
transpose.) The Kelly formula says
F = C −1M

(8.2)

Optimization of Expected Growth Rate Using
Simulated Returns
If one relaxes the Gaussian assumption and substitutes another analytic
form (e.g., Student’s t) for the returns distribution to take into account the
fat tails, we can still follow the derivations of the Kelly formula in Thorp’s

173
RISK MANAGEMENT

where C is the covariance matrix of the returns of the portfolios and M is the
mean excess returns of these portfolios.
There is an extensive example on how to use this formula in Quantitative
Trading. But what should we do if our broker has set a maximum leverage
n
Fmax that is smaller than the total gross leverage ∑ i|Fi|? (We are concerned
with the gross leverage, which is equal to the absolute sum of the long and
short market values divided by our equity, not the net leverage, which is the
net of the long and short market values divided by our equity.) The usual
n
recommendation is to multiply all Fi by the factor Fmax /∑ i|Fi| so that the total gross leverage is equal to Fmax. The problem with this approach is that the
compounded growth rate will no longer be optimal under this maximum
leverage constraint. I have constructed Example 8.2 to demonstrate this.
n
The upshot of that example is that when Fmax is much smaller than ∑ i|Fi|, it
is often optimal (with respect to maximizing the growth rate) to just invest
most or all our buying power into the portfolio or strategy with the highest
mean excess return.

Example 8.2: Optimal Capital Allocation Under a
Maximum Leverage Constraint
When we have multiple portfolios or strategies, the Kelly formula
says that we should invest in each portfolio i with leverage Fi
determined by Equation 8.2. But often, the total gross leverage
n
∑ i|Fi| computed this way exceeds the maximum leverage Fmax
imposed on us by our brokerage or our risk manager. With this
constraint, it is often not optimal to just multiply all these Fi by the
n
factor Fmax /∑ i|Fi|, as I will demonstrate here.
Suppose we have two strategies, 1 and 2. Strategy 1 has annualized
mean excess return and volatility of 30 percent and 26 percent,
respectively. Strategy 2 has annualized mean excess return and
volatility of 60 percent and 35 percent, respectively. Suppose further
that their returns distributions are Gaussian, and that there is zero
correlation between the returns of 1 and 2. So the Kelly leverages for
them are 4.4 and 4.9, respectively, with a total gross leverage of 9.3.
The annualized compounded growth rate is (Thorp, 1997)
