
Knowing others is
wisdom;
Knowing the self is
enlightenment.
Mastering others requires
force;
Mastering self needs
strength.
Lao Tsu6

196

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

imagine they have arrived at the theater only to discover they have
lost their ticket. “Would you pay another $10 to buy another
ticket?” A second group was told to imagine that they are going to
the play but haven’t bought a ticket in advance. When they arrive
at the theater, they realize they have lost a $10 bill. Would they still
buy a ticket? In both cases, the students were presented with
essentially the same simple question: Would you want to spend $10
to see the play? Eighty-eight percent of the second group, which
had lost the $10 bill, opted to buy the ticket. However, the first
group, the ticket losers, focusing on sunk costs, tended to ask the
question in a different way: Am I willing to spend $20 to see a $10
play? Only 46 percent said yes.7
If there is one trait that
virtually all effective
leaders have, it is
motivation. They are
driven to achieve beyond
expectations—their own
and everyone else’s. The
key word here is achieve.
Plenty of people are
motivated by external
factors such as a big
salary or the status that
comes from having an
impressive title or being
part of a prestigious
company. By contrast,
those with leadership
potential are motivated
by a deeply embedded
desire to achieve for the
sake of achievement.
Daniel Goleman8

There are a number of behaviors that almost guarantee losses
in the markets. These behaviors, the antithesis of the way trend
followers operate, include:
• Lack of discipline: It takes an accumulation of knowledge and
sharp focus to trade successfully. Many would rather listen to
the advice of others than take the time to learn for themselves.
People are lazy when it comes to the education needed for
trading. Think about Bernard Madoff. People just wanted to
believe.
• Impatience: People have an insatiable need for action. It might
be the adrenaline rush they’re after—their “gambler’s high.”
Trading is about patience and objective decision making, not
action addiction.
• No objectivity: We are unable to disengage emotionally from
the market. We “marry” our positions.
• Greed: Traders try to pick tops or bottoms in the hope they’ll
be able to “time” their trades to maximize profits. A desire for
quick profits blinds traders to the real hard work needed to
win.
• Refusal to accept truth: Traders do not want to believe the
only truth is price action. As a result, they follow other
variables setting the stage for inevitable losses.
• Impulsive behavior: Traders often jump into a market based on
a story in the morning paper. Markets discount news by the
time it is publicized. Thinking that if you act quickly, somehow
you will beat everybody else in the great day-trading race is a
grand recipe for failure.

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

• Inability to stay in the present: To be a successful trader, you
can’t spend your time thinking about how you’re going to spend
your profits. Trading because you have to have money is not a
wise state of mind.
• Avoid false parallels: Just because the market behaved one way
in 1995 does not mean a similar pattern today will give the
same result.
If you try to bridge the gap between the present and the future
with market predictions, you’re guaranteed to be in a continual
state of uncertainty whether you admit to it or not. Scientists have
begun to investigate the impact of extended uncertainty on human
beings. The conclusion? We react the same way to uncertainty that
other animals do when faced with a threat, by shifting into “fightor-flight” mode.
Unlike the animal’s environment, where the threat passes
quickly one way or another, our lives are spent in constant stressful
situations, many of which never go away or never arrive. According
to neuroscientist Robert Sapolsky, human beings, unlike other
animals, can—and often do—experience stress simply by imagining
stressful situations. “For 99 percent of the beasts on this planet,
stressful situations include about three minutes of screaming terror,
after which the threat is over or you are over. Humans turn on the
exact same stress response thinking about 30-year mortgages. Yet,
while thinking about a mortgage is not life-threatening, the stress is
probably going to last much longer than three minutes. So what will
the biggest public health problem be in the developed world 50
years from now? Depression.”9
Traders also get depressed when they lose. Usually, they look
everywhere else, blaming others or events to avoid taking
responsibility for their actions. Instead of understanding their own
emotions to understand why they make the decisions they do, they
chase after Holy Grails to hopefully find an ironclad “winning”
strategy.
Another reason our uncertainty looms so large is because we
are ambivalent about money to begin with. Some of us would like to
have more money, but feel guilty about admitting that. A few of us
have lots of money, but want even more and still feel guilty. Take a
moment to think through your motivations for trading. If you have

197

NLP is short for NeuroLinguistic Programming.
The name sounds high
tech, yet it is purely
descriptive. Neuro refers
to neurology, our nervous
system—the mental
pathways our five senses
take which allow us to
see, hear, feel, taste, and
smell. Linguistic refers to
our language ability; how
we put together words
and phrases to express
ourselves, as well as how
our “silent language” of
movement and gestures
reveals our states,
thinking styles and more.
Programming, taken from
computer science, refers
to the idea that our
thoughts, feelings and
actions are like computer
software programs. When
we change those
programs, just as when
we change or upgrade
software, we immediately
get positive changes in
our performance. We get
immediate improvements
in how we think, feel, act
and live.
Charles Faulkner10

Fat, drunk, and stupid is
no way to go through life,
son.
Animal House12

198

Self-Knowledge Keys
1. Know what you want.
Know who you are, not
who you think you should
be. Self-awareness gives
you the power to pursue
what really feeds your
soul and the belief that
you deserve it.
2. Know the cost of
getting what you want.
Realize the trade-offs of
every choice. People often
think if they are clever
they can make choices
without experiencing any
downside. Any road you
choose means there is a
road you won’t
experience.
3. Be willing to pay the
cost. People often try to
negotiate to win a choice
without cost. Every
choice involves a price;
we get to decide what
cost we want to pay.13

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

any reason for trading other than to make money, find something
else to do and avoid the stress from the beginning. There is nothing
good or bad about money. Money is just a tool—nothing more,
nothing less.
Is money a legitimate reason to feel anxious or guilty? Ayn
Rand articulates a nonjudgmental and rational attitude about
money in her classic Atlas Shrugged:
“‘So you think that money is the root of all evil? Have you
ever asked what is the root of money? Money is a tool of
exchange, which can’t exist unless there are goods
produced and men able to produce them. Money is the
material shape of the principle that men who wish to deal
with one another must deal by trade and give value for
value. Money is not the tool of the moochers, who claim
your product by tears, or of the looters, who take it from
you by force. Money is made possible only by the men who
produce. Is this what you consider evil?”11
According to any number of economic theories, conflicted
feelings about money shouldn’t exist, but clearly they do. Human
behavior should reflect a rational approach to money. We are
supposed to refuse to pay too much for a watch because of the
social cache of a label, but we still pay. We are supposed to make
intelligent objective choices that maximize our wealth and financial
security, but we don’t.
Then what is the motivation behind the person who runs up
credit card debt at 14 percent interest, but would never think of
dipping into his savings account to pay off that debt? What is the
explanation for people who spend time researching a new car or
designer kitchen, but when it comes time to invest, refuse to learn
or engage in any research? Charles Faulkner thinks there is more
at play in these situations:
“Some problems run deeper, springing from limiting,
unconscious beliefs. For instance, a trader who has labeled
himself a one-for-trader, or who learned as a child the
biblical story it’s easier for a camel to pass through the eye
of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God,
may subconsciously sabotage his trading to respect his

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

beliefs. They’re deeply ingrained in us…but if all the ethical
people think money is bad, who’s going to get the
money?”14
Building off Faulkner’s comments, David Harding (Winton
Capital) is focusing on the need for proper thinking across all areas
of life when it comes to money and risk. At the University of
Cambridge, Harding created a new professorship designed to help
improve people’s understanding of the mathematics of risk. The
idea is to help individuals, institutions, and governments refine
their decisions in the middle of risky situations.
A recent Harding press release was clear: “Risk is a factor in all
human activity and different people react to risks in very different
ways. Questions requiring a scientific ability to assess the chances
of something happening—or not happening—arise all the time.
Here are some examples:
• Following the poisoning of the Russian ex-spy Alexander
Litvinenko, traces of polonium-210 were found at various
locations in London that he had visited. Statistically, how
probable is it that someone who visited the same locations at a
later stage would contract radiation poisoning?
• An apparently healthy woman is judged to be at risk of breast
cancer and is advised to undergo mastectomy. Should she
do so?
• A person has to cross a main road to reach a few shops. Should
he walk straight across the road, or use an available footbridge
instead?
• How sensible would it be for me to invest in the stock market
today? Might delaying improve my prospects greatly?
• A 29-year-old man decides to marry his girlfriend of three
years. What is the chance that he will meet a more suitable
partner at a later stage?”
As these examples show, risks need to be considered in both the
most ordinary of situations, and in high-pressure environments. But
always be careful to not abuse the statistics.

199

It may readily be
conceived that if men
passionately bent upon
physical gratifications
desire greatly, they are
also easily discouraged;
as their ultimate object is
to enjoy, the means to
reach that object must be
prompt and easy or the
trouble of acquiring the
gratification would be
greater than the
gratification itself. Their
prevailing frame of mind,
then, is at once ardent
and relaxed, violent and
enervated. Death is often
less dreaded by them
than perseverance in
continuous efforts to one
end.
Alexis de Tocqueville15

200

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

Emotional Intelligence: Daniel Goleman
Many traders mindlessly repeat the same actions, day after day,
hoping for better results. They want to believe that if they are able
to discern patterns, they will win. As a result, they are continually
making connections and drawing parallels that are not valid. They
miss seeing the differences. Ironically, the real pattern they miss is
the pattern of acting with complete confidence to make decisions,
right or wrong, in the face of the unknown.
The less confident we are, the more frustrating and demoralizing the experiences will be. The more you learn about the markets
and yourself, the more confident you become. The more confident
you become, the more effective you become as a trader.
In 1995, psychologist Daniel Goleman published his best-seller
Emotional Intelligence, a powerful case for broadening the meaning
of intelligence to include our emotions. Drawing on brain and
behavioral research, Goleman demonstrated why people with high
IQs often flounder, while people with modest IQs often do
extremely well. The factors that influence how well we do in life
include self-awareness, self-discipline, intuition, empathy, and an
ability to enter the flow of life, character traits most traders would
not consider particularly useful for garnering profits from the
markets.16
You see, Dr. Stadler,
people don’t want to
think. And the deeper they
get into trouble, the less
they want to think. But by
some sort of instinct, they
feel that they ought to and
it makes them feel guilty.
So they’ll bless and follow
anyone who gives them a
justification for not
thinking.
Ayn Rand19

Being self-aware also means understanding what you want out
of life. You know what your goals and values are and you are able to
stick to them. For instance, if you’re offered a high-paying job that
doesn’t square with your values or your long-term goals, you can
turn it down promptly and without regret. If one of your employees
breaches corporate ethics, you deal with it instead of either
ignoring it or worse yet making a half-hearted response because you
pretend to yourself it won’t happen again.17
Emotional self-control makes anyone more productive.
However, Goleman is not saying we should repress our feelings of
anxiety, fear, anger, or sadness. We must acknowledge and understand our emotions for what they are. Like animals, biological
impulses drive our emotions. There is no way to escape them, but
we can learn to self-regulate our feelings and, in so doing, manage
them. Self-regulation is the ongoing inner conversation that
emotionally intelligent engage in to be free from being prisoners of

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

their feelings. If we are able to engage in such a conversation, we
still feel bad moods and emotional impulses just as everyone else
does, but we can learn to control them and even to channel them
in useful ways.18
A trend follower’s ability to delay gratification, stifle
impulsiveness, and shake off the market’s inevitable setbacks and
upsets, makes him not only a successful trader, but also a leader.
Goleman found that effective leaders all had a high degree of
emotional intelligence along with the relevant IQ and technical
skills. While other “threshold capabilities” were entry-level
requirements for executive positions, emotional intelligence was
the “sine qua non” of leadership. Without emotional intelligence,
someone can have superior training, an incisive and analytical
mind, and infinite creativity, but still won’t make a great leader.21
If you look at how trend followers develop, you’ll see that they
are often self-starters, motivated from the beginning to achieve.
However, perfecting the strategy of trend following, applying it to
new markets, teaching others how to trend follow, and expanding
their own knowledge of trading is what keeps the great trend traders
motivated to pursue the game.
Just as important as managing feelings is being able to
recognize the feelings of others. Few of us live, or trade for that
matter, in a vacuum. The sense of being cut off from the world, of
being isolated with no one to turn to, is a common consequence for
traders. This doesn’t necessarily mean you need a group of
colleagues to hang out with around the water cooler every couple of
hours, but objectivity most definitely comes from having a balanced
life, so make sure you don’t sit at a computer 24/7!

Charles Faulkner
Why have men like Richard Donchian and Ed Seykota (see
Chapter 2, “Great Trend Followers”) been able to teach trend
following? One answer is found in the field of Neuro-Linguistic
Programming (NLP). One of the top teachers of NLP is Charles
Faulkner who speaks with an authority and clarity gained from
having taught hundreds of traders how to gain the “mental edge”:
“NLP’s techniques involve moving out negative mental
beliefs and replacing them with positive ones. Think of an

201

Over-familiarization with
something—an idea, say
or a method, or an
object—is a trap…
Creativity requires
something new, a
different interpretation, a
break from the twin
opiates of habit and
cliché.
Denise Shekerjian20
When popular opinion is
nearly unanimous,
contrary thinking tends
to be most profitable. The
reason is that once the
crowd takes a position, it
creates a short-term, selffulfilling prophecy. But
when a change occurs,
everyone seems to change
his mind at once.
Gustave Le Bon23

Walk into the college
classroom, and you will
hear your professors
teaching your children
that man can be certain
of nothing; that his
consciousness has no
validity whatsoever; that
he can learn no facts and
no laws of existence; that
he’s incapable of knowing
an objective reality.
Ayn Rand24

202

Trend Following (Updated Edition): Learn to Make Millions in Up or Down Markets

unpleasant trade…As you do that, what happens if you take
a breath and go ‘aaah,’ push it out and then trade with it?
Much better. People go through fifths of scotch trying to get
that feeling. When you get agitated, go ‘whoosh’ and just
step out of it that way and you’ll find that it’s less. Do it
again and you’ll be at zero real fast.”22
“I model human
excellence.”
Charles Faulkner25

Reason is the main
resource of man in his
struggle for survival.
Ludwig von Mises29

What feels good is often
the wrong thing to do.
William Eckhardt30

When the market is
moving and money is
flying, it’s easy to forget
that it’s the basics that
ultimately produce
success. Even after
trading everything from
exotic over-the-counter
options to plain vanilla
Dow stocks, I still need to
constantly and
obsessively evaluate
every single trade, every
single day.
Jonathan Hoenig,
Portfolio Manager,
Capitalistpig Hedge Fund LLC

I first met Charles Faulkner at a trading seminar years back. It
was easy to see that people are immediately drawn to him. I also
saw this trait again in my recent interview of him for my
documentary film Broke: The New American Dream. Faulkner just
has a natural gift for teaching how to see the big picture. He always
urges traders to take matters into their own hands.
He wants traders to believe that, “I am competent to be
confident. I know what’s going on in these markets. If I don’t know,
I get out.”26
Like many teachers, Faulkner uses simple stories to illustrate
complex lessons. I found, for instance, Faulkner’s “Swiss skiing”
example from The New Market Wizards to be especially insightful.
He used skiing to explain NLP. He pointed out that until the 1950s,
most people thought skiing was a matter of natural talent that you
had or you didn’t have. Then, films were made of some of Europe’s
greatest skiers to identify all the movements that characterized
them. It was found that they all had certain techniques in common.
All kinds of people could learn to be good skiers if the movements
that made a great skier, the essence of their skills, could be
identified so they could be taught to others. Faulkner observed that
this essence of skills was called a model, and that the model (or set
of basic principles) could be applied to any endeavor.27

Ed Seykota’s Trading Tribe
Ed Seykota has long served as a mentor to traders. His natural
inclination to teach and mentor has evolved into his Trading Tribe,
a global network of groups of traders who meet monthly to work
through challenges:
“The trading tribe is an association of traders who commit
to excellence, personal growth, and supporting and
receiving support from other traders.”28

Chapter 6 • Human Behavior

203

Seykota’s tribe works on the psychological and emotional issues
that he believes are crucial for successful trading (and life for that
matter). Faulkner tells a story about Seykota’s finely honed
intuition when it comes to trading:
“I am reminded of an experience that Seykota shared with
a group. He said that when he looks at a market, that
everyone else thinks has exhausted its up trend, that is
often when he likes to get in. When I asked him how he
made this determination, he said he just put the chart on
the other side of the room and if it looked like it was going
up, then he would buy it…Of course this trade was seen
through the eyes of someone with deep insight into the
market behavior.”31
Seykota doesn’t pretend to have all the answers, but he is
extremely good at turning the mirror back to students so they focus
on where issues really lie. His precision with language, like
Faulkner’s, makes one pay attention. One of Seykota’s students,
Chauncey DiLaura, broke down Seykota’s teachings:
“The mind is a filter, letting only some information
in…When you’re designing systems or setting stops, it’s an
ever-present part of what you do. My goal is to get in touch
with those subconscious processes. A lot of what [Seykota
does is] a breathing technique to achieve an altered state of
consciousness where you somehow relax your conscious
filters. We did it both unstructured and in a structured way,
with ideas to concentrate on, such as, ‘Why do I always do
this when I’m trading?’”32
Here are some of my favorite insights from my conversations
with Seykota:
• One use of the Trading Tribe Process (TTP) is to locate and
dissolve the feelings that stand between you and following your
system.
• When you notice all things happen now, and when you take
responsibility for your experience, you notice that even “noise”
results from your intention. At that point, you can clarify your
intention and remove the noise. The entire length of the chain

“My life has stopped, but I
continue to age,”
deadpans Karen Levine, a
Wharton School MBA who
has worked at General
Mills (GIS), Unilever,
Deloitte Consulting,
Condé Nast, and Hearst.
But in real terms, Levine
made more in 1988 fresh
out of Harvard College
than she earns today.
During her two years of
battling unemployment,
Levine has worked for $8
an hour at Pottery Barn
and for $18 an hour as a
temp for a Wall Street
trading firm. “I can’t even
afford a dog,” she says.33

204

The illiterate of the
twenty-first century will
not be those who cannot
read and write, but those
who cannot learn,
unlearn, and relearn.
Alvin Toffler

Human beings never
think for themselves, they
find it too uncomfortable.
For the most part,
members of our species
simply repeat what they
are told—and become
upset if they are exposed
to any different view. The
characteristic human
trait is not awareness but
conformity…Other
animals fight for territory
or food; but, uniquely in
the animal kingdom,
human beings fight for
their ‘beliefs’…The reason
is that beliefs guide
behavior, which has
evolutionary importance
among human beings.
But at a time when our
behavior may well lead
us to extinction, I see no
reason to assume we
have any awareness at
all. We are stubborn, selfdestructive conformists.
Any other view of our
species is just a selfcongratulatory delusion.
Michael Crichton36
