
Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

time they executed my orders the stocks had broken
twenty points more. The tape was way behind the market
and reports were slow in coming in by reason of the awful
rush of business. When I found out that the stocks I had
ordered sold when the tape said the price was, say, $100
and they got mine off at $80, making a total decline of
thirty or forty points from the previous night's close, it
seemed to me that I was putting out shorts at a level that
made the stocks I sold the very bargains I had planned to
buy. The market was not going to drop right through to
China. So I decided instantly to cover my shorts and go
long.
My brokers bought; not at the level that had made me
turn, but at the prices prevailing in the Stock Exchange
when their floor man got my orders. They paid an average
of fifteen points more than I had figured on. A loss of
thirty-five points in one day was more than anybody could
stand.
The ticker beat me by lagging so far behind the market.
I was accustomed to regarding the tape as the best little
friend I had because I bet according to what it told me. But
this time the tape double-crossed me. The divergence
between the printed and the actual prices undid me. It was
the sublimation of my previous "unsuccess", the selfsame
thing that had beaten me before. It seems so obvious now
that tape reading is not enough, irrespective of the brokers'
execution, that I wonder why I didn't then see both my
trouble and the remedy for it.
I did worse than not see it; I kept on trading, in and out,
regardless of the execution. You see, I never could trade
with a limit. I must take my chances with the market. That
is what I am trying to beat the market, not the particular
price. When I think I should sell, I sell. When I think
stocks will go up, I buy. My adherence to that general
principle of speculation saved me. To have traded at
limited prices simply would have been my old bucket-shop
method inefficiently adapted for use in a reputable
46

III

commission broker's office. I would never have learned to
know what stock speculation is, but would have kept on
betting on what a limited experience told me was a sure
thing.
Whenever I did try to limit the prices in order to
minimize the disadvantages of trading at the market when
the ticker lagged, I simply found that the market got away
from me. This happened so often that I stopped trying. I
can't tell you how it came to take me so many years to
learn that instead of placing piking bets on what the next
few quotations were going to be, my game was to
anticipate what was going to happen in a big way.
After my May ninth mishap I plugged along, using a
modified but still defective method. If I hadn't made
money some of the time I might have acquired market
wisdom quicker. But I was making enough to enable me to
live well. I liked friends and a good time. I was living down
the Jersey Coast that summer, like hundreds of prosperous
Wall Street men. My winnings were not quite enough to
offset both my losses and my living expenses.
I didn't keep on trading the way I did through
stubbornness. I simply wasn't able to state my own
problem to myself, and, of course, it was utterly hopeless
to try to solve it. I harp on this topic so much to show what
I had to go through before I got to where I could really
make money. My old shotgun and BB shot could not do
the work of a high-power repeating rifle against big game.
Early that fall I not only was cleaned out again but I was
so sick of the game I could no longer beat that I decided to
leave New York and try something else some other place. I
had been trading since my fourteenth year. I had made my
first thousand dollars when I was a kid of fifteen, and my
first ten thousand before I was twenty-one. I had made
and lost a ten-thousand-dollar stake more than once. In
New York I had made thousands and lost them. I got up to
fifty thousand dollars and two days later that went. I had
no other business and knew no other game. After several
47

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

years I was back where I began. No worse, for I had
acquired habits and a style of living that required money;
though that part didn't bother me as much as being wrong
so consistently.

48

IV
Well, I went home. But the moment I was back I knew that
I had but one mission in life and that was to get a stake
and go back to Wall Street. That was the only place in the
country where I could trade heavily. Some day, when my
game was all right, I'd need such a place. When a man is
right he wants to get all that is coming to him for being
right.
I didn't have much hope, but, of course, I tried to get
into the bucket shops again. There were fewer of them and
some of them were run by strangers. Those who
remembered me wouldn't give me a chance to show them
whether I had gone back as a trader or not. I told them the
truth, that I had lost in New York whatever I had made at
home; that I didn't know as much as I used to think I did;
and that there was no reason why it should not now be
good business for them to let me trade with them. But they
wouldn't. And the new places were unreliable. Their
49

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

owners thought twenty shares was as much as a gentleman
ought to buy if he had any reason to suspect he was going
to guess right.
I needed the money and the bigger shops were taking in
plenty of it from their regular customers. I got a friend of
mine to go into a certain office and trade. I just sauntered
in to look them over. I again tried to coax the order clerk to
accept a small order, even if it was only fifty shares. Of
course he said no. I had rigged up a code with this friend
so that he would buy or sell when and what I told him. But
that only made me chicken feed. Then the office began to
grumble about taking my friend's orders. Finally one day
he tried to sell a hundred St. Paul and they shut down on
him.
We learned afterward that one of the customers saw us
talking together outside and went in and told the office,
and when my friend went up to the order clerk to sell that
hundred St. Paul the guy said: "We're not taking any
selling orders in St. Paul, not from you." "Why, what's the
matter, Joe?" asked my friend. "Nothing doing, that's all,"
answered Joe.
"Isn't that money any good? Look it over. It's all there."
And my friend passed over the hundred—my hundred in
tens.
He tried to look indignant and I was looking
unconcerned; but most of the other customers were
getting close to the combatants, as they always did when
there was loud talking or the slightest semblance of a scrap
between the shop and any customer. They wanted to get a
line on the merits of the case in order to get a line on the
solvency of the concern.
The clerk, Joe, who was a sort of assistant manager,
came out from behind his cage, walked up to my friend,
looked at him and then looked at me.
"It's funny," he said slowly "it's damned funny that you
never do a single thing here when your friend Livingston
isn't around. You just sit and look at the board by the hour.
50

IV

Never a peep. But after he comes in you get busy all of a
sudden. Maybe you are acting for yourself; but not in this
office any more. We don't fall for Livingston tipping you
off."
Well, that stopped my board money. But I had made a
few hundred more than I had spent and I wondered how I
could" use them, for the need of making enough money to
go back to New York with was more urgent than ever. I felt
that I would do better the next time. I had had time to
think calmly of some of my foolish plays; and then, one
can see the whole better when one sees it from a little
distance. The immediate problem was to make the new
stake.
One day I was in a hotel lobby, talking to some fellows I
knew, who were pretty steady traders. Everybody was
talking stock market. I made the remark that nobody could
beat the game on account of the rotten execution he got
from his brokers, especially when he traded at the market,
as I did.
A fellow piped up and asked me what particular brokers
I meant.
I said, "The best in the land," and he asked who might
they be. I could see he wasn't going to believe I ever dealt
with first-class houses.
But I said, "I mean, any member of the New York Stock
Exchange. It isn't that they are crooked or careless, but
when a man gives an order to buy at the market he never
knows what that stock is going to cost him until he gets a
report from the brokers. There are more moves of one or
two points than of ten or fifteen. But the outside trader
can't catch the small rises or drops because of the
execution. I'd rather trade in a bucket shop any day in the
week, if they'd only let a fellow trade big."
The man who had spoken to me I had never seen before.
His name was Roberts. He seemed very friendly disposed.
He took me aside and asked me if I had ever traded in any
of the other exchanges, and I said no. He said he knew
51

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

some houses that were members of the Cotton Exchange
and the Produce Exchange and the smaller stock
exchanges. These firms were very careful and paid special
attention to the execution. He said that they had
confidential connections with the biggest and smartest
houses on the New York Stock Exchange and through their
personal pull and by guaranteeing a business of hundreds
of thousands of shares a month they got much better
service than an individual customer could get.
"They really cater to the small customer," he said. "They
make a specialty of out-of-town business and they take just
as much pains with a ten-share order as they do with one
for ten thousand. They are very competent and honest."
"Yes. But if they pay the Stock Exchange house the
regular eighth commission, where do they come in?"
"Well, they are supposed to pay the eighth. But you
know!" He winked at me.
"Yes," I said. "But the one thing a Stock Exchange firm
will not do is to split commissions. The governors would
rather a member committed murder, arson and bigamy
than to do business for outsiders for less than a kosher
eighth. The very life of the Stock Exchange depends upon
their not violating that one rule."
He must have seen that I had talked with Stock
Exchange people, for he said, "Listen! Every now and then
one of those pious Stock Exchange houses is suspended for
a year for violating that rule, isn't it? There are ways and
ways of rebating so nobody can squeal." He probably saw
unbelief in my face, for he went on: "And besides, on
certain kind of business we—I mean, these wire houses
charge a thirty-second extra, in addition to the eighth
commission. They are very nice about it. They never
charge the extra commission except in unusual cases, and
then only if the customer has an inactive account. It
wouldn't pay them, you know, otherwise. They aren't in
business exclusively for their health."
52

IV

By that time I knew he was touting for some phony
brokers. "Do you know any reliable house of that kind?" I
asked him.
"I know the biggest brokerage firm in the United
States," he said. "I trade there myself. They have branches
in seventy-eight cities in the United States and Canada.
They do an enormous business. And they couldn't very
well do it year in and year out if they weren't strictly on the
level, could they?"
"Certainly not," I agreed. "Do they trade in the same
stocks that are dealt in on the New York Stock Exchange?"
"Of course; and on the curb and on any other exchange
in this country, or Europe. They deal in wheat, cotton,
provisions; anything you want. They have correspondents
everywhere and memberships in all the exchanges, either
in their own name or on the quiet."
I knew by that time, but I thought I'd lead him on.
"Yes," I said, "but that does not alter the fact that the
orders have to be executed by somebody, and nobody
living can guarantee how the market will be or how close
the ticker's prices are to the actual prices on the floor of
the Exchange. By the time a man gets the quotation here
and he hands in an order and it's telegraphed to New York,
some valuable time has gone. I might better go back to
New York and lose my money there in respectable
company."
"I don't know anything about losing money; our
customers don't acquire that habit. They make money. We
take care of that."
"Your customers?"
"Well, I take an interest in the firm, and if I can turn
some business their way I do so because they've always
treated me white and I've made a good deal of money
through them. If you wish I'll introduce you to the
manager."
"What's the name of the firm?" I asked him.
53

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

He told me. I had heard about them. They ran ads in all
the papers, calling attention to the great profits made by
those customers who followed their inside information on
active stocks. That was the firm's great specialty. They
were not a regular bucket shop, but bucketeers, alleged
brokers who bucketed their orders but nevertheless went
through an elaborate camouflage to convince the world
that they were regular brokers engaged in a legitimate
business. They were one of the oldest of that class of firms.
They were the prototype at that time of the same sort of
brokers that went broke this year by the dozen. The
general principles and methods were the same, though the
particular devices for fleecing the public differed
somewhat, certain details having been changed when the
old tricks became too well known.
These people used to send out tips to buy or sell a
certain stock—hundreds of telegrams advising the instant
purchase of a certain stock and hundreds recommending
other customers to sell the same stock, on the old racingtipster plan. Then orders to buy and sell would come in.
The firm would buy and sell, say, a thousand of that stock
through a reputable Stock Exchange firm and get a regular
report on it. This report they would show to any doubting
Thomas who was impolite enough to speak about
bucketing customers' orders.
They also used to form discretionary pools in the office
and as a great favor allowed their customers to authorize
them, in writing, to trade with the customer's money and
in the customer's name, as they in their judgment deemed
best. That way the most cantankerous customer had no
legal redress when his money disappeared. They'd bull a
stock, on paper, and put the customers in and then they'd
execute one of the old-fashioned bucket-shop drives and
wipe out hundreds of shoestring margins. They did not
spare anyone, women, schoolteachers and old men being
their best bet.
54

IV

"I'm sore on all brokers," I told the tout. "I'll have to
think this over," and I left him so he wouldn't talk any
more to me.
I inquired about this firm. I learned that they had
hundreds of customers and although there were the usual
stories I did not find any case of a customer not getting his
money from them if he won any. The difficulty was in
finding anybody who had ever won in that office; but I did.
Things seemed to be going their way just then, and that
meant that they probably would not welsh if a trade went
against them. Of course most concerns of that kind
eventually go broke. There are times when there are
regular epidemics of bucketeering bankruptcies, like the
old-fashioned runs on several banks after one of them goes
up. The customers of the others get frightened and they
run to take their money out. But there are plenty of retired
bucket-shop keepers in this country.
Well, I heard nothing alarming about the tout's firm
except that they were on the make, first, last and all the
time, and that they were not always truthful. Their
specialty was trimming suckers who wanted to get rich
quick. But they always asked their customers' permission,
in writing, to take their rolls away from them.
One chap I met did tell me a story about seeing six
hundred telegrams go out one day advising customers to
get aboard a certain stock and six "hundred telegrams to
other customers strongly urging them to sell that same
stock, at once.
"Yes, I know the trick," I said to the chap who was
telling me.
"Yes," he said. "But the next day they sent telegrams to
the same people advising them to close out their interest in
everything and buy or sell another stock. I asked the senior
partner, who was in the office, "Why do you do that? The
first part I understand. Some of your customers are bound

55

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

to make money on paper for a while, even if they and the
others eventually lose. But by sending out telegrams like
this you simply kill them all."
"What's the big idea?"
"Well", he said, "the customers are bound to lose their
money anyhow, no matter what they buy, or how or where
or when. When they lose their money I lose the customers.
Well, I might as well get as much of their money as I can
and then look for a new crop.''
Well, I admit frankly that I wasn't concerned with the
business ethics of the firm. I told you I felt sore on the
Teller concern and how it tickled me to get even with
them. But I didn't have any such feeling about this firm.
They might be crooks or they might not be as black as they
were painted. I did not propose to let them do any trading
for me, or follow their tips or believe their lies. My one
concern was with getting together a stake and returning to
New York to trade in fair amounts in an office where you
did not have to be afraid the police would raid the joint, as
they did the bucket shops, or see the postal authorities
swoop down and tie up your money so that you'd be lucky
to get eight cents on the dollar a year and a half later.
Anyhow, I made up my mind that I would see what
trading advantages of this firm offered over what you
might call the legitimate brokers. I didn't have much
money to put up as margin, and firms that bucketed orders
were naturally much more liberal in that respect, so that a
few hundred dollars went much further in their offices.
I went down to their place and had a talk with the
manager himself. When he found out that I was an old
trader and had formerly had accounts in New York with
Stock Exchange houses and that I had lost all I took with
me he stopped promising to make a million a minute for
me if I let them invest my savings. He figured that I was a
permanent sucker, the ticker-hound kind that always plays

56

IV

and always loses; a steady-income provider for brokers,
whether they were the kind that bucket your orders or
modestly content themselves with the commissions.
I just told the manager that what I was looking for was
decent execution, because I always traded at the market
and I didn't want to get reports that showed a difference of
a half or a whole point from the ticker price.
He assured me on his word of honor that they would do
whatever I thought was right. They wanted my business
because they wanted to show me what high-class
brokering was. They had in their employ the best talent in
the business. In fact, they were famous for their execution.
If there was any difference between the ticker price and
the report it was always in favor of the customer, though of
course they didn't guarantee that. If I opened an account
with them I could buy and sell at the price which came
over the wire, they were so confident of their brokers.
Naturally that meant that I could trade there to all
intents and purposes as though I were in a bucket shop—
that is, they'd let me trade at the next quotation. I didn't
want to appear too anxious, so I shook my head and told
him I guessed I wouldn't open an account that day, but I'd
let him know. He urged me strongly to begin right away as
it was a good market to make money in. It was for them; a
dull market with prices seesawing slightly, just the kind to
get customers in and then wipe them out with a sharp
drive in the tipped stock. I had some trouble in getting
away.
I had given him my name and address, and that very
same day I began to get prepaid telegrams and letters
urging me to get aboard of some stock or other in which
they said they knew an inside pool was operating for a
fifty-point rise.
I was busy going around and finding out all I could
about several other brokerage concerns of the same
bucketing kind. It seemed to me that if I could be sure of
57

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

getting my winnings out of their clutches the only way of
my getting together some real money was to trade in these
near bucket-shops.
When I had learned all I could I opened accounts with
three firms. I had taken a small office and had direct wires
run to the three brokers.
I traded in a small way so they wouldn't get frightened
off at the very start. I made money on balance and they
were not slow in telling me that they expected real
business from customers who had direct wires to their
offices. They did not hanker for pikers. They figured that
the more I did the more I'd lose, and the more quickly I
was wiped out the more they'd make. It was a sound
enough theory when you consider that these people
necessarily dealt with averages and the average customer
was never long-lived, financially speaking. A busted
customer can't trade. A half-crippled customer can whine
and insinuate things and make trouble of one or another
kind that hurts business.
I also established a connection with a local firm that had
a direct wire to its New York correspondent, who were also
members of the New York Stock Exchange. I had a stock
ticker put in and I began to trade conservatively. As I told
you, it was pretty much like trading in bucket shops, only
it was a little slower.
It was a game that I could beat, and I did. I never got it
down to such a fine point that I could win ten times out of
ten; but I won on balance, taking it week in and week out. I
was again living pretty well, but always saving something,
to increase the stake that I was to take back to Wall Street.
I got a couple of wires into two more of these bucketing
brokerage houses, making five in all and, of course, my
good firm.
There were times when my plans went wrong and my
stocks did not run true to form, but did the opposite of
what they should have done if they had kept up their
regard for precedent. But they did not hit me very hard—
58

IV

they couldn't, with my shoestring margins. My relations
with my brokers were friendly enough. Their accounts and
records did not always agree with mine, and the
differences uniformly happened to be against me. Curious
coincidence not! But I fought for my own and usually had
my way in the end. They always had the hope of getting
away from me what I had taken from them. They regarded
my winnings as temporary loans, I think.
They really were not sporty, being in the business to
make money by hook or by crook instead of being content
with the house percentage. Since suckers always lose
money when they gamble in stocks—they never really
speculate—you'd think these fellows would run what you
might call a legitimate illegitimate business. But they
didn't. "Copper your customers and grow rich" is an old
and true adage, but they did not seem ever to have heard
of it and didn't stop at plain bucketing., Several times they
tried to double-cross me with the old tricks. They caught
me a couple of times because I wasn't looking. They always
did that when I had taken no more than my usual line. I
accused them of being short sports or worse, but they
denied it and it ended by -my going back to trading as
usual. The beauty of doing business with a crook is that he
always forgives you for catching-him, so long as you don't
stop doing business with him. It's all right as far as he is
concerned. He is willing to meet you more than halfway.
Magnanimous souls!
Well, I made up my mind that I couldn't afford to have
the normal rate of increase of my stake impaired by
crooks' tricks, so I decided to teach them a lesson. I picked
out some stock that after having been a speculative
favorite had become inactive. Water-logged. If I had taken
one that never had been active they would have suspected
my play. I gave out buying orders on this stock to my five
bucketeering brokers. When the orders were taken and
they were waiting for the next quotation to come out on
59
