
25,000 to 100,000 shares at a clip.

What is the stock you shorted that has a product that your kids
love?
Nintendo. They do Pokemon. Do you know Pokemon?

THE T R A D I N G ROOM

Afraid not. [This interview preceded the media crescendo that
led to a Pokemon Time magazine cover.]
It's a Japanese cartoon character that is very popular right now.
Why are you shorting it, if your kids like it?
Because I think it's a fad. It's a one-product company.
[Looking at the screen, Cohen comments] I think the market may go a
little higher, but I'm actually turning very negative.
Why is that?
The big caps are moving higher, but the rally has no breadth. The
market is moving up on light volume. Also, people will start to get
more concerned about Y2K as we get closer to the end of the year.
A Fed announcement concerning interest rates is scheduled for the day I
am visiting. As we approach within fifteen minutes of the announcement, Cohen begins entering a slew of buy and sell orders well removed
from the prevailing market prices. "In case the market does something
stupid," he explains. In other words, he is positioning himself to take the
opposite side of any extreme reaction—price run-up or sell-off—in
response to the Fed report.
Just before the announcement, the TV is turned on, just like in the
movie Trading Places. (Although, for the record, the Trading Places
sequence, which takes place on the commodity trading floor, is divorced
from reality because the release of agricultural reports is deliberately
delayed until after the close of the futures markets—but then again it's
only a comedy.) As the clock ticks down to 2 P.M., the tension and anticipation build. Cohen claps his hands and laughs, shouting in eagerness,
"Here we go!" A minute before the announcement, a spontaneous rhythmic clapping—the let's go [team name] beat one hears at sports events—
ripples through the room.
The Fed announcement of a ]A percent hike in interest rates is exactly
in line with expectations, and the market response is muted. There is a
small flurry of trading activity in the room, which quickly peters out.
"Okay, that was exciting, let's go home," Cohen jokingly announces.
Cohen methodically types quote symbols into his keyboard at the rate
of approximately one per second, bringing up companies that are not on

one of his numerous quote screens. The market begins to rally, and
Cohen considers buying but then decides to hold off. Ten minutes later
the market reverses direction, more than erasing its prior gains.

How much of what you do is gut feel?
A lot, probably at least 50 percent.

stock itself, which is something t h a t i believe is true. 1 don't know if the
percentages arc exactly correct, but conceptually the idea makes sense.
When you put on a trade arid it goes against you, how do you
decide when you're wrong?
11 I am in I he track' because of a catalyst, the first t h i n g I check is
whether I he catalyst s t i l l applies. I'or example, about a month ago, 1

expected that I B M would report disappointing earnings, and I went

I attempt to continue the interview, but it is virtually impossible with all
the distractions and interruptions. Cohen is intently focused on his computer screens, frequently calling out trades, and also taking phone calls.
The few questions and answers that I manage to record contain nothing
that I wish to retain. The remainder of the interview, with the exception
of the final section, is conducted in the more sedate environs of Cohen's

office.

short ahead of (he report. I was bearish because a lot of computer and
software companies were missing t h e i r numbers [reporting lower-

than-expecled earnings] due to Y2K issues. Customers were delaying
the installation of new systems because w i t h the year 2000 just
around the corner, they figured that they might as well stick with their
existing systems.

1 went short the slock at $169. The earnings came out. and they

were just: phenomenal—-a complete blowout! I got out sharply higher
When did you first become aware that there was a stock market?
When I was about thirteen years old. My father used to bring home
the New York Post every evening. I always checked the sports pages. I
noticed that there were all these other pages filled with numbers. I
was fascinated when I found out that these numbers were prices,
which were changing every day.
I started hanging out at the local brokerage office, watching the
stock quotes. When I was in high school, I took a summer job at a
clothing store, located just down the block from a brokerage office, so
that I could run in and watch the tape during my lunch hour. In those
days, the tape was so slow that you could follow it. You could see volume coming into a stock and get the sense that it was going higher.
You can't do that nowadays; the tape is far too fast. But everything I
do today has its roots in those early tape-reading experiences.

Did your economics education at Wharton help at all in your
career as a stock trader?
Not much. A few things they taught you were helpful.
Like what?
They taught you that 40 percent of a stock's price movement was due
to the market, 30 percent to the sector, and only 30 percent to the

in alter-the close trading, b u y i n g back my position at $187. The trade
just didn't work. The nexi day the stock opened at $197. So t h a n k
Cod I covered t h a i night in alter-hours trading.
Has that been something you were always able to do—that is,
turn on a dime when you think you're wrong?
You better be able to do that. This is not a perfect game. 1 compile
statistics on my traders. My best trader makes money only 63 percent

or the time. Most traders make money only in the 50 to 55 percent
range. That means you're going to he wrong a lot. If that's the case,
you better make sure your losses are as small as they can be, and that
your winners are bigger.

Any trade stand out as being particularly emotional?
1 held a 23 percent position in a private company that was bought by
XYZ. | Cohen asked me not to use the actual name because of his contacts with the company. As a result, I ended up with a stock position
in XYZ, which i held for l o u r or live years in my personal account
without the stock doing much ol anything.
XVZ had a subsidiary, w h i c h had an Internet Web site for financial
commentary. They decided lo take this subsidiary public. XYZ stock
started to run up in front of the scheduled offering, rallying to $13,

THE T R A D I N G ROOM

which was higher than it had been at any lime 1 held it. 1 got out, and
was happy to do so.
The public offering, which was originally scheduled lor December, was delayed and the stock drifted down. A tew weeks later, they
announced a new offering date in January, and the stock skyrocketed
as part of the Internet mania. In two weeks, XYZ went up from $ 10 to
over $30.
I couldn't stand the idea that after holding the stock for all those
years, J got out just before it exploded on the upside. But I was really
pissed off because I knew the company, and there was no way the
stock was remotely worth more than $30. The subsidiary was going
public at $15. If it traded at $100, it would be worth only about $10
to the company. If it traded at $200, it would add only about $20 to
the company's value. The rest of the company was worth maybe $5.
So you had a stock, which under the most optimistic circumstances
was worth only $15 to $25, trading at over $30.
1 started shorting the hell out of the stock. I ended up selling
900,000 shares of stock and a couple of thousand calls. My average
sales price was around $35, and the stock went as high as $45. On
Friday, the day of the offering, XYZ plummeted. On Friday afternoon
I covered the stock at $22, $21, and $20. 1 bought back the calls,
which I had sold at $ I 0 to $15, for $ 1.
This trade worked out phenomenally well. But when you go
short, the risk is open-ended. Even here, you said your average
price was around $35 and the stock did go as high as $45. What
if it kept going higher? At what point would you throw in the
towel? Or, if your assessment that the stock was tremendously
overvalued remained unchanged, would you just hold it?
A basic principle in going short is that there has to be a catalyst. Flere,
the catalyst was the offering. The offering was on Friday, and I started
going short on Tuesday, so that I would be fully positioned by that
time. If the offering took place, and the stock didn't go down, then I
probably would have covered. What had made me so angry was that I
had sold out my original position.
So you got redemption.
I got redemption. That was coo!.

What happens when you are short a stock that is moving against
you, and there is no imminent catalyst? You sold it at $40, and it
goes to $45, $50. When do you get out?
It a stock is moving against me, I'm probably buying in some every day.
Even if there's no change in the fundamentals?
Oh sure. I always tell my traders, "If you think you're wrong, or if the
market is moving against you and you don't know why, take in half. You
can always put it on again." If you do that twice, you've taken in threequarters of your position. Then what's left is no longer a big deal. The
thing is to start moving your feet. I find that too many traders just stand
there and let the truck roll over them. A common mistake traders make
in shorting is that they take on too big of a position relative to their
portfolio. Then when the stock moves against them, the pain becomes
too great to handle, and they end up panicking or freezing.
What other mistakes do people make?
They make trades without a good reason. They step in front of freight
trains. They short stocks because they are up, as if that were a reason.
They'll say, "1 can't believe the stock is so high," and that's their total
research. That makes no sense to me. My response is: "You have to do
better than that." I have friends who get emotional about the market.
They fight it. Why put yourself in that position?
But the XYZ trade that you told me about, wasn't that fighting the
market?
The difference is that there was a catalyst. I knew the offering was
scheduled for Friday. I knew what was going on. I also knew what I
expected to happen. It was actually a well-planned trade, even
though I was pissed off at having liquidated my stock position so
much lower.
What else do people do wrong?
You have to know what you are, ancl not try to be what you're not. If
you are a day trader, day trade. If you are an investor, then be an
investor. It's like a comedian who gets up onstage ancl starts singing.
What's he singing for? He's a comedian. Here's one I really don't
understand: I know these guys who set up a hedge fund that was part
trading and part small cap. Small caps are incredibly illiquid, and you
have to hold them forever—it's the exact opposite of trading!

S T E V E COHEfl

How do you interact with the traders who work for you?
I have different traders covering different sectors for a number of reasons. There are a lot of people in the room, and it would be cumbersome to have different traders trading the same names. Also, since
we're trading over one billion dollars now, we want to cover as many
situations as we can. This firm is very horizontal in nature, and I'm
sort of orchestrating the whole thing. You could say I'm the hub and
the traders are the spokes.
How do you handle a situation when a trader wants to put on a

trade that you disagree with?
I don't want to tell my traders what to do. I don't have a corner on
what's right. All I want to do is make sure they have the same facts
that I do, and if they still want to do the trade, then they can. I
encourage my guys to play. I have to. I'm running over one billion dollars. I can't do it all myself.
How do you pick your traders?
A lot of the traders who work here were referred to me. I have also
trained people who have grown up within the system. I've had people
who began as clerks and are now trading tens of millions or dollars,
and doing it very well.
One thing I like to do is pair up traders. You need a sounding
board. You need someone who will say, "Why are we in this position?"
There is a check and balance, as opposed to being in your own world.
We also have teams where the trader is teamed up with an analyst
of the same industry. I like that idea because it helps the trader learn
the subtleties of the industry and understand what factors really move
the stocks in that sector.
Are these trading teams informal or are they literally pooling
their trading capital?
No, they're working together. Their livelihood depends on each other.
Have you seen improvements in the trading performance by
using this team approach?
The results speak for themselves.
Was the team approach your idea?
It was an evolutionary process. Most traders want to trade everything.
One minute they are trading Yahoo, the next Exxon. They're traders!

THE T R A D I N G R O O M

My place operates very differently. I want my traders to be highly
focused. I want them to know a lot about something, instead of a little about everything.
That means they can't diversify.
They can't, but the firm is diversified. As long as they can trade the
short side as well as the long side, I don't think anyone in this room
thinks being focused on a single sector is a negative.
Are you looking for any special skills when you hire potential
traders?

I'm looking for people who are not afraid to take risks. One of the
questions I ask is: "Tell me some of the riskiest things you've ever
done in your life." I want guys who have the confidence to be out
there; to be risk takers.
What would make you wary about a trader?
I'm concerned about traders who wait for someone else to tell them
what to do. I know someone who could be a great trader. He has only
one problem: He refuses to make his own decisions. He wants everyone else to tell him what to buy and sell. And then when he's wrong,
he doesn't know when to get out. I've known him for a long time, and
he's done this all along.
Do you give him advice?
Yeah! It doesn't matter. He still does it. He finds a new way to make it
look like he's making his own decisions, but he really isn't. Ironically,
if he just made his own decisions, he would do great. Obviously, on
some level he's afraid. Maybe he is afraid of looking stupid.
You have had quite a run—years of mammoth returns and a sizeable amount of capital under management. Are you ever tempted
to just cash in the chips and retire?
A lot of people get scared and think that since they made a lot of
money they'd better protect it. That's a very limiting philosophy. I am
just the opposite. I want to keep the firm growing. I have no interest
in retiring. First, I have nothing else to do. I don't want to go play
golf. You know the old saying: "Golf is great until you can play three
times a week, and then it's no fun anymore." Second, I enjoy what
I'm doing.
I've grown the company in a way that has kept my interest.

STilt C O H E H J

We've expanded from just traditional trading to a whole range of
new strategies: market neutral, risk arbitrage, event driven, and so
on. Also, my traders teach me about their sectors. I'm always learning, which keeps it exciting and new. I'm not doing the same thing
that I was doing ten years ago. I have evolved and will continue to

evolve.
Do you have a scenario about how the current long-running bull
market will end ?
It's going to end badly; it always ends badly. Everybody in the world
is talking stocks now. Everybody wants to be a trader. To me that is
the sign of something ending, not something beginning. You can't
have everybody on one side of the fence. The world doesn't work
that way.
Any final words?
You can't control what the market does, but you can control your reaction to the market. I examine what I do all the time. That's what trading is all about.
These turn out not to be his final words for the interview. After my visit, I
called Cohen with some follow-up questions. This phone portion of the
interview follows.

How would you describe your methodology?
I combine lots of information coming at me from all directions with a
good feel for how the markets are moving to make market bets.
What differentiates you from other traders?
I'm not a lone wolf. Many traders like to fight their own battles. I prefer to get a lot of support. The main reason I am as successful as I am
is that I've built an incredible team.
Hypothetically, what would happen if you were trading in a room
on your own?
I would still be very profitable, but I wouldn't do as well. There is no
way I could cover the same breadth of the market.

What about the timing of your trades. Why do you put on a trade
today versus yesterday or tomorrow, or for that matter, at a given
moment, as opposed to an hour earlier or later?

THE T R A D I N G ROOM

It depends on the trade. I put on trades for lots of different reasons.
Sometimes I trade off the tape—the individual stock price action;
sometimes I trade off the sector; and sometimes I trade based on a
catalyst.
When I was there last week, you were bullish on bonds. Since
then, prices initially went a little higher but then sold off. Did
you stay long?
No, I got out of the position. The basic idea is that you trade your
theory and then let the market tell you whether you are right.
I have heard that you have a psychiatrist on staff to work with
your traders.

Ari Kiev. He works here three days a week. [Kiev is interviewed in this
book.]
How did this come about?
Ari's experience includes working with Olympic athletes. I saw some
similarities: Traders also work in a highly competitive environment
and are performance driven. I felt that the inability of some traders to
achieve success was usually due to personal flaws rather than a consequence of bad ideas versus good ideas. All traders have something
holding them back.
Has the counseling arrangement with Ari been helpful?
I've seen results. If you look around, baseball players have coaches,
tennis players have coaches, and so on. Why shouldn't traders have
coaches?
Of the tens of thousands of trades that you have done, do any
stand out?
One time, I shorted a million shares of a stock and it dropped $ 10 the
next day. That was pretty good.
What was the story there?
Without naming any names—or else the company will never speak to
me again—there were a number of other stocks in the sector that
were under pressure, but this stock was going up because it was being
added to the S&P index. I figured that once the index fund buying
was completed, the stock would sell off. The day after I went short,
the company reported disappointing earnings, and the trade turned
into a home run.

STEVE COHEN

Any positions you ever lost sleep over?

release. Since his reason lor placing t h e trade had been violated,

Nah, I think I sleep pretty good. I don't lose sleep over any positions.

Cohen covered his position immediately. He didn't try to rationalize

Maybe a better question might be: What was the worst day I ever had?
Okay, what was the worst day you ever had?

the situation; he didn't give the market a little more time. Although
he took a sizable loss, had he waited just until the next morning, the

One day I lost about $4 to 5 million.

What happened on that day?
I don't even remember. The reality is that if you trade long enough
everything happens.

stock would have gone another $ [ ( ) against him. All traders make
mistakes; the great traders, however, l i m i t the damage.

For Cohen, cutting losses is almost a re Hex action. Although
developing such loss control skills usually takes many years of experience, Cohen offers one piece of related advice that should be as use-

ful to the novice as to the professional: "If you t h i n k you're wrong, or

What is gut feel? It is just an expression for intelligence that we
can't explain. I have seen gut feel firsthand in a number of traders—
traders who can view the same information as everyone else and
somehow see clearly which direction the market is likely to go.
Watching Steve Cohen, you are left with the unmistakable impression that he has a real sense of where the market is headed. This
sense, or gut feel, is nothing more that a distillation of the experiences and lessons drawn from tens of thousands of trades. It is the
trader as a human computer.
So-called gut feel is a combination of experience and talent. It
cannot be taught. Novice traders cannot expect to have gut feel, and
experienced traders may also not possess it. Even many of the Market Wizards don't possess gut feel; in many cases, their trading success is due to a different talent—for example, a skill for market
analysis or system building.
Although Steve Cohen's trading style cannot be emulated, his
trading disciplines can. Insofar as Cohen's behavior demonstrates
some of the key attributes of the successful trader, the accounts of
his trading experiences contain important information even for the
beginning trader. For example, Cohen provides an excellent model of
the expert trader's approach to risk control.
As good as he is, Cohen makes mistakes too—sometimes big
ones. Consider the trade in which he shorted IBM before an earnings report. He was dead wrong on his expectations, and the stock
gapped up $18 against him in the first trades after the report's

if the market is moving against you and you don't know why, take in

half. You can always put it on again."
Another important lesson provided by Cohen is that it is critical
that your style of trading match your personality. There is no single
right way to trade the markets. Know who you are. For example,
don't try to be both an investor and a day trader. Choose an approach
that is comfortable for you.

Cohen also advises that it is i m p o r t a n t to make sure you have a
good reason for p u l l i n g on a trade. Buying a stock because it is "too

low" or selling it because il is "too high" is not a good reason. If that
is the extent of your analysis, there is no reason why you should

expect to win in the markets.
Being a great trader is a process, ft's a race with no finish line.
'Hit- markets are not static. No single style or approach can provide
superior results over long periods of time. To continue to outperform, the great traders continue to learn and adapt. Cohen constantly tries to learn more about the markets—to expand his
expertise to encompass additional stocks, sectors, and styles of trading. As Cohen explains, trading for him is an evolutionary process.

T H E MIND OF A W I N N E R

ARI KIEV. M.D.

The Mind of a Winner

An Kiev Is not a Market Wizard; he is not even a trader. Why then should
you pay attention to his advice? Because Steve Cohen, who is unquestionably one of the world's greatest traders (sec interview in this book),
thinks enough of Doctor Kiev to have made him a permanent fixture at
his firm, S.A.C. Doctor Kiev began working with traders at S.A.C. in
1992, conducting weekly seminars. This role steadily expanded over the
years, and he now spends three full days each week at S.A.C, working
with traders both individually and within groups. He also consults with a
small number of professional traders at other firms.
Doctor Kiev graduated Harvard and received his medical degree at
Cornell. After a residency at Johns Hopkins Hospital and the Maudsley
Hospital in London and serving as a research associate at Columbia, he
returned to Cornell Medical College to head their social psychiatry
department, focusing on suicide prevention research. In 1970, he
founded the Social Psychiatry Research Institute, which participated in
major trials of the antidepressant drugs, such as Pro?.ac, Paxil, Zoloft, and
Celexa, among others.
Doctor Kiev was the first psychiatrist appointed to the U.S. Olympic
Sports Medicine Committee and worked with Olympic athletes during
1977—82. It was his work in helping Olympic athletes enhance their performance that years later attracted Steve Cohen's attention, because
Cohen believed that there were strong parallels between top athletes and
top traders.
