
Typically the values of the predictors are known, but the value of the
dependent variable is not. In many applications, this is because the dependent variable Y refers to a future outcome, whereas the X variables refer
to values that are currently known. Once a functional relationship has
been derived, it is possible to predict values for the dependent variable by
plugging in known values of the predictor variables.
Functional relationships can be derived in two ways. They can be deduced from explanatory theories or they can be estimated (induced) from
historical data by function fitting (e.g., regression analysis). Currently, TA
is primarily constrained to the latter because theories of TA are just now
being formulated (see Chapter 7).

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

THE ROLE OF LOGIC I

111

SCIENCE

Scientific knowledge commands respect, in part because its conclusions
are based on logic. By relying on logic and empirical evidence to justify its
conclusions, science avoids two of the common fallacies that contaminate
informal reasoning: appeals to authority and appeals to tradition. An appeal to authority offers as proof the statement of a purportedly knowledgeable person. An appeal to tradition offers a long-standing way of
doing things as proof.
To its detriment, much of popular TA is justified on grounds of tradition or authority rather than fornlallogic and objective evidence. In many
instances, current authorities merely quote prior authorities who, in turn,
quote yet earlier experts and so on back to an original source whose
knowledge was primarily intuitive. Thus the fallacies of authority and tradition are mutually reinforcing.
The First Rule of' Logic: Consistency

Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) is credited with the invention of fornlal logic,
which evolved from geometry. The Egyptians had been making accurate
measurements of lines and angles and calculating areas for over two thousand years, but it was the "Greeks who extended these basic notions and
transformed them into a compelling system of irrefutable conclusions derived from mathematical definitions (axioms)."10
Formal logic is the branch of mathematics concerned with the laws of
correct reasoning that are used to formulate and evaluate the validity of
arguments. In contrast to informal inference, if the rules of formal logic
are followed, a true conclusion is guaranteed.
The most fundamental principle of formal logic is the rule of consistency. It is expressed in two laws: the Law of the Excluded Middle and the
Law ofNoncontradiction. "The law of the excluded middle requires that a
thing must either possess or lack a given attribute. There is no middle alternative. Or said differently, the middle ground is excluded."ll A statement is either true or false. It cannot be both. However, the law is only
properly applied to situations that are binary and is easily misapplied to
situations that are not truly two-state.
"Closely related to the law of the excluded middle is the law of noncontradiction. It tells us that a thing cannot both be and not be at the same
time."12 A statement cannot be true and not true at the same time. An argument that allows for its conclusion to be true and not true at the same
tinle is said to be a self-contradictory.
As will be shown in subsequent sections, these laws of logic are
used to great effect in science. Although observed evidence, such as the

112 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

profitable back test of a TA rule, cannot logically prove that the rule has
predictive power, that same evidence can be used to logically disprove
(contradict) the assertion that the rule is devoid of predictive power. By
the Law of Noncontradiction, this indirectly proves that the rule does possess predictive power. This method of proving empirical laws, called the
method of indirect proof or proof by contradiction, is the logical basis of
the scientific method.
Propositions and Arguments

Logical inference takes two distinct forms: deduction and induction. We
will consider each separately and then see how they are used together in
the logical framework of modern science, the hypothetico-deductive
method. However, before considering these forms of inference some definitions are in order.
• Proposition: a declarative statement that is either true or false sometimes referred to as a claim. For example, the statement The headand-shoulder pattern has more predictive power than a random
signal is a proposition. A proposition differs from other kinds of

statements that do not possess the attribute of truth of falsity such as
exclamations, commands, and questions. Therefore, only propositions may be affirmed or denied.
• Argument: a group of propositions, one of which is referred to as the
conclusion, which is claimed to follow logically from the other propositions, called premises. Thus, an argument asserts that its premises
provide the evidence to establish the truth of its conclusion.
Deductive Logic
As mentioned earlier, the there are two forms of logic, deductive and

inductive. This section considers deductive logic; the next considers
inductive.
Categorical Syllogisms. A deductive argument is one whose premises
are claimed to provide conclusive, irrefutable evidence for the truth of its
conclusion. A common form of deductive argument is the categorical syllogism. It is comprised of two premises and a conclusion. It is so named
because it deals with logical relations between categories. It begins with a
premise that states a general truth about a category, for example All humans are mortal, and ends with a conclusion that states a truth about a
specific instance, for example Socrates is mortal.

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

113

Premise 1: All humans are mortal.
Premise 2: Socrates is a human.
Therefore: Socrates is mortal.
Notice that the argument's first premise establishes a relationship between two categories, humans and mortals: All humans are mortal. The
second premise makes a statement about a particular individual member
of the first category: Socrates is a human. This forces the conclusions
that this individual must also be a member of the second category:
Socrates is mortal.
The general form of a categorical syllogism is as follows:
Premise 1: All members of category A are members of category B.
Premise 2: X is a member of category A.
Therefore: X is a member' of category B.
Deductive logic has one especially attractive attribute-certainty. A
conclusion arrived at by deduction is true with complete certainty, but
this is so if and only if two conditions are met: the premises of the argument are true and the argument has valid form. If either condition is lacking, the conclusion is false with complete certainty. Therefore, a valid
argument is defined as one whose conclusion must be true if its premises
are true. Or, said differently, it is impossible for a valid argument to have
true premises and a false conclusion.
In summary, conclusions arrived at by deduction are either true or false.
If either valid form or true premises are lacking, then the conclusion is false.
If both are present, the conclusion is true. There is no middle ground.
It is important to note that truth and validity are two distinct properties. Truth, and its opposite, falsity, are properties that pertain to an individual proposition. A proposition is true if it conforms to fact. Because
premises and conclusions are both propositions, they are aptly characterized as either true or false. The premise All pigs can fly is false. The
premise Socrates is a man is true as is the conclusion Socrates is mortal.
Validity is a property that pertains to the form of an argument. In
other words validity refers to the logical relationships between the propositions comprising the argument. Validity or lack thereof describes the
correctness of the logical inference linking the premises to the conclusion, but validity makes no reference to the factual truth of the argunlent's
premises or conclusion. An argument is said to be valid if, when its
premises are true, its conclusion must also be true.
However, an argument can be valid even if is composed of false
propositions so long as the logical connections between the propositions

114 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

CARS

Sports
Cars
FIGURE 3.2 Euler circles.

are sound. The categorical syllogism that follows has valid form because
its conclusion is logically compelled by its premises, yet its premises and
conclusion are clearly untrue.

AU humans are immortal.
Socrates is a human.
Therefore, Socrates is immortal.
Because validity has nothing to do with matters of fact, validity can
best be demonstrated with arguments or diagrams of arguments, called
Euler circles, which make no factual references whatsoever. In a Euler diagram, the set of elements comprising a category is represented by a circle. To show that one category, such as sports cars, is a subset of the more
general category-cars in general-the circle representing sports cars resides within the larger circle representing cars. See Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.3 makes clear why argument 1 is valid but argument 2 is not.
Argument 1 is valid because its conclusion, X is a B, follows necessarily
from (i.e., is compelled by) its premises. However, Argwnent 2 is not valid
because it conclusion, X is an A, is not logically compelled by its
premises. X may belong to category A but not necessarily. The Euler diagrams portray validity more forcefully than the argument itself because
the argument alone requires some thinking.
Argument 1
All As are B's.

Xis anA.
Therefore, X is a B.

115

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

Argument 1
Valid

Argument 2
Invalid

All A's are 8's.
X is an A.
Therefore X is a B.

All A's are B's.
X is a 8.
Therefore X is an A.

Category B

Category 8

Category A

Category A

x
FIGURE 3.3 Valid and invalid categorical syllogisms.

Argument 2
All A's are B's.
Xis aBo
Therefore, X is an A.

Conditional Syllogisms: l'he Logic of Scientific Arguments.

Another form of deductive argument, and the one that is central to scienti:fic reasoning, is the conditional syllogism. It is the logical basis for establishing the discovery of new knowledge.
Like the categorical syllogism, the conditional syllogism is also composed of three propositions: two premises and a conclusion. It is so
named because its first premise is a conditional proposition.
A conditional proposition is a compound statement that combines
two simple propositions using the words If-then. The proposition following if is referred to as the antecedent clause and the proposition following
then is referred to as the consequent clause. The general form of a conditional proposition is

If (antecedent clause), then (consequent clause)

116 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

For example:

If it is a dog, then it has four legs.
In the example, it is a dog is the antecedent clause and it has four
legs is the consequent clause. A second example that is closer to the purpose at hand would be

If the TA rule has predictive power, then its back tested rate of return wiU exceed zero.
Our ultimate goal will be to establish the truth of the antecedent
clause of these conditional propositions like the preceding example. As
will become clear, the route to establishing its truth is an indirect one!
The second premise of a conditional syllogism is a proposition that either affirms or denies the truth of either the antecedent clause or the consequent clause of the first premise. Referring to the prior example, the
second premise could be one of the following four statements:
It is a dog: Affirms the truth of the antecedent.

It is not a dog: Denies the truth of the antecedent.
It has four legs: Affirms the truth of the consequent.
It does not have four legs: Denies the truth of the consequent.
The conclusion of the conditional syllogism affirms or denies the
truth of the remaining clause of the first premise. In other words, the conclusion references the clause that is not mentioned in the second premise.
For example, if the second premise refers to the antecedent clause of the
first premise, It's a dog, then the conclusion would refer to the consequent
clause, It has four legs.
An example of a conditional syllogism is as follows:

Ifit is a dog, then it has four legs.
It is a dog (affirms the truth of the antecedent).
Therefore, it has four legs (affirms the truth of the consequent).
When a conditional syllogism possesses valid form, its conclusion is
logically compelled by the two premises. Moreover, if it has valid form and
its premises are factually true, then the conclusion of the conditional syllogisms must also be true.

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

117

There are two valid
forms of the conditional syllogism; affirming the antecedent and denying the consequent. In an argument that affirms the antecedent, the second premise affirms the truth of the antecedent clause of the first
premise. In an argument that denies the consequent, the second premise
asserts that the consequent clause of the first premise is not true. These
two valid forms of argument are shown here. They assume all dogs possess four legs.

Valid FOl'lns 01' the Conditional Syllogism.

Affirming the antecedent:
Premise 1: If it is a dog, then it has four legs.
Premise 2: It is a dog.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, it has four legs.
In this valid form, the second premise affirms the antecedent clause
by stating It is a dog. These two premises deductively compel the conclusion It has four legs. The general form of a conditional syllogism in which
the antecedent is affirmed is
Premise 1: If A is true, then B is true.
Premise 2: A is true.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, B is true.
The other valid form of the conditional syllogism is denial of the consequent. In this form, the second premise asserts that the consequent
clause of premise 1 is a falsehood. From this, one may conclude that the
antecedent clause of premise 1 is also false. This is illustrated by the following example:
Premise 1: If it is a dog, then it has four legs.
Premise 2: It does NOT have four legs.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, it is not a dog.
Denial of the consequent follows the general form:
Premise 1: If A is true, then B is true.
Premise 2: B is not true.
Valid Conclusion: Therefore, A is not true.

118 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

This is sometimes shortened to

If A, thenE.
NotE.
Therefore, not A.
Notice that this form of argument uses evidence (creature does not
have four legs) to prove that antecedent (It is a dog) is false. It is this form
of reasoning that is used in science to prove that a hypothesis is false. The
hypothesis plays the role of the antecedent. We hypothesize that the creature is a dog. The consequent clause predicts what will be observed if the
hypothesis is true. That is, if the creature is truly a dog, then, when it is observed, it will be seen to possess four legs. In other words, the conditional
proposition, If A, then B, predicts that B would be observed in an experiment if the hypothesis (A) were in fact true. The second premise states
that when the observation was made, the observation contradicted the
prediction, that is, B was not observed. Given this, we can validly deduce
that the hypothesis A is false.
As will be shown in due course, if we can prove that hypothesis A is
false, we can indirectly prove that some other hypothesis is true. That
other hypothesis is the new knowledge that we wish to establish as true,
for exanlple that a new vaccine is more effective than a placebo or that
some TA rule predicts more effectively than a randomly generated signal.

Invalid Form of the Conditional Syllogism. An important reason
for using formal logic is the difficulty people often have when reasoning
informally about conditional syllogisms. Consistent with the numerous biases and illusions discussed in Chapter 2, psychological studies l3 have
shown that people tend to commit two fallacies when reasoning about
conditional propositions: the fallacy of affirming the consequent, and the
fallacy of denying the antecedent. An example of the fallacy of affirming
the consequent is
Premise 1: If it is a dog, then it has four legs.
Premise 2: It has four legs.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, it is a dog.
The fact that a creature has four legs certainly does not compel the
conclusion that the creature is a dog. It may be a dog. The evidence is consistent with the fact that it is a dog. However, the evidence is also consistent with other conclusions. It could just as easily be a cow, a horse, or

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

119

any other four-legged creature. The fallacy of affirming the consequent
has the general form:
Premise 1: If A is true, then B is true.
Premise 2: B is true.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, A is true.
This fallacy is a very common error in poor scientific reasoning and
one committed in many articles on TA. Consider the following syllogism,
which commits the fallacy of affirming the consequent.
Premise 1: If TA rule X has predictive power, then it should produce
profits in a back test.
Premise 2: The back test was profitable.
Invalid Conclusions: Therefore, the TA rule has predictive power.
Both of these premises may be true, but the conclusion is not necessarily true. With respect to the first premise, it is true that if the TA rule X does
possess predictive power it should back test profitably. In other words, a
profitable back test would be consistent with the supposition that the rule
has predictive power. However, a profitable back test could also be consistent with the supposition that the rule was merely lucky. Similarly, just as
evidence of four legs is consistent with a dog, it is also consistent with all
other four-legged creatures. 14 The fallacy of affirming the consequent is the
reason that empirical evidence cannot be used to prove that a hypothesis is
true. As we shall see, one philosopher of science, Karl Popper, contended
that the scientific method must, therefore, rest on denial (falsification) of
the consequent, which, as pointed out earlier, is a valid form of inference.
The other fallacy associated with conditional syllogisms is the fallacy
of denying the antecedent. It is illustrated here:
Premise 1: If it is a dog, then it has four legs.
Premise 2: It is not a dog.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, it does not have four legs.
The fact that a creature is not a dog does not preclude its having four
legs. The general form of this fallacy is
Premise 1: If A is true, then B is true.
Premise 2: A is not true.
Invalid Conclusion: Therefore, B is not true.

120 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

In logical shorthand

If A, thenB.
NotA.
Therefore, not B.
Invalid arguments can be hard to notice when they concern complex
subjects. The best way to reveal them is to plug in commonplace items for
A and B and see if the conclusion follows from the premises.
Figures 3.4 and 3.5 summarize the preceding discussion of the conditional syllogism.
As mentioned, the great strength of deductive reasoning is its ability
to deliver conclusions that are true with certainty. However, deductive
logic has a great wealrness; it is unable to reveal new lrnowledge about the
world. All that a deductive argument can do is to reveal truths that were
already implicit in its premises. In other words, deductive reasoning can
only tease out truths that were already present in the premises though
they may not have been evident.
This is not meant to minimize or trivialize deduction but to clarify its
role. It may well be that a conclusion implied by the premises is far from
obvious. Great mathematical discoveries are exactly that-the revealing
of truths that had been implicit in the axioms of a mathematical system
but that had not been understood prior to being proven. Such was the
case with the much-publicized proof of Fermat's last theorem. It was first

Valid
Affirming the Antecedent
If A, then B.
A.
Therefore, B.

Denying the Consequent
If A, then B.
Not B.
Therefore, Not A.

FIGURE 3.4 Conditional syllogisms: general form.

Invalid

121

The Scientific Method and Technical Analysis

Valid

Invalid

Affirming The Antecedent

If a dog, then has 4 legs.
It is a dog.
Therefore, has 4 legs.

Denying The Consequent
If a dog, then has 4 legs.

Legs not equal to 4.
Therefore not a dog.

FIGURE 3.5 Conditional syllogisms: example.

hinted at in the margin of a book in 1665 but not proven until 1994, by Andrew Wiles and Richard Taylor.
Inductive Logic

Induction is the logic of discovery. It aims to reveal new knowledge about
the world by reaching beyond the knowledge contained in the premises of
an inductive argument. However, this new knowledge comes with a
price-uncertainty. Conclusions reached by induction are inherently uncertain. That is, they can only be true with some degree of probability.
Thus, the notion of probability is intimately connected with induction.
Induction proceeds in a manner opposite to deduction. We saw that deduction progresses from a premise expressing a general truth that is held to
apply to an unlimited number of instances, AU men are mortal to a conclusion about a specific instance Socrates is mortal. In contrast, inductive reasoning moves or, better said, leaps from a premise based on a limited
number of observed instances to a general conclusion about an unlimited
number of similar but not-yet-observed instances. Thus, this form of inference is often referred to as inductive generalization. It is in leaping beyond
what has been directly experienced by observation that induction incurs
uncertainty-the possibility that its conclusion may be wrong.
Inductive generalization is illustrated by the following:
Premise: Each of one thousand healthy dogs hadfour legs.
General conclusions: All healthy dogs will have four legs.

122 METHODOLOGICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS

The conclusion, in this example, is called a universal generalization,
because it asserts that all members of the class dog have the attribute four
legs. Universal generalizations have the form

All X's are Y's.
or

100 percent ofX's have the attribute Y.
Generalizations need not be universal. Nonuniversal generalizations
have the form

P percent ofX's are Y's.
or

P percent ofX's have attribute Y.
or

X's have attribute Y with probability P.
Again, we see that probability is inextricably tied to the concept of
generalization. In fact, nonuniversal generalizations are also known as
probabilistic generalizations. An example would be: A higher percentage
of bulldogs are prone to violence than poodles. This statistically sound
nonuniversal generalization 15 does not claim all bulldogs are prone to violent behavior, nor does it claim that even a majority are so inclined. However, it does say that, as a group, statistics show that bulldogs have a
higher probability of being dangerous than poodles.
Aristotle's defeat as scientist was in part attributable to his failure to
appreciate that nonuniversal generalizations convey useful knowledge.
His fascination with the certainty of deductive proofs led him to restrict
his search to universal generalizations. He was unable to see that many
important regularities of the natural world are inherently probabilistic.
