offered 1,000 lots at 91.00. Just as I was thinking that I had this trade nailed, in less than five
minutes the market reversed and soared to 92.00.
I was down $1 million, and the market was only a few ticks away from limit bid. I had never lost so
much money, so fast, and it was because I did things differently than I normally do.
What specifically?
I usually don't trade that big early in the year. I like to make money gradually at first and then play
with the money I have made.
It sounds like part of your money-management philosophy is based on treating each year
independently.
Right. Anyway, I sold a little bit more up at the highs, and from that point on, I was only concerned
with covering. I waited patiently, and the market started coming back down. I ended up losing only
$400,000 for the day, not all that bad considering where I was earlier. But that trade had a big
175

emotional impact on me. I was flabbergasted by the market action. I had forgotten that markets
could run away like that. I couldn't believe how wrong I had been.
What did you mean earlier when you said the Japanese cornered the market?
When the Japanese want to buy something, their big thing is market share. This was the first time
the U.S. got a good feel of how the Japanese buy securities—they buy them all.
Was this the move that drove us to the highs in the bond market?
That's right.
So, apparently, the Japanese weren't as fazed by the yield being so low for all the risk implied
in a long bond position.
I don't think they look at it in terms of yield. Rather, they view things as whether prices are going
up, and if they are, they buy. Every time they would buy, prices would go up, and they would buy
some more.
The bond market has collapsed again since then; did they get out of their position in time?
Sure. Do you know who bought the most at the highs? The U.S. dealers who desperately needed to
cover because they had sold on the way up.
Are the Japanese smart traders then?
No, they just have a style. They are cannonball traders. They go one way, and they all go together.
A friend of mine at one of the Japanese shops told me about a Japanese trader who bought just
about every long bond on the screen. About fifteen minutes later he called back and asked, "Why is
the basis [the price spread between cash T-bonds and T-bond futures] going out?" Naively, the
Japanese trader had noticed that cash prices had gone way up, while futures didn't go up very much.
My friend told him, "Well, you just bought every bond available. Of course, the basis is going to go
out." They didn't really understand the impact of their trading.
The Japanese did much the same thing in the U.S. equity market in 1987 as they did in bonds in
1986. They practically took control of it, buying because prices kept going higher.
Г11 never forgive myself for not buying stocks and selling bonds in 1987. That was going to be my
number one trade in 1987.
Was the reasoning that the bond market had already run way up, while stocks hadn't? Did
you just believe the two markets were out of line valuewise?
That's right. Also, we knew the Japanese were buying the high-capitalization U.S. stocks. Having
already learned their buying style in the bond market, the trade was even more obvious.
Then why didn't you do it?
The spread between the S&P and the T-bond contract was trading between $19,000 and $25,000 on
a one-to-one contract value basis. I went on a four-day vacation, and in just a few days, Japanese
buying in the stock market had pushed the spread to $30,000.
Why didn't you buy the spread before the vacation, since you had the idea?
I was waiting for the spread to break out above its trading range. I wanted to buy it above $26,000.
At a $30,000 spread, I just couldn'tpull the trigger.
What is the key trading rule you live by?
Never add to a loser.
What does the average trader do wrong?
He overtrades and begs for tips.
How do you handle a losing streak?
I instinctively trade smaller and sometimes I just take a break. It is a good habit to wipe the slate
clean and start fresh.
When you are going bad, but still have some good positions on, do you liquidate them as well?
Absolutely. They are bound to turn against you too.
I found the subjects of dual trading and the Japanese impact on the U.S. T-bond market among the
most interesting portions of my conversation with Brian Gelber. These subjects, however, did not
176

provide any insights into the art of trading. On a more practical note, one of the primary caveats
provided by Gelber concerned the misuse of brokerage research. He noted a tendency for the broker
and client to use longer-term research for short-term trading. This misapplication of information
often leads to trading losses, even when the research is right.
Clearly, flexibility and suppression of ego are key elements of Gelber's success. Referring to hot
traders, he notes, "I'll go with their opinion.... It doesn't matter if I'm right. All that matters is
whether I make money."
Finally, Gelber's reaction to losing streaks is one cited by a number of traders. He advises wiping
the slate clean and starting fresh. Getting out of everything allows the trader to achieve greater
clarity. Liquidated positions, if they still appear attractive, can always be reentered once the trader
has regained his confidence.

177

