
Properly reading and interpreting the market is an endeavor that is as unique
of an experience to one person as it is to another. However, when it comes to
trading tools, market participants want them to timely and accurately perform
seven main functions:
1. Provide intelligence and insight into the broader market structure while at
the same time helping to pinpoint precise entries.
2. Speed up analysis of trading conditions in multiple timeframes (and quite
often in multiple trading instruments).
3. Improve accuracy in reading the market’s subtle clues of imminent change
in market activity, regardless of the timeframe being observed.

246

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

4. Improve decision-making ability by offering multiple and simultaneous
views and perspectives of varying market conditions and environments.
5. Give a glimpse into the future (forecasting) by allowing market professionals to objectively eliminate one side of the market from consideration
while weighing the probabilities of the remaining possible outcomes.
6. Tightly manage risk in all trades while preserving proﬁts in both directional
and nondirectional trades.
7. Help market participants relax, observe, analyze, interpret, and make good
decisions about high-probability situations while the computer does the
laborious background analysis of trading levels, volume, volatility, and the
like.
At TAS Professional, we instinctively knew years ago that classic Market
Proﬁle provided the right answers to the questions we had about the market.
But one of the challenges inherent in classic Market Proﬁle was the steep
learning curve associated with gleaning the right information from the proﬁles.
And there was an additional subjectivity in its interpretation that left us
wondering: Is there a better way to use the core concepts of Auction Market
Theory and Market Proﬁle and yet simplify the presentation to its actionable
components?
It was the need to overcome these inherent challenges that lead us to
develop the TAS PRO Indicator SuiteTM of trading tools. After seven years
of ongoing development, we developed this suite of trading tools that have
allowed us, our traders, market analysts, and clients around the world to make
some very good market calls using our tools and technology.
Speciﬁcally, the TAS PRO Indicator Suite helps market professionals to:
r Clearly read, interpret, and understand where the concentration of crowd

activity is located to make incisive interpretations and timely decisions that
are suitable to a wide variety of applications.
r Read, understand, and make decisions based on the two phases of market
activity—the only two events that repeatedly occur in the market.
r Make better decisions by properly interpreting volume-at-price, time-atprice, volatility, pivot levels, momentum characteristics, and other key market attributes and characteristics in all timeframes.
r Avoid neutral, low-odds areas in the market—saving time, money, energy,
and frustration that would otherwise be wasted on “go-nowhere” situations.
r Improve trading odds by being able to eliminate one side of the market
from consideration with objectivity.

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

247

r Improve market timing and reward-to-risk by understanding where the

crowd is demand-supporting a declining market or supply-capping a rising
market.
r Analyze and trade the market on their terms according to their tactics,
strategies, and methods—which can now be supplemented by the TAS
PRO Indicator Suite. These tools were intentionally designed to be additive
with the least amount of disruption to existing analysis and trading methods.
We have successfully adapted the attributes and strengths of classic Market
Proﬁle and Auction Market Theory into a suite of professional trading and
market analysis tools. To demonstrate how we have simpliﬁed classic Market
Proﬁle, we will start with an overview of three indicators in our TAS PRO
Indicator Suite, and then discuss actual trading applications.

TAS PRO VAP Map

TAS PRO VAP MapTM (Volume-at-Price Map) dynamically calculates and
displays a sideways, color-coded frequency distribution histogram that is set
to a user-deﬁnable ﬁxed number of look-back bars. VAP Map orients market
professionals to any timeframe of auction activity by using a volume-at-price
“heat map” format (rather than a TPO-based format) to ﬁnd the areas where
the market will most likely move fast vertically through price ranges, versus
moving slowly through time horizontally. These volume-at-price maps are
overlaid on bar charts and can be set to any look-back and/or multiple lookback period maps on a single chart. (See Figure 5.19.)
VAP Maps can either remain ﬁxed in place or move forward one bar at
a time as new bars are printed on a chart. These “proﬁle maps” are overlaid
on price bars to graphically represent areas of market balance and imbalance
and employ the concepts of statistical probability distribution that have their
basis in Auction Market Theory and Market Proﬁle. VAP Maps reﬂect price
action relative to the volume traded within the delineated map area. Five key
features of VAP Maps are:
1. Their gradient-rich, intuitive, color-coded display delineates where volume
is accumulating—or not accumulating—at price.
2. They provide key insights about where the market is likely to move slowly
and develop horizontally through time versus where the market is likely to
move rapidly and vertically through price levels.

248

FIGURE 5.19

TAS PRO VAP Map Illuminates Three Volume-at-Price Distribution (Numbered) Areas and Two “Holes”

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

249

3. They are adaptable to any timeframe or tradable instrument that has a
volume component.∗
4. They have the ability to place multiple right-facing and/or left-facing VAP
Maps of different look-back lengths on the same chart.
5. They provide customizable horizontal line resolution with key-area highlights.

VAP Map Applications
VAP Map is the tool we primarily use for our premarket trade analysis and it
serves as our roadmap for the day to show where the major capital ﬂows are
likely to occur. We additionally use VAP Map for the following applications:
r VAP Maps reveal that markets have the tendency to trade slowly and hori-

zontally within the red areas of VAP Maps and to trade rapidly and vertically
in the blue regions of the maps. Purple areas of the maps (i.e., red + blue)
represent areas where a market is in transition from one phase to the next.
r VAP Maps are especially intuitive in large timeframes in terms of orienting
traders to the general tone and tempo of the market.
r When price is trading inside the red value area, the market bias is horizontal.
Anticipate moderate to strong support and resistance at the extremes of the
value area.
r When price does break out of the red value area, the market bias is vertical.
Anticipate the previous value area and especially the point of control (POC)
area to demarcate support or resistance.
r Create multiple, independent, and simultaneously displayed maps to get
a broader perspective of several areas of the market and how price and
volume-at-price action affects the present market, especially where there is
a conﬂuence of activity.

TAS PRO Dynamic VAP
TAS PRO Dynamic VAPTM (Dynamic Volume-at-Price) displays a dynamic
representation of developing balance and imbalance areas by measuring
volume-at-price, a statistical method for aggregating trading data that has
∗

For securities that do not have a volume component, such as spot Forex, TAS PRO TAP
Map (time-at-price map) reveals proﬁles on the following basis: since volume accumulation
at price = horizontal development, then time at price = volume. As a proxy for volume,
we have created an algorithm in the TAP Map indicator that approximates relative volume
accumulation by measuring time at price for securities without a volume component.

250

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

its roots in Auction Market Theory and Market Proﬁle. Dynamic VAP “proﬁles” are displayed as a series of three horizontal lines (also known as a “box”).
r The upper line represents the upper resistance boundary of the balance area,

the Unfair High.

r The lower line represents the lower support boundary, the Unfair Low.
r The middle line represents the Point of Control (POC).

The proﬁles are calculated based on the price action from the previous
proﬁle and new proﬁles are derived from a proprietary swing and momentum
algorithm that dynamically calculates the next Dynamic VAP proﬁle.
Dynamic VAP orients market professionals to the shorter-term, fastversus-slow auction that’s occurring within the larger-timeframe auction—as
well as smaller-timeframe changes in the perception of value—a key concept. We’ve isolated the slow-versus-fast area of proﬁles, added a volatility
component to the algorithm, and simpliﬁed them into a three-line graphic
that highlights the area where the markets will likely rotate when price trades
inside the lines—and above or below those areas where the markets will move
to one side, resulting in a fast directional move.
Three key features of Dynamic VAP are:
1. Dynamic VAP is usable on all timeframes for all securities with a volume
component.∗
2. The longer the timeframe, the more robust are the support and resistance
areas that are identiﬁed by the unfair low and unfair high.
3. Use it to identify low-risk, high-probability areas to trade while measuring
relative volatility.
When price is trading inside Dynamic VAP proﬁles, it depicts an interim
state of market balance, an area of trade that is deemed fair to both sides. New
proﬁles form after the market moves away from balance toward imbalance,
when new valuations are detected from market data. When price goes into
imbalance, either a new set of Dynamic VAP proﬁles will form or price will
be pulled back into the existing proﬁles. (See Figure 5.20.)
∗

For securities that do not have a volume component, such as spot Forex, TAS PRO TAP
Map (time-at-price map) reveals proﬁles on the following basis: since volume accumulation
at price = horizontal development, then time at price = volume. As a proxy for volume,
we have created an algorithm in the TAP Map indicator that approximates relative volume
accumulation by measuring time at price for securities without a volume component.

251

FIGURE 5.20

TAS PRO Dynamic VAP on Daily U.S. 10-Year T-Note Futures

252

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

Dynamic VAP Applications
Dynamic VAP helps eliminate a lot of the guesswork and subjectivity that
goes into entering, managing, and exiting trades. For example:
r If we are long above a Dynamic VAP proﬁle, then our stop is below the

proﬁle—and vice-versa for shorts. The reasoning behind this is that the areas
above and below Dynamic VAP proﬁles are essentially holes. As we’ve
discussed, the expectation for price trading into holes is that there will
be high-probability follow-through and, if not, then the probe higher is
rejected fairly quickly for a quick-and-tight stopout.
r Dynamic VAP is an effective trade management tool and forms the basis for
our rules-based trading approach. For example, a break above a Dynamic
VAP proﬁle tells us: (a) don’t be short; (b) get long or be long; and (c) hold
the trade as long as price trades above consecutively higher proﬁles—or exit
the trade when price trades into or below the next Dynamic VAP proﬁle.
r When price is bracketed inside a Dynamic VAP proﬁle, the top line is
considered a supply area (resistance) and the bottom line is considered a
demand area (support).
r When price moves outside the top of a Dynamic VAP proﬁle, then (a) a
breakout has occurred, (b) the market bias is directional to the upside, and
(c) the relative vertical speed of movement through price levels will likely
increase.
r When price moves outside the bottom of a Dynamic VAP proﬁle, then (a) a
breakdown has occurred, (b) the market bias is directional to the downside,
and (c) the relative vertical speed of movement through price levels will
likely increase.
r When breakouts and breakdowns occur above and below Dynamic VAP
proﬁles, there is a high probability that the new directional move will remain
intact until a new Dynamic VAP proﬁle occurs.
r Previous Dynamic VAP proﬁles to the left in the chart are support or
resistance areas where the market will either pause and reverse—or pause,
consolidate, and then resume the current directional move.
r Dynamic VAP proﬁles that are narrower (top to bottom) area relatively
lower-volatility states and provide relatively lower-risk entry opportunities,
compared to wider Dynamic VAP proﬁles, which are relatively highervolatility states.
r When price is trading inside a Dynamic VAP proﬁle, we look to buy the
lows in the range and/or short the highs. To improve trading odds in this
situation, we give directional preference to higher-timeframe trends.

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

253

TAS PRO Navigator
TAS PRO NavigatorTM is a versatile indicator that combines several signals
to assist in market analysis, getting on the right side of the market, and
managing trades. TAS PRO Navigator provides several types of actionable information about underlying trading conditions and is a composite indicator
that combines classic trend and volatility indicators to highlight trend, nontrend, momentum, potential exhaustion, and reversal points. (See Figures 5.21
and 5.22.)
Five key features of TAS PRO Navigator are:
1. Rich, colorful display of multiple algorithms that is usable on any timeframe.
2. Indicates which side of the trade to be on, where there is the highest
probability of going in the direction of capital ﬂow, and which side to
avoid, where there is lesser capital ﬂow.
3. Measures momentum and relative strength or relative weakness of underlying trend.
4. Indicates price divergence and peak conditions.
5. Shows shifts in market conditions from one phase to the next: uptrend,
countertrend short, downtrend, and countertrend long.

TAS PRO Navigator Applications
TAS PRO Navigator is a very suitable companion indicator to Dynamic VAP
and Dynamic TAP. While the latter indicators focus on proﬁling aspects of
market analysis, TAS PRO Navigator’s color coding assists market professionals in making quick assessments of market conditions including trend
exhaustion.
r When the TAS PRO Navigator histogram is green or red, either a long or

short trend, respectively, is in place.

r When the histogram switches color from green to dark green—or from red

to dark red—trend momentum is slowing and countertrend trade opportunities may be indicated.
r Magenta bars indicate trend exhaustion/peaking trend conditions and potentially indicate the end of a trend. This is a relatively high-probability
event, however; traders may want to time their exits using other TAS PRO
indicators, such as Dynamic VAP or Dynamic TAP.
r Use the color-coded zero line to quickly assess relative volatility as well
as identify broader areas of support and resistance. Yellow indicates a

254

FIGURE 5.21

TAS PRO Navigator on Daily 10-Year T-Note Futures

255

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.22

TAS PRO Navigator on Daily Copper Illuminating Directional Bias and
Momentum Indications

Navigator indicating if a directional
move is gaining momentum . . .

. . . or losing momentum

Zero Line—Used as long/short
decision-support tool

Divergence with price

20,1403

Return to Zero Line can identify
potential support or resistance areas
Peaking condition alert

market that is supply balanced; cyan indicates a market that is supply
imbalanced.
r Relative peaks of the Momentum Histogram will provide further insight on
momentum. Consecutive histogram peaks further away from the zero line
indicate increasing momentum, and consecutive peaks closer to the zero
line indicate decreasing momentum.
Rules-Based Trading and Analysis with
TAS PRO Navigator

TAS PRO Navigator assists our traders in perfecting market call timing and,
moreover, clearly shows what not to do, what to do, and when to execute—if
at all. This simpliﬁed and objective method allows us to risk-manage our
trades in several ways:
r Helps us measure reward to risk for each trade based on trading a fast market

segment between two areas of slow market movement (consolidation).

256
TABLE 5.2

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
TAS PRO Navigator Color Coding Orients Traders to Rules-Based Trading

Momentum Histogram
Color

Market State

Suggested Action for Our Prop
Traders

Green

Uptrend

Get long, stay long

Dark green

Uptrend in pullback

Consider countertrend shorts

Red

Downtrend

Get short, stay short

Dark red

Downtrend in pushback

Consider countertrend longs

Magenta

Trend exhaustion

Tighten stops on longs or shorts

r Helps us eliminate from consideration the one side of the market where

price has very low odds of going (e.g., trying to short an uptrend, not for
the countertrend pullback, but for a new downtrend).
r Allows our traders to follow very speciﬁc trading rules based on the indications from our trading tools, while removing most of the burden of
past price/volume analysis. This allows traders to focus on what’s actually
occurring rather than what traders would like to have happen.
We developed TAS PRO Navigator to orient our prop traders to the rulesbased trading methodology taught in our TAS PRO Approach to Trading and
Market Analysis courses. Based on color coding of the momentum histogram,
market participants can readily orient themselves to the current market condition in any timeframe, as shown in Table 5.2 (for full-color examples of this
color coding, please visit http://tasprofessional.com/bloomberg/indicatorsnavigator.php).
In addition to the rules-based color coding built into TAS PRO Navigator,
it is an effective tool for analyzing momentum strength and weakness. Notice
in Figure 5.23 that the S&P futures were in an uptrend during 2006 and
2007, ﬁtting the price deﬁnition of a series of higher peak highs and higher
peak lows. TAS PRO Navigator, however, was divergent and exhibiting lower
peak highs and lower peak lows.
While we could use TAS PRO Navigator in this instance to time our
entries into shorter-term countertrend pullback trades against the uptrend,
a potentially much larger situation was brewing: uptrend momentum was
stalling. Knowing that momentum was stalling, we could use this shorter-term
entry strategy to leg into a potentially longer-term move that eventually did
occur in 2008. In this case, rather than wait for conﬁrmation of a breakdown

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.23

257

TAS PRO Navigator on Weekly S&P 500 E-Mini Futures Countertrend

Strategy

Don’t be long:
Be short—stay short
Peak condition

Countertrend long:
Get long or wait for next
short.
Downside momentum
weakening

Don’t be short:
Countertrend short:
Be long Get short or wait for next long
—stay long Upside momentum weakening
Peak condition

and resulting downtrend, we use TAS PRO Navigator’s clues to leg into a
short position while the market is still in an uptrend.
TAS PRO Navigator includes a statistically based algorithm that displays
magenta-colored bars in the histogram when it detects peak market conditions. We know, for example, that markets will trade directionally higher until
they encounter prior supply levels where they will typically pause to absorb
that supply. So while Dynamic VAP (or TAP) indicate how efﬁciently (in balanced markets) or inefﬁciently (in imbalanced markets) a market is rationing
supply, TAS PRO Navigator can provide vital clues where a trending market
is getting tired, eventually leading to exhaustion. Figure 5.24 illustrates these
concepts.
TAS PRO Indicator Application Examples

According to the TAS PRO Approach to Trading and Market AnalysisTM ,
there are only a limited number of trade types and trade locations to consider.

258

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

FIGURE 5.24

TAS PRO Navigator and Dynamic VAP on Intraday NASDAQ E-Mini

Futures

Peak

Peak

Countertrend
long

Weak up move
Countertrend shorts

Stay short
No longs here
Countertrend longs
Peak

The steps to determine your actions are to ﬁrst identify the phase of market
development (vertical or horizontal) and whether it is early in that phase or
late. Next, identify the Areas of Opportunity within vertical or horizontal
development. Once these are determined, trade locations can be identiﬁed
and appropriate trade tactics can be applied to each situation.
The four market development phases to distinguish in higher and then
lower timeframes are:
1. Mature balance (mature horizontal development)
2. Early vertical development
3. Mature vertical development
4. Early stage of balance (early horizontal development)
A mature balance area is a range with relatively equal highs and relatively equal lows and many overlapping swings within the horizontal range.
When viewing the volume proﬁle (TAS PRO VAP Map), it will most often

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

259

show a sideways bell-shaped accumulation that includes a High Volume Area
and Point of Control that is approximately centered. It doesn’t have to be
symmetrical but often is.
Note: We make a distinction between a proﬁle map’s Point of Control
versus a High Volume Area, as follows:
r The Point of Control (POC) is the price containing the highest volume

accumulation in a volume-at-price distribution. This also applies to the
highest accumulation of time at price in a time-at-price distribution. The
POC of a VAP Map or TAP Map distribution is colored light green.
r A High Volume Area (HVA) in a proﬁle map is an area of pronounced
high volume-at-price on the vertical scale in comparison with surrounding volume above and below. The peak of the bell-shaped curve often
forms in a volume proﬁle during horizontal development but it can also
refer to an area of high volume-at-price in a phase of vertical development. The important key is that there has been much greater trade activity
and volume compared with surrounding prices. VAP Map clearly identiﬁes the HVAs in any timeframe with a red or magenta color. (For fullcolor examples of this color coding in TAS Professional proﬁle maps, visit
http://www.tasprofessional.com/bloomberg/indicators.php.)
A balance area can be considered mature by taking on these characteristics
in its volume accumulation at price (volume proﬁle) or in its time accumulation at price—or both. The process of a balance area becoming mature
is a graduated spectrum and is not a suddenly deﬁnable event. Discretion is
required to determine relative maturity of a balance area; however, these guidelines will allow you to make a reasonable determination. (See Figure 5.25.)
Early stage vertical development most often follows horizontal development, the only exception being in the case of a V-pivot reversal. Typical price
action in transition to this phase will be a price movement away from the
HVA of a balance area and outside of the extremes of the balance area. The
character of this movement is most often described by terms such as sharp,
forceful, persistent, or aggressive.
When a market is in balance, the HVA often acts as a magnet attracting
price and accumulating volume. When a market is making a transition from
balance to vertical development, the price action around the HVA will often
change in character. For example, instead of acting like a magnet, it begins to
repel price in an increasingly sharp manner. This is often an indication that
the phase of mature balance (mature horizontal development) is over and the
market is transitioning to early-stage vertical development. (See Figure 5.26.)
