
 What share size should I take? 

 One share, 10 shares or 100 shares? What about 1,000 shares? This depends on your account size and your daily target. If you are targeting $1,000 a day, then 10 or 20 shares might not be enough. You either have to take more shares or increase your account size. If you don’t have enough money to trade for a $1,000 daily target, you should lower your daily goal. 

 I am holding around $25,000 in my trading account and I usually choose 800 shares to trade. My daily goal is $500 or $120,000/year. That is sufficient for my lifestyle. What is your trading goal? 

 What is my stop loss? 

 The absolute maximum a trader should risk on any trade is 2% of their account equity. For example, if you have a $30,000 account, you should not risk more than $600 per trade, and if you have a $10,000 account, you should not risk more than $200. If your account is small, limit yourself to trading fewer shares. If you see an attractive trade, but a logical stop would have to be placed where more than 2% of your money would be at risk, then pass on that trade and look for another one. You can risk less, but you should never risk more. You must avoid risking more than 2% on a trade.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Three-Step Risk Management 

 Step 1: Determine your maximum dollar risk for the trade you’re planning (never more than 2% of your account). Calculate this before your trading day starts. 

 Step 2: Estimate your maximum risk per share, the strategy stop loss, in dollars, from your entry. This comes from the strategies set out in Chapter 7, where I explain in each strategy what the stop loss should be. 

 Step 3: Divide “1” by “2” to find the absolute maximum number of shares you are allowed to trade each time. 

 To better illustrate this, let’s return to the example of MOH from a few pages back. If you have a $40,000 account, the 2% rule will limit your risk on any trade to $800. Let’s assume you want to be conservative and risk only 1% of that account, or $400. That will be Step 1. 

 As you monitor MOH, you see a situation develop where the VWAP Strategy (see Chapter 7) may very well work in your favor. You decide to sell short the stock at $50, and you want to cover them at $48.80, with a stop loss at $50.40. You will be risking $0.40 per share. That will be Step 2 of risk control. 

 For Step 3, calculate your share size by dividing “Step 1” by “Step 2” to find the maximum size you may trade. In this example, you will be allowed to buy a maximum of 1,000 shares. 

 In this case, you may not have enough cash or buying power to buy 1,000 shares of MOH at $50 (because you have only $40,000 in your account). So instead you will buy 800 shares or, perhaps, even 500 shares. Remember, you can always risk less, but you are not allowed to risk more than 2% of your account under any circumstance. 

 With the strategies introduced in Chapter 7, I explain where my stop loss would be based on technical analysis and my trade plan. I cannot consider maximum loss for your account because I of course don’t know your account size. You need to make that judgment for yourself. For example, when your stop would be above of a moving average (see Chapter 5 for my indicators on my chart), you need to calculate and see if that stop would be bigger than your maximum account size or not. If break of moving average will yield a $600 loss, and you have set a $400 maximum loss per trade, then you should either take fewer shares in that trade or not take that trade at all and wait for another opportunity. 

 You may correctly argue that it will be difficult to calculate share size or stop loss based on a maximum loss on your account while you are waiting to jump into a trade. You will need to make a decision fast or else you will lose the opportunity. I understand that calculating your stop loss and maximum loss in your account size in a live trade is difficult. Remember Rule 2? Day trading is not supposed to be easy. Trading needs practice and I strongly recommend that new traders paper trade under supervision for at least three months in a live simulated account. It sounds crazy at the beginning, but you will quickly learn how to manage your account and your risk per trade. You will be amazed at how rapidly the human brain can do calculations on what share size to take and where to set the stop loss.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Trading Psychology 

 A burning question for many when they begin their trading career is “Why do most traders fail?” 

 Imagine three traders place the exact same trades and all of them lose money. The first trader becomes discouraged, curses the market, and gives up for the day. The second trader reacts with frustration, trades more aggressively to get his money back, and loses even more by the end of the day. The third trader pauses her trading, walks out for a few minutes to reassess her emotions, comes back to her desk, re-evaluates her strategy, waits for a clear signal of opportunity, and places a good trade that brings her even by the end of the day. 

 What is the difference among these traders? 

 The answer to these two questions is that success and failure are based on how traders behave and how they control their emotions. That is what determines winners from losers. 

 A key reason why many traders fail is that they take negative events and losses in trading personally. Their confidence and peace of mind is connected to their trading results. When traders do well, they feel good. When they encounter losses, they become discouraged, doubtful, and frustrated, questioning themselves, their strategy and their career. Instead of dealing directly and constructively with their losses, they react to the emotions triggered by their personalizing of the events. 

 Successful traders are those who trade for skill and not for the money. Almost all professional traders hide their unrealized Profit and Loss (P&L) column while in a trade. They have no interest in seeing how much they are up or down. They focus on the perfect execution of a profit target or a stop loss level. Consistently profitable traders take every negative or positive trade they make as an opportunity to improve themselves. 

 Day trading requires you to make quick decisions while at the same time being very disciplined. Every morning, you should scan the market, find the opportunities, and sometimes in a matter of seconds make decisions on whether you should buy or sell or sell short the Stock in Play, and you need to make that call with a high degree of discipline. 

 You may be surprised to read this, but your state of alertness, your energy level, and your overall health have a significant impact on your daily trading results. Fatigue, physical tension, and ill health will often affect your concentration and adversely affect your sound decision making process. It is difficult to make and sustain the required mental efforts for day trading when you lack proper sleep or feel down from a lack of exercise. Very often, your moods are influenced by your physical state, even by factors as delicate as what and how much you eat. Keep a daily record of both your trading results and your physical condition and you will see these relationships for yourself. Begin preventive maintenance by keeping your body, and thus your mind, in their peak operating condition. Your personal life outside of trading can also affect your decision making as a trader. For example, it is common for young traders to experience more stress after they have married, had children, or purchased a new home, because these added financial responsibilities create additional worry and stress (but also hopefully much pleasure!). 

 My trading strategies (that I will explain later) slowly improved with time, but the breakthrough came when I realized that the key to winning was controlling myself and practicing self-discipline. You have to know in advance what you will do in any given trading situation. It’s challenging to predict what the market will do, but you have already lost if you first don’t know what you yourself will do. New trading strategies, tips from chatrooms or from this book, or even the most sophisticated software imaginable, will not help traders who cannot handle themselves and control their emotions. 

 For every trade, you must ask yourself some questions: 

 Does this fit into my trading personality and my risk tolerance? 
 What strategy will this fit into? 
 If this trade goes the wrong way, where is my stop? 
 How much money am I risking in the trade, and what is the reward potential? 

 This is what many traders find difficult. All of these decisions, the very process of ensuring these decisions fit into your risk tolerance and your strategy parameters, are a tough multitasking call. Not only is it multitasking, but it is multitasking while under stress. 

 I understand that stress. There have been times when I've been in the trade, had an $80,000 position, and all I needed to do was to sell. But as I was looking at my keyboard, I found myself frozen like the proverbial deer in the headlights. I couldn’t even figure out which keys to punch. This sort of paralysis is not unusual when you’re overwhelmed. It happens to every single one of us. But remember, confidence in trading doesn’t arise from being right and profitable in all of your trades, it comes from surviving the occasions of being wrong and losing money. 

 Trading is stressful. Active day trading is perhaps the most stressful of all trading periods. One mistake can ruin your month. One missed proper profit taking can ruin your week. There is a fine line between being a good trader and being a losing trader. If you are under pressure, don’t make any trades. Take a walk to release your stress and do not restart trading until you are once again focused and calm. Often trading professionals will refresh their minds by going for a run after a bad loss, and then come back to restart trading, but in a simulator and not live, until they are back on track emotionally. 

 Be in touch with the results of your decisions and constantly be reviewing your performance. 

 Are you trading profitably? 
 Have you had five wins in a row or have you had five losses in a row?  
 If you are on a losing streak, will you be in touch with your own emotions and maintain your composure, or will you let your judgment be impaired? 

 I cannot emphasize enough just how important the following steps are: you must take the time to prepare, you must work hard, you must plan your trades, you must take the time afterwards to review your trades, and you cannot do it alone. You cannot succeed on your own. There is so much value in sharing ideas and learning from a community of traders and, should you have one, your mentor. 

 Consider skill and discipline to be your trading muscles. Muscles require exercise to grow and, once you’ve grown them, they need to be exercised or you will lose them. That's what I experience every day: continually exercising my ability to practice self-control and discipline. 

 Some of these skills, however, are comparable to learning to ride a bicycle. Once you’ve learned it, riding a bike is a skill that can’t be taken away. Once you’ve learned it, the skill of identifying a good stock to trade will not go away. But remember, discipline is something you will need to constantly work at to be a successful trader. You’ve entered a profession in which you will always be learning. That’s great and it’s very stimulating. But it's important to remember that if you start to get over-confident and think you’ve outsmarted the market on trading wisdom, or that you don’t need to learn any more, you’ll often get a quick reminder from that market. You’ll lose money and you will see that the market is correcting you. 

 I will reiterate: being able to make quick decisions and being able to make and then follow your trading rules are critical for success in the market. As you continue through this book, you are going to read much about risk management. Everything that traders do comes back to risk management because ultimately it is the most important concept for a trader to understand. All day long, you are managing risk. Related to this is the ability to manage risk so that you will make good decisions - even in the heat of the moment. 

 That’s the next rule of day trading: 

 Rule 6: Your broker will buy and sell stocks for you at the Exchange. Your only job as a day trader is to manage risk. You cannot be a successful day trader without excellent risk management skills, even if you are the master of many effective strategies. 

 As mentioned before, traders are in the business of trading. You need to define your risk as a business person - the maximum amount of money you’ll risk on any single trade. Unfortunately, there is no standard dollar amount that I can suggest. As explained earlier, an acceptable risk depends on the size of your trading account as well as on your trading method, personality and risk tolerance. But remember the previously explained 2% rule. It is worth repeating: 

 The absolute maximum traders may risk on any trade is 2% of their account equity. For example, if you have a $30,000 account, you may not risk more than $600 per trade, and if you have a $10,000 account, you may not risk more than $200. If your account is small, limit yourself to trading fewer shares. If you see an attractive trade, but a logical stop would have to be placed where more than 2% of your equity would be at risk, pass on that trade and look for another trade. You may risk less, but you may never risk more. You must avoid risking more than 2% on a trade. 

 You must remember, trading is not about being right. Trading is a business of statistics and probabilities. It is a patient game of finding setups that offer you a good risk/reward opportunity and then taking those trades. For me personally, 30% of my trades will result in a loss, but I am a constantly profitable trader. I am not expecting to be right every single trade. This is the name of the business. Imagine you have a restaurant or coffee shop; would you be profitable every single day? No. There are some days that you will not have enough customers or sales to support even your staff or your lease. But there will also be good days and evenings for your business. 

 If you examine the work of most successful traders, they all take many small losses. Their results are littered with numerous small losses of 7c (cents), 5c, 3c, and even 1c per share. Most good day traders have few losses that are more than 30c per share. Most winning trades should work for you right away. 

 One of the fundamentals you must learn from this book is that every day trading strategy comes with a stop loss level and you must stop out from stocks that trade against your strategy. Imagine for a moment that you are shorting a stock below an important intraday resistance level and you are waiting for the price to go lower. That is fine. But suddenly the price turns against you and breaks the resistance level and trades higher. Now your original trade plan is obsolete. You have no reason to stay in the trade. You cannot wait in the trade in the hope that the stock may trade lower again. That is wishful thinking. You can wipe out your trading account with ONE crazy move. The stock may or may not trade lower again, but above the resistance level you have no reason to be short in the stock. If the stock was weak and comes back below the level, you may enter the trade again. Commissions are cheap, so accept a small loss and get out. You can always get back into the trade when the setup is ready. 

 Those who never master this fundamental rule will fail. This is a common problem amongst new traders: they don’t accept the small loss. You must work at this while trading in a simulator. You should move to live trading only if you have mastered accepting and respecting your stop loss. If you don’t know where your stop loss is or where it should be, it means than perhaps you should not be in that trade in the first place. It means you have not planned it correctly. It also means you should step back to reading about and reviewing your strategies and return to again trade in the simulator. 

 Consistently profitable traders just make sound and reasonable trades. They accept that they cannot control the market or results on every single trade, but they stick to their plan and control their capital. Often you can review your profit and loss at the end of the month. Professional traders often review their P&L quarterly, and then make a decision on their performance and adjust their trading strategies accordingly. 

 Many traders think a good trading day is a positive day. Wrong. A good trading day is a day that you were disciplined, traded sound strategies and did not violate any trading rules. The normal uncertainty of the stock market will result in some of your days being negative, but that does not mean that a negative day was a bad trading day.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Chapter 4: How to Find Stocks for Trades 
 “You are only as good as the stocks that you trade.” This is a famous expression in the trading community. There are too many new traders who do not know what a good stock to day trade is nor how to find one, and they waste too many trading days mistakenly believing that the market is impossible to day trade in. 

 You can be the best trader in the world, but if your stocks do not move, nor have enough volume, then you cannot make money consistently. Trading a stock that doesn’t move is a trading day wasted. As a day trader, you must be efficient with your time and buying power (which will be explained in Chapter 5). 

 Now, we don’t want stocks to just move, but we seek stocks where we can identify that they are about to move in a certain direction. It is possible that a stock that moves $5 intraday may never offer us excellent risk/reward opportunities. Some stocks move too much intraday without foreshadowing their direction. 

 Your next challenge as a new trader is how to find these stocks. 

 I often get emails from traders saying that they struggle with how to find the right stocks to trade. Many of them understand how trading works and have a proper education and the right gear for day trading, but when it comes to actually finding stocks to trade in real time, they are clueless. I certainly experienced this as a new trader. If you learn the strategies explained in Chapter 7, but you cannot make money consistently, it is possible that you are in the wrong stock. Again, you are only as good as the stocks you trade. You need to find the stocks that are in play by day traders or, as I call them, Stocks in Play . 

 There is more than one way to select Stocks in Play and make money trading them, and there is definitely more than one correct way. Some traders trade baskets of stocks and indexes. Some day traders like my friend Trader Brian trade exchange-traded funds (ETFs) exclusively. Many have developed proprietary filters to find stocks. Others concentrate on trading the markets as a whole with index Futures. Often professional traders at the trading desks of the big banks simply trade in a sector like Gold or Oil or Tech. But remember, we are retail traders with limited amounts of capital, so we must be efficient with selecting our Stocks in Play. 

 A Stock in Play is a stock that offers excellent risk/reward setup opportunities - opportunities where your downside is 5c and your upside is 25c, or your downside is 20c and your upside is $1 – that’s 1:5. You can regularly read a Stock in Play that is about to trade higher or lower from its present price. A Stock in Play moves, and these moves are predictable, frequent, and catchable. A good intraday stock offers numerous and excellent risk/reward opportunities. 

 Every day, there are a new series of stocks that are in play. Trading Stocks in Play allow you to be the most efficient with your buying power. They often offer much better risk/reward opportunities intraday and allow you to execute your ideas and trading rules with more consistency. Trading the right Stocks in Play help you to combat algorithmic programs.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Stocks in Play 

 What are Stocks in Play? I explain in detail later in this book how to find them, but they could be, in no particular order: 

 A stock with fresh news 
 A stock that is up or down more than 2% before the market Open 
 A stock that has unusual pre-market trading activity 
 A stock that develops important intraday levels which we can trade off from 

 You must remember that retail trading does not work on all stocks. It only works on the stocks that have high relative volume . Some stocks like Apple Inc. (ticker: AAPL) will on average trade millions and millions of shares each day, while other stocks on average might trade only 500,000 shares each day. Does this mean you should trade AAPL only? No. High volume will be relative from one stock to another. You don’t just look for high total volume. There are some stocks that on average will trade with much volume. You need to look for what's above average for that specific stock. Thirty million shares of AAPL traded in one day might very well not be higher than usual. Do not trade AAPL unless it has a very unusual trading volume. If trading volume is not higher than normal, it means that the trading is being dominated by institutional traders and high frequency trading computers. Stay away from it. 

 Figure 4.1 - AAPL Daily Chart for Summer 2016. Days that AAPL had a significant relative volume are marked. Those days were suitable for day trading AAPL. 

 Take a look at Figure 4.1 above, the AAPL daily chart for the summer of 2016. As you can see, there were only two days that had high relative activity. They’re marked with arrows on the chart. Interestingly enough, when you take a close look at the chart, you realize that on those days the stock gapped up or down. I marked those price gaps on the chart. If you wanted to trade AAPL, you should have traded it only on those days. The other days were comprised of just normal, high frequency, algorithmic trading. Retail traders should stay away from stocks that are trading normally. 
