
8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 59

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 59 •

Livermore returned to New York that evening.
That night, April 18, 1906, at 5 A.M., while Livermore was fast
asleep in New York, the earth under San Francisco moved, slowly
at first, rumbling, then quaking, shaking, shivering, as an underground shock wave began to rock the city. The San Andreas fault
was adjusting itself, shrugging its massive shoulders. Most of the
city fell, and a few unlucky souls were trapped in the opening and
closing maw of what had been solid earth. Tall buildings staggered,
collapsed, and fell. The financial district was fiery rubble; the train
station was leveled, and the tracks were twisted and bent like soft
pretzels. The tremblor was felt as far away as Palo Alto. The Stanford University campus was demolished by the quake. Scores of
people were killed.
The next morning Livermore read the newspaper headlines:
“Earthquake Disaster in San Francisco.” He read on: “The market
dropped only a few points on the news.”
Livermore knew that bad news in a bull market climate takes a
lot longer to sink in with the public than bad news in a bear market, when the climate is already negative. In fact, before the market closed, stocks had rebounded to their former levels. Livermore
was short 5,000 shares, but he was flat on the trade. He had made
no money.
His friend had also returned to New York. “You were right
about bad news coming, but I told you that you can’t spit into the
wind. And the wind is positive. You should have listened to me,
J.L.,” he said.
“Winds change,” Livermore said, reading the ticker tape, not
looking up.
Livermore figured that even if the disaster proved not to be as
bad as was originally thought, railroad stocks would not go up.
The next day the news dribbled in from San Francisco and the
market drifted down, but not drastically. Livermore was convinced

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 60

• 60 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

he was right. He went to his broker, got a special line of credit, and
sold another 5,000 shares of Union Pacific short.
The next day, the third day after the earthquake, the market
tumbled. Union Pacific fell like a stone, and Livermore walked out
of the wreckage with $250,000 in profit. He never figured out
exactly why he did what he did in listening to his inner voice. It
was one subject he did not analyze too deeply. He quietly slipped
the cash into his account. Now he could trade with a much bigger
line—an additional $250,000—and that was what he thought
about the most.
He had cut short his Atlantic City vacation. After the earthquake windfall, he went to the races in Saratoga Springs for a holiday. He loved the entire spectacle of Saratoga: the beauty of the
place, the regal setting, the sleek, beautiful horses. Most of the
well-dressed, influential people of New York City gathered there
every summer for the races.
Once again, Livermore wandered into the Hutton brokerage
offices in Saratoga to see what was cooking in New York. He sat
quietly studying the tape, looking up at the chalkboard as the
prices of the leading stocks were posted. People came by to whisper tips into the ear of the Boy Plunger. Approaching 30, he still
looked like a well-dressed college kid. The office manger came
over and flashed the order slips in front of him, showing the
buy/sell orders from some of the bigger players who were in
Saratoga. Livermore just smiled and said nothing.
His attention was focused on Union Pacific, his old friend. Livermore had no feelings with regard to either buying long or selling a stock short. It made no difference, since he had figured that
the market went down as often as it went up. He waited patiently
in cash, waiting to strike. The Union Pacific volume and price
movement Livermore saw on the tape had changed and were now,

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 61

THE SAN FRANCISCO EARTHQUAKE RUMBLES IN NEW YORK

• 61 •

he believed, in an accumulation phase. He did no trading for three
days as he watched the stock, ignoring the races. He finally came
to the conclusion that it was being accumulated by a professional
group of players, based on the tape movement.
The stock was at 160 when, on the third day, he started to buy.
He bought in lots of 500 until he had 5,000 shares. He got a frantic call from Ed Hutton, his old, respected friend, a friend who was
also well informed and had friends in high places. There was little
that happened on Wall Street that Hutton did not know about.
“J.L., you’re crazy,” Hutton said.
“What are you talking about?”
“They’re slipping it to you. The pool that runs the stock is feeding the stock to you as fast as you can take it. Then they are going
to walk away from it, and buy it back from you cheap. You’re the
patsy here. You’re the sucker, in a sucker play.”
“You sure?”
“Couldn’t be surer. Comes from the best source, the top.”
“I don’t agree,” Livermore said. “I think it’s being accumulated.”
“Yeah, by you! It’s going to go down. Listen, I like the commissions, and I want you to be the biggest trader in New York. I’m
just trying to save you from disaster.”
“All right, Ed,” Livermore paused, thinking. He knew that
Hutton was a true friend, a friend who had helped him often in
the past.
“Thanks, Ed. I’ll quit the position.”
“Right. You can’t expect to win on every play, J.L.,” Hutton
said, and hung up.
Livermore sat down and looked at the order slips and fills in his
hands. After a few minutes, he got up and told the clerk to sell him
out. The Union Pacific position was liquidated at $162 a share.

8467_Smitten_03_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 62

• 62 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

After commissions it was an even trade. The next day Union
Pacific announced a 10 percent dividend, and the stock shot up 10
points. Livermore would have pocketed $50,000.
Livermore was in the Hutton office in Saratoga when the dividend was announced. He sat there quietly as the stock shot up.
The office manager looked at him and shrugged. He knew what
had happened the day before. He knew what Ed Hutton had told
him. Livermore smiled and nodded.
Livermore was not angry or upset with Hutton. He looked at
the experience as part of his education. How could he get angry
when he understood that the market was independent of feelings?
The market was pure action, cold, and true only to itself. He
believed it always did the right thing, even if he could not see it at
the time.
Livermore now resolved to follow only his own method of trading stock. He now knew that tipsters came in all sizes and shapes
and wore all kinds of disguises—even close friends with the best
intentions. They were to be avoided at all cost.
Livermore had learned some great lessons over the past 15 years.
He was one year short of 30. He had a good stake and a good line
with his brokers. He had shaken off his bucket-shop methods of
trading. Now, after Saratoga, he was going to notch it up a level.
Instead of concentrating on stocks, he was going to concentrate
on the basic conditions of the market. “Yes,” he thought to himself. “Before I pick a stock I will examine the basics of the overall
market.”
He loved this game, the game of speculation. He loved it for its
endless challenge. It was a game that he could never completely
win. But he did not have to win all the time to make a lot of
money. If he could win on average he could have a great life and a
lot of fun.
He was ready.

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 63

*

chapter four

*

The Crash of 1907

All men naturally desire knowledge.

Aristotle

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 64

• 64 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

JESSE LIVERMORE HAD BEEN SEARCHING FOR HIS TRAD-

ing strategy. Slowly, it was starting to form. The first step was to
concentrate on the overall market before making a trade. He
would follow the line of least resistance—up in a bull market, buy
long, down in a bear market, sell short. If the market went sideways, he would wait in cash for a clear direction to be established.
He had no interest in finding a bargain or a cheap stock. He was
not a bottom fisher. He was a trend follower. He was only interested in following the trend, what he called the line of least resistance. He was one of the first true momentum players.
Now that he had a basic market strategy, he needed a moneymanagement strategy to complement it. He was known on the
Street as the Boy Plunger, but plunging had not always served him
well. He had been busted, broke, three times by the age of 30.
He watched the most successful Wall Street traders in action. He
observed that they were all good money managers, each with an
individual approach. He knew he needed his own system.
He now knew it was not whether the market or a stock would
turn, but exactly when it would turn—timing was everything. But
he also realized that no one could call or predict exactly when the
market would turn or what a stock would do. So, Livermore
developed his probing, or testing the market, approach.
The strategy was simple: Do not plunge. Send out a probe
before buying, just as a commanding officer sends out a reconnaissance platoon to probe the enemy lines and gather intelligence.
Livermore followed this basic military strategy in stock market
trading, which is, after all, a kind of war.
It is very important to note that Livermore would determine
the number of shares or the size of his investment in dollars before
making the first trade.
If Livermore planned to take a position of 10,000 shares in a
given stock, he would first probe with a purchase of 20 percent of

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 65

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 65 •

his planned position—that is, he would buy 2,000 shares. Suppose
he paid $100 a share. If the price dropped after he made his first
purchase, he would either close out the first position or wait—
never taking a loss of more than 10 percent.
He expected the stock price to rise. If it did, he would buy a
second position of another 2,000 shares at, say, $101 per share. He
would then be in profit.
If the stock continued to rise, he would take a third position of
2,000 shares at, say, $104.
At this point he would own 6,000 shares; he would be 60 percent invested against his objective of a 10,000-share position. But
he would have made each purchase at a slightly more expensive
level. For Livermore, this was good: It proved to him that the stock
was moving in the right direction.
Now he would wait for a further move and a correction. For
example, suppose the stock moved from $100 to $112, then had a
normal correction down to $104 dollars, the spot where he had
made his last purchase.
If the stock moved up from this price of $104, Livermore would
make his final purchase of 4,000 shares at, say, $106, giving him an
average price of around $105 for the total position of 10,000
shares.
To put it another way: Livermore would establish 20 percent of
his planned position on the first purchase, 20 percent on the second position, and 20 percent on the third position. He would wait
for a confirmation and then take his final position of 40 percent.
He considered each of these purchases to be a crucial stage in
establishing his overall position. If, at any time, the stock went
against him, he would be patient and wait, or he would close out
all his positions, never sustaining a loss of more than a 10 percent.
The first probe or transaction is crucial; it is the key to this technique. After the first transaction, do not make a second until you

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 66

• 66 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

have confirmed that your judgment is correct. When the stock has
moved in the direction you expected it to move, and you have a
profit, your judgment has been confirmed.
Livermore believed that stocks are never too high to begin buying or too low to begin selling short. Livermore believed that there
was only one side of the market to avoid. He could be on the bull
side or the bear side—it made no difference to Livermore—just so
long as he was not on the wrong side.
From experience, Livermore knew that one of the hardest
things to do as a trader was to sell out a position early if he was
wrong on the initial purchase and the stock moved against him.
Trying to explain the market to his boys, he said, “The transaction becomes personal to too many speculators when their judgment is proven wrong and the stock moves against them. It is
exactly at this time that the speculator must take action and cut
losses. The speculator has been proven wrong, because the stock
has moved against him, and must now admit it quickly and close
the trade. It is a question of overcoming and control of the ego.”
Livermore had come to realize that the big money was in the
big swings, in waiting for the basic trend to play out and riding
the stock for as long as possible before the inevitable change in the
basic trend was seen in the line of least resistance. He would wait
for the market to give him the clues. He would not anticipate the
market by guessing its direction. Like Sherlock Holmes, he would
wait for the clues to appear, the facts to mount up, before making
his conclusion.
Livermore now had three important rules to follow in his new
trading strategy:
• First, decide on the overall direction of the market. Determine
the line of least resistance. Be sure of the basic trend.

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 67

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 67 •

• Second, develop a buying strategy. Probe the market. Test it by
trading small positions first. Do not rush in and bet your
whole stash on impulse.
• Third, be patient and wait for all the facts. Wait for a move to
play out. It is the big moves that make the big money.
It was late in 1906 when his new strategy finally paid off. Livermore sensed what he believed was going to be a major change in
market direction—a basic change downward. This was not obvious to the major players or the press, who were still calling for the
roaring bull market to continue.
He examined all the factors carefully and decided that the market
was cresting, even though the line of least resistance still appeared to
be upward. He used his new trading approach to confirm this judgment, sending out probes across a variety of the leading stocks. He
probed the four leading stock groups, selling at least two stocks short
in each of the four groups. His short sales held—that is, the stocks
that he had sold short went down, and on the rallies those stocks faltered, unable to make new highs, closing only a few points up, but
then sinking, sliding backward off their old highs.
Livermore slowly increased his positions on each failed rally.
The last holdout was Reading, a railroad stock that would not
budge. It was supposed to be cornered, a stock whose outstanding
shares were all controlled by a pool, or a person. Livermore
believed no one stock could withstand the basic tidal wave that he
saw on the horizon—the change from an upward-trending bull
market to a downward-trending bear market. He believed that
Reading could not buck the trend. It would collapse along with
the others when the time was right.
Livermore decided to help its decline along. He sold short
through two brokers simultaneously. He sold 4,000 shares of

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 68

• 68 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

Reading at $111. He had the market orders timed to hit the market simultaneously. The orders were filled at diminishing prices.
He hit Reading again by selling 2,000 more, establishing his short
line of 6,000 shares at a final price of $92. He was well into profit
in less than a few hours. Reading then collapsed, as did all the
other stocks in which Livermore had established positions.
His first major escapade using his new technique of probing the
market had worked. Now he was faced with another problem:
when to cover and buy back his shorts.
Livermore had been wiped out and had seen his profits disappear many times before by not closing out his positions and banking his paper profits while he could. This time he did not wait for
the market to show a clear sign that it had bottomed out. He
wanted his profits. He closed out his positions, put the money in
the bank, and left for Palm Beach.
He was weary of trading and wanted to forget about the market
for a while. He loved deep-sea fishing, so he went and relaxed. He
deserved it. He also wanted to reflect more on his new trading
strategy. He had almost a million dollars in his bank account now.
It was 1907, he was 30 years old, and he knew he was finally on
the right track.
After Palm Beach, he headed for Paris. He liked Europe because
there was no talk of the stock market, and he wanted to rest his
mind for a while. With plenty of money in his bank account, in a
beautiful place with beautiful people, he was content for a while.
But it did not last for long. His passion was the stock market,
and soon he was drawn back into it. He read the Paris edition of
the Herald Tribune. It became clear that the New York market was
headed for an even bigger tumble then he had originally thought.
He was sorry now that he had closed out his positions so soon.
He really had no basic reason to close out the original positions

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 69

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 69 •

except that he was fearful of losing his profits. He wanted to put
his profits in the bank, which he had done.
He took a fast liner back to New York.
He did not know it, but he was about to witness the panic of
1907.
As soon as he arrived he went short the market again, using
probes to make sure he was correct in the basic trend. He established very large short positions in several of the leading stocks.
The turn-of-the-century market had been a full runaway bull
market to date, with wild gyrations in the prices of the more speculative issues.
The basic financial problem soon became apparent: call loans.
Call loans were time-restricted demand loans made by banks to
brokerage houses. The cash from these loans was, in turn, put up
for margin by the brokerage houses for their customers. The loans
were the fuel that powered the market—the margin was essential.
These loans were made every day at the Money Post between
12:00 and 2:15 P.M., when the bankers appeared on the stock market floor ready to loan money to the brokers. The problem had
been developing for months, but it culminated on October 24,
1907.
The problem was simple. The banks did not have enough cash
available for the brokers to cover their margin requirements. What
money was available was being offered at 100 to 150 percent interest. And the banks, which usually fought to lend this high-yield
money, were not interested in extending any further loans to brokerage houses, at any interest rate. It was a credit crunch of the
most dire proportions. Stocks plummeted. Livermore kept selling
short, pyramiding his position into the weakness.
On October 24, at 12 P.M., chaos ruled on the floor of the
exchange. Hundreds of brokers gathered around the Money Post,

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 70

• 70 •

JESSE LIVERMORE : WORLD ’ S GREATEST STOCK TRADER

screaming out their demands for short-term loans, but there was
no money available—no money at all. This meant that the brokers
had to sell their stock positions on the open market to cover their
margins, but there were no buyers for stock. All the buying had
dried up. It was the market’s worst nightmare—no cash and no
buyers—and it had happened quickly. Pure, abject, unadulterated,
raw fear swept over the brokers and the bankers.
Wall Street was out of cash.
The brokers ran to R. H. Thomas, president of the stock
exchange. He called James Stillman, president of the National City
Bank, the richest, most powerful bank in the United States, a bank
that boasted of never extending a loan at more than 6 percent
interest.
When Stillman had finished listening to Thomas, he simply said
“We must go see Mr. Morgan.” They left immediately to visit J. P.
Morgan, head of the House of Morgan, the world giant of finance.
Morgan listened to Stillman and Thomas as they outlined the
disastrous situation, a disaster that could spread right across the
nation and cripple its entire industrial base. Morgan wasted no
time. When he had heard enough, Morgan rose, and said: “Return
to the exchange and tell them that there will be money for them.”
They asked, “Where from?”
“From the banks,” Morgan answered, staring at the two men.
“Where else?”
Thomas sped back to the floor of the exchange and told the
crowd that was standing around the Money Post that there would
be money for them, “Mr. Morgan has assured us!”
“When?” they yelled in desperation.
“Soon,” came the answer.
“How much?” They screamed.
“Enough!” was the answer.
But the clock kept ticking. Finally, at a little after 2 P.M., John T.

8467_Smitten_04_a.qxd 08/14/2001 3:37 PM Page 71

THE CRASH OF 1907

• 71 •

Atterbury of Van Emburgh and Atterbury, a close associate of J. P.
Morgan, arrived on the floor. The noise disappeared and the
crowd stood transfixed, opening a path to the Money Post for
Atterbury. When he got to the post, he raised his hand and said “I
am authorized to lend ten million dollars.”
The crowd went crazy, with brokers yelling out the amounts
they needed. Atterbury yelled over the voices. “Quiet, be quiet,
one at a time, there will be enough for everyone!”
“Where do we get the money?” one broker yelled.
“You will be told where to go tomorrow! Now take it easy, and
let’s get this done,” Atterbury responded.
This day became a legend on Wall Street—the day J. P. Morgan
singlehandedly saved the stock market and perhaps prevented the
financial collapse of the nation.
When Thomas and Stillman had left the offices of the House of
Morgan, J. P. Morgan had called the presidents of the major banks.
He told each of them, “We need to prop up the market with cash,
and we need to do it now. We must give them what they need. It
is a critical situation.”
Each banker replied in the same manner: “We are loaned to the
maximum. We have no cash to lend to the brokers to support the
market.”
“You have reserves!” Morgan exclaimed.
“But we are already below the legal limits!”
“Use the reserves, what the hell do you think they are for?” he
told each one of the bankers.
Morgan was a person whom Livermore admired. Morgan was a
brilliant person of practical principles, a patriot, a financial giant.
That day, October 24, 1907, was to be branded into Livermore’s
memory. It was the first time he had ever made more than $1 million in profit, and he had done it in a single day. Furthermore, the
day was not yet over. For him it was most important that he had
