
continually carried a small knife in his pocket, and whenever anybody, offending in this
respect, knelt before him to receive his blessing, he would whip it out slily, and cut off a
handful, and then, throwing it in his face, tell him to cut off all the rest, or he would go to
hell.
But fashion, which at times it is possible to move with a wisp, stands firm against a lever;
and men preferred to run the risk of damnation to parting with the superfluity of their
hair. In the time of Henry I, Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, found it necessary to
republish the famous decree of excommunication and outlawry against the offenders; but,
as the court itself had begun to patronize curls, the fulminations of the church were
unavailing. Henry I and his nobles wore their hair in long ringlets down their backs and
shoulders, and became a scandalum magnatum in the eyes of the godly. One Serlo, the
King's chaplain, was so grieved in spirit at the impiety of his master, that he preached a
sermon from the well-known text of St. Paul, before the assembled court, in which he
drew so dreadful a picture of the torments that awaited them in the other world, that
several of them burst into tears, and wrung their hair, as if they would have pulled it out
by the roots. Henry himself was observed to weep. The priest, seeing the impression he
had made, determined to strike while the iron was hot, and, pulling a pair of scissors from
his pocket, cut the king's hair in presence of them all. Several of the principal courtiers
consented to do the like, and, for a short time, long hair appeared to be going out of
fashion. But the courtiers thought, after the first glow of their penitence had been cooled
by reflection, that the clerical Dalilah had shorn them of their strength, and, in less than
six months, they were as great sinners as ever.
Anselm, the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been a monk of Bec, in Normandy, and
who had signalized himself at Rouen by his fierce opposition to long hair, was still
anxious to work a reformation in this matter. But his pertinacity was far from pleasing to
the King, who had finally made up his mind to wear ringlets. There were other disputes,
of a more serious nature, between them; so that when the Archbishop died, the King was
so glad to be rid of him, that he allowed the see to remain vacant for five years. Still the
cause had other advocates, and every pulpit in the land resounded with anathemas against
that disobedient and long-haired generation. But all was of no avail. Stowe, in writing of
this period, asserts, on the authority of some more ancient chronicler, "that men,
forgetting their birth, transformed themselves, by the length of their haires, into the
semblance of woman kind;" and that when their hair decayed from age, or other causes,
"they knit about their heads certain rolls and braidings of false hair." At last accident
turned the tide of fashion. A knight of the court, who was exceedingly proud of his
beauteous locks, dreamed one night that, as he lay in bed, the devil sprang upon him, and
endeavoured to choke him with his own hair. He started in affright, and actually found
that he had a great quantity of hair in his mouth. Sorely stricken in conscience, and
looking upon the dream as a warning from Heaven, he set about the work of reformation,
and cut off his luxuriant tresses the same night. The story was soon bruited abroad; of
course it was made the most of by the clergy, and the knight, being a man of influence
and consideration, and the acknowledged leader of the fashion, his example, aided by
priestly exhortations, was very generally imitated. Men appeared almost as decent as St.
Wulstan himself could have wished, the dream of a dandy having proved more

