
Exploring Types of Brokers
and Brokerage Services
Before you can pick the type of broker that best fulfills your needs, you need
to understand the kinds of services that each kind of broker provides. After
you gain an understanding of your options and select the types of services
you want, you then need to carefully research each of the brokers that match
your needs. Within each classification are good and bad brokers. We give you
the tools for researching brokerage firms in the sections that follow.

Full-service brokers
If you want someone to assist you with buying decisions and implementing
those decisions, you need to check out the full-service brokers. They offer
extensive research and other services. Usually, they call you with trading
ideas. All you need to do is say yes or no. You pay a transaction fee for trades
plus a commission percentage based on the dollar volume. You can invest in
stocks, futures, options, bonds, mutual funds, money market funds, and
variable annuities. You can work with a full-service broker by telephone,
mail, fax, or using an Internet connection. Most have Web sites you can
access online for information, and many allow you to enter your own trades.

Chapter 3: Going for Broke(r): Discovering Your Brokerage Options
For example, here is the transaction fee schedule for one of the better-known
full-service brokers (others can be as much as twice as high):
Transaction Size

Commission Rate

$0–$2,499

$40 plus 1.7% of principal

$2,500–$6,249

$65 plus 0.66% of principal

$6,250–$19,999

$85 plus 0.34% of principal

$20,000–$49,999

$115 plus 0.33% of principal

$50,000–$499,999

$170 plus 0.11% of principal

$500,000+

$270 plus 0.09% of principal

Minimum broker-assisted trade — $54.95 per trade. Maximums are determined by transaction size.

Alternatively, some full-service brokers do permit you to make all the trades
you want per year for a fee of 0.30 percent to 2.5 percent of the total assets in
your brokerage account. Using language common to traders, that’s 30 to 250
basis points. You have to have more than $10 million in an account to get the
lowest fee. Traders with less than $100,000 pay closer to the 2.5 percent of
assets to access the unlimited trading features.
Just because you choose to use a full-service broker doesn’t mean you can just
sit back and let your money grow after placing it into an account. Brokers make
money on commissions for the exchange of stocks. If they have no transactions
during a given month, they don’t get paid. Unscrupulous brokers recommend
trades to their customers to generate new commissions even when those
decisions are not necessarily the best investment advice for their clients.
Even the research arms of many full-service brokerage houses have come
under scrutiny from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the
past few years, primarily because their analysts didn’t accurately reflect
the values of stocks in companies that used the firms’ investment-banking
capabilities. Analysts tend to see their firms’ clients through rose-colored
glasses when providing research reports, especially when their firms make a
lot of money by providing investment-banking services to those companies.
Just because you choose to work through a full-service broker doesn’t mean
you can sidestep doing your own research. You always need to perform due
diligence, independently researching your stock purchases. Although you
certainly can use the research arm of your brokerage firm, it shouldn’t be your
sole source of research on any stock you’re thinking about buying or that you
already hold.

35

36

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
If you’re planning to be a trader, do your own research and implement your
own trading strategies. Why pay for the services of a full-service broker? We
really don’t recommend that you waste your money on the additional costs
of maintaining a full-service brokerage account or paying the high transaction
fees and commissions.

Discount brokers
Many discount brokers offer the same services as full-service brokers,
including research. The big exception is that you won’t get individual attention
or unsolicited advice on what to buy or sell. Some discount brokers send out
monthly newsletters with stock recommendations; most don’t trade futures
or sell variable annuities. You can access a discount broker by telephone,
mail, fax, or using an Internet connection. In order to get the lowest fees on
trades, you need to do your own trades by accessing the broker’s Web site.
The big difference to you, as an individual trader, is that you can save a lot
of money on trading costs, provided you know what you’re doing and you
understand the language of stock trading. Transaction fees for online trades
can range from as low as $5 up to about $30 with a discount broker. If you
want special services requiring a broker’s assistance, you can work with a
human being. Depending on the discount brokerage firm and the level of
service required, fees can range from $25 to $50 per trade. Some discount
brokers provide broker-assisted trades using a commission rate schedule
similar to the ones offered by full-service brokers, but for lower fees per
trade. If you get involved in more complicated trading transactions that
require human assistance, costs can rise significantly. Anytime you’re
planning to use a broker’s assistance, be sure you understand any additional
costs that may be charged to your account for that assistance.

Direct-access brokers
If you want to bypass the traditional brokers and trade directly through an
exchange or market maker, you need to open your account with a direct-access
broker so you can use one or more of the electronic communications
networks (ECNs) to make your trades. Traders usually download software
onto their PCs so they can access the ECN directly using their Internet
connections.
Traders using direct-access brokers typically get real-time Nasdaq Level I
quotes, which show the latest bid and ask prices, quote size, the last trade,
and volume.

Chapter 3: Going for Broke(r): Discovering Your Brokerage Options
Direct-access brokers also offer Nasdaq Level II. Nasdaq fees are higher for
Level II, and the brokerage may also charge an additional fee for this type
of access. In addition to what you see in a Level I quote, you also find the
number of market makers participating in the market for any one stock.
A Nasdaq Level II quote screen shows the best bid price and the best ask
price for specific stocks from participating market makers. All the bid and ask
prices are ranked from best to worst. Some direct-access brokers combine
Nasdaq Level II information and ECN book data to show the complete market
depth for a specific stock. The ECN book is not a printed book like you would
expect to find on a bookstore shelf. It’s a compilation of all the trades and
the bid and ask quotes available on all the electronic networks. Examples of
Level I and Level II quote screens are shown in Chapter 14.
Traders can review the quotes and select which market maker or ECN to use
for each transaction. Most full-service and discount brokers make that choice
for you when you’re working with them. A few discount brokers are providing
access to ECNs.
When working with direct-access brokers, one key difference is that the
software you use may reside on your own computer and not on your broker’s
server, which greatly accelerates the speed at which you can trade. Again,
some discount brokers provide software to enable you to receive direct raw
data on your home computer, but their software is not as sophisticated as
what direct-access brokers have to offer. Software issues are covered in detail
in Chapter 4.
We often talk about how you can miss trading at the prices you want, especially
in fast-moving markets. Well, having direct access doesn’t guarantee that
you won’t miss a price, but your chances of catching those prices are better,
because you won’t have to wait for pages to download from your broker’s
server. Of course, for this advantage to work for you, you must have highspeed Internet access, which can include DSL, cable, or satellite access.
Working with a direct-access broker gives you a steady stream of raw financial
data — the actual trades, current bid and ask prices, trading volume, and
market statistics. The trading software that you load onto your computer
determines how this data is organized and presented on your computer
monitor. Providing better access is how direct-access brokers distinguish
their services from other brokers.
Software prices and access fees vary greatly and can cost you as much as
$300 per month. The fees sometimes can be waived, especially if your trading
volume is high enough — typically about 50 or more trades per month. As
you can see, you have to make regular trades for a direct-access broker to be
more cost effective than a discount broker. That said, even some discount
brokers offer limited direct access using less-sophisticated software.

37

38

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Proprietary trading firms
Proprietary (or “prop”) trading firms enable traders to use at least some of
the firm’s capital in addition to or instead of their own. Depending on the firm,
traders share the gains and may (or may not) share the losses. You can’t just
walk in and expect to trade with one of these firms. You must have an NASD
Series 7 license combined with a proven history of trading in the equity
markets. Some proprietary trading firms may also require that you have a
Series 55 and Series 63 license. Proprietary trading is definitely not an alternative
for beginners. These firms train you in their respective trading styles.

Futures brokers
Unless you’re working with a full-service brokerage firm, you may have
to open a separate account with a futures broker if you want to trade
commodities or other types of futures. Futures brokers must be licensed by
the NASD in a way that differs from stockbrokers. Many direct-access brokers
provide futures brokerage services, but you will not always find them at a
discount broker. We talk more about licensing in Chapter 20 and about
trading futures in Chapter 18.

Services You Should Consider
When Choosing Your Broker
You can’t choose your broker purely on the basis of price. You need to know
what types of services are offered to enable you to make the types of trades
you want to make. When researching brokers, check out the types of orders
supported, whether they can offer you a data feed, what types of charts they
provide, and whether they can give you ECN access if you want to make your
own trades electronically.

Types of orders supported
As we mention in Chapter 2, not all brokers provide stop orders for OTC and
Nasdaq trades. The Nasdaq has no facility for handling stop orders, so the
broker must monitor your stop prices and enter either market or limit orders
if your price is triggered. Although monitoring stop prices usually is done
automatically, not all brokers offer the service. If you know you’ll be using
stops with many of your trades, you need to find a broker who provides
those services. Some discount brokers provide those services, provided
you’re willing to pay for them.

Chapter 3: Going for Broke(r): Discovering Your Brokerage Options
As such, you also need to compare not only prices for those services but also
the respective brokers’ reputations for effectively and efficiently providing
those services. If you want to place contingent orders (see Chapter 2), you
may discover that few discount brokers offer that service even for a price.
As you trade, you definitely need to steer clear of brokers who accept payment
for order flow, a practice in which some exchanges or market makers pay
brokerage firms for routing orders to them. Firms can make a penny or more
per share, but the SEC requires the firm to inform you whether it receives
payment for order flow when you first open an account and thereafter on an
annual basis. Each time a firm receives a payment for order flow, it must
disclose that information on the trade confirmation. If you see an indication
on one of your trades that your broker received this type of payment, you
have the right to request notification in writing about the source and type
of payment related to that transaction. These payments may encourage
unethical brokers to steer orders away from the best prices and toward the
market maker offering such payments.

Data feed
The type of data to which you want to have access is crucial. Most brokers
provide basic stock quotes, usually in real time, and some may even offer
market data providing a much deeper look at the market that includes not
only current sales information but also previous sales information. If you
want access to a higher level of data, you need to be certain that you open
your brokerage account with a firm that provides the level of data that you
need, or you may buy it from a third party. Again, pricing for differing data
feeds can vary among brokerage firms. Firms that offer you ways of getting
this data feed through your home computer, as opposed to accessing it from
their servers, charge more, but remember that you’ll receive the information
quicker. The faster your Internet connection, the more quickly and reliably
you will receive this information. We cover data feeds in greater detail in
Chapter 4.

Charts
Data fed into your home computer is raw stock market data. How this
information is formatted on your computer and the charts you’re able to
build from it are dependent on the software that’s provided by your broker.
Charting software can be critical to your ability to make trading decisions.
Your broker may charge you to use the software, but will usually discount
or waive the fee based on the size of your portfolio or your volume of trading
activity. There are also many free charting alternatives available online,
including StockCharts.com, which we used to produce the charts for this
book. We talk about charting capabilities in Chapter 4.

39

40

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

ECN access
If direct access to stock exchanges and market makers is important to you,
then you need to find a broker that provides ECN access. You don’t have to
open an account through a direct-access broker; some discount brokers do
provide ECN access. Be sure to check out the section on “Choosing the Right
Broker for You,” later in this chapter.

Understanding the Types
of Brokerage Accounts
You can open your brokerage accounts in a couple different ways — as a
cash account or a margin account. If you open a margin account, you also
must open a cash account. You also may open separate accounts for
retirement savings. Because retirement accounts have more restrictions,
your trading alternatives are more limited in those accounts, but that isn’t
necessarily a bad thing. You shouldn’t be risking your retirement funds on
speculative trading anyway.

Cash accounts
The traditional brokerage account is a cash account, which also is known
as a Type 1 account. With a cash account, you must deposit the full cost of
any purchases by the settlement date of the transaction. At many brokerage
houses prior to 2002, you were permitted to place an order to buy stock even
if the cash was not yet in your account. As long as the money was deposited
within three days of the completion of the transaction, you could make the
purchase. Today, however, few brokers give you that kind of flexibility. Most
brokers require funds to buy stocks to be in your cash account before you
can place an order. The amount of cash you need to have on deposit varies
by broker; some let you open an account for as little as $100 or $1,000, but
others require as much as $10,000 or more to open a new cash account.

Margin accounts
You don’t have to have as much cash on hand to buy stock when you open
a margin account, which also is known as a Type 2 account. This type of
account enables you to borrow certain amounts of money using cash or
securities already in the account as collateral. Because using a margin
account essentially is buying stocks, bonds, or commodities on credit, each
respective brokerage firm has its own screening procedure to determine
whether you qualify for the loan and can buy on margin.

Chapter 3: Going for Broke(r): Discovering Your Brokerage Options
The Federal Reserve requires a $2,000 minimum deposit to open a margin
account, and it currently limits the amount you can borrow on margin to 50
percent of the initial purchase price. Not all stocks can be bought on margin.
Some brokerage firms enforce even stricter margin rules, especially if you
choose to invest in volatile stocks. When buying stocks on margin, you
pay an interest rate on the margin loans, but most brokerage firms charge
relatively low rates to encourage the transaction business. Be sure to check
out the “Margin requirements” section later in this chapter.
When opening a margin account, the firm also requires you to sign what’s
called a hypothecation agreement, which stipulates regulations for the
account and permits the broker to have a lien on your account whenever the
balance in your account falls below the minimum maintenance margin (more
about that in a moment). The agreement also enables your broker to loan
your shares to short sellers. That’s where shorted stock comes from. We talk
more about short selling and the mechanics of margin trading in Chapter 14.
You’re taking a risk by purchasing shares of stock with borrowed money and
using shares you own as collateral. If your stock holdings fall in value below
the minimum maintenance margin requirement, your broker can force you to
sell stock you don’t want to sell and use other assets you may not want to use
to cover the outstanding loan. The risks and regulations for using a margin
account are described more fully in the section on margin requirements,
found later in this chapter.

Options
If you want to trade options, your broker will require you to sign a special
options agreement acknowledging that you understand the risks associated with
trading options or derivative instruments. This practice became common
after brokers were sued by some clients because they suffered huge losses
when trading options and claimed they were unaware of the risks. The
agreement protects the broker from being sued if you lose a lot of money,
so you need to know what you’re doing when dealing with derivatives (see
Chapter 18).

IRAs and other retirement accounts
IRAs and other accounts in which you’re saving for retirement — such as
401(k)s or 403(b)s — sometimes allow you to trade options, but margin
trading is not allowed at all. These limitations are for your protection to
avoid risking major losses in your long-term investments that never should
be put at such high levels of risk. The amount you can contribute each year
to all retirement accounts is limited by the Internal Revenue Code.

41

42

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
Although you may be able to find a brokerage firm that allows you to trade
using options — puts and calls, which are a type of option (see Chapter 18) —
you nevertheless risk penalties for certain trading activities that occur in
your retirement account whenever the IRS determines the account is being
used for trading purposes rather than long-term investing. Officially, the
Internal Revenue Code prohibits the “IRA or Keogh Plan account holder
from loaning money to the account. Likewise, the holder cannot guarantee
borrowing by the account or cover its losses.” That’s why margin accounts,
which entail a type of borrowing, are not allowed.
Because these accounts are either tax-free or tax-deferred, you can’t write
off any losses in them against any gains from investments held outside of
them — in other taxable accounts. In other words, you don’t have the same
tax-planning choices with IRAs or retirement accounts to offset gains and
losses. All money taken out of an IRA at retirement is taxed at your current
income tax rate. This differs from stocks held outside an IRA. For these
stocks, you can use stock losses to minimize the tax you might have to pay
on stock gains. If you hold the stock for longer than a year, you are taxed
based on the lower capital gains rate of 15 percent for most taxpayers (some
low-income taxpayers qualify for a rate as low as 5 percent) rather than your
higher current income tax rate, which can be as high as 35 percent for some
taxpayers.
Here are some additional trading limitations of retirement accounts:
✓ Margin is not allowed: Using funds within a retirement account as
collateral for trading on margin is not permitted. It’s against the law.
You won’t find a broker that will permit you to place retirement funds in
margin accounts.
✓ Short positions are prohibited: Speculative trading using short positions,
which is a common trading strategy for futures contracts and widely
used by experienced stock and bond traders, requires a margin account.
When someone shorts a stock, he or she borrows the stock and sells it
in the hope of buying it back later for less. Selling short requires the use
of margin, and is therefore not permitted in a retirement account. We
talk more about short selling in Chapter 14.
✓ Trading policies are more stringent: All brokers have more stringent
trading policies for retirement accounts. Before you open a retirement
account, check with your broker about their trading limitations to be
sure they match your intentions for the account.
✓ Options trading may not be permitted: If you’re an experienced trader,
you can find some brokerage firms that allow options trading in your
retirement account. Not all types of options, however, can be traded
in a retirement account. The ones that you most likely can trade are
covered calls, long call and put positions, or cash-secured puts. We talk
more about puts and calls in Chapter 18.

Chapter 3: Going for Broke(r): Discovering Your Brokerage Options

Choosing the Right Broker for You
Before beginning a search for the right broker, you must first decide what
type of trader you want to be and what services you need. If you want to be
a position trader, or one who trades infrequently, your best bet is either a
full-service or a discount broker. Making the choice between full-service and
discount brokers depends upon how independently you want to operate as
a trader. If you want advice on your stock investing plans, you need to seek
out a full-service broker, but we certainly don’t recommend this expensive
option. Before risking your money on trading, however, you need to be
comfortable enough with the language and mechanics of trading and how to
conduct your own research. If you don’t need the services of a direct-access
broker, your best bet is to select a discount broker.
