
83

23. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

A “quick-and-dirty” way to plot MACD can be used by traders whose software
doesn’t include this indicator. Some packages allow you to draw only two EMAs.
In that case, you can use crossovers between two EMAs, such as 12-day and 26-day
EMAs as a proxy for MACD and Signal lines.

MACD-Histogram
MACD-Histogram offers a deeper insight into the balance of power between bulls
and bears than the original MACD Lines. It shows not only whether bulls or bears
are in control but also whether they are growing stronger or weaker. It is one of the
best tools available to market technicians.
MACD-Histogram = MACD line − Signal line
MACD-Histogram measures the difference between the MACD line and the Signal line. It plots that difference as a histogram—a series of vertical bars. That distance may appear puny, but a computer rescales it to fill the screen (Figure 23.2).

E

A

G

C
B

D

F

H

FIGURE 23.2â•… DJIA daily, 26- and 13-day EMAs, 12-26-9 MACD Lines. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

MACD-Histogram
When MACD Lines cross over, MACD-Histogram, which is derived from them, crosses
above or below its zero line. You can see buy and sell signals of MACD lines, marked by
green and red arrows. These signals are often delayed, but MACD-Histogram gives its
own fine signals. We’ll return to them later in this chapter, but at this point let’s look at
just one.
Compare the Dow bottoms D and F. The second bottom was slightly lower (it turned
out to be a false downside breakout), but the corresponding bottom of MACD-Histogram
was more shallow than the first, warning that bears were weaker than before and an upside
reversal was likely to occur.

84

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

If the fast line is above the slow line, MACD-Histogram is positive and plotted
above the zero line. If the fast line is below the slow line, MACD-Histogram is negative and plotted below the zero line. When the two lines touch, MACD-Histogram
equals zero.
When the spread between the MACD and Signal lines increases, MACDHistogram becomes taller or deeper, depending on its direction. When the two lines
draw closer, MACD-Histogram becomes shorter.
The slope of MACD-Histogram is defined by the relationship between any two
neighboring bars. If the last bar is higher (like the height of letters m–M), the slope
of MACD-Histogram is up. If the last bar is lower (like the depth of letters P–p),
then the slope of MACD-Histogram is down.

Market Psychology
MACD-Histogram reveals the difference between long-term and short-term consensus of value.The fast MACD line reflects market consensus over a shorter period.The
slow Signal line reflects market consensus over a longer period. MACD-Histogram
tracks the difference between them.
The slope of MACD-Histogram identifies the dominant market group. A rising MACD-Histogram shows that bulls are becoming stronger. A falling MACDHistogram shows that bears are becoming stronger.
When the fast MACD line rallies ahead of the slow Signal line, MACD-Histogram
rises. It shows that bulls are becoming stronger than they have been—it is a good
time to trade from the long side. When the fast MACD line drops faster than the
slow line, MACD-Histogram falls. It shows that bears are becoming stronger—it’s a
good time to trade from the short side.
When the slope of MACD-Histogram moves in the same direction as prices, the
trend is safe. When the slope of MACD-Histogram moves in a direction opposite to
that of prices, the health of the trend is in question.
The slope of MACD-Histogram is more important than its position above or
below the centerline. It is best to trade in the direction of the slope of MACDHistogram because it shows whether bulls or bears dominate the market. The best
buy signals occur when MACD-Histogram is below its centerline but its slope turns
up, showing that bears have become exhausted. The best sell signals are given when
MACD-Histogram is above its centerline but its slope turns down, showing that
bulls have become exhausted.

Trading Rules
MACD-Histogram gives two types of trading signals. One is common, occurring at
every price bar. The other is rare but extremely strong. It may occur only a few times
a year on the daily chart of a stock. It’s even more rare on the weekly charts, but
more frequent on the intraday charts.
The common signal is given by the slope of MACD-Histogram. When the current
bar is higher than the preceding bar, the slope is up. It shows that bulls are in control
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

23. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

85

and it’s time to buy. When the current bar is lower than the preceding bar, the slope
is down. It shows that bears are in control and it’s time to be short. When prices go
one way but MACD-Histogram moves the other way, it shows that the dominant
crowd is losing its enthusiasm and the trend is weaker than it appears.
1. Buy when MACD-Histogram stops falling and ticks up. Place a protective stop
below the latest minor low.
2. Sell short when MACD-Histogram stops rising and ticks down. Place a protective stop above the latest minor high.
MACD-Histogram ticks up and down on the daily charts so often that it’s not
practical to buy and sell every time it turns. The changes of slope of MACDHistograms are much more meaningful on the weekly charts, which is why it is
included in the Triple Screen trading system (see Chapter 39). A combination of an
exponential moving average and MACD-Histogram helps create the Impulse system,
described in Chapter 40.

When to Expect a New Peak or Valley
A record peak for the past three months of daily MACD-Histogram shows that
bulls are very strong and prices are likely to rise even higher. A record new low for
MACD-Histogram for the past three months shows that bears are very strong and
lower prices are likely ahead.
When MACD-Histogram reaches a new high during a rally, the uptrend is healthy
and you can expect the next rally to retest or exceed its previous peak. If MACDHistogram falls to a new low during a downtrend, it shows that bears are strong and
prices are likely to retest or exceed their latest low.
MACD-Histogram works like headlights on a car—it gives you a glimpse of the
road ahead. Not all the way home, mind you, but enough to drive safely at a reasonable speed.

More on MACD-Histogram
MACD-Histogram works in all timeframes: weekly, daily, and intraday. Signals in
longer timeframes lead to greater price moves. For example, the signals of weekly
MACD-Histogram lead to greater price changes than the daily or intraday MACD.
This principle applies to all technical indicators.
When you use MACD Lines and MACD-Histogram on the weekly charts, you
don’t have to wait until Friday to find your signals. A trend can turn in the middle of
the week—the market does not watch the calendar. It makes sense to perform weekly
studies each day. I set my software to plot weekly charts in the traditional manner,
from Monday through Friday, but with a twist: the latest weekly bar reflects trading
for the current week, starting on Monday. After the market closes on Monday, my
latest ‘weekly bar’ is identical to Monday’s daily bar. The weekly bar on Tuesday
reflects two trading days, and so on. Because of this, on Monday I take the new weekly
bar at a heavy discount, but by Thursday I start trusting it a great deal more.

86

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

Divergences
Divergences are among the most powerful signals in technical analysis. In this subchapter, we’ll focus on MACD-Histogram, but this concept applies to most indicators.
Divergences between MACD-Histogram and prices are infrequent, but they give
some of the most powerful signals.They often mark major turning points.They don’t
occur at every important top or bottom, but when you see one, you know that a big
reversal is probably at hand.
Bullish divergences occur towards the ends of downtrends—they identify market

bottoms. A classical bullish divergence occurs when prices and the oscillator both
fall to a new low, rally, with the oscillator rising above its zero line, then both fall
again. This time, prices drop to a lower low, but an oscillator traces a higher bottom
than during its previous decline. Such bullish divergences often precede sharp rallies
(Figure 23.3).

B

C
A

FIGURE 23.3â•… DJIA weekly, 26- and 13-day EMAs, 12-26-9 MACD Lines and MACD-Histogram. (Chart by
TC2000 from the book Two Roads Diverged: Trading Divergences)

A Bullish Divergence
Here you see a divergence that signaled the 2007–2009 bear market bottom, giving a strong
buy signal right near the lows. In area A, the Dow appeared in a free fall, as Lehman
Brothers went bust and waves of selling hit the market. The record low A of MACD-H
indicated that bears were extremely strong and that the price bottom A was likely to be
retested or exceeded. In area B, MACD-H rallied above its centerline, “breaking the back
of the bear.” Notice that the brief rally reached the “value zone” between the two moving
averages. This is a fairly common target for bear market rallies. In area C, the Dow slid to a
new bear market low, but MACD-H traced a much more shallow low. Its uptick completed
a bullish divergence, giving a strong buy signal.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

23. MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE-DIVERGENCE

87

I’m showing you this weekly chart of DJIA and its MACD-Histogram as a perfect
example of a divergence. It deserves to be pinned to a wall near your trading desk.
You won’t always get such a perfect picture, but the closer you get to it, the more
reliable it’ll be.
Notice that the breaking of the centerline between two indicator bottoms
is an absolute must for a true divergence. MACD-Histogram has to cross above
that line before skidding to its second bottom. If there is no crossover, there is no
divergence.
Another key point: MACD-H gives a buy signal when it ticks up from the
second bottom. It does not have to cross above the centerline for the second time.
The buy signal occurs when MACD-H, still below zero, simply stops declining and
traces out a bar that is less negative than its preceding bar.
This divergence of MACD-Histogram in Figure 23.3 was reinforced when MACD
Lines traced a bullish pattern between the bottoms A and C, with the second bottom
more shallow than the first. Such patterns of MACD Lines are quite rare. They indicate that the coming uptrend is likely to be especially strong, even though we cannot
call them divergences because this indicator has no zero line. The rally that began in
2009 lasted almost a year before its first meaningful correction.
Also, we can’t call the pattern of lower indicator tops after the bottom C a divergence. The lower tops reflect a gradual weakening of the uptrend with the passage of
time. In order to count as a divergence, MACD-Histogram has to cross and recross
its zero line.
Bearish divergences occur in uptrends—they identify market tops. A classical

bearish divergence occurs when prices reach a new high and then pull back, with
an oscillator dropping below its zero line. Prices stabilize and rally to a higher high,
but an oscillator reaches a lower peak than it did on a previous rally. Such bearish
divergences usually lead to sharp breaks.
A bearish divergence shows that bulls are running out of steam, prices are rising
out of inertia, and bears are ready to take control. Valid divergences are clearly
visible—they seem to jump at you from the charts. If you need a ruler to tell whether there is a divergence, assume there is none (Figure 23.4).
The previous chart featured a striking bullish divergence at the 2009 stock market
bottom. Now, for a similarly striking illustration of a massive bearish divergence,
let’s roll back the clock and examine the 2007 bull market top.
Notice that the breaking of the centerline between the two indicator tops is
an absolute must for a true divergence. MACD-Histogram has to drop below its zero
line before rising to the second top.
Another key point: MACD-H gives a sell signal when it ticks down from
the second top. We don’t need to wait for it to cross below the centerline again.
The sell signal occurs when MACD-H, still above zero, simply stops rising and traces
out a bar shorter than the preceding bar.
The message of a bearish divergence in Figure 23.4 was reinforced by MACD
Lines, which traced a bearish pattern between the tops X and Z. The second top of

88

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

X
Z

Y

FIGURE 23.4â•… DJIA weekly, 26- and 13-day EMAs, 12-26-9 MACD Lines and MACD-Histogram. (Chart by
TC2000 from the book Two Roads Diverged: Trading Divergences)

A Bearish Divergence
In area X, the Dow rallied to a new bull market high and MACD-Histogram rallied with it,
rising above its previous peak and showing that bulls were extremely strong. This indicated
that the price peak X was likely to be retested or exceeded. Note that the top X of MACDH, despite its complex form, was not a divergence because the valley in its middle never
sank below zero.
In area Y, MACD-H fell below its centerline, “breaking the back of the bull.” Notice that
prices punched below the value zone between the two moving averages. This is a fairly
common target for bull market breaks. Notice also a kangaroo tail at the bottom Y. In area Z,
the Dow rallied to a new bull market high, but the rally of MACD-H was feeble, reflecting the
bulls’ weakness. Its downtick from peak Z completed a bearish divergence, giving a strong
sell signal and auguring in the nastiest bear market in a generation.

MACD Lines was more shallow than the first, confirming the bearish divergence
of MACD-H. Such patterns of MACD Lines tell us that the coming downtrend is
likely to be especially severe.
“Missing right shoulder” divergences in which the second peak fails to cross the
zero line are quite rare, but produce very strong trading signals. An experienced
trader can look for them, but they are definitely not for beginners. They are described and illustrated in the e-book Two Roads Diverged:Trading Divergences.
Kerry Lovvorn performed extensive research to find that the most tradable
divergences occur when the distance between the two peaks or the two bottoms
of MACD-H is between 20 and 40 bars—and the closer to 20, the better. In other
words, the two tops or two bottoms cannot be too far apart. 20 bars translate into
20 weeks on a weekly chart, 20 days on a daily chart, and so on. Kerry also found
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

24. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM

89

that the best signals come from divergences in which the second top or bottom is no
more than half the height or the depth of the first.
Triple Bullish or Bearish Divergences consist of three price bottoms and three
oscillator bottoms or three price tops and three oscillator tops. They are even stronger than regular divergences. In order for a triple divergence to occur, a regular
bullish or bearish divergence first has to abort. That’s another good reason to practice tight money management! If you lose only a little on a whipsaw, you will preserve both the money and psychological strength to re-enter a trade.The third top or
bottom has to be more shallow than the first but not necessarily the second.

The Hound of the Baskervilles
This signal occurs when a reliable chart or indicator pattern doesn’t lead to the
action you expected and prices move in the opposite direction. A divergence may
indicate that an uptrend is over, but if prices continue to rise, they give the Hound
of the Baskervilles signal.
This signal is named after the story by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in which Sherlock
Holmes was called to investigate a murder at a country estate. He found the essential
clue when he realized that the family dog didn’t bark while the murder was being
committed. That meant the dog knew the criminal and the murder was an inside job.
The signal was given by the lack of expected action—by the lack of barking!
When the market refuses to bark in response to a perfectly good signal, it gives
you the Hound of the Baskervilles signal. This shows that something is fundamentally
changing below the surface.Then it is time to get in gear with the new powerful trend.
I am not a fan of â•›“stop-and-reverse” orders, but make an exception for the Hound
of the Baskervilles. On those rare occasions when a bearish divergence aborts, I may
go long. In the rare instances when a bullish divergence aborts, I look to go short.

■■24. The Directional System
The Directional system is a trend-following method developed by J. Welles Wilder,
Jr., in the mid-1970s and modified by several analysts. It identifies trends and shows
when a trend is moving fast enough to make it worth following. It helps traders to
profit by taking chunks out of the middle of important trends.

How to Construct the Directional System
Directional Movement is defined as the portion of today’s range that is outside of the
previous day’s range. The Directional system checks whether today’s range extends
above or below the previous day’s range and averages that data over a period of time.
These complex calculations are best performed on a computer. The Directional
system is included in most programs for technical analysis.

90

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

DIRECTIONAL MOVEMENT
A

C

D
DM=0

B

+ DM

+ DM
DM=0
– DM
+ DM
– DM

FIGURE 24.1â•… Directional Movement.

Directional movement is the largest part of today’s range that is outside of yesterday’s range.
1. If today’s range extends above yesterday’s range, Directional Movement is positive
(+DM).
2. If today’s range extends below yesterday’s range, Directional Movement is negative
(−DM).
3. If today’s range is inside of yesterday’s range or extends above and below it by equal
amounts, there is no Directional Movement (DM = 0). If today’s range extends both
above and below yesterday’s range, DM is positive or negative, pending on which part
of the “outside range” is larger.
4. On a limit-up day, +DM equals the distance from today’s close to yesterday’s high. On
a limit-down day, −DM equals the distance from today’s close to yesterday’s low.

1. Identify “Directional Movement” (DM) by comparing today’s high-low range
with yesterday’s high-low range. Directional Movement is the largest part of
today’s range outside of yesterday’s range. There are four types of DM (Figure
24.1). DM is always a positive number (+DM and −DM refer simply to movement above or below yesterday’s range).
2. Identify the “True Range” (TR) of the market you analyze. TR is always a positive number, the largest of the following three:
a. The distance from today’s high to today’s low
b. The distance from today’s high to yesterday’s close
c. The distance from today’s low to yesterday’s close
3. Calculate daily Directional Indicators (+DI and −DI). They allow you to
compare different markets by expressing their directional movement as a percentage of each market’s true range. Each DI is a positive number: +DI equals
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

91

24. THE DIRECTIONAL SYSTEM

zero on a day with no directional movement up; −DI equals zero on a day with
no directional movement down.
DM
+ DI = +TR

DM
− DI = −TR

4. Calculate smoothed Directional Lines (+DI13 and −DI13). Smooth +DI and
−DI are created with moving averages. Most software packages allow you to
pick any period for smoothing, such as a 13-day moving average. You get two
indicator lines: smoothed Positive and Negative Directional lines, +DI13 and
−DI13. Both numbers are positive. They are usually plotted in different colors.
The relationship between Positive and Negative lines identifies
trends. When +DI13 is on top, it shows that the trend is up, and when −DI13 is
on top, it shows that the trend is down. The crossovers of +DI13 and −DI13 give
buy and sell signals.
5. Calculate the Average Directional Indicator (ADX). This unique component of the Directional system shows when a trend is worth following. ADX
measures the spread between Directional Lines +DI13 and −DI13. It is calculated
in two steps:
a. Calculate the daily Directional Indicator DX:

DX =

+ DI13 − − DI13
•
+ DI13 + − DI13 100

For example, if +DI13 = 34 and −DI13 = 18, then,
DX = 34 − 18 • 100 = 30.77, rounded off to 31
34 + 18

b. Calculate the Average Directional Indicator ADX by smoothing DX with a
moving average, such as a 13-day EMA.
During a persistent trend, the spread between two smoothed Directional lines
increases, and ADX rises. ADX declines when a trend reverses or when a market enters a trading range. It pays to use trend-following methods only when ADX is rising.

Crowd Behavior
The Directional system tracks changes in mass bullishness and bearishness by measuring the capacity of bulls and bears to move prices outside of the previous day’s
range. If today’s high is above yesterday’s high, it shows that the market crowd is
more bullish. If today’s low is below yesterday’s low, it shows that the market crowd
is more bearish.
The relative positions of Directional lines identify trends. When the Positive
Directional line is above the Negative Directional line, it shows that bullish traders
dominate the market. When the Negative Directional line rises above the Positive

92

COMPUTERIZED TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

Directional line, it shows that bearish traders are stronger. It pays to trade with the
upper Directional line.
The Average Directional Indicator (ADX) rises when the spread between Directional lines increases. This shows that market leaders, for example bulls in a rising
market, are becoming stronger, the losers weaker, and the trend is likely to continue.
ADX declines when the spread between Directional lines narrows down. This
shows that the dominant market group is losing its strength, while the underdogs
are gaining. It suggests that the market is in turmoil, and it’s better not to use trendfollowing methods.

A

B

C

FIGURE 24.2â•… ANV daily, 22-day EMA, Directional System (13). (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Directional System
Swings between strength and weakness are a typical market feature. Strong stock groups
grow weak while the weak ones become strong, and then they swap roles again. Gold and
silver stocks were the two weakest stock industry groups in 2013, but they began bottoming out in December. Allied Nevada Gold Corp. (ANV) was one of several stocks I began
buying at that time.
The low at point A was $3.07, at point B the stock dipped to $3.01 and recoiled, leaving behind a false downside breakout, and at point C it retested support by declining to
$3.08—and from there it was off to the races, with its EMA turning up. The Directional
system gave its buy signal during the bar marked with a vertical green arrow: the green
bullish Directional line was above the red bearish line, while the ADX penetrated above
the red line.
You may find a similar shorting signal in the lettered area, but a discretionary trader
doesn’t trade every signal he sees: shorting a stock near $3 that has already declined from
$45 would mean chasing a very old trend. Near the right edge you see a pullback to value,
offering a good opportunity to add to the long position.
