
In the Womb

101

Exchange building. It was furnished with metal desks and chairs. The
most basic amenities, such as a coffee machine or TV, were missing.
There was a bookcase with trading books that hardly anyone ever read.
Eventually a Ping-Pong table was brought in.
The Turtle seating arrangements were reminiscent of grade school.
They were seated two by two, with six-foot-tall dividers between the
cubicles. The informal, no-frills environment was typical of the way
Dennis ran his business and his life. Mr. Anti-Establishment was passing his attitude down to his students.
This attitude left others in the building wondering what the Turtle
ofﬁce was up to. After all, they had all kinds of downtime trading as
trend traders. They would go days without trading. On top of that, there
was no dress code. They used to show up to work in the summer in cutoffs and T-shirts.
A Harvard MBA worked side-by-side with a recent high school graduate. A Jehovah’s Witness played Ping-Pong with a blackjack player
from Eastern Europe. Jewish and Christian students were mixed into
one diverse ofﬁce.
Consider Anthony Bruck, a wiry and fashionable Chicago socialite
and artist. He reminded some of Andy Warhol. He’d come to work
dressed in skin-tight black clothes. Bruck, like Jim Kenney, was a friend
of Dennis before the experiment started.
Erle Keefer loved the wild diversity of what was almost a mini United
Nations: “You had people who didn’t have a college degree, then people who had doctorates. Anthony Bruck had a doctorate in linguistics.
Actually, I think that probably helped him to be a good trader because
you had to think about it analytically and conceptually.”
Mike Carr was a terriﬁc demonstration of Dennis’s eclectic hiring
policy. He couldn’t spell “future” (as in trading futures), so to speak, in
the beginning. Carr, like other newbie Turtles, had to be shown a chart
and how to read it. He was living proof that you did not need a Harvard
MBA to excel.
Even more unusual was the inclusion of Lucy Wyatt. For years,
people who were aware of the Turtle story have assumed that there
was only one female Turtle, Liz Cheval. But it turns out that there
were two.
Wyatt was a friend of William Eckhardt’s. Jim DiMaria noted:

102

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

“While the rest of us were like Turtles and that’s what we were and
that’s what we did, she would kind of come and go. She did actually
have a desk . . . in the room. I guess maybe that’s the Turtle barometer . . . you have a desk in that room.”
Off the record, several Turtles who’d been hired through the screening process commented that having Dennis employees and friends in
the room trading as Turtles caused strife. One said, “The regular Turtles, so to speak, wondered how in the hell were they ever picked
for this program. The ones not picked via a screening process just didn’t
have the mental horsepower for it.” All one Turtle could remember
about Wyatt was that she was always doing her nails.
Mike Cavallo said that Wyatt had been Eckhardt’s girlfriend. He
noted, “She was in the room with us. So of the people, if you were going to say who was a Turtle and who wasn’t, she would have been considered to be the least likely to be called a Turtle.”
Did Wyatt trade? Apparently yes. Many people who hear the Turtle
story make excuses for why they could never ﬁt in. Wyatt made it clear
that anyone could have ﬁt in with the Turtles.
Wildly differing political views did not keep Turtles from ﬁtting in,
either. Jerry Parker and Richard Dennis, for example, were political
opposites. Mike Shannon painted Parker in extreme terms: “[He was]
about as right-wing conservative as you can get and we had people in
there who were more liberal than Rich by a long shot.” Shannon got a
kick out of the political diversity crammed into the one-room ofﬁce.
He said, “Jerry was far right and at the time I was more far left. We
would really lock horns once in a while on certain political and social
issues. He is so far right. It’s just unbelievable. I just never really took
him seriously in that regard.” However, Shannon did take Parker seriously as a trader, saying, “He’s very good. But the funny thing is with all
of that, when it came to the actual trading and discussing the systems
and methodologies, we were all on the same page. No matter what the
political background or social background, we all tried to cooperate as
much as possible.”
These political differences were no small matter. Jeff Gordon
learned this ﬁrsthand at a dinner before the 1984 presidential election.
Everyone knew Mondale was Dennis’s guy. Dennis started going
around the table asking everyone who they were voting for. One by

In the Womb

103

one, they all said, “Mondale.” They were all his guests, and Dennis
was one of the richest guys around. However, when it was Gordon’s
turn he said, “Gary Hart.” Gordon knew he had just upset the trading
king of Chicago.
However, far more important than any political differences were the
commonalities. Mike Cavallo saw all the Turtles as extremely bright,
but viewed the group as an interesting mix of competitive and easygoing people. He believed that the great majority of the Turtles could
have a day ﬁlled with total disasters yet still be pleasant.3
In hindsight, it’s hard to know for sure if the Turtles were like what
Cavallo described or if they ultimately became like that as a result of
their unique situation. No one was going to make waves when a rich
guy was giving out millions to a group to trade with an incentive plan
to make their own millions. That kind of opportunity kept mouths
closed.
The Turtles, however, didn’t immediately realize that they had been
given the “golden goose” for making millions. Since they had to hit
the ground running, they did not have time to test the rules Dennis had
given them. They had to trust Dennis and Eckhardt implicitly.
Erle Keefer, hired in the second Turtle class, was in the minority
with his desire for a “proof of concept.” Like his mentor, Keefer remained skeptical: “You said I learned about the golden goose, but I
didn’t have a computer program, hadn’t seen printouts, hadn’t seen
proof of concept. You know what I mean?”
As time went on, some Turtles did test the rules Dennis gave them.
This effort changed the direction of the Turtle program. Still, initially,
the Turtles executed their trades based on the rules they had been
taught. They were making big money doing so. In fact, all were now
making more money than they ever had in their lives. At that moment,
everyone associated with C&D Commodities was certain that they had
proven nurture trumps nature—even if no one outside of the ﬁrm knew
this yet.
A Boring Trading Strategy
The Turtles experienced what the term “free time” really meant. There
simply was no trading if a market didn’t move. Not trading when there

104

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

was no market movement was, in fact, one of the most important rules
of all. No trending market, no proﬁt. No market moves, no calling
Robert Moss to place trades.
These long periods of doing nothing would be considered useless by
today’s hyperactive crowd, in love with checking stock quotes every
minute. However, the Turtles would have had no need for hot tips from
the likes of Jim Cramer of Mad Money or CNBC’s David Faber’s latest
“breaking” news story.
Today, people gobble up dozens of trading infomercials and nightly
advice from everyone under the sun on what to buy and sell. All of this
was useless to the Turtles. Today’s get-rich-quick crowds have created a
whole culture of traders afraid of missing something. They obsess about
analysis about what the markets have done or are going to do—even if
it has no direct connection to their trading decisions. The Turtles, on
the other hand, were perfectly content to do nothing when the rules
said to do nothing.
The Turtles would come in every day already armed with their war
plans so that they didn’t make bad decisions in the heat of the battle.
Stare at the screen and it’s going to say, “Do something, trade me.” All
top traders today work like hell to develop a trading philosophy. They
convert that philosophy to rules. After that, they stand back and see if
their rules act as expected. If you build a system that gives you an
entry and exit, tells you how much to bet along the way and adjusts to
your current capital and current market volatility at all times, no more
analysis is needed.
The Turtles did not ﬁght this boring state of affairs. However, everyone handled downtime differently. Jerry Parker, for example, played
electronic baseball until he had ﬁgured out all the tricks. Does that
mean Parker was gooﬁng off and not trading properly? No. Far from it.
Parker was always prepared. Self-discipline meant doing nothing until
the time came to do something. Parker knew what role they played in
Dennis’s life when he said that Dennis ran the training “because he
wanted to have a certain chunk of money traded using systematic rules”
while he went on and tried out new techniques.4
But for now, their trading was all about downtime. It was for the
Turtles a deliberate process of following about thirty markets, wait-

In the Womb

105

ing to do something. They didn’t trade foreign markets at the time;
many of those were yet to be invented. Their basket of markets was
not very active.
The Turtle think tank did have occasional undercurrents and personal biases, particularly when it came to Liz Cheval. This was Chicago trading in the early 1980s, and some Turtles thought sexism was
an issue. The fact that some Turtles may not have taken Cheval seriously was not easy to deal with. Michael Shannon said, “Between guys
hitting on her and guys shunning her and stuff, it kind of made her
somewhat ambivalent to the whole Turtle process.”
Cheval appreciated the fact that she was getting a great education in
the program, but she may have had some residual animosity toward
other Turtles. Shannon added support: “A lot of people just underestimated her. You have to remember this was the ’80s. How many women
commodity traders did you know at the time?” Even though they were
the Turtles, it clearly did not mean they were all behaving with the
decorum of choirboys.
Jiri Svoboda used his inordinate amount of downtime for other
ventures beyond trading. He was always trying to ﬁgure out ways to beat
the house. This, however, was not gambling in the way most people
think of it. His view was all about understanding the odds and making
money.
Svoboda had no problem leaving the ofﬁce for two or three months
at a time. Other Turtles made sure his trades got placed properly once
Svoboda had worked out all of his if/then contingencies. In turn, he
then spent much of his time in Las Vegas developing systems that could
read cards being dealt at blackjack tables.
This behavior was ﬁne within the parameters of the experiment, because Dennis himself had created the atmosphere of “get the job done
and I don’t care where you are physically.” By giving Turtles his rules,
his money, his brokers, and his ATRs (the computed daily volatility for
each market, or what they called “N”), Dennis had taken away much
of the day-to-day routine the Turtles would have been experiencing
had they been trading entirely on their own.
The trading day unfolded with the Turtles tracking their group of
markets. If one or more of those markets generated an entry or exit

106

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

signal, they picked up the phone, called to the trading ﬂoor, and made
the trade. Then they would wait for the market to move one way or the
other before picking up the phone and calling the ﬂoor again.
The Turtles were on their own Survivor island. They marked all of
their charts and made all their calculations on loose-leaf paper. If they
wanted a Wall Street Journal, they had to buy it. Dennis of course would
have paid, but he was a technical trader, not a fundamental guy. There
was no reason to study the Journal every day.
Think about how many people in 2007 read the Wall Street Journal
daily from start to ﬁnish searching for fundamental insights. Consider
how many people scan annual reports or crop reports online. Not the
Turtles.
Everything they did was basic. The Turtles would actually write
down their orders for the next day and make a carbon copy. They would
leave the carbon copy behind, in case they couldn’t make it in the next
day. That way their orders would still be executed properly. Jim DiMaria laughed, “People don’t even know what carbon paper is anymore.”
Beyond the day-to-day ofﬁce idiosyncrasies, the physical locations of
the Turtles would soon change dramatically. For that ﬁrst year they
were all in the same ofﬁce, but after that some left. Mike Cavallo was
in the ofﬁce for one year before he moved home to Boston to continue
working for Dennis long distance. Russell Sands was gone after the ﬁrst
year, too—he left the program completely.
Their ofﬁce environment was slowly changing as time went by. Jim
DiMaria said, “At some point, half the people, like Jerry Parker, moved
back to Virginia (his home). So those of us Chicago people who wanted
to stay, we moved to a smaller ofﬁce. But the dynamic was gone at that
point.”
Early on, when everyone was together in Chicago, there were bonding moments as they labored in the trenches with little outside guidance. They were not expert traders out of the gate—far from it. To
begin with, almost all the Turtles were in their twenties or late teens. It
wasn’t long before the ﬁrst-year class was down 50 percent each on average six months into the program. If you think some of them were
panicking, you’re right.
Still, out of those early volatile performance swings came personal

In the Womb

107

anecdotes that put their daily grind into perspective. September 1985,
for example, was a difﬁcult learning moment. The “Group of Seven”
ﬁnance ministers made a concerted effort to weaken the U.S. dollar.
Over the weekend they changed their policy on the dollar. All of the
currencies quickly gapped a couple of hundred points higher. Some of
the Turtles were short.
Jeff Gordon, who had exited his positions, remembered that Tom
Shanks was still short. He said, “You have to imagine, here we are,
managing millions of dollars, we come in [Monday], we have these
positions and the market is so much against you. We have large positions, we’ve just lost a horrendous amount of money, through no fault
of our own.” Gordon was pointing out that Shanks was following
Dennis’s rules and that by following those rules exactly, he had incurred
signiﬁcant losses.
Even though the Turtles were given precise rules. Dennis’s weakness for discretionary decisions rubbed off on his students. In theory
they all had the same rules for selecting markets to trade, when to enter
and exit, and how much to buy and sell. However, there were ongoing
incidents of exceptions to the rules.
One of those exceptions involved a cocoa trade. Erle Keefer vividly
recalled it: “Cocoa is going out the roof. We generated the whole move
because we were allowed to add on. We had the whole market. The
guys on the ﬂoor knew it was Rich’s traders, but they just kept the market going. We push it up another ten points and they add on. We are
shoving that through the roof and when our buying dried up, the market collapsed. We all got stung hard because honestly we were loaded.
Phil Lu was the only one who didn’t have any cocoa positions.”
During the Turtle program, Dennis had a policy that one day a year
all Turtles would individually go to lunch with him. They got to trade
with Dennis for the day, so to speak. When Phil Lu came back from his
day with Dennis, he thought Dennis was unhappy with him. Dennis
wanted to know what caused Lu not to take the cocoa trade. Lu’s decision to not take the trade clearly was against how they had been
trained.
Lu had a reason. Each day the Turtles had to write down their contingencies for the day. Lu, who never really had the intense trader drive,
simply had two pieces of paper listing his if/then contingencies, his buy

108

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

and sell points, for each market each day, and his second sheet listed
cocoa. It turns out that Lu had a rule that if he had two pages and if a
trade wasn’t on page one, he wouldn’t trade it. Cocoa was on page two
for him.
Dennis said, “Why didn’t you trade cocoa? What told you?” Lu said,
“Oh, I only trade stuff that is on my ﬁrst page and cocoa wasn’t on my
ﬁrst page.” Lu thought he saw Dennis’s face fall. After all, Dennis, ever
the curious skeptic, had hoped he was about to learn something new
from one of his students.
Lu’s trading was a great example of the imprecision within the Turtle
world that could and did lead to different levels of performance. It was
the type of incident that showed even though the Turtles were doing
exceedingly well trading, there were reasons for differing performance
numbers.
Dennis’s hiring process loaded the experiment up with real characters. Perhaps the most colorful background of any Turtle was that of
Mike Shannon.
At one point I asked Shannon if there was anything else to know
about the whole Turtle process. He said bluntly and out of left ﬁeld,
“You know that I was a criminal, right?” Before explaining himself, he
said his story deserved a disclaimer. First, his transgressions were twentyﬁve years ago, and second, he is very anti-drug today. He then explained,
“Probably about two or three years before I joined Richard Dennis, I
was a drug dealer. I used to control about maybe 80 percent of the drug
trafﬁc within the Rush Street nightclub scene in Chicago.”
Other Turtles conﬁrmed his account, but this unusual story kept
unfolding long into the Turtle program. After he had been working for
Dennis for ﬁfteen months or so as a Turtle, Shannon was called to testify in a federal drug case for the government. Dennis found out and
called him into the ofﬁce. Shannon thought he was going to be let go
when Dennis reached into his briefcase and pulled out a transcript of
the trial. Dennis was stern: “Now look, I am not going to ﬁre you if you
tell me the truth. Just tell me the truth, what’s going on?” Shannon
gave up the whole story about his drug-dealing past and his current side
gig working for the FBI. Dennis was shaking his head. “Are you done
with them?” Shannon had no clue whether they were done with him.

In the Womb

109

Shannon was convinced that Dennis was the reason his problems
went away. He said, “I was well into the Turtle program and I was a
little proﬁtable as well. I think if I was a marginal trader he might have
cut me loose.” Shannon said that Dennis’s political connections ended
his nightmare, adding, “So, I have no criminal record.”
Another Turtle said about Dennis’s handling of Shannon, “Rich
grew up around a lot of pretty tough guys, being in the trading business
and everything else. Rich knew that there was always another story. By
his nature Rich is an amazingly forgiving person.”
Throughout the Turtle blowouts, quirky trading decisions, and a federal narcotics investigation, Dennis treated his people right. On one
occasion he ﬂew the entire C&D entourage to Las Vegas to see the
rock band Blood, Sweat and Tears (he was a 1970s music aﬁcionado,
after all). Even though he might have led an outwardly frugal life, Dennis was generous to everyone he came in contact with.
The Group Dynamic
The Turtles were exposed to ideas with tremendous power, but those
ideas did not come without a price. Human nature was always at play.
It was one thing to practice applying Dennis and Eckhardt’s rules on a
blackboard, but learning how the rules performed in live action was
critical for conﬁdence.
In this sense, the Turtles’ training had unmistakable parallels with
the U.S. Army Rangers’ training regime. The Rangers work under the
assumption that extraordinary performance can’t come from rehearsing under ordinary conditions. Elite troops can be forged only from
extraordinary challenges that force them to draw upon emotional and
physical reserves they never knew they possessed. Trading for Dennis
was the same. The Turtles had been taught how to handle their worstcase trading scenarios and to feel conﬁdent in any trading situation but
it wasn’t easy.5
Gaining conﬁdence, whether Turtle or Ranger, involved a setting.
The Turtles were in an empty ofﬁce learning their way; the Rangers
were in physical training pit learning theirs. Both groups always had
the eerie feeling that someone was watching over them. In a way the

110

TheCompleteTurtleTrader

Turtles and Rangers were both trapped, though voluntarily. They had
signed over their lives to people they didn’t know with the expectation
that those people would subject them to pain.6
Of course, the Turtles did not endure the physical pain of Ranger
School, but they certainly endured psychological pain while they
gained conﬁdence in their ability to trade. Whether intentional or not,
the Turtle ofﬁce environment fostered a tribelike atmosphere.
And many Turtles saw their group, or tribe, dynamic as crucial while
they were in the womb trading Dennis’s millions. Erle Keefer felt the
psychological need: “The reason we all needed to stay together, especially in the beginning, was we literally made all our money in a normal year in about a three-week period. The rest of the year, most people
were down minus 30 percent. And then the markets all clicked in and
we had bullets to ﬁre because of Rich’s money management scheme.
You can go from minus 30 percent down to a plus 150 percent up in
three weeks with no trouble at all.”
Slaving away together as comrades-in-arms was important because
they were getting the crap kicked out of them on a day-to-day basis,
with lots of small losses and very little positive reinforcement. When
the big trend came it was great, but they still had to patiently wait for it
to happen.
Imagine sitting there day after day with a multimillion-dollar trading
account funded by a guy who is Chicago’s trading royalty. And imagine
that the account appears to be slowly dwindling away, little bit by little
bit, even though you are doing what you are supposed to do. There was
self-doubt. There was concern. The group dynamic helped the Turtles
alleviate stress and reassure each other that they were all doing the right
thing.
As time passed, though, the Turtles saw Dennis’s system making
huge amounts of money from big trends. They ﬁnally had the psychological assurance of “I know this works in my gut, and you can’t take
that away from me.”
However, even with the tribelike atmosphere, even with the Ranger
parallels, even with learning in their guts what it really meant to trade
like Dennis, as evidence accumulated, it showed that the group process
had ultimately turned out not to be signiﬁcant. That’s because the
“Turtle trading tribe” was ultimately undermined by an unexpected
