
Typical Parameters for Intermediate Trends 61

Chart 4-1 S&P Composite, 1982-1991, and an intermediate KST. (From www.pring.com.)

1
4604

0 S&P Composite Lee Lae

100 intermediate KST

100 +

Tiss i064 [rses fies [reer _— [isos [isea__fige0_ ree |

Chart 4-2 S&P Composite, 1991-2001, and an intermediate KST. (From www.pring.com.)

a ava

seeeiapeees ah tae

S&P Composite Vote
1605

Intermediate KST

: We \,
pt ;
400 4

sa Te S54 — RSE [1596 __ T1997 1986989 2000.

NR

Tar


62 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

covered by Chart 41, for instance, the first intermediate rally in the bull mar-
ket lasted well over a year from August 1982 to October 1983. Even if I had
taken the July 1983 top as a reference point, the rally would still have lasted
for almost a year. Moreover, the whole year of 1995 was consumed by one
complete intermediate advance.

Summary

* The typical primary trend can be divided into two one-half primary inter-
mediate cycles, each consisting of an upmove and a downmove. In a bull
market, each successive upwave should reach a new cyclical high, and in
a bear market, each successive downwave of the intermediate cycle should
teach a new low. Breaking the pattern of rising lows and falling peaks is
an important, but not unequivocal, warning of a reversal in the primary
trend. For more conclusive proof, technicians should derive a similar con-
clusion from a consensus of indicators.

* A secondary movement or reaction is that part of an intermediate cycle
that runs counter to the main trend, a downward reaction in a bull mar-
ket or a rally in a bear market. Secondary intermediate movements typi-
cally last from 4 weeks to 3 months and retrace between one-third and
two-thirds of the previous primary intermediate price movement.
Secondary price movements may also take the form of a line or horizon-
tal trading pattern.

© The character of intermediate cycles can be used to help identify primary
trend reversals.

* As an approximate rule, the stronger an intermediate rally, the less the
retracement is likely to be, and vice versa for primary bear markets.

i
|
:

Price Patterns

Basic Concepts a
The techniques discussed in this chapter and in Chapters 6 through are
concerned with analysis of any price trend that has been determined by
i i ‘ket.
interaction of buyers and sellers in a free mar’ a .
™ The concept of price patterns is demonstrated in Figs. plane wriahs
i i in whi ere are : Up,
ure 5-1 represents a typical price cycle in w h ree ee
i tially a horizontal or
id , and down. The sideways trend is essen o1 t
sitional one, which separates the two major market movements. Sometimes

ry

Figure 5-1 Normal reversal.

a

Figure 5-2 V-type reversal.

63


64 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

a highly emotional market can change without warning, as in Fig. 5-2, but
this rarely happens. Consider a fast-moving train, which takes a long time
to slow down and then go into reverse; the same is normally true of finan-
cial markets.

To the market technician, the transitional phase has great significance
because it marks the turning point pemesee a rising and a falling market. If

prices have been advancing, the enthusiasm of the buyers has outweighed /°9*:

the imism of sellers up to this point, and prices have risen accordingly.
During the transition phase, the balance becomes more or less even until
finally, for one reason or another, itis tipped in a new direction as the rel-
ative weight of selling pushes the trend (of prices) down. At the termina-
tion of a bear market, the reverse proc occurs.

These transition phases are almost invariably signaled by clearly definable
price patterns or formations. The successful completion of such patterns or
formations alerts the technician to the fact that a reversal in trend has taken
place. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 5-3, which shows the price
action at the end ofa long rising trend. As soon as the price rises above line
B, it is in the transitional area, although this is apparent only some time
after the picture has developed.

Once into the area, the price rises to line AA, which is technically termed
a resistance area. The word resistance is used because at this point the index
shows opposition to a further price rise. This term, along with support, is dis-
cussed at length in Chapter 15. When the demand/supply relationship
comes into balance at AA, the market quickly turns in favor of the sellers
because prices react. This temporary reversal may occur because buyers
refuse to pay up for a security, or because the higher price attracts more sell-
ers, or for both of these two reasons. The important fact is that the rela-
tionship between the two groups is temporarily reversed at this point.

eer

CA es CU ee

So Ven in NENG Go fet As, t@
eS rp pleat shee Sati ght \w~ EY

8

ys sis

Figure 5-3 Trading range rectangle.

i
{
i
H
}

Price Patterns

> 65
fe

Following the unsuccessful sien on AA, prices turn down until line BB,
known as a support level, is reached. Just as the price level at AA reversed the
balance in favor of the sellers, so the support level BB alters the balance
again. This time, the trend moves in an upward direction because at BB
prices become relatively attractive for buyers who missed the boat on the
way up, while sellers who feel that the price will again reach AA hold off.
For a while, there is a §Gandoff between buyers and sellers within the con-
fines of the area bounded by lines AA and BB. Finally, the price falls below
BB, and a major new (downward) trend is signaled. :

To help explain this concept, the contest between buyers and sellers is
like a battle fought by two armies engaged in trénch warfare. In Fig. 5-4(a),
armies A and Bare facing off. Line AA represents army A’s defense, and BB
is army B's line of defense. The arrows indicate the forays between the two
lines, as both armies fight their way to the opposing trench, but are unable
to penetrate the line of defense. In Fig. 5-4(4), army B finally pushes
through A’s trench. Army A is then forced to retreat and make a stand at

the second line of defense (line A,A,). In the stock market, line AA repre-

sents selling resistance, which, once overcome, signifies a change in the bal-
ance between buyers and sellers in favor of the buyers, so that prices will
advance quickly until new resistance is met. The second line of defense, line
A,A, represents resistance to a further advance.

On the other hand, army B might quite easily break through A,A, but
the further it advances without time to consolidate its gains, the more likely
it is to become overextended and the greater is the probability of its suf-
fering a serious setback. At some point, therefore, it makes more sense for
this successful force to wait and consolidate its gains. 5 ;

If prices in financial markets extend too far without time to digest their
gains, they too are more likely to face a sharp and seemingly unexpected
reversal. eo ev ba

(a) ()
Figures 5-4 Trench warfare.

A
8

239 2)

Snare Femail amen:

ae

j

aa

cadens


66 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Introducing the Rectangle

The transitional or horizontal phase separating rising and falling price
trends discussed previously is a pattern known as a rectangle. This formation
corresponds to the line formation developed from the Dow theory. The rec-
tangle in Fig. 5-3, marking the turning point between the bull and bear
phases, is termed a reversal pattern. Reversal patterns at market tops are
known as distribution areas or patterns (where the security is distributed from
strong informed participants to weak uninformed ones), and those at mar-
ket bottoms are called accumulation patterns (where the security passes from
weak uninformed participants to strong informed ones) [see Fig. 5-5(a)].
If the rectangle were completed with a victory for the buyers as the price
pushed through line AA [see Fig. 5-5(b)], no reversal of the rising trend
would occur. The breakout above AA would therefore have reaffirmed the
underlying trend. In this case, the corrective phase associated with the for-
mation of the rectangle would temporarily interrupt the bull market and
become a consolidation pattern. Such formations are also referred to as con-
solidation or continuation patterns.

During the period of formation, there is no way of knowing in advance
which way the price will ultimately break; therefore, it should always be

assumed that the prevailing trend is in existence until it is proved to have
been reversed.

Size and Depth

The principles of price pattern construction and interpretation can be
applied to any time frame, from 1-minute bars all the way through to
monthly or even annual charts. However, the significance of a price for-
mation or pattern is a direct function of its size and depth.

A A
(e) (b)

Figures 5-5 (a) Reversal rectangle. (b) Consolidation rectangle.

Price Patterns 67

Thus, a pattern that shows up on a monthly chart is likely to be far more
significant than one on an intraday chart, and so forth. It is just as impor-
tant to build a strong base from which prices can rise as it is to build a large,
strong, deep foundation upon which to construct a skyscraper. \

In the case of financial market Pusgy tos foundation is an accumulation

is;

pattern that represents an area of ikdedisivé combat between buyers and sell-

ers. The term accumulation is used because market bottoms always occur
when the news is bad. Such an environment stimulates sales by uninformed
investors who were not expecting developments to improve. During an accu-
mulation phase, more sophisticated investors and professionals would be
positioning or accumulating the asset concerned in anticipation ; of
improved conditions 6 to 9 months ahead. During this period, it is moving
from weak, uninformed traders or investors to strong and knowledgeable
hands. The longer the period of accumulation, the greater the amount of
a security that moves from weak into strong hands and the larger is the base
from which prices can rise. r

At market tops, the process is reversed, as those who were accumulating
at or near the bottom sell to less sophisticated market participants, who
become more and more attracted as prices rise and the underlying funda-
mental conditions improve. Where a substantial amount of distribution
develops, this is usually followed by a protracted period of price srogion or
base building. + ‘

Figure 5-6 Long rectangle.



68 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

The time taken to complete a formation is important because of the
amount of an asset changing hands, and also because a movement in price
beyond the boundaries of a pattern means that the balance between bu
ers and sellers has altered. When the price action has been in a stalemate”
for a long time and investors have become used to buying at one price and
selling at the other, a move beyond either limit Tepresents a fundamental
change, which has great psychological significance.

The depth of a formation also determines its significance. Consider the
trench war Srialdg once more. If the &pposing trenches are,very close
together, say, within 100 yards, this means that the victorious Maul, when
it comes, will be less significant than if they are separated by several miles;
in such a case, the battles will have been much more intense and the vic-
tory that much greater. The same is true in the financial markets. The
breeching of a wide trading range has far greater psychological significance
than that of a narrow one.

Measuring Implications

Most of the results obtained with technical analysis procedures do not indi-
cate the eventual duration of a trend. Price patterns are the exception, since
their construction offers some limited forecasting possibilities. Before we
examine this aspect, it is first necessary to draw the distinction between arith-
metic and logarithmic or ratio scaling, because the choice determines the
significance of the measuring implications.

Arithmetic Scale

Arithmetic charts consist of an arithmetic scale on the vertical or yaxis, with
time shown on the horizontal or «x axis, as illustrated in Fig. 5-7. All units of
measure are plotted using the same vertical distance, so that the difference
in space between 2 and 4 is the same as that between 20 and 22. Arithmetic
scaling is not a good choice for long-term price movements, since a rise from
2 to 4 represents a doubling of the price, whereas a rise from 20 to 22 rep-
resents only a 10 percent increase.

In the U.S. stock market, a price move in excess of 50 points for the Dow
is normal. A 50 point move in 1932, though, when the average was traded
well below 100, would have represented a huge move. For this reason, long-
term movements should be plotted on a ratio or logarithmic scale. The
choice of scale does not materially affect daily charts, in which price move-
ments are relatively small in a proportionate sense. For periods over 1 year,
in which fluctuations are much larger, I always prefer to use a ratio scale.

Ys

i
i
5
H
}
i
i
i
i

Price Patterns 69

J FMA Ma
Tone

Figure 5-7 Arithmetic scaling (same vertical distance = same point move).

Chart 5-1 compares an arithmetic scale with a ratio scale for the Standard
& Poor’s Composite. The distortions on the arithmetic scale are self-
evident.

Ratio Scale

Prices plotted on a ratio scale show identical distances for identical per-
centage moves. In Fig. 5-8, let’s say that the vertical distance between 1 and
2 (a 2:1 ratio) is #/2 in, Similarly, the 2:1 distance between 4 and 2 is also
represented on the chart as '/s in. A specific vertical distance on the chart
indicates the same percentage change in the price being measured, what-
ever the level. For example, if the scale in Fig. 5-8 was extended, !/zin. would
always represent a doubling, from 1 to 2, 16 to 32, 50 to 100, and so on, just
as 1/2 in. would indicate a rise of 50 percent and 1 in. would show a qua-
drupling of prices. Almost all computer software gives the user the option
of choosing between arithmetic and logarithmic scales.

It is important to remember that market prices are a function of psy-
chological attitudes toward fundamental events. Since these attitudes have
a tendency to move proportionately, it makes sense to plot them on a scale
that reflects proportionate moves equally.

Figure 5-9 shows a rectangle that has formed and completed a (distribu-
tion) top. The measuring implication of this formation is the vertical dis-
tance between its outer boundaries, that is, the distance between lines AA
and BB projected downward from line BB. If AA represents 100 and BB 50,
then the downside objective will be 50 percent, using a ratio scale. When
Projected downward from line BB, 50 percent gives a measuring implica-
tion of 25. Although this measuring formula offers a rough guide, it is usu-
ally a minimum expectation, and prices often go much further than their



70 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 5-1 S&P Composite arithmetic ve. ratio scale. This chart contains the S&P lotted
on arithmetic and ratio scales. Note how the arithmetic scale totally obliterates any price flue-
tuations in the early part of the century and exaggerates the price movements in the last 20
years or so. The 1929-1932 period, the most severe on record, does not even appear as a

blip on this scale. This is not true of the lower panel, which features a logarithmic or ratio scale.
(From Intermarket Review.)

1600 |
1000-| S&P Composite (arithmetic scale)

1000 ~

S&P Composite (ratio scale)

1900 i910 [1920 [reso __—fis40 1980 [1960 [i970 [1880 isso

1

Figure 5-8 Ratio scaling (same vertical distance = same proportionate move).

implied objective. In a very high proportion of cases, the objective level
derived from the measuring formula becomes an area of support or resis-
tance when the price trend is temporarily halted. <3

; The importance of using logarithmic scales whenever possible is shown
in Fig. 5-10. In Fig. 5-10(a), the price has traced out and broken down from
a rectangle. Projecting the vertical distance between 200 and 100 downward
gives an objective of 0, clearly a very unlikely possibility. On the other hand,

Price Patterns a

Figure 5-9 Measuring implication from a rectangle.

Fig. 5-10(b) uses the same projection based on a logarithmic scale. In this
case, a more realistic objective of 50 is obtained.

If a rectangle appears as a bottom reversal pattern or as a consolidation
pattern, the measuring rules remain consistent with the example given for
the distribution formation. This is shown in Figs. 5-11(a)-(¢). ,

If the minimal objective proves to be the ultimate extension of the new
trend, a substantial amount of accumulation or distribution, whichever is
appropriate, will usually occur before prices can move in their original direc-
tion. Thus, ifa 2-year rectangle is completed and the downward price objec-
tive is reached, even though further price erosion does not take place, it is
still usually, though certainly not always, necessary for a base (accumulation)
to be formed of approximately the same size as the previous distribution (in
this case 2 years) before a valid uptrend can take place.’

In many cases, the price will move beyond the objective. In really strong
moves, it will move in multiples of it, where the various multiples or the
objective itself becomes an important support and resistance area.

Confirmation of a Valid Breakout

Price

So far, it has been assumed that any move, however small, out of the price
pattern constitutes a valid signal of a trend reversal (or resumption, if the
pattern is one of consolidation). Quite often, misleading moves known as
whipsaws occur, so it is helpful to establish certain criteria to minimize the

‘Note: It is very important to remember that price objectives represent the minimum ultimate
target and are not normally achieved in one move. Usually, a series of rallies and reactions in
an upside breakout is required, or reaction or retracements in a downside breakout, before
the objective is reached.



72

Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

@)

Price Patterns 73

possibility of misinterpretation. Conventional wisdom holds that you should
wait for a 3 percent penetration of the boundaries before concluding that
the breakout is valid. This filters out a substantial number of misleading
moves, even though the resulting signals are jess timely.

This approach was developed in the first part of the twentieth century
when holding periods for market participants were much longer. Today, with
the popularity of intraday charts, 3 percent could represent the complete
move and then some. I have no basic objection to the 3 percent rule for
longer-term price movements in which the fluctuations are much greater.
However, the best approach is a commonsense one based on experience and
judgment in each particular case. It would be very convenient to be able to
say that anything over a specific percentage amount represents a valid break-
out, but unfortunately a lot depends on the time frame being considered
and the volatility of the specific security.

For example, electric utilities are very stable in their price action com-
pared to mining stocks where the volatility is far greater. Applying the same
percentage breakout rule to both obviously doesn’t make sense. What con-
stitutes a decisive breakout, where the odds of a whipsaw are considerably
reduced is then very much a matter of personal judgment based on expe-
rience, trial, and error. This judgment should take into consideration such
factors as the type of trend being monitored, the volatility of the security,
volume, and momentum characteristics.

Another factor that can help early on in deciding if a breakout is valid
lies in the fact that a good breakout should hold for several periods. For
example, you may observe a decisive upside breakout from a rectangle on
a daily chart, but if it cannot hold for more than 1 day above the breakout
level, the signal is highly suspect. Often the technical position is worse after
such breakouts. This is because breakouts that cannot hold indicate exhaus-
tion, and exhaustion moves are often followed by strong price trends in the
opposite Dtecrion to, that indicated by.the (false).breakout. An example of
a false breakout is featured in Chart 5-2 for June 2001 Gold.

On entering any trade or investment based on a price pattern breakout,
itis important to decide ahead of time what type of price action would cause
you to conclude that the breakout was a whipsaw. An example might be a
break below a previous minor low, a decline below a predetermined level
from the breakout point. A stop should then be placed below such a pivotal
Point. In this way, you will have calculated the loss you are willing to under-
take and the point where the original premise for the trade; that is, the
breakout is no longer operative. Failure to make such a decision ahead of
time will mean that your decision to sell is more likely to be based on emo-
tion and knee-jerk reactions to news events than on a logical preset plan. A



74 Part I: Trend-Determining Techniques

Chart 5-2 Gold futures and an exhaustion breakout. This chart of June (2001) Gold shows
a nice decisive breakout from a reverse head-and-shoulders (H&S) pattern. Unfortunately, this
proved to be an exhaustion move since the breakout was unable to hold above the neckline.
In such situations, it is usually best to liquidate once it is realized that a false breakout has devel-
oped. There are three places to take action when the price slips decisively below the breakout
point, it falls below the line joining the head with the right shoulder, or the price slips below
the right shoulder itself. The violation of each of these benchmarks becomes progressively more
reliable as a signal, but it encounters a greater potential loss. (From Intermarket Review.)

possible point of no return for the false breakout in Chart 5-2 would be at
the point, where the dashed up trendline joining the lows was violated.

Volume

Volume usually goes with the trend; that is, volume advances with a rising
trend of prices and falls with a declining one. This is a normal relationship,
and anything that diverges from this characteristic should be considered a
warning sign that the prevailing price trend may be in the process of revers-
ing. Figure 5-12 shows a typical volume/price relationship.
