
c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:12

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

Char Count=

125

order based on a visual chart point or dollar amount. (Refer back to Figure 9.1.)

HEAD AND SHOULDERS PATTERN
The Head and Shoulders pattern is more complex in its structure than the
Double Top and Bottom patterns. There are more swings involved with this
pattern, and it is sometimes not identified until close to completion.
A combination of many of the patterns we have already covered in
previous chapters of this book—AB=CD, Gartley, Butterfly, Three Drives,
and other extension patterns—may be present in the formation of the
Head and Shoulders pattern. Schabacker indicated this pattern was one of
the seven cardinal patterns, which referred to common chart formations
that had forecasting value that were accumulation or distribution reversal
patterns.
The pattern is called Head and Shoulders because when viewing the
pattern on a price chart the structure appears to form two shoulders and a
head. See Figure 9.6 for an illustration of the Head and Shoulders pattern.

Figure 9.6 Head and Shoulders pattern—basic formation.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:12

126

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 9.7 Daily chart of IBM with a Head and Shoulders Top pattern with Fibonacci ratios applied.

Applying Fibonacci Ratios to the Head and
Shoulders Top Pattern
Let’s take a look at a Head and Shoulders Top pattern that has Fibonacci
ratios applied and has several other patterns as part of the structure. Figure 9.7 is a daily chart of IBM with a completed Head and Shoulders Top
pattern. In this example you can see that the left shoulder also contains a
Butterfly pattern and an AB=CD pattern. In the circled area you can see a
Double Top pattern. In this case we have several patterns coming into the
same price area as a potential top and reversal area.
The retracement in the left shoulder from point X to A to B came
to above the .786 level. This is important to note, because how the right
shoulder forms in relation to this will give information as to the validity of
this pattern and its potential strength or weakness, since the right shoulder is the reaction pattern coming after the high or head has been made.
This countertrend rally will usually stop at the .618 or .786 level. When the
right shoulder has a lower ratio than the left shoulder, it usually signifies
a much more bearish pattern. Time symmetry is also important and places
an added significance on the pattern if it is present.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

13:12

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

Char Count=

127

Trading the Head and Shoulders Top Pattern
There several ways to approach trading this pattern, the first being that the
trader is already short the market based on an extension pattern, such as
the Butterfly and AB=CD pattern that can be seen in Figure 9.7, or possibly from the Double Top pattern that formed. This pattern is very easy to
see after the full formation, but, as we indicated earlier, it is a little more
difficult to spot sooner, before at least the top or head is complete and the
first reaction down from there has taken place.
We will assume that if the trader is already positioned short in the market based on other patterns near the highs and has taken partial profits,
the trader can then begin to look for signs of a right shoulder forming by a
reaction rally back up, as outlined earlier. A stop-loss order could be kept
at breakeven or just at the previous highs of the head, because the pattern
would be void if the price then exceeded this level. As mentioned previously, the majority of traders watch for a break of the neckline to enter the
trade. Because of this, the trader positioned in this trade earlier would want
to monitor the price for a break of the neckline for potential further gains.
There is always the possibility of any pattern failing, so the trader could
also take a second profit as the neckline is being tested or broken and move
the stop to just above the last high. Figure 9.8 shows an example of placing
the stops and where the break of the neckline is. From that point, if prices
continue further, the trader can then use either a 1.272 extension from the
AD of the AB=CD pattern for further profits and trail a stop or a Fibonacci
retracement from a larger swing.
Another traditional way to measure a profit objective with this pattern
is to take the height of the pattern and project it down from the price level
of the broken neckline. Figure 9.9 shows this example.
This pattern can also be entered using the break of the neckline by
using a sell-stop order and letting the market pull you into the trade. A
stop-loss order can be placed using a visual chart point or dollar amount.
Failure Point The failure point in this pattern is just above the formation of the head. Refer back to Figure 9.6. At this point the trader would
look to go long by using a buy-stop order. The stop-loss order can be placed
using a visual chart point or dollar amount. Failure points and failed patterns will usually have a strong move in the opposite direction of the original pattern.

Head and Shoulders Bottom Pattern
Since we mentioned earlier that these patterns have been present in markets for centuries and have not changed, we will take this opportunity to

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

128

August 14, 2007

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 9.8 IBM daily chart example of Head and Shoulders Top pattern showing
stops moved as the price reaches the neckline level. The 1.272 extension of AD can
be used for a proﬁt objective.

show you an example of this repetition. Figure 9.10 is a Head and Shoulders Bottom pattern from 1928. It is an example from R.W. Schabacker’s
1930 book, Stock Market Theory and Practice.
The chart is of Westinghouse Electric from 1928 (i.e., prior to the crash
of 1929). In this figure, A, B, and C are used to label the left shoulder, head,
and right shoulder of the pattern (the Bottom pattern is an inverted Head
and Shoulders Top pattern). If we were to remove the labeling of this chart
and the year it is from, it would be indistinguishable from any price chart
today that forms the same pattern.
On the left-hand side of Figure 9.10 you can see an AB=CD pattern
that forms and is completed at the point labeled A, or the bottom of the left
shoulder. A small sell AB=CD then forms following the completion of the
left shoulder and makes a new low to complete the point of the head.
Once the price moves up from the point labeled B or the bottom of the
head, you can see long bars where the neckline is broken, and then a small
buy AB=CD before the price accelerates to the upside. The price does not
quite make it down to the .618 retracement of BC, the completion of the
head and the completion of the right shoulder, which, as we discussed earlier, would have been a sign of strength. Again, this is a sign of a shift of

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

13:12

Char Count=

129

Figure 9.9 IBM daily chart example of Head and Shoulders Top pattern. The pattern height can be measured and projected down from the break of the neckline and
used for a proﬁt objective.

momentum to the upside. The same trading techniques and risk management apply to this chart from 1928 as to any other chart in this book.
The caption at the bottom of the page states that it is an irregular Head
and Shoulders Bottom pattern. Schabacker says of this chart that no chart
picked at random from actual market history will ever show a perfect formation. He does not consider this pattern perfect because the head of the
pattern, B, does not go as low as it could have, and the right shoulder does
not retrace as deeply as it could have to form a perfect Head and Shoulders
pattern. We thought it both interesting and educational to show this particular example that illustrates these imperfections. It is not often that we get
perfect patterns. The longer a trader studies any pattern, the easier it is to
identify the acceptable imperfect patterns and distinguish them from ones
that are invalid.
Failure Point By now you probably know the failure point of this pattern. It is below B, the completion of the head. If the price were to reverse
and make new lows below that point, the pattern would be considered a
failed pattern. Once the momentum shifts up and starts making higher lows
and higher highs, an astute trader could even use the point below C, the
completion of the right shoulder, for a failure point.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

130

August 14, 2007

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 9.10 Head and Shoulders Bottom pattern from Stock Market Theory and
Practice.
Source: R.W. Schabacker, Stock Market Theory and Practice (B.C. Forbes, 1930).

BROADENING TOP AND BOTTOM PATTERNS
Schabacker credits A.W. Wetzel with first publicly identifying the Broadening Top and Bottom patterns. In his book Stock Market Theory and Practice, Schabacker refers to this pattern as one of the seven formations that
indicate preparation for a major movement. This pattern was seen in many
stocks in the third quarter of 1929 preceding the crash of October and the
bear market that followed.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

13:12

Char Count=

131

This pattern is rare, and Schabacker stated that because of this it was
less important as an indicator than the more common reversal patterns.
This does not in any way mean that it is not a powerful pattern when it
does form.
This pattern was marketed by J. Welles Wilder 50 or so years later as
the Reverse Point Wave system. It was sold at the time for about $2,500 to
almost 1,000 traders. It is also covered in H.M. Gartley’s 1935 book, Profits
in the Stock Market, where it is referred to as the T-6 Broadening Top.

Pattern Structure
The structure of this pattern consists of five reversal points. Each low is
successively lower and each high successively higher. Figure 9.11 shows a
Broadening Top formation in the Dow Jones Industrial Average preceding
the price highs of 2000 and the bear market that ensued.
The Broadening Top and Bottom patterns are really nothing more than
triangle and coil patterns, which are classic technical analysis patterns in
which the market comes to a point of indecision before breaking out to
either the upside or downside. They can also be continuation type patterns
found in trends. Refer to Chapter 10, “Learning to Recognize Trend Days.”
The apex of the pattern is reversed from a traditional and more commonly
found triangle pattern. The apex is on the left side of the pattern rather

Figure 9.11 Dow Jones Industrial Average weekly chart of a Broadening Top pattern shows ﬁve reversal points and the apex on the left side. Many stocks in the third
quarter of 1929 formed this pattern preceding the October crash.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

132

August 14, 2007

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

than on the right side and expands from there. The pattern is sometimes
referred to as an Expanding Triangle pattern.
You can see in Figure 9.11 that following the decline after point 5 there
is a rally that would be considered a sixth reversal point, but the rally does
not exceed point 5. The establishment of this lower high indicates the probability of a reversal.

Adding Fibonacci Ratios
We can define the waves in most Broadening Top and Bottom patterns by
the use of Fibonacci numbers. Each wave in the pattern is interrelated by
these numbers. The most common Fibonacci numbers that will be seen
and used in this pattern are .618, .786, 1.00, 1.272, and 1.618.
Figure 9.12 shows a portion of the Dow index chart used in Figure 9.11
with the addition of Fibonacci ratios to define the geometric structure.
The left side of the pattern from points 1 through 3 forms a 1.272 extension pattern. You can also see the formation of a Three Drives pattern,
which completes at point 3 of the Broadening Top pattern. There is also
a small AB=CD that completes at the top of the pattern. Point 3 is higher
than point 1.
Points 2 through 4 form another 1.272 extension pattern. This pattern
extends just a bit beyond the 1.272. Point 4 is lower than point 2. One last

Figure 9.12 Dow index weekly chart of Broadening Top pattern with Fibonacci
ratios added to deﬁne the geometric structure.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Classical Technical Analysis Patterns

13:12

Char Count=

133

1.272 extension pattern forms from point 4 to point 5 to complete the pattern. A note here on the final wave completion at point 5: An extension up
to the 2.00 is acceptable, but anything beyond that signals the market is in
a strongly trending mode.
The lower high that would be the sixth point rally completes at the .786
retracement of the initial decline from point 5. In this example the pattern
is very symmetrical and the waves are easily identifiable.
The formation of a Broadening Bottom pattern is just the opposite of
the Broadening Top pattern. (See Figure 9.13 for an example of a Broadening Bottom pattern.) You can see in this example that the corn market
takes off and goes into a very strong uptrend after completing the pattern.
The low points 1, 3, and 5 do not reach the 1.272 extension—they just
exceed the 1.00. Symmetrically this pattern is almost perfect. The time it
takes to form the lows between points 1 and 3 and again between 3 and 5
is almost identical, as is illustrated in Figure 9.13.

Failure Point
Both Figures 9.12 and 9.13 have the failure points of the Broadening Top
and Bottom patterns marked. These patterns are seen at tops and bottoms
on longer-term time frames; they can form on smaller time frames, but

Figure 9.13 Corn daily chart example of Broadening Bottom pattern. Although
the lows do not quite reach the 1.272 extensions, the times between lows are almost
identical.

c09

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

134

13:12

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

when found on the longer-term time frames they can signal a major reversal. This is evident in the example of the Broadening Top pattern of the
Dow index (refer back to Figure 9.12).
When these patterns fail, they can lead to explosive moves in the opposite direction (i.e., continuing in the direction of the original trend). When
point 5, which should be the completion point of the pattern, explodes with
a wide range bar (usually two to three times the length of an average daily
bar) or a price gap occurs, a continuation move of major proportions is
most likely under way. As always, the trader must quantify the risk and use
stop-loss protection when trading this pattern.

Trading the Broadening Top and
Bottom Patterns
As is noted and depicted in the example charts of this pattern, it is not unusual to see other patterns form as a Broadening Top or Bottom pattern is
forming. In Figure 9.12 we can see an AB=CD pattern, a 1.272 extension
pattern, and a Three Drives pattern. When entering a trade into a Broadening Top or Bottom pattern, the trader can use any of these other patterns
as entries and any of the stop-loss and profit objective techniques we have
already discussed.
Using the example in Figure 9.12 of the Broadening Top pattern, a retracement entry could be used after the initial reaction down and a stoploss order placed above either the .786 or the 1.00 if the risk is acceptable.
A trailing stop can be used for managing exits on the trade.
In the case of the Broadening Bottom in Figure 9.13, the example
shows there is not much of a retracement; the trader who is waiting for
a 1.272 to enter would miss the initial entry. The trader would probably
want to scale down to a smaller time frame for a pattern to enter on and
place a stop-loss order. If the pattern is being traded from a longer-term
time frame such as a daily or weekly chart, keep in mind that it could be a
longer-term reversal signal and you may want to plan exits accordingly.
If either pattern has a failure and turns up or down through the failure
points, the trader would want to then look for an entry in the direction of
that failure.
Although a Broadening Top or Bottom pattern is rarer than others presented in this book, it can be one of the most reliable and profitable patterns and is certainly worth the trader’s time to study.

c10

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

9:22

Char Count=

C H A P T E R 10

Learning to
Recognize
Trend Days

A

trend day can easily become a countertrend trader’s largest loss day
as a result of repeatedly trying to trade against the trend. A trend day
can be defined as a market where price opens on or near its highs
or lows and then closes at the opposite end of the range. These traders
may feel they are doing the right thing by taking the countertrend signals
or patterns but repeatedly get stopped out. A day like that can erase weeks
or even months of profits. Not only can it damage the trader financially, but
it can also damage the trader’s mind-set. Conversely, if a trader learns to
identify trend days and trade in the direction of the trend, the trader can
turn that around and trend days can be their best trading days.
In this chapter we want to present examples of trend days that occur in
the S&P 500 E-mini market. We chose this market for a couple of reasons;
first, it is a widely traded market by day traders, and second, the characteristics illustrated in this market can also be used with individual stocks or
other markets. Since the S&P 500 index has a total of 500 stocks, it would
stand to reason that if the index is trending, a large majority of the stocks in
that index will also be trending. The main purpose of including this chapter
is to help countertrend traders become aware of when a trend is present
so that they can make well-informed trading decisions that will help them
to protect capital and learn to trade in the direction of the short-term trend
in this market.
The areas we cover are:
Ĺ Identifying a trend day.
Ĺ Patterns found on trend days.
Ĺ Combining time frames and using Fibonacci ratios on trend days.
135

c10

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

136

9:22

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Ĺ Avoiding countertrend trades on a trend day and controlling risk on a
trend day.
Ĺ Example of trading a trend day.

IDENTIFYING A TREND DAY
We first define a trend as higher highs and higher lows in an uptrend and
lower highs and lower lows in a downtrend. (See Figures 10.1 and 10.2.)
Trends can manifest on any time frame, short or long, and for trends longer
in duration the trend will be seen first on the shorter time frames. Strong
trends will open or close on or near the lows or highs and close at the
opposite end of the range. It is a mistake to assume when a trend is in
progress that a price has gone too high so therefore it is a short sale or
it has gone too low and therefore it is a buy. Prices can always move
further up or down than anyone expects. The percentage of trend days
is much smaller than the percentage of range or countertrend type days.
A typical trading month may see anywhere from two to five trend days
on average.

Figure 10.1 Example of a short-term 5-minute chart uptrend in the S&P 500
E-mini market. Higher highs and higher lows deﬁne the uptrend. On this day the
market opens near the lows and closes near the highs.

c10

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

August 14, 2007

Learning to Recognize Trend Days

9:22

Char Count=

137

Figure 10.2 Example of a short-term 5-minute chart downtrend in the S&P 500
E-mini market. Lower highs and lower lows deﬁne the downtrend. Just the opposite
of Figure 10.1, the market opens near the highs and closes near the lows.

When trading from a short time frame such as a 5-minute chart, the
trader should be aware that a trend can manifest at any point during the
trading day and end at any point in the trading day. In other words, sometimes trends can be short-lived.
Figure 10.3 is a price chart of the same time period as Figure 10.1.
Figure 10.3 shows a more condensed view that gives us a little more data to
work with. In this example we can see the market gapping up on the open.
This tells us there is an imbalance of price. The vertical grid line marks
the opening price on the day, and to the left is the previous day’s closing
price bar. The important point to note here is how the market holds the
gap open. In Figure 10.3 we can see how the market holds the gap with no
attempt to retrace back into the gap and fill in the price void. This is our
first sign of strength and an indication that an uptrend may be in the making
for the day. We can also see marked in Figure 10.3 a long, wide range bar
that makes new highs on the day; this also can be an early indication of a
trend day. If the price had reversed back into the gap after making the long,
wide range bar with new highs, then a trend day would have most likely not
been in progress.
The markets are constantly in a process of either contracting (i.e.,
trading in a range), which gives us the countertrend trading setups, or

c10

JWPR033-Pesavento (Wiley Trading Series)

138

August 14, 2007

9:22

Char Count=

TRADE WHAT YOU SEE

Figure 10.3 Example of a short-term 5-minute chart uptrend in the S&P 500 Emini market. The price holds the gap-up open and makes no attempt to ﬁll the gap.
A long, wide range bar makes highs on the day, a sign of strength and an indication
that an uptrend may be in progress.

expanding, which gives us trends. There are three market tendencies that
can alert the trader to the possibility of a trend day developing.
1. A narrowing of range, referred to as an NR7, which is defined as the

narrowest range in the past seven trading days. This was first published
by Toby Crabel in Day Trading with Short Term Price Patterns and
Opening Range Breakout (Traders Press, 1990). Linda Raschke also
has done extensive research using narrow range trading days as a characteristic that can precede a trend day.
2. Gap opening followed by long, wide range bars in the first 15 to 30
minutes of trading.
3. Neutral market closes, where the market closes in the same area that
it opened.
Both Toby Crabel and Linda Raschke have done excellent statistical
research on these market tendencies that precede trends.
When a trend day does develop, it will be most valid when all indexes—
S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average, NASDAQ, and Russell—are trending in the same direction. In an uptrend they would each be making new
