NINTH EDITION

TECHNICAL
ANALYSIS OF
STOCK
TRENDS

AU3772_C000.fm Page 2 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

Dow–JonesSM, The DowSM, Dow–Jones Industrial AverageSM, and DJIASM are service marks of Dow–
Jones & Company, Inc., and have been licensed for use for certain purposes by the Board of Trade of
the City of Chicago (CBOT®). The CBOT’s futures and future options contracts based on the Dow–Jones
Industrial AverageSM are not sponsored, endorsed, sold, or promoted by Dow–JonesSM, and Dow–JonesSM makes no representation regarding the advisability of trading in such products.

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2007 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-8493-3772-0 (Hardcover)
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-8493-3772-7 (Hardcover)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material
is quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable
eﬀorts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and the publisher cannot
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the consequences of their use.
No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microﬁlming,
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.
com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC) 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-proﬁt organization that provides licenses and
registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the
CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Edwards, Robert D. (Robert Davis), 1893Technical analysis of stock trends / Robert D. Edwards, John Magee, W.H.C.
Bassetti. -- 9th ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8493-3772-0 (alk. paper)
1. Investment analysis. 2. Stock exchanges--United States. 3. Securities--United
States. I. Magee, John, 1901- II. Bassetti, W. H. C. III. Title.
HG4521.E38 2006
332.63’20420973--dc22
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

2006045096

NINTH EDITION

TECHNICAL
ANALYSIS OF
STOCK
TRENDS
ROBERT D. EDWARDS
JOHN MAGEE
W.H.C. BASSETTI

Boca Raton London New York

A M E R I C A N M A N A G E M E N T A S S O C I AT I O N
New York • Atlanta • Brussels • Chicago • Mexico City • San Francisco
Shanghai • Tokyo • Toronto • Washington, D.C

AU3772_C000.fm Page 5 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

Preface to the 9th Edition
Warp speed universe. Warp speed financial markets. The 8th Edition of this
classic book appeared when it seemed that the millennium and paradise had
been achieved and that, like McKay’s tulipomania, the price of stocks would
rise forever and men would rush from the world over and pay whatever
price was asked for what-was-its-name.com, Internet.groceries, or ihype.com
or icon.com or gotcha.com. And, feature this, Dow 36000. The bubble was
just in the process of bursting, of course. Before it burst fabulous fortunes
were made by roller blader and scooter tycoons and by young geeks with
nothing but chutzpah and a laptop. One of my favorite stories is of the young
entrepreneur who said “Why don’t I deserve it (the $100MM he made in the
IPO)? I’ve devoted three years of my life to this project.” (Now dead.)
Now many of those people are in prison and the hangover lingers on.
Lying, cheating, and stealing on all sides. From Enron to Arthur Anderson.
Billions, if not trillions into a black hole. As all this developed I warned of
the impending collapse in the John Magee Investment Letters on the web.
There was nothing magic or brilliant about seeing what was going on.
Perspective and perception came from applying the lessons taught in this
book by Edwards and Magee. Like Benedict XVI (in a different area) I am a
humble worker in their vineyard.
I press on attempting to modernize (where necessary) and extend their
work, fit it to the modern situation and make it even more useful to current
day traders and investors.
In this ongoing labor of love I have been immeasurably assisted by my
graduate students and colleagues at Golden Gate University in San Francisco. In constant interaction with them, I have been stimulated to see important aspects of Edwards and Magee’s work and develop and emphasize these
elements in my teaching and in this new edition.
Specifically, both long-term and short-term traders will find important
new material in this edition. In my graduate seminars I have seen the power
of what Magee called the “Basing Points” procedure and so have extended
the treatment of this material. My interest in and respect for Dow Theory
have recently increased as the result of a paper done with Brian Brooker for
the Market Technicians Association (“Dissecting Dow Theory”). Material
from that paper will be found in this edition. Short-term traders and futures
speculators will appreciate extensive new material on commodity trading.
These traders have been entirely too influenced by mechanical numberdriven systems of recent years and need to restore perspective by mastering
the material in this book.
It was never the intent of this book to forecast or analyze current markets.
Rather it’s purpose was, and is, to learn from history and the past so as to
be better able to deal with the present and the future. Current markets are

AU3772_C000.fm Page 6 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

analyzed (and forecast?) at the John Magee website. Nonetheless, the very
process of keeping current involves picturing issues and instruments in play.
The major indices themselves in 2005 were in play, and gold, silver and oil.
We don’t know how they will pan out. But we can make an analysis with
the data we have. For this is the situation the analyst is faced with every day.
He doesn’t know how it will turn out. But, by following the methods and
principles taught in this book he can put himself on the right side of the
probabilities.
This is no idle remark. The power and effectiveness of classical chart
analysis can be seen by examining how it performed in the past at critical
times. At the John Magee Technical Analysis website the following comment
was made in January 2000:
Dow: The Dow can expect to find support at 10000 and is buyable,
but in small commitments or portions of a portfolio or additions
thereto. We expect to see it in a very large seesaw from 9-12000 for
some time and would hedge at the high end and increase commitments and lift hedges on oversold conditions at the low end.
In November 2000 the following comment was made:
November 18, 2000
There is really only one chart pattern of significance in these
markets, and that is the big one, more than 12 months long now,
and the pattern is a big serpent, whipping back and forth, and as
Shakespeare said, signifying nothing. Nothing that is but more of
the same. How will we know when it signifies something? Well
we won't really know till we know, but we'll let you know when
we know. So we would continue to pick likely shorts and employ
short term trading strategies for traders, and hedge at interim
tops and lift the hedges at bottoms. Based on the chart picture
and last week's anemic behavior we would not trade for bounces
in the NASDAQ. If anything it is a short, but a risky one.
These past letters, dramatically illustrating the effectiveness of the methods of this book, may be found online through links at the address specified
below. Your editor, personally, is not a genius for having made these analyses.
It is the method that is to credit, and any number of my graduate students
can make the same analyses, as can any alert chart analyst.
The reader should not skip the prefatory material to the 8th Edition. The
same practices outlined there have been followed in this edition. Magee said
the reader should not skim through this book and put it on his library shelf.
Instead it should be read and reread and constantly referred to. And so the
reader should, yes, so he should.

AU3772_C000.fm Page 7 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

Richard Russell, the dean of Dow Theory Analysts, has reportedly said
that the price of the Dow and the price of gold will cross in coming years.
He has also remarked that the S&P appears to evince a 10-year head-andshoulders pattern. Robert Prechter believes we are at the crest of the tidal
wave and the tsunami cometh.
Dow 36000. Dow 3000. This book contains the best tools to cope with
whatever the future holds.
W.H.C. Bassetti
San Francisco, California

A Special Note Concerning Resources on the Web
In the age of instant and easy (and free) access to information on the Internet
it would be foolish to ignore the opportunities available to interact with the
material of this book. So the reader will find numerous free materials that
augment the book at www.edwards-magee.com/nf05/ninthedition.html.
For example, when the reader learns in Chapter 28 of the Basing Points
Procedure he will be able to go to the website and print out a PDF of material
that he can place beside Figure 210.1 for instant and easy cross reference,
instead of having to turn pages constantly back and forth from the chart to
the keys and commentary, or having to bend the book into pretzels at a copy
machine. In general, wherever references are made in the text to the website
it is for this purpose, to give the reader easy and flexible usage of the material.
And, likewise, at this address the reader will find links to past letters that
show how the method functioned in real time in real markets.

A Special Note about Dow Theory
Senator Everett Dirkson said one time that trying to get U.S. Senators herded
together and moving in one direction was like trying to transport bull frogs
in a wheelbarrow. Trying to synchronize the signals of the various Dow
Theory analysts is a similarly challenging proposition. No Ayatollah exists
to issue the final fatwa as to whether the signal is valid. Always one to abhor
a vacuum I have organized a committee at Golden Gate University to evaluate pronouncements of signals and opine as to whether the signals are
valid. This committee may be contacted at the addresses found in Resources
and at cbassetti@ggu.edu.

Acknowledgments for the Ninth Edition
For professional assistance: Jack Schannep, Robert W. Colby, Curtis Faith,
Greg Morris and John Murphy, Tim Knight and Chi Huang.
For assistance at Taylor & Francis: Richard O’Hanley, Raymond O’Connell,
Pat Roberson, Andrea Demby, and Roy Barnhill.

AU3772_C000.fm Page 8 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

For research assistance and manuscript preparation: Brian Brooker and Grace
Ryan, my fearsomely bright and efficient teaching and research assistants.
And my inimitable technical assistant, Samuel W.D. Bassetti.
At Golden Gate University for ongoing support and assistance: Professor
Henry Pruden, Barbara Karlin, Janice Carter, Tracy Weed and Cassandra
Dilosa.
Special appreciation goes to makers of software packages and their supportive executives for software used in the preparation of this and previous
editions.
John Slauson
Adaptick
1082 East 8175 South
Sandy, UT 84094
www.adaptick.com
Steven Hill
AIQ Systems
P.O. Box 7530
Incline Village, NV 89452
702-831-2999
www.AIQsystems.com
Alan McNichol
Metastock
Equis International, Inc.
3950 S. 700 East, Suite 100
Salt Lake City, UT 84107
www.equis.com

Bill Cruz, Ralph Cruz, Darla Tuttle
Tradestation
Omega Research
14257 SW 119th Avenue
Miami, FL 33186
305-485-7599
www.tradestation.com
Tim Knight, Chi Huang
Prophet Financial Systems, Inc.
658 High Street
Palo Alto, CA 94301
www.prophet.net
http://tradertim.blogspot.com
Greg Morris, John Murphy
Stockcharts.com, Inc.
11241 Willows Road, #140
Redmond, WA 98052
www.stockcharts.com

AU3772_C000.fm Page 9 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

Preface to the Eighth Edition
Here is a strange event. A book written in the mid-20th century retains its
relevancy and importance to the present day. In fact, Technical Analysis of
Stock Trends remains the definitive book on the subject of analyzing the
stock market with charts. Knock-offs, look-alikes, pale imitations have proliferated in its wake like sea gulls after a productive fishing boat. But the
truth is they have added nothing new to the body of knowledge Edwards
and Magee originally produced and Magee refined up to the 5th edition.
What accounts for this rare occasion of a book’s passing to be a classic? To
be more, in fact, than a classic, to be the manual or handbook for current usage?
To answer this question we must ask another. What are Chart formations? Chart formations identified and analyzed by the authors are graphic
representations of unchanging human behavior in complex multivariate situations.
They are the depiction of multifarious human actions bearing on a single
variable (price). On price converge a galaxy of influences: fear, greed, desire,
cunning, malice, deceit, naiveté, earnings estimates, broker need for income,
gullibility, professional money managers’ need for performance and job security, supply and demand of stocks, monetary liquidity and money flow, selfdestructiveness, passivity, trap setting, manipulation, blind arrogance, conspiracy and fraud and double dealing, phases of the moon and sun spots,
economic cycles and beliefs about them, public mood, and the indomitable
human need to be right.
Chart formations are the language of the market, telling us that this stock
is in its death throes; that stock is on a rocket to the moon; that a life and
death battle is being waged in this issue; and in that other, the buyers have
defeated the sellers and are breaking away.
They are, in short, the inerasable fingerprints of human nature made
graphic in the greatest struggle, next to war, in human experience.
As Freud mapped the human psyche, so have Edwards and Magee
mapped the human mind and emotions as expressed in the financial markets.
Not only did they produce a definitive map, they also produced a methodology for interpreting and profiting from the behavior of men and markets.
It is difficult to imagine further progress in this area until the science of
artificial intelligence, aided by yet unimaginable computer hardware, makes
new breakthroughs.

If It Is Definitive, Why Offer a New Edition?
Unlike Nostradamus and Jules Verne (and many current investment advisors),
the authors did not have a crystal ball or a time machine. Magee did not

AU3772_C000.fm Page 10 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

foresee the electronic calculator and made do with a slide rule. And while
he knew of the computer, he did not anticipate that every housewife and
investor would have 1000 times the power of a Whirlwind or Univac I on
his (her) desk (cf. Note on Gender). In short, the March of Time. The Progress
of Science. The Inexorable Advance of Technology.
Amazingly, the great majority of this book needed no update or actualization. Who is to improve on the descriptions of chart formations and their
significance?
But insofar as updates are necessary to reflect the changes in technology
and in the character and composition of the markets, that is another story.
Human character may not change, but in the new millennium there is nothing but change in the character and composition of the markets. And while
regulatory forces might not be completely in agreement, the majority of these
changes have been positive for the investor and the commercial user. Of
course, Barings Bank and some others are less than ecstatic with these developments.

An Outline of the Most Important Additions Made
to This Book to Reflect Changes in the Times,
Technology, and Markets
Generally speaking, these additions, annotations, and updates are intended
to inform the general reader of conditions of which he must be aware for
investing success. In most cases, because of the enormous amount of material, no attempt is made to be absolutely exhaustive in the treatment of these
developments. Rather the effort is made to put changes and new conditions
in perspective and furnish the investor with the resources and proper guide
to pursue subjects at greater length if desired. In fact, an appendix has been
provided, entitled Resources, to which the reader may turn when he has
mastered the material of the book proper.
The stubborn individualist may realize investment success with the use
of this book alone (and paper, pencil, ruler, and chart paper (cf. Section on
TEKNIPLAT™ chart paper).

Technology
In order to equip this book to serve as a handbook and guide for the markets
of the new millennium, certain material has been added to the text of the
5th and 7th editions. Clearly the astounding advances in technology must
be dealt with and put in the context of the analytical methods and material
of the original. To achieve success in the new, brave world, an investor must
be aware of and utilize electronic markets, the Internet, the microcomputer,
wireless communications, and new exchanges offering every kind of exotica
imaginable.

AU3772_C000.fm Page 11 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

The advanced investor should also be aware of and understand some
of the developments in finance and investment theory and technology —
the Black–Scholes Model, Modern Portfolio Theory, Quantitative Analysis.
Fortunately, all these will not be dealt with here, because in truth one intelligent investor with a piece of chart paper and a pencil and a quote source
can deal with the markets, but that is another story we will explore later in
the book. Some of these germane subjects will be discussed sufficiently to
put them in perspective for the technical analyst, and then guides and
resources will be pointed out for continued study. My opinion is that the
mastery of all these subjects is not wholly necessary for effective investing
at the private level. What need does the general investor have for an understanding of the Cox–Ross–Rubinstein options analysis model to recognize
trends? The Edwards–Magee model knows things about the market the CRR
model does not.

Trading and Investment Instruments
The new universe of available trading and investment instruments must be
taken into account. The authors would have been in paradise at the profusion
of alternatives. In this future world, they could have traded the Averages
(one of the most important changes explored in this book); used futures and
options as investment and hedging mechanisms; practiced arbitrage strategies beyond their wildest dreams; and contemplated a candy store full of
investment products. The value and utility of these products would have
been immeasurably enhanced by their mastery of the charting world of
technical analysis. As only one example, one world-prominent professional
trader I know has made significant profits selling calls on stocks he correctly
analyzed to be in down trends, and vice versa — an obvious (or, as they say,
no-brainer) to a technician, but not something you should attempt at home
without expert advice. Techniques like this occasioned the loss of many
millions of dollars in the Reagan Crash of 1987.

Changes and Developments in Technical Analysis
Have any new chart patterns (that is to say, changes in human behavior and
character) emerged since the 5th edition? Not to my knowledge, although
there are those who take the same data and draw different pictures from
them. How else could you say that you had something new! different!
better!? There are other ways of looking at the data which are interesting,
sometimes valuable, and often profitable, which goes to prove that many
are the ways and gateless is the gate to the great Dow. Point and figure
charting have been used very effectively by traders I know, and candlestick
charting depicts data in interesting ways. Furthermore, since Magee’s time,
aided by the computer, technicians have developed innumerable, what I call,
number-driven technical analysis tools: (the puzzlingly named) stochastics,

AU3772_C000.fm Page 12 Tuesday, November 21, 2006 1:50 PM

oscillators, exponential and other moving averages, etc., etc., etc. It is not
the intent of this book to explore these tools in depth. That will be done in
a later volume. These concepts are briefly explored in an appendix supplied
by Richard McDermott, editor of the 7th edition.
I have also made additions to the book (Chapter 18.1) to give a perspective on long-term investing, since Magee specifically addressed the second
part of the book (on tactics) to the speculator. I have substantially rewritten
Chapters 24 and 42 to reflect current ideas on portfolio management and
risk management. I have expanded on the idea of rhythmic trading — an
idea which is implicit in the original. I have expanded the treatment of
runaway markets so that the Internet stocks of the 1990s might be put in
perspective (Chapter 23).
And then, paradigms. Paradigms, as everyone should know by now, are
the last refuge of a fundamentalist when all other explanations fail.

Paradigm Changes
Whenever the markets, as they did at the end of the 20th century, depart
from the commonly accepted algorithms for determining what their prices
ought to be, fundamentalists (those analysts and investors who believe they
can determine value from such fixed verities as earnings, cash flow, etc.) are
confronted with new paradigms. Are stock prices (values) to be determined
by dividing price by earnings to establish a reasonable price/earnings (p/e)
ratio? Or should sales be used, or cash flow, or the phase of the moon, or —
in the late 1990s, should losses be multiplied by price to determine the value
of the stock? Technicians are not obliged to worry about this kind of financial
legerdemain. The stock is worth what it can be sold for today in the market.

The Crystal Ball
Investors will get smarter and smarter, starting with those who learn what
this book has to say. The professionals will stay one step ahead of them,
because they are preternaturally cunning and because they spend all their
time figuring out how to keep ahead of the public, but the gap will narrow.
Software and hardware will continue to advance, but not get any smarter.
Mechanical systems will work well in some areas, and not in others. Mechanical systems are only as good as the engineer who designs them and the
mechanic who maintains them. Buying systems is buying trouble. Everyone
should find his own method (usually some variant of the Magee method, in
my opinion). All good things will end. All bad things will end. The bag of
tricks with which the insiders bilk the public will get smaller and smaller.
New and ingenious procedures will be developed by the insiders. The well
of human naiveté is bottomless. For every one educated, a new one will be
born in a New York minute. It is deeply disturbing at the turn of the century
that the owners of the NASDAQ and the NYSE should be thinking of going
