
P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

12

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

root of the ratio of the time frames. This has implications for risk management, profit
targets, stops, and volatility on each time frame. For instance, if a trader has been trading a system on 5-minute charts with $0.25 stops and wishes to transfer that 
to 30-minute
charts, the stops will probably need to be adjusted to about $0.61 ($0.25 × 30/5). This
relationship does not hold exactly in all markets and all time frames, but it is a good rule
of thumb and can give some insight into the risks and rewards of other time frames.
The rule of consistency also applies to choice of time frames. Once you have settled
on a trading style and time frame, be slow to modify it unless you have evidence that it is
not working. This story will be told with the most clarity and power in a consistent time
frame. In addition, if you catch yourself wanting to look at a time frame you never look
at while you are in a losing trade, be very careful. This is often a warning of an impending
break of discipline.

Bars, Candles, or Other Choices
Most traders today seem to be focused on using candlestick charts, but the more oldfashioned bar charts should not be overlooked. Both chart types display the same data
points but in a slightly different format; they have the same information on them, so one
is not better than the other. The main advantage of bar charts is that they can be cleaner
visually and it is usually possible to fit more data in the same space because bars are
thinner than candles. For many traders, the colors of candlestick charts make it easier
to see the buying and selling pressure in the market, providing another important visual
cue that helps the trader process the data faster.
Another issue to consider, particularly with intraday charts, is how much importance
should be attached to the closing print of each period. Historically, this was the price in
many markets, and it still has significance in some contexts. Profits and losses (P&Ls),
margins, and various spreads are calculated off daily settlement prices; exchanges have
complex procedures for calculating these prices, which are rarely simply the last print of
the session. However, times are changing. In currencies, most domestic platforms report
a closing price sometime in the New York afternoon, and we have to wonder just how
important that price is for the Australian dollar or the yen, whose primary sessions ended
many hours earlier. As more and more markets go to 24-hour sessions, the importance of
this daily settlement price will continue to decline. The problem is even more significant
on intraday bars, bar as closing prices on intraday bars are essentially random samples
and may differ from platform to platform. If you are trading candlestick patterns, which
attach great significance to the close, you are trading the patterns you see on your screen.
If you switched to a different data provider, the data might be time-stamped differently,
and you would see different patterns. How important can those patterns really be?

INDICATORS
Indicators are calculated measures that are plotted on price charts, either on top of the
price bars or in panels above or below the bars. There are many different indicators in

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Edge

13

common usage, and traders have a wide range of approaches and applications for these
tools. Some traders are minimalists, using few or no indicators at all, while others will use
multiple indicators in complex relationships. In addition, some indicators are extremely
simple calculations, while others are very complex, perhaps even using complex calculations borrowed from other applications such as radar or digital signal processing. There
is certainly no one right way to set up or use indicators, but, here again, consistency is
paramount. Few traders find success by constantly switching between indicators. There
is no holy grail or combination of tools that will lead to easy trading profits.
One other important point is that you must intimately understand the tools you use.
Know how they will react to all market conditions, and know what they are saying about
the market structure and price action at any time. Focus on tools that highlight and emphasize important elements of market structure, because your main focus should be on
the price bars themselves. Intuition comes from repeated exposure to structured data in
well-planned and consistent contexts; make your chart setups serve this purpose. Much
of this book—and Chapter 7 and Appendix B in particular—focuses on these ideas and
reinforces the importance of fully understanding every tool you use.

THE TWO FORCES: TOWARD A NEW
UNDERSTANDING OF MARKET ACTION
Price action is a complex and imperfectly defined subject. There are many traders who
believe that price action is something nebulous that cannot be quantified. To other
traders, trading price action means trading the patterns of price bars on charts, without the addition of indicators or other lines. In this book, price action simply means
how markets usually move, which, frankly, is, usually randomly. Be clear on this point:
markets are usually random and most of the patterns markets create are also random.
However, we can sometimes identify spots where price movement is something less than
random and is somewhat more predictable, and these less-than-random spots may offer
profitable trading opportunities.
Price action is the term used to describe the market’s movements in a dynamic state.
Price action creates market structure, which is the static record of how prices moved
in the past. Think about a finger tracing a line in the sand. Market structure is the line
left in the sand; price action describes the actual movements of the finger as it drew the
line. In the case of a finger, we would talk about smooth or jerky, fast or slow, and lightly
or with deep pressure into the sand. In the case of actual price action, we would look
at elements such as: How does the market react after a large movement in one direction? If aggressive sellers are pressing the market lower, what happens when they relax
their selling pressure? Does the market bounce back quickly, indicating that buyers are
potentially interested in these depressed prices, or does it sit quietly, resting at lower
levels? How rapidly are new orders coming into the market? Is trading one-directional,
or is there more two-way, back-and-forth trading? Are price levels reached through continuous motion, or do very large orders cause large jerks in prices? All of these elements,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

14

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

and many more, combine to describe how the market moves in response to order flow
and a myriad of competing influences.
In the past, many authors have used a wide range of analogies to describe financial markets. Ideas and models have been borrowed from the physical and mathematical
sciences, so terms like momentum, inertia, vectors, and trajectories have crept into the
vocabulary. More recently, some thinkers have applied the tools of digital signal processing to market data, so we have a new vocabulary that includes cycles, transforms, and
waves. Markets are confusing enough in their natural state; some of the analytical frameworks traders use add to the confusion. I propose a simpler model: that market action
appears to be the result of two interacting forces: a motive force that attempts to move
price from one level to another and a resistive force that opposes the motive force. These
forces represent the sum of all analysis and decision making at any one time.
The normal state of existence in most markets most of the time is equilibrium. The
two forces are in balance. Buyers and sellers have no sharp disagreement over price; the
market may drift around a central value, but there are no large trends or price changes.
Market action in this environment is highly random; if we were to analyze this type of
action statistically, we would find that it conforms very closely to a random walk model.
This is also precisely the type of environment that technically motivated traders must
strive to avoid, as there can be no enduring statistical edge in a randomly driven market.
Markets in this state of equilibrium will have varying degrees of liquidity and ability
to absorb large orders. Eventually, there is a failure of liquidity on one side, and the
market makes a sudden, large movement in one direction. Perhaps this movement is
in response to new information coming into the market, or it can simply be a result
of a random price movement setting off further movement in the same direction. No
matter the reason behind the movement, in theoretical terms, the motive force has, at
least temporarily, overcome the resistive force. In the parlance of technical analysis, this
type of sharp movement is called an impulse move or a momentum move.
From this point, there are basically two options. In many cases, the resistive force
is quickly able to overcome the motive force, and the market finds balance again. This
may be at a new level, or prices may immediately retrace their course and return to
the preshock levels. Psychologically, market participants have chosen to view this large
price movement as a temporary aberration, and new liquidity comes into the market that
will dampen any future distortion. However, it is possible that the large price spike will
lead to continued movement in the same direction. In this scenario, a feedback loop
develops where the market makes a large movement, which, in turn, provokes another
large price movement, and the market trends.
In most cases, the market structure of this trending movement will be a series
of directional moves alternating with nondirectional periods in which the market
essentially rests and absorbs the previous move. In the bigger picture, the motive force
has overcome the resistive force, but there is still a subtle interplay of balance and
imbalance on shorter time frames. Prices trend because of an imbalance of buying and
selling pressure. (This is often, but not always, indicative of nonrandom action, as trends
exist in completely random data.) Once prices are trending, at some point they will have

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Edge

15

moved far enough that the resistive force is once again able to balance the motive force,
and the market again finds a new balance.
This interplay of motive and resistive forces, from a very high-level perspective, is
the essence of price action and the root of technical analysis. The patterns we see in
the market are only reflections of the convictions of buyers and sellers. They are useful
because we can see them, trade them, and use them to define risk, but always remember
that they are manifestations of deeper forces in the marketplace.

PRICE ACTION AND MARKET STRUCTURE
ON CHARTS
Charts are a way to organize and to structure the flood of information the market generates and can reveal clues about the strength of the underlying forces. There is no one
right way to read a chart, but I will share the basic elements of an approach that has been
very useful to me over the years. These tools and this framework have shown themselves
to be reliable time and time again, but these are my tools and my method. You must make
them your own tools. Use everything here as a collection of ideas from which you can
begin to build your own approach to the markets.
Market structure refers to the static structure visible on charts, made up of previous
movements in the market and places where those movements stopped. The key elements
of market structure are pivot points and the swings connecting them, both of which may
be evaluated either in price (the vertical axis on a chart), in time (the horizontal axis), or
in a combination of the two.
Price action is the dynamic process that creates market structure. Price action is
also more subjective; in most cases, market structure is concrete. Market structure is
static and is clearly visible on a chart, but price action usually must be inferred from
market structure. Also, both are specific to time frames, though price action is often visible as the market structure of lower time frames. These definitions and their implications
will become clear over the next chapters.

Pivot Points
The basic units of market structure on any time frame are pivot highs and lows (also
called swing highs or lows). A pivot high is a bar that has a higher high than the bar that
came before it and the bar that comes after it. At least in the very short term, the bar’s
high represents the high-water mark past which buyers were not able to push price, and
can be considered a very minor source of potential resistance. A pivot low is the same
concept inverted: a bar with a lower low relative to both the preceding and the following
bars. Figure 1.3 shows a chart with every pivot high and pivot low marked. Note that it is
possible for a bar to be both a pivot high and a pivot low at the same time, and that pivot
highs and pivot lows are very common.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

16

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 1.3 Every Pivot High and Low

Another name for the type of pivot in Figure 1.3 is a first-order pivot. Though these
first-order pivots do sometimes coincide with major turning points in the market, they
are so common that they cannot be extremely significant. Every major turning point, by
definition, comes at a pivot, so it is easy to overstate their importance; once you see
a chart with every possible pivot marked, it becomes obvious that this structure is so
common that it is nearly insignificant. It is also interesting to consider that most pivots
on one time frame mark significant market structures on lower time frames, but this is a
complication that we will save for later. As a stand-alone concept, first-order pivot highs
and lows have limited utility; their power comes from their relationship to other pivots
and their ability to define market structure. They are like a single brick in a building—not
that interesting or useful by itself.
Second-order pivot highs (also called intermediate-term pivots) are first-order pivot
highs that are preceded and followed by lower first-order pivot highs; again, this structure
is inverted for second-order pivot lows. In Figure 1.4, notice that these second-order
pivots begin to define some more significant structural points. It is much more likely that
second-order pivots will come at important turning points, but remember that there is no
predictive power because this is a pattern that is defined post hoc. They always look far

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

The Trader’s Edge

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

17

FIGURE 1.4 Second-Order Pivots (Marked with Arrows) Deﬁne More Important Market Structure

more significant in the middle of a chart than they do on the right edge. It is also worth
noting that there is no law that says second-order pivot highs and lows have to alternate;
it is possible to have three second-order pivot highs or lows in a row. If you are going to
use this concept systematically, make sure your rules plan for this situation.
Predictably, this concept can be extended on many levels, but in actual practice,
most of our focus is on third-order pivots, which usually mark major inflections (see
Figure 1.5). Almost without exception, a trader who could identify these third-order
pivots in advance would have nearly perfect entries on both sides of the market. This
cannot be done, but it does point out that these third-order pivots delineate the market structure very clearly. It is worth your time to train your eye to see these pivots
quickly; the value in this structure is in providing context for the market’s movements.
Once you understand the basic ideas behind this concept, it is probably a good idea
to not be too rigid with these structures and definitions. If you see something on a
chart that is fulfilling the basic role of one of these structures but for one reason or
another does not exactly fit the criteria, it often makes sense to bend the rules for
that case. The goal is to define meaningful market structure, not to blindly follow a set
of rules.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

18

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 1.5 Third-Order Pivots Usually Deﬁne the Most Important Market Structure on Any
Time Frame

It also should be obvious that this is a backward-looking analytical method. This is a
problem with all swing or wave methods: they offer fantastic explanations of past market action, but have little or no predictive power at the right edge. This pivot structure is
not intended to be a trading methodology; it is context. For instance, a sharp down move
might be interpreted differently if it comes at a point where the market had been making consistently higher second-order pivot highs and lows compared to an environment
where they were more randomly distributed. As another example, a movement that penetrates a significant third-order pivot high or low can sometimes significantly change the
market environment. The purpose of this tool is to provide that structure and context,
not actual trade entries.

Length of Swing
Once we have defined the second- or third-order pivot structure of the market, we can
connect the pivot highs and lows with lines to outline the swing structure of the market.
(In the spots where highs and lows do not alternate, take the lowest low of the series

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Edge

19

or the highest high of the series as the anchor point.) If this type of analysis is new to
you, it is probably a good idea to draw the structure on a few hundred charts until it
becomes somewhat intuitive; eventually you want to be able to glance at a chart and
see this structure immediately. Like everything else, it gets easier only with continued
practice and familiarity. It is impossible to overstate the importance of this skill.
Once the individual swings are delineated, we can start to consider what the market
structure actually tells us about the balance of buying and selling pressure in the market.
The core concepts are simple:

r When buyers are stronger than sellers, upswings will be longer, both in price and in
time, than downswings.

r When sellers are in control, downswings will be longer than upswings.
r Significant support and resistance levels are visible as rough areas (not precise lines)
beyond which pivots have been unable to penetrate.

r When there is relative equilibrium, there is no clear pattern to the swings.
There is nothing mysterious about market structure and price action. They grow
from these simple patterns, which then combine in a nearly infinite number of variations.
Focusing on the variations is difficult because they are legion—it is an exercise in futility
to try to catalog all of the complexities and variations of patterns, though this attempt
has been repeated many times throughout history. Understand the root. Understand the
market structure. There are a handful of common patterns and templates that provide
the foundation for most of the significant patterns in the market. We will spend much
of the rest of this book refining these templates, looking at specific ways to trade around
them, and considering how to manage the risk of those trades. Here is a brief introduction
to a few of the most important of these patterns. Commit them to memory; you will be
seeing them again.
Figure 1.6 shows the basic uptrend template: upswings are longer than the downswings, creating a consistent pattern of higher pivot lows and higher pivot highs. This
pattern, inverted, would become a downtrend.
Figure 1.7 shows a market in a trading range. This is a random environment in which
the conviction of buyers and sellers is relatively equal and there is no clear pattern to

FIGURE 1.6 An Uptrend

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

20

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE FOUNDATION OF TECHNICAL ANALYSIS

FIGURE 1.7 A Trading Range

???

FIGURE 1.8 A Break in the Uptrend Pattern

prices. There can be sudden, sharp moves within trading ranges, but they are often more
or less unpredictable.
Figure 1.8 shows a pattern that gives a warning of a break in an uptrend’s established
pattern. This is often the first step of a trend change, but you cannot trade based only on
this pattern; this is a warning sign to pay careful attention to what comes next. There is
great value in knowing when patterns have broken, as this suggests a potential change in
the balance of buyers and sellers in the market.
Figure 1.9 shows an example of a classic breakout above resistance. This suggests
one of two things: On one hand, markets in trading ranges (see Figure 1.7) are highly
random and this type of move may be nothing more than a random (and temporary)
move beyond previous levels. On the other hand, it could be an early warning that buying

FIGURE 1.9 A Breakout of the Trading Range

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

7:17

Printer: Hamilton Printing

21

The Trader’s Edge

FIGURE 1.10 A Breakout Preceded by Higher Lows into Resistance

pressure is now stronger than selling pressure in this market, and it is possible that prices
could trend significantly higher from this point.
Figure 1.10 shows a particular pattern that often precedes the best breakouts. If buyers are able to hold the market higher on successive declines, a pattern of higher pivot
lows pressing against the resistance area will result. This suggests real buying conviction
supporting the move and the potential breakout.
This is certainly not a complete encyclopedia of swing patterns, but it does highlight
the basic concept: the length of swings and the relative position of pivot points can give
insight into the character of the market.
Market Structure versus Traditional Chart Patterns
There are two broad schools of thought in technical analysis. One approach is to catalog
every possible chart pattern and variation of those patterns. A trader using this approach
might look for wedges, pennants, ﬂags, boxes, ledges, head and shoulders patterns, and
double tops and bottoms—these are only a few of the traditional patterns, and many more
have worked their way into modern practice. These traders spend a lot of time studying
these patterns and variations, and they usually have speciﬁc trading plans for each pattern.
Richard Schabacker was the ﬁrst writer to codify this approach, in the late 1920s, and it
was crystallized in his landmark 1932 Technical Analysis and Stock Market Proﬁts.
Upon his early death in 1935, his brother-in-law, Robert Edwards, took over the company he had founded and continued his work of market analysis. Later, Edwards teamed
up with John Magee, and the two wrote Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (1948; 4th ed.,
1964), which is now considered to be the ultimate, authoritative source on chart patterns.
