
18

I

exactly. But if something was coming and I didn't know
where from, I couldn't be on my guard against it. That
being the case I'd better be out of the market.
You know, I don't do things blindly. I don't like to. I
never did. Even as a kid I had to know why I should do
certain things. But this time I had no definite reason to
give to myself, and yet I was so uncomfortable that I
couldn't stand it. I called to a fellow I knew, Dave Wyman,
and said to him : "Dave, you take my place here. I want
you to do something for me. Wait a little before you call
out the next price of Sugar, will you?"
He said he would, and I got up and gave him my place
by the ticker so he could call out the prices for the boy. I
took my seven Sugar tickets out of my pocket and walked
over to the counter, to where the clerk was who marked
the tickets when you closed your trades. But I didn't really
know why I should get out of the market, so I just stood
there, leaning against the counter, my tickets in my hand
so that the clerk couldn't see them. Pretty soon I heard the
clicking of a telegraph instrument and I saw Tom
Burnham, the clerk, turn his head quickly and listen. Then
I felt that something crooked was hatching, and I decided
not to wait any longer. Just then Dave Wyman by the
ticker, began: "Su—" and quick as a flash I slapped my
tickets on the counter in front of the clerk and yelled,
"Close Sugar!" before Dave had finished calling the price.
So, of course, the house had to close my Sugar at the last
quotation. What Dave called turned out to be $103 again.
According to my dope Sugar should have broken $103
by now. The engine wasn't hitting right. I had the feeling
that there was a trap in the neighborhood. At all events,
the telegraph instrument was now going like mad and I
noticed that Tom Burnham, the clerk, had left my tickets
unmarked where I laid them, and was listening to the
clicking as if he were waiting for something. So I yelled at
him: "Hey, Tom, what in hell are you waiting for? Mark
the price on these tickets—$103! Get a gait on!"
19

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Everybody in the room heard me and began to look
toward us and ask what was the trouble, for, you see, while
the Cosmopolitan had never laid down, there was no
telling, and a run on a bucket shop can start like a run on a
bank. If one customer gets suspicious the others follow
suit. So Tom looked sulky, but came over and marked my
tickets "Closed at $103" and shoved the seven of them over
toward me. He sure had a sour face.
Say, the distance from Tom's place to the cashier's cage
"wasn't over eight feet. But I hadn't got to the cashier to
get my money when Dave Wyman by the ticker yelled
excitedly: "Gosh! Sugar, 108!" But it was too late; so I just
laughed and called over to Tom, "It didn't work that time,
did it, old boy?"
Of course, it was a put-up job. Henry Williams and I
together were short six thousand shares of Sugar. That
bucket shop had my margin and Henry's, and there may
have been a lot of other Sugar shorts in the office; possibly
eight or ten thousand shares in all. Suppose they had
$20,000 in Sugar margins. That was enough to pay the
shop to thimblerig the market on the New York Stock
Exchange and wipe us out. In the old days whenever a
bucket shop found itself loaded with too many bulls on a
certain stock it was a common practice to get some broker
to wash down the price of that particular stock far enough
to wipe out all the customers that were long of it. This
seldom cost the bucket shop more than a couple of points
on a few hundred shares, and they made thousands of
dollars.
That was what the Cosmopolitan did to get me and
Henry Williams and the other Sugar shorts. Their brokers
in New York ran up the price to $108. Of course it fell right
back, but Henry and a lot of others were wiped out.
Whenever there was an unexplained sharp drop which was
followed by instant recovery, the newspapers in those days
used to call it a bucket-shop drive.
20

I

And the funniest thing was that not later than ten days
after the Cosmopolitan people tried to double-cross me a
New York operator did them out of over seventy thousand
dollars. This man, who was quite a market factor in his day
and a member of the New York Stock Exchange, made a
great name for himself as a bear during the Bryan panic of
1896. He was forever running up against Stock Exchange
rules that kept him from carrying out some of his plans at
the expense of his fellow members. One day he figured
that there would be no complaints from either the
Exchange or the police authorities if he took from the
bucket shops of the land some of their ill-gotten gains. In
the instance I speak of he sent thirty-five men to act as
customers. They went to the main office and to the bigger
branches. On a certain day at a fixed hour the agents all
bought as much of a certain stock as the managers would
let them. They had instructions to sneak out at a certain
profit. Of course what he did was to distribute bull tips on
that stock among his cronies and then he went in to the
floor of the Stock Exchange and bid up the price, helped by
the room traders, who thought he was a good sport Being
careful to pick out the right stock for that work, there was
no trouble in putting up the price three or four points. His
agents at the bucket shops cashed in as prearranged.
A fellow told me the originator cleaned up seventy
thousand dollars net, and his agents made their expenses
and then pay besides. He played that game several times
all over the country, punishing the bigger bucket shops of
New York, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, Cincinnati and
St. Louis. One of his favorite stocks was Western Union,
because it was so easy to move a semi active stock like that
a few points up en-down. His agents bought it at a certain
figure, sold at two points profit, went short and took three
points more. By the way, I read the other day that that
man died, poor and obscure. If he had died in 1896 he
would have got at least a column on the first page of every
New York paper. As it was he got two lines on the fifth.
21

II
Between the discovery that the Cosmopolitan Stock
Brokerage Company was ready to beat me by foul means if
the killing handicap of a three-point margin and a pointand-a-half premium didn't do it, and hints that they didn't
want my business anyhow, I soon made up my mind to go
to New York, where I could trade in the office of some
member of the New York Stock Exchange. I didn't want
any Boston branch, where the quotations had to be
telegraphed. I wanted to be close to the original source. I
came to New York at the age of 21, bringing with me all I
had, twenty-five hundred dollars.
I told you I had ten thousand dollars when I was twenty,
and my margin on that Sugar deal was over ten thousand.
But I didn't always win. My plan of trading was sound
enough and won oftener than it lost. If I had stuck to it I'd
have been right perhaps as often as seven out of ten times.
In fact, I always made money when I was sure I was right
23

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

before I began. What beat me was not having brains
enough to stick to my own game—that is, to play the
market only when I was satisfied that precedents favored
my play. There is a time for all things, but I didn't know it.
And that is precisely what beats so many men in Wall
Street who are very far from being in the main sucker
class. There is the plain fool, who does the wrong thing at
all times everywhere, but there is the Wall Street fool, who
thinks he must trade all the time. No man can always have
adequate reasons for buying or selling stocks daily or
sufficient knowledge to make his play an intelligent play.
I proved it Whenever I read the tape by the light of
experience I made money, but when I made a plain fool
play I had to lose. I was no exception, was I? There was the
huge quotation board staring me in the face, and the ticker
going on, and people trading and watching their tickets
turn" into cash or into waste paper. Of course I let the
craving for excitement get the better of my judgment. In a
bucket shop where your margin is a shoestring you don't
play for long pulls. You are wiped too easily and quickly.
The desire for constant action irrespective of underlying
conditions is responsible for many losses in Wall Street
even among the professionals, who feel that they must take
home some money every day, as though they were working
for regular wages. I was only a kid, remember. I did not
know then what I learned later, what made me fifteen
years later, wait two long weeks and see a stock on which I
was very bullish go up thirty points before I felt that it was
safe to buy it. I was broke and was trying to get back, and I
couldn't afford to play recklessly. I had to be right, and so I
waited. That was in 1915. It's a long story. I'll tell it later in
its proper place. Now let's go on from where after years of
practice at beating them I let the bucket shops take away
most of my winnings.
And with my eyes wide open, to boot! And it wasn't the
only period of my life when I did it, either. A stock
operator has to fight a lot of expensive enemies within
24

II

himself. Anyhow, I came to New York with twenty-five
hundred dollars. There were no bucket shops here that a
fellow could trust. The Stock Exchange and the police
between them had succeeded in closing them up pretty
tight. Besides, I wanted to find a place where the only limit
to my trading would be the size of my stake. I didn't have
much of one, but I didn't expect it to stay little forever. The
main thing at the start was to find a place where I wouldn't
have to worry about getting a square deal. So I went to a
New York Stock Exchange house that had a branch at
home where I knew some of the clerks. They have long
since gone out of business. I wasn't there long, didn't like
one of the partners, and then I went to A. R. Fullerton &
Co. Somebody must have told them about my early
experiences, because it was not long before they all got to
calling me the Boy Trader. I've always looked young. It was
a handicap in some ways but it compelled me to fight for
my own because so many tried to take advantage of my
youth. The chaps at the bucket shops seeing what a kid I
was, always thought I was a fool for luck and that that was
the only reason why I beat them so often.
Well, it wasn't six months before I was broke. I was a
pretty active trader and had a sort of reputation as a
winner. I guess my commissions amounted to something. I
ran up my account quite a little, but, of course, in the end I
lost. I played carefully; but I had to lose. I'll tell you the
reason: it was my remarkable success in the bucket shops!
I could beat the game my way only in a bucket shop;
where I was betting on fluctuations. My tape reading had
to do with that exclusively. When I bought the price was
there on the quotation board, right in front of me. Even
before I bought I knew exactly the price I'd have to pay for
my stock. And I always could sell on the instant. I could
scalp successfully, because I could move like lightning. I
could follow up my luck or cut my loss in a second.
Sometimes, for instance, I was certain a stock would move
at least a point. Well, I didn't have to hog it, I could put up
25

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

a point margin and double my money in a jiffy; or I'd take
half a point. On one or two hundred shares a day, that
wouldn't be bad at the end of the month, what?
The practical trouble with that arrangement, of course,
was that even if the bucket shop had the resources to stand
a big steady loss, they wouldn't do it. They wouldn't have a
customer around the place who had the bad taste to win all
the time.
At all events, what was a perfect system for trading in
bucket shops didn't work in Fullerton's office. There I was
actually buying and selling stocks. The price of Sugar on
the tape might be $105 and I could see a three-point drop
coming. As a matter of fact, at the very moment the ticker
was printing $105 on the tape the real price on the floor of
the Exchange might be $104 or $103. By the time my
order to sell a thousand shares got to Fullerton's floor man
to execute, the price might be still lower. I couldn't tell at
what price I had put out my thousand shares until I got a
report from the clerk. When I surely would have made
three thousand on the same transaction in a bucket shop I
might not make a cent in a Stock Exchange house. Of
course, I have taken an extreme case, but the fact remains
that in A. R. Fullerton's office the tape always talked
ancient history to me, as far as my system of trading went,
and I didn't realise it.
And then, too, if my order was fairly big my own sale
would tend further to depress the price. In the bucket shop
I didn't have to figure on the effect of my own trading. I
lost in New York because the game was altogether
different. It was not that I now was playing it legitimately
that made me lose, but that I was playing it ignorantly. I
have been told that I am a good reader of the tape. But
reading the tape like an expert did not save me. I might
have made out a great deal better if I had been on the floor
myself, a room trader. In a particular crowd perhaps I
might have adapted my system to the conditions
immediately before me. But, of course, if I had got to
26

II

operating on such a scale as I do now, for instance, the
system would have equally failed me, on account of the
effect of my own trading on prices.
In short, I did not know the game of stock speculation. I
knew a part of it, a rather important part, which has been
very valuable to me at all times. But if with all I had I still
lost, what chance does the green outsider have of winning,
or, rather, of cashing in?
It didn't take me long to realise that there was
something wrong with my play, but I couldn't spot the
exact trouble. There were times when my system worked
beautifully, and then, all of a sudden, nothing but one swat
after another. I was only twenty-two, remember; not that I
was so stuck on myself that I didn't want to know just
where I was at fault, but that at that age nobody knows
much of anything.
The people in the office were very nice to me. I couldn't
plunge as I wanted to because of their margin
requirements, but old A. R. Fullerton and the rest of the
firm were so kind to me that after six months of active
trading I not only lost all I had brought and all that I had
made there but I even owed the firm a few hundreds.
There I was, a mere kid, who had never before been
away from home, flat broke; but I knew there wasn't
anything wrong with me; only with my play. I don't know
whether I make myself plain, but I never lose my temper
over the stock market. I never argue with the tape. Getting
sore at the market doesn't get you anywhere.
I was so anxious to resume trading that I didn't lose a
minute, but went to old man Fullerton and said to him,
"Say, A. R., lend me five hundred dollars."
"What for?" says he. "I've got to have some money."
"What for?" he says again.
"For margin, of course," I said.

27

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

"Five hundred dollars?" he said, and frowned. "You
know they'd expect you to keep up a 10 per cent margin,
and that means one thousand dollars on one hundred
shares. Much better to give you a credit."
"No," I said, "I don't want a credit here. I already owe
the firm something. What I want is for you to lend me five
hundred dollars so I can go out and get a roll and come
back."
"How are you going to do it?" asked old A. R. "I'll go and
trade in a bucket shop," I told him.
"Trade here," he said.
"No," I said. "I'm not sure yet I can beat the game in this
office, but I am sure I can take money out of the bucket
shops. I know that game. I have a notion that I know just
where I went wrong here."
He let me have it, and I went out of that office where the
Boy Terror of the Bucket Shops, as they called him, had
lost his pile. I couldn't go back home because the shops
there would not take my business. New York was out of the
question; there weren't any doing business at that time.
They tell me that in the go's Broad Street and New Street
were full of them. But there weren't any when I needed
them in my business. So after some thinking I decided to
go to St. Louis. I had heard of two concerns there that did
an enormous business all through the Middle West. Their
profits must have been huge. They had branch offices in
dozens of towns. In fact I had been told that there were no
concerns in the East to compare with them for volume of
business. They ran openly and the best people traded there
without any qualms. A fellow even told me that the owner
of one of the concerns was a vice-president of the Chamber
of Commerce but that couldn't have been in St. Louis. At
any rate, that is where I went with my five hundred dollars
to bring back a stake to use as margin in the office of A. R.
Fullerton & Co., members of the New York Stock
Exchange.
28

II

When I got to St. Louis I went to the hotel, washed up
and went out to find the bucket shops. One was the J. G.
Dolan Company, and the other was H. S. Teller & Co. I
knew I could beat them. I was going to play dead safe—
carefully and conservatively. My one fear was that
somebody might recognise me and give me away, because
the bucket shops all over the country had heard of the Boy
Trader. They are like gambling houses and get all the
gossip of the professionals. Dolan was nearer than Teller,
and I went there first. I was hoping I might be allowed to
do business a few days before they told me to take my
trade somewhere else. I walked in. It was a whopping big
place and there must have been at least a couple of
hundred people there staring at the quotations. I was glad,
because in such a crowd I stood a better chance of being
unnoticed. I stood and watched the board and looked them
over carefully until I picked out the stock for my initial
play.
I looked around and saw the order-clerk at the window
where you put down your money and get your ticket. He
was looking at me so I walked up to him and asked, "Is this
where you trade in cotton and wheat?"
"Yes, sonny," says he.
"Can I buy stocks too?"
"You can if you have the cash," he said.
"Oh, I got that all right, all right," I said like a boasting
boy.
"You have, have you?" he says with a smile.
"How much stock can I buy for one hundred dollars?" I
asked, peeved-like.
"One hundred; if you got the hundred."
"I got the hundred. Yes; and two hundred too!" I told
him.
"Oh, my!" he said.
"Just you buy me two hundred shares," I said sharply.
"Two hundred what?" he asked, serious now. It was
business.
29

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I looked at the board again as if to guess wisely and told
him, "Two hundred Omaha."
"All right!" he said. He took my money, counted it and
wrote out the ticket.
"What's your name?" he asked me, and I answered,
"Horace Kent."
He gave me the ticket and I went away and sat down
among the customers to wait for the roll to grow.
I got quick action and I traded several times that day.
On the next day too. In two days I made twenty-eight
hundred dollars, and I was hoping they'd let me finish the
week out. At the rate I was going, that wouldn't be so bad.
Then I'd tackle the other shop, and if I had similar luck
there I'd go back to New York with a wad I could do
something with.
On the morning of the third day, when I went to the
window, bashful—like, to buy five hundred B. R. T. the
clerk said to me, "Say, Mr. Kent, the boss wants to see
you."
I knew the game was up. But I asked him, "What does
he want to see me about?"
"I don't know."
"Where is he?"
"In his private office. Go in that way." And he pointed to
a door. I went in. Dolan was sitting at his desk. He swung
around and said, "Sit down, Livingston."
He pointed to a chair. My last hope vanished. I don't
know how he discovered who I was; perhaps from the
hotel register.
"What do you want to see me about?" I asked him.
"Listen, kid. I ain't got nothin' again yeh, see? Nothin' at
all. See?"
"No, I don't see," I said.

30

II

He got up from his swivel chair. He was a whopping big
guy. He said to me, "Just come over here, Livingston, will
yeh?" and he walked to the door. He opened it and then he
pointed to the customers in the big room. "D'yeh see
them?" he asked.
"See what?"
"Them guys. Take a look at 'em, kid. There's three
hundred of 'em! Three hundred suckers! They feed me and
my family. See? Three hundred suckers! Then yeh come in,
and in two days yeh cop more than I get out of the three
hundred in two weeks. That ain't business, kid not for me!
I ain't got nothin' again yeh. Yer welcome to what ye've
got. But yeh don't get any more. There ain't any here for
yeh!"
"Why, I..."
"That's all. I seen yeh come in day before yesterday, and
I didn't like yer looks. On the level, I didn't. I spotted yeh
for a ringer. I called in that jackass there"—he pointed to
the guilty clerk "and asked what you'd done; and when he
told me I said to him: "I don't like that guy's looks. He's a
ringer!" And that piece of cheese says: "Ringer my eye,
boss! His name is Horace Kent, and he's a rah-rah boy
playing at being used to long pants. He's all right!" Well, I
let him have his way. That blankety-blank cost me twentyeight hundred dollars. I don't grudge it yeh, my boy. But
the safe is locked for yeh."
"Look here," I began.
"You look here, Livingston," he said. "I've heard all
about yeh. I make my money coppering suckers' bets, and
yeh don't belong here. I aim to be a sport and yer welcome
to what yeh pried off'n us. But more of that would make
me a sucker, now that I know who yeh are. So toddle
along, sonny!"
I left Dolan's place with my twenty-eight hundred
dollars' profit. Teller's place was in the same block. I had
found out that Teller was a very rich man who also ran up
a lot of pool rooms. I decided to go to his bucket shop. I
31

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

wondered whether it would be wise to start moderately
and work up to a thousand shares or to begin with a
plunge, on the theory that I might not be able to trade
more than one day. They get wise mighty quick when
they're losing and I did want to buy one thousand B. R. T. I
was sure I could take four or five points out of it. But if
they got suspicious or if too many customers were long of
that stock they might not let me trade at all. I thought
perhaps I'd better scatter my trades at first and begin
small. It wasn't as big a place as Dolan's, but the fixtures
were nicer and evidently the crowd was of a better class.
This suited me down to the ground and I decided to buy
my one thousand B. R. T. So I stepped up to the proper
window and said to the clerk, "I'd like to buy some B. R. T.
What's the limit?"
"There's no limit," said the clerk. "You can buy all you
please—if you've got the money."
"Buy fifteen hundred shares," I says, and took my roll
from my pocket while the clerk starts to write the ticket.
Then I saw a red-headed man just shove that clerk away
from the counter. He leaned across and said to me, "Say,
Livingston, you go back to Dolan's. We don't want your
business."
"Wait until I get my ticket," I said. "I just bought a little
B. R. T."
"You get no ticket here," he said. By this time other
clerks had got behind him and were looking at me. "Don't
ever come here to trade. We don't take your business.
Understand?"
There was no sense in getting mad or trying to argue, so
I went back to the hotel, paid my bill and took the first
train back to New York. It was tough. I wanted to take
back some real money and that Teller wouldn't let me
make even one trade.
I got back to New York, paid Fullerton his five hundred,
and started trading again with the St. Louis money. I had
good and bad spells, but I was doing better than breaking
32
