
only upon a single time frame, it illustrates how relative price swings reveal unique characteristics
of market movement.
Rate of change (ROC) indicators measure trending price over time. Volatility studies this same
information but first removes direction from the equation. It stretches waves of price movement into
a straight line and then calculates the length. Volatile markets move greater distances over time than
less volatile ones. But this internal engine has little value to swing traders unless it can contribute to
profits. Fortunately, volatility has an important characteristic that enables accurate prediction. It
tends to move in regular and identifiable cycles.
As prices ebb and flow, volatility oscillates between active and inactive states. Swing traders can
apply original techniques to measure this phenomenon in both the equities and futures markets. For
example, 10-and 100-period Historical Volatility studies the relationship between cyclical price
swings and their current movement. And Tony Crabel’s classic study of range expansion, Day
Trading with Short Term Price Patterns and Opening Range Breakout, predicts volatility through
patterns of wide and narrow price bars.

TREND-RANGE AXIS
Markets cycle between constricted ranges and directional trends through all time frames.
Congestion reflects negative feedback energy that invokes price movement between well-marked
boundaries but does not build direction. Rallies and selloffs reflect positive feedback energy that
invokes directional price movement. Conges tion breakouts shift market force from negative to
positive feedback. Climax events shift market force from positive to negative feedback. Profit
opportunity rises sharply at all feedback interfaces.
Momentum generates great force as increasing volatility resolves into directional price movement.
It quickly awakens the positive feedback state that invokes chart bar expansion out of congestion.
The crowd takes notice of this new, dynamic condition and participation rises. This fuels an
escalating momentum engine and generates further price change. This dynamic mechanism
continues to feed on itself until a climax finally shuts it down and forces a reversal into new
congestion.
Trend marks territory as it spikes through relative highs and lows within all time frames. This
signature behavior appears through all markets and in all historical chart activity. Trends print rising
or falling prices over time. A series of lower highs and lower lows identify downtrends while
uptrends reverse this sequence with higher highs and higher lows. Individual markets reflect a
powerful trend relativity phenomenon when viewed through different time frames. The same stock
may exhibit an uptrend on the daily chart, a bear market on the weekly, and sideways congestion
when seen through 60-minute bars.
Quiet periods characterize most market action. Strong directional movement requires an extended
rest to absorb instability. Long sideways or countertrend ranges after trends reflect lower
participation while they establish new support and resistance. Volatility slowly declines through this
congestion as price action recedes. As noted earlier, these dull markets finally invoke conditions
that encourage the next trend leg. Price reaches stability and momentum quickly returns to start a
new round of activity.
Price patterns represent dynamic trend or range systems that invoke measurable outcomes. Each
setup formation exhibits a directional probability that reflects current internal and external
conditions. Swing traders execute positions to capitalize on the pattern’s highest-odds tendency.

They also measure risk and apply defensive techniques to exit their trades if the pattern fails to
respond according to expectations.
Different tactics capitalize on each stage of the trend-range axis. But many participants misinterpret
their location and apply the wrong strategy at the wrong time. Or they limit execution to a narrow
trading style that fails through most market stages. Swing traders avoid these dangerous pitfalls
when they learn diverse strategies that apply to many different conditions and environments. But
first they must understand the complex mechanics of the trend-range axis:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Price movement demonstrates both directional trend and nondirectional range.
Range motion alternates with trend movement.
Trends reflect a state of positive feedback where price movement builds incrementally in a
single direction.
Ranges reflect a state of negative feedback where price movement pulses between minimum
and maximum points but does not build direction.
Trends reflect an upward or downward bias.
Trends change and reverse at certain complex points of development.
Ranges reflect their repeating patterns, bias for continuation or reversal, and the trend
intensity expected to follow them.
Movement out of ranges continues the existing trend or reverses it.
Range volatility peaks at the interface between a trend climax and the inception point of a
new congestion pattern.
Range volatility ebbs at the apex point just prior to the inception of a new trend.
High range volatility = wide range bars, high volume, and low price rate of change.
Low range volatility = narrow range bars, low volume, and low price rate of change.
Congestion pattern breakouts reflect a shift from negative feedback to positive feedback.
High volatility associated with the end of positive feedback induces nondirectional price
movement.
Low volatility associated with the end of negative feedback induces directional price
movement.
Negative feedback registers on oscillators as shifts between overbought and oversold states
but does not register on momentum gauges.
Positive feedback registers on momentum indicators as directional movement but gives false
readings on oscillators.

The pendulum swings endlessly between trend and range. As a market completes one dynamic
thrust, it pauses to test boundaries of the prior move and draw in new participants. Price finally
absorbs volatility and another trend leg begins. This cyclical movement invokes predictive chart
patterns over and over again through all time frames. Profitable trade execution arises through early
recognition of these formations and custom rules that capitalize on them.
Markets must continuously digest new information. Their future discounting mechanism drives
cyclical impulses of stability and instability. Each fresh piece of information shocks the common
knowledge and builds a dynamic friction that dissipates through volatility-driven price movement.
In its purest form, volatility generates negative feedback as price swings randomly back and forth.
But when focused in a single direction, positive feedback awakens to generate momentum into a
strong trend. Proper recognition of these active-passive states will determine the swing trader’s
success or failure in market speculation.
Pattern Cycles organize trading strategy along this important trend-range axis. When breakouts
erupt, follow the instincts of the momentum player. Buy high and sell higher as long as a greater

fool waits to assume the position. But quickly recognize when volume falls and bars contract. Then
focus to classic swing trading tactics and use price boundaries to fade the short-shift direction.
FIGURE 1.2
Markets alternate between directional trend and congested range through all time frames. After a rally or selloff,
stability slowly returns as a new range evolves. This quiet market eventually offers the right conditions for a new
trend to erupt. Notice how the end of each range exhibits a narrow empty zone interface just before a new trend
suddenly appears to start a fresh cycle.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

SWING VS. MOMENTUM
Fast-moving stocks attract attention and awaken great excitement. Many neophytes catch gambling
fever with these hot plays and never explore any other methods of speculation. The financial press
reinforces their dangerous illusion with frantic re porting of big gainers and losers. But momentum
profits require great skill and discipline. When the emotional crowd ignites sharp price movement,
greed quickly clouds risk awareness. Many participants react foolishly and chase positions into
major reversals. For most traders, momentum devours equity and destroys promising careers.
Price seeks equilibrium. When shock events destabilize a market, countertrend force emerges
quickly to return a stable state. This inevitable backward reaction follows each forward impulse.
Novices fail to consider this action-reaction cycle when they enter momentum positions. They
blindly execute trades that rely on a common but dangerous strategy: long side entry on an

accelerating price thrust. Reversals then appear suddenly to shake out the weak hands. The typical
momentum player lacks an effective risk management plan during these sharp counter-trends and
tries to exit with the herd. Bids dry up quickly on the selloff and force an execution well below the
intended price.
The momentum chase chews up trading accounts during choppy markets as well. This popular
strategy requires a strong trending environment. As noted earlier, periods of directional price
change last a relatively short time in relation to longer sideways congestion. But rather than stand
aside, many participants fall prey to wish fulfillment and see trends where they don’t exist. They
enter small price swings on the false assumption that the action represents a new breakout. While
these errors may not incur large losses, they damage equity and confidence at the same time.
Survivors of the momentum game begin to appreciate the market’s complexity and realize that
trading mastery requires many diverse skills. As price cycles through regular phases, strategy needs
to adapt quickly to capitalize on the current crowd. Swing trades that execute right near support or
resistance offer one powerful alternative. This classic execution style demands more precise
planning than momentum, but allows measurable risk and highly consistent rewards.
Trend-range alternation spawns different trading styles. When markets ignite into rapid price
movement, skilled momentum traders use the crowd’s excitement
TABLE 1.1
Momentum vs. Swing Characteristics
Momentum
Trade
State:
Positive feedback
Strategy:
Reward
Basis:
Demand
Chart:
Trend
Impulse:
Action
Purpose:
Thrust
Condition:
Instability
Indicator:
Lagging
Price Change:
Directional

Swing
Negative feedback
Risk
Supply
Range
Reaction
Test
Stability
Leading
Flat-line

to pocket large gains. The inevitable rollover into defined support and resistance marks the
dominance of precise swing trading techniques. But neither category actually stands apart from the
other. The need to adapt quickly to changing market conditions requires that all successful traders
apply elements of both strategies to earn a living.
Swing traders seek to exploit direct price thrusts as they enter positions at support or resistance.
They use chart pattern characteristics to locate and execute short-term market inefficiencies in both
trending and rangebound markets. This classic strategy closely relates to position trading tactics that
hold stocks from 1 to 3 days or 1 to 3 weeks. But swing trading actually represents a time frameindependent methodology. Modern practitioners may never hold a position overnight but still apply
the exact same strategies as longer-term participants.
The origin of the swing stems from George Taylor’s The Taylor Trading Technique, a classic
commentary on the futures markets first published in the 1950s. His 3-Day Method envisions a
cycle that classifies each day as a “buy,” “sell,” or “sell short’’ opportunity. At its core, the narrow
swing tactic buys at support and sells at resistance through congested markets. It fades the shortterm direction as it predicts that a barrier will hold and reverse price. Modern trading expands this

concept to locate the swing through many other market conditions and broadens the tactics that
build profits.
The equity markets present a natural arena for the swing trader. The symbiotic relationship between
futures and equities ensures that cyclical buying and selling behavior crosses all markets. Equities
have the advantages of massive liquidity and time frame diversity. In other words, participants can
scalp the same market at the same time that institutions take positions for multiyear investments.
Classic swing trading concepts must adapt to unlock their power in today’s markets. The revolution
in high-speed trade execution opens swing strategies that last for minutes instead of days.
Dependable price patterns appear on charts in all time frames. As modern traders work with realtime charting, intraday swing setups offer the same opportunities that appear daily on longer-term
charts.
The ability to trade through diverse conditions marks successful careers. Swing trading provides a
natural framework to identify changing conditions and apply new methods to exploit them. This
exposes another outdated concept for this versatile approach. At its core, swing trading is not the
opposite of momentum trading. During those times when strong price movement characterizes a
market, disciplined momentum strategy becomes the preferred swing trade. In this way, modern
swing traders can apply the principles of risk management and price boundaries to the manic world
of the speculator—and use momentum’s greed to their advantage.

TIME
Pattern Cycles oscillate equally through all time frames. Trade setups remain valid in every chart
view, whether they print on 1-minute or monthly bars. Each chart length attracts a specialized group
of participants that interacts with all other groups through the universal mechanics of greed and
fear. This dynamic 3D process results in trend convergence-divergence through different time
lengths. Swing traders improve performance when they adjust their chart view to match the chosen
holding period. As Table 1–2 illustrates, modern swing tactics encompass both the world of the day
trader and the position trader.
Successful trade execution aligns positions through a multidimensional time view. First choose a
primary screen that reflects the holding period and matching strategy. Then study the chart one
magnitude above that period to identify support-resistance and other landscape features that impact
reward:risk. Finally, shift down to the chart one magnitude below the primary screen and identify
low-risk entry points. Alexander Elder defined many elements of this strategy in his Triple Screen
system in Trading for a Living. The time has come to expand his classic concepts to accommodate
the faster fingers of the modern high-speed markets.
Evaluate a trade setup through all time frames that may affect the position. The view just above and
below the intended holding period may not capture important trendlines, gaps, or patterns. Study
that market’s multiyear history before execution as time permits to identify large-scale swing
pivots. If the trade target passes through major highs or lows that are several years old, give those
levels adequate attention. Other players will see the same chart features and may use them for entry
or exit. But keep in mind that the importance of old price extremes decays over time. Consider the
current emotional intensity of the crowd before dismissing trades based on old obstacles.
Time frame analysis above and below the current setup chart will identify opportunity and risk in
most cases. For example, when a promising setup appears on a 5-minute chart, the swing trader
checks the 60-minute chart for support-resistance but uses the 1-minute chart to time execution to
the short-term flow of the market. This multidimensional approach works through all time levels.

Even mutual fund holders can benefit when they locate a potential investment on a weekly chart but
use the daily and monthly to time entry to the highest probability for success.
Market participants routinely fail at time management. Many never identify their intended holding
period before they enter a trade. Others miss major supportTABLE 1.2
Trading Style and Related Price Chart
Participant
Price Chart
Scalpers
1-minute
Day traders
5-minute
Position traders
60-minute
Investors
Daily
Institutions
Weekly
resistance on the daily chart when they execute on the 60-minute bars. Some sit on nonperforming
positions for weeks and tie up important capital while excellent opportunities pass by. In all cases,
time works as efficiently as price to end promising careers.
Time of day, week, and month all display unique properties that enhance or damage the odds for
profit. Market insiders use the volatility of first-hour executions to fade clean trends and empty
pockets. Options expiration week can kill strong markets or force flat markets to explode. Thin
holiday sessions offer dramatic rallies or selloffs in the most unexpected issues. And many Fridays
begin with government statistics that ignite sharp price movement.
Every profit opportunity arrives with a time shadow hanging over it. Learn to focus attention on
important feedback at the exact time that the information will likely impact that market. It may flag
an execution window that closes in minutes or offer an exit that should be taken without question
when it arrives. Recognize the impact of time on reward:risk before position entry and update
conclusions as each new price bar prints.
Swing traders must manage time as efficiently as price. Calculate the expected holding period for
each new position based on the distance to the next high-risk zone. Use both price and time triggers
for stop loss management. Time should activate exits on nonperforming trades even when price
stops have not been hit. Execute only when time bias improves the odds for profit, and stand aside
frequently.

TREND RELATIVITY
Trends validate only for the time frame in which they occur. A trend in one time frame does not
predict price change in the next lower time frame until the shorter period intersects key levels of the
larger impulse. Pattern Cycles in time frames larger and smaller than the current trend are
independent and display unique attributes of the trend-range axis. This interrelationship continues
all the way from 1-minute through yearly chart analysis.
Swing traders must always operate within this 3D trend relativity. The most profitable positions will
align to support-resistance on the chart above the trade and display low-risk entry points on the
chart below. But trend relativity considerations do not end there. Price evolves through bull and
bear conflicts in all time frames. When ongoing trends don’t fit neatly into specific charting periods,
trade preparation may become subjective and dangerous.

Hard work yields promising setups that align to the swing trader’s holding period. But these
opportunities must fit into a larger market structure for the positions to succeed. With trends in
motion less than 20% of the time through all markets, odds do not favor a confluence of favorable
trading conditions through three time frames. The perfect opportunity rarely exists. An exciting
breakout on one chart may face massive resistance on the longer-term view just above a planned
entry level. Or a shorter-term chart may display so much volatility that any entry becomes a
dangerous enterprise.
Few executions align perfectly with the charting landscape. Successful trading requires a careful
analysis of conflicting information and entry when favorable odds rise to an acceptable level. When
faced with a good setup in one time frame but marginal conditions for those surrounding it, use all
available skills to evaluate the overall risk. If reward:risk moves into a tolerable range, consider
execution even if all factors do not favor success. That’s the nature of the trading game.
Support-resistance priority parallels chart length. Use this hierarchy to locate high-probability entry
levels and avoid low-reward trades. For example, major highs and lows on the daily chart carry
greater importance than those on the 5-minute chart. As the shorter bars drift down toward the lows
of the longer view, strong support exists for a significant bounce. These 3D mechanics also suggest
that resistance in the time frame shorter than the position can safely be ignored when other
conditions support the entry.
Profit opportunity aligns to specific time frames. But many participants never clearly define their
targeted holding period and trap themselves in a destructive strategy flaw. They see their trades in
one time frame but execute them in another. This trend relativity error often forces a new position
just as the short-term swing turns sharply against the entry. Neophytes fall into this trap with great
frequency. They feel pride when they see an impending move on their favorite chart and recklessly
jump on board. The action-reaction cycle then kicks in and shakes them out as price tests support
before heading higher.
Trend relativity errors rob profits on good entries as well. No one wants to leave money on the
table. So marginal players may freeze as soon as a new position moves in their favor. But inaccurate
price targets can measure one trend while the initial entry springs off another. Natural wave motion
then whipsaws the flawed position sharply and sends the trade into a substantial loss well before
reaching a reward target.
Visual information seeks to reduce noise and increase signal as it travels from the eye to the brain.
The rational mind sees large trends but may conveniently filter out the many obstacles along the
way. Or the marginal participant manipulates the chosen holding period and curve fits the
opportunity to match the current plan. Most players should never change their holding period
without detailed preplanning. Specific time frames require unique skills that each swing trader must
master with experience. This noble effort should not begin trying to rescue a loser from bad
decision-making.
Compensate for this mental bias through precise trade management. Begin with a sharp focus on the
next direct move within a predetermined time frame. Prepare a written trading plan that states how
long the position will be held and stick with it. Establish a profit target for each promising setup and
then reevaluate the landscape that price must cross to get there. Consider the pure time element of
the trade. Decide how many bars must pass before a trade will be abandoned, regardless of gain or
loss.
FIGURE 1.3
Three different time frame charts paint very different pictures of the same price action. Atmel breaks through
major horizontal support and pulls back to test resistance on the daily view. But that important test hides from the
