
If the index is price weighted, replication of the index requires an equal number of
shares of each stock. So the total dividend payout is simply the sum of all the dividends.
If the index is capitalization weighted, replication of the index requires a different
number of shares for each stock. In that case, the total dividend payout will be the
dividend payout for each stock multiplied by the number of shares required for
replication.

Given the apparently complex dividend calculations, as well as the interest consid-
erations on the index and dividends, determining the exact fair value of a futures
contract might seem a daunting task. In practice, however, active trading firms have
computers which can quickly, and continuously, calculate the fair value for futures
contracts on most commonly traded stock indices,

Even when it is not possible to calculate the exact fair value, many traders find it
almost as effective to estimate the fair value by adding the carrying cost to the index and
subtracting the average dividend payout. For example, suppose there are nine weeks


308 Chapter 15

(63 days) to expiration on a stock index futures contract with the underlying index
currently at 425.00. If interest rates are 8% annually, and the average annual dividend
payout on the stocks making up the index is 6%, we have:

(8% — 6%) x 63/365 x 425.00 = 1.47

Therefore, the approximate fair value of the futures contract is 425.00 + 1.47 = 426.47,
The reader should be aware that this is only an estimate. If it turns out that a large
number of stocks do not pay their regular dividends during this nine-week period, or if
the dividend payout is unusually large, this estimate could prove to be far from accurate.

The daily dividend payout for the S&P 500 index for one quarterly cycle, from
March 1993 to June 1993 expiration, is shown in Figure 15-1, Note the large amounts
which were paid at the beginning of May, compared to the relatively small amounts
paid during April. The cumulative effect of this dividend payout, in terms of the total of
dividends expected to June expiration, is shown in Figure 15-2. The line drops only
slightly during April, but declines sharply during the first two weeks in May. A trader
who intended to initiate some type of arbitrage strategy either just prior to, or just after,
a large dividend payout, would need more than a rough estimate of the fair value of an
S&P 500 futures contract. If he were not aware of the exact dividend payout, a strategy
which he expected to be profitable might turn out to be just the opposite.

It is also possible to reverse the calculations and ask, given an observed futures
price, where would the index have to be for the futures to be fairly valued? For example,

Figure 15-1: S&P 500 Index Dividend Payout
(March 1993 to June 1993 Expiration)

0.25

0.20 |
| t

015

0.10

Daily Dividends in Index Points

0.00 He Perey t mH
25 30 5 10.15 20 25 30 5 10 15 20 25 30 5 10 15
April May dune



Stock Index Futures and Options 309

Figure 15-2: S&P 500 Dividends to Expiration
(March 1993 to June 1993 Expiration)

3507
3005 —_—
250
2
&
fe}
a.
% 200-4
3
£
£
S 1.805
c
oS
QZ
5
1.004
0.50
Q.OOS TAT TAT TTT TAT TTT TTT TT TTI TTT TTT TTT TTT TAT TTT TT TTT tt tt rt
25 30 5 10 15 20 25 30 5 10 15 20 25 30 5 10
March April May June

if the futures price is 432.70, and we assume that it is trading at fair value, what should
the index price be if there are 6 weeks (42 days) to expiration, interest rates are 6%, and
the expected dividend payout is 2.23? First we can add the dividend payout of 2.23 to
the futures price of 432.70, giving a value of 434.93. Then we can deduct the carrying
costs on this amount over the next six-weeks:

434.93 x 42/365 x 6% = 3.00
The implied index value is therefore 434.93 — 3.00 = 431.93.

INDEX ARBITRAGE

In theory, the price of a futures contract should always reflect the fair value of holding
the futures contract rather than holding the stocks making up the index. But markets
are not always one hundred percent efficient. If the futures price doesn’t reflect the fair
value, a trader can execute a profitable arbitrage by purchasing the undervalued asset,
either the basket of stocks or the futures contract, and selling the overvalued asset. Ifa
trader believes that the fair value of a stock index futures contract is 386.75, and finds
that the futures contract is trading at 387.40, he will attempt to buy all the stocks in
their correct proportion and simultaneously sell the futures contract. If the trader
succeeds, and if the point value of the futures contract is $500, for each futures contract
he executes he will show a theoretical profit of:

(387.40 - 386.75) x $500 = .65 x $500 = $325


310 Chapter 15

Of course, this profit will only be fully realized at expiration, when the futures contract
is automatically settled at the index value. At the same time, the trader will also have
to liquidate his stock holdings to ensure that at the moment of expiration both his
futures position and stock position zero out. This can be done by placing a market on
close order, guaranteeing that the last trade price for each stock which determines the
final index value will be the liquidation price for the trader’s stock holdings.

What would happen if the fair value for the stock index futures contract were
386.75, but the futures contract were actually trading at 385.95? Now the trader would
take just the opposite position, buying the undervalued futures contract and selling the
basket of stocks. The theoretical profit would be:

(386.75 - 385.95} x $500 = .80 x $500 = $400

Unfortunately, some practical problems might affect the workability of this strategy. If
the trader wants to sell stock which he doesn’t own, he will have to borrow it. If no
stock is available, or if the market in which he is dealing does not freely permit the short
sale of stock, he may not be able to execute the arbitrage, no matter how mispriced the
futures contract. Finally, a trader might not earn full interest on the short sale of stock.
If the actual interest earned is less than the interest rate used to calculate the fair value
of the futures contract, the fair value of the futures contract, for trading purposes, may
be less than the presumed fair value of 386.75.

This type of trading strategy, where one buys or sells a mispriced stock index futures
contract and takes an opposing position in the underlying stocks, is one type of index
arbitrage. Since computers can often be programmed to calculate the fair value of a
futures contract, and to exectte the arbitrage when the futures contract is mispriced,
such a strategy is also commonly referred to as program trading. A buy program consists
of buying the stocks and selling the futures contract, and a sell program consists of selling
the stocks and buying the futures contract.

How great a mispricing of a futures contract relative to the price of the underlying
stocks justifies futures arbitrage? If markets are totally frictionless, a trader would
attempt to execute an arbitrage if there were any mispricing, no matter how small.
Unfortunately, markets are not totally frictionless. An arbitrage which in theory is
profitable because of a mispriced futures contract may be unprofitable when transaction
costs are factored in. Ifa trader believes that it will cost approximately 1% index point
to execute all the trades required for an arbitrage, he will not attempt to enter into a
program trade unless the futures contract is at least 50 too expensive or too cheap. If
he also considers the problems associated with the short sale of stock, he may decide
that the futures contract must be .75 too cheap before he will initiate a sell program.
With the fair value of the futures contract at 386.75, the trader will initiate a program
trade only if the price of the futures contract is outside the range

386.75 — .75 and 386.75 + .50

or less than 386.00 and more than 387.25.
Even if the quoted index price is 386.75, and the futures contract is higher than
387.25 or lower than 386.00, the trader cannot be certain that a profit opportunity


Stock Index Futures and Options 311

exists. In order to execute an arbitrage, it is necessary to trade all the stocks at a price
consistent with the index value of 386.75. But there is a bid price and an offer price for
each individual stock, and it is likely that the last trade price for some of the stocks in
the index took place at the bid price, some at the ask price, and some at prices in
petween. If a trader wants to immediately execute a buy program, he will have to
purchase every stock in the index at the ask price, and this may be at a price well above
the quoted index value.

Moreover, the quoted index price can sometimes present a distorted picture of
actual market conditions. The index itself may be quoted at 386.75, but does that
represent the price at which all the stocks in the index are trading? Perhaps trading in
some of the stocks has been halted due to pending news. Or perhaps the last sale for
one or more of the stocks took place at a price outside the current market for the stock.
The last sale in a stock may have been at 381/4, but if the market in the stock is falling
very quickly, the offered price for the stock may be 37934. The index value is based on
the last sale price of 381/4, but the actual price is at least as low as 3744, and possibly
even lower. Ifa trader hopes to profit from a mispriced futures contract he must know
the true market for all the stocks which underlie that contract.

Assuming the trader can execute all purchases and sales at theoretically profitable
prices, is there anything which could go wrong with a program trade consisting of stocks
against stock index futures? Suppose a trader buys an underpriced futures contract and
simultaneously sells the underlying stocks. If the index starts to fall, and the futures
contract follows, the trader will show a profit on his stock trades and a loss on his futures
trade, and presumably these two components will offset each other. Unfortunately, the
stock trades, being subject to stock-type settlement, only result in a paper profit, while
the futures trade, being subject to futures-type settlement, results in a cash loss. If the
index drops far enough, and the trader must borrow cash to meet the variation
requirements for the futures contract, the interest cost may be so great that the arbitrage
which initially appeared profitable actually turns into a loss. This is similar to the
settlement risk for a conversion or reversal in the futures option market described in
Chapter 11.

From this, we can see that a program trade always wants the market to move in
the direction of the futures contract so that cash will flow into the trader’s account. This
will increase the trader’s potential profit, since he will be able to earn interest on this
cash over the life of the futures contract. In this respect, we can apply the concept of
the delta to futures contracts in much the same way we do to an option contract. The
delta is the rate at which a contract will change its theoretical value with respect to
movement in the underlying contract. For example, assume that a stock index is quoted
at 300.00. If there are three months to expiration, with interest rates at 8%, and an
expected dividend payout of 4.50, the fair value of a futures contract is approximately:

300.00 + (300.00 x 3/12 x .08) — 4.50 = 301.50

Suppose the index immediately rises 10% to 330.00. The new fair value of the futures
Contract is:


S312 Chapter 15

330.00 + (330.00 x 3/12 x .08) - 4.50 = 332.10

The index rose 30.00 while the futures contract rose 30.60, The delta of the futures
contract is therefore 102, since 30.60/30.00 = 1.02. The futures contract is changing
its value at 102% the rate of the underlying index.

If we assume that the dividend payout remains constant, the delta of a futures
contract is simply a function of interest rates. The extra two deltas associated with the
futures contract results from an interest rate of 8% and a time to expiration of three
months, since 3/12 x .08 = .02. As the amount of time to expiration changes, or as
interest rates change, the delta of the futures contract will also change.

We can now express in delta terms the amount by which a program trade is
unbalanced. If a trader buys 50 futures contracts, each with a delta of 102, and sells an
appropriate amount of the underlying stocks, his delta total position is

(50 x 102} - (50 x 100) = +100

He is long as if he had purchased stock outright corresponding to one index contract. If
he wants to be exactly delta neutral, he must sell a basket of stocks corresponding to
one index contract.

A change in interest rates will not only affect the delta of the futures contract, but
can also affect the profitability of a program trade. If a trader institutes a buy program
(buy the stocks, sell the futures), he is effectively borrowing cash in order to purchase
the stocks. If the cost of funds is tied to a floating interest rate, any increase in rates will
hurt his position and any decrease will help. If he institutes a sell program (sell the
stocks, buy the futures) he is effectively lending cash. Now any increase in rates will
help his position and any decrease will hurt. If the change in interest rates is sufficiently
large, an initially profitable program trade might become unprofitable. This can be
especially true if the program trade consists of very long-term futures contracts. In such
a case, the interest considerations are magnified because of the increased costs of
borrowing or lending over extended periods. In the same way, because of reduced
interest considerations, changes in interest rates are unlikely to affect program trades
consisting of short-term futures.

We have thus far assumed that the dividend payout of all the stocks in an index
remains constant, but this is not necessarily true. Companies can have good years and
bad years, and their dividend policies can change accordingly. In a buy program (buy
the stocks, sell the futures), any increase in dividends will help the position, and any
decrease will hurt. In a sell program (sell the stocks, buy the futures), the effect is just
the opposite. In a broadly based index consisting of hundreds of stocks it is unlikely that
a change in the dividend policy of any one company, or even several companies, will
have a significant impact on the profitability of a program trade. But in a narrowly based
index consisting of only a few stocks, a change in the expected dividend payout of even
one firm can alter the potential profitability of the trade. In sucha case, the trader must
carefully consider beforehand the possibility of a dividend change in the companies
making up the index.


Stock Index Futures and Options 313

INDEX OPTIONS

There are really two types of stock index options, those where the underlying is a stock
index futures contract, and those where the underlying is the index itself. Although they
are alike in many respects, they also have unique characteristics which set them apart
from each other. For this reason, we will look at each market separately.

Options on Stock Index Futures

Since an option on a stock index futures contract is often evaluated in the same way as
a traditional futures option, a trader in such a market has all the usual problems which
go with futures option evaluation. He must pick 4 suitable pricing model, determine the
correct inputs into the model, choose appropriate strategies, and consider the risks that
go with these strategies. Since exercise or assignment of a futures option contract will
result in the trader taking a long or short position in the stock index futures contract,
the trader might logically use the current futures price as the underlying price input into
his theoretical pricing model. But a futures option trader is often faced with a new
problem. Should he also use the current price of the futures contract as his price input
if the futures contract is clearly mispriced and trading at other than fair value?

For example, if a stock index futures contract is trading at 424.00 but an option
trader believes that the fair value is 425.00, which value should the trader feed into his
theoretical pricing model? If the trader really believes that the futures contract ought to
be trading at 425.00, and also believes that all the assumptions upon which the
theoretical pricing model is based are valid, then he might very well choose to use
425.00 as the underlying price in his model. He can then take option positions, whether
outright or spread positions, by purchasing options which he believes are underpriced
and selling those which he believes are overpriced.

Notice, however, that with the futures contract trading at 424.00, he cannot use
425.00 as his price input and still use the futures contract to hedge his option position.
If he were to do so, whatever positive theoretical edge he achieved because of his option
trades would automatically be offset by the negative theoretical edge resulting from his
futures trades. This becomes obvious when we recall the basic synthetic relationship for
futures options from Chapter 11:

call price — put price = futures price — exercise price

If the trader believes the underlying futures contract ought to be trading at 425.00, then
he also believes that the 425 call and the 425 put ought to be trading at an identical
Price. The difference between the presumed futures price and the exercise price is zero,
so the difference between the call price and put price ought to also be zero. But with
the underlying futures market actually trading at 424.00, the call price will be approxi-
mately 1.00 less than the put price. If the 425 call is trading for 8.50 and the 425 put
is trading for 9.50, the call will appear too cheap to the trader and the put will appear
too expensive. Unfortunately, if the trader buys the call for 8.50 and sells the put for
9.50, he has no way to lock in his presumed profit of 1.00. If he attempts to complete
the reverse conversion (buy the call, sell the put, sell the underlying), he will have to


314 Chapter 15

do so by selling the futures contract at 424.00. What he makes on the options he will
give back on the futures contract.

If a trader simply wants to execute volatility or directional spreads based on a
presumed underlying price of 425.00, then it might very well make sense to use that
price as the input into the theoretical pricing model. But professional option traders rely
heavily on arbitrage relationships for many of their trading strategies. If a price other
than the actual underlying price is used, these arbitrage relationships will no longer be
valid. Because the choice of underlying price may vary from trader to trader, many
on-line option evaluation services give traders the choice of using either the actual
futures price or the theoretical futures price as the basis for theoretical evaluation.

Although the ultimate decision about the underlying price is the trader’s, in a stock
index futures option market a trader should be very careful about using an underlying
futures price different from the quoted price. As we have already seen, the theoretical
value of a stock index futures contract depends on information which may not be readily
available to the trader. If he is wrong about the price at which the index is actually
trading because the individual stock prices do not reflect the true market, his theoretical
evaluation of the futures contract will be incorrect. Most traders have learned through
experience that the apparent mispricing of a stock index futures contract is often
illusory, or at least smaller than it appears.

Options on a Cash Index

The exercise or assignment of a stock option requires the buyer or seller to take delivery
or make delivery of the underlying stock. In theory there is no reason why the exercise
or assignment of a stock index option could not be treated the same way. If a trader
were to exercise such an option, he would take delivery or make delivery of all the
stocks in the index, in their correct proportion, at a price equivalent to the value of the
index. The trader who was assigned would take an opposing position at the same price.

While this sounds reasonable, in practice it presents the same problems that would
arise if we were to settle a stock index futures contract through the physical delivery of
all the stocks. The delivery of many different stocks, in their appropriate amounts (which
might include fractional shares), would overwhelm the clearing organization. As with
futures, the popular solution is to settle the contract in cash rather than through physical
delivery. If a trader holds a 440 call and exercises it with the index at 450, he is credited
with a cash amount equivalent to 10 index points. If each index point has a value of
$100, his account is credited with $1,000. The account of the trader who is assigned
on the same call is debited $1,000. In the same way, ifa trader exercises a 475 put with
the index at 450, his account will be credited with $2,500. The account of the trader
who is assigned will be debited $2,500.

In theory, if the index option is American, carrying with it the right of early
exercise, the cash settlement should be based on the index value at the time the trader
exercises his option. But this is impractical since exercise is not an instantaneous
transaction, An exercise notice must be filled out by the trader, submitted to the clearing
firm, and then submitted to the clearing house. Even if one could pinpoint the precise
time at which an option was exercised, it might be difficult to ascertain the exact value


Stock Index Futures and Options 315

of the index. For all these reasons, the exercise or assignment value for an index option
is calculated from the index value at the end of the trading day.3 Whether an exercise
notice is submitted at 10:00 AM or 3:00 PM, both traders will be credited with cash equal
to the difference between the exercise price and the index value at the close of trading
on that day.4

Evaluating a Cash Index Option

The most common method for evaluating cash options on a stock index is based on the
assumption that the underlying contract for a cash index option is a basket of stocks
which, taken together, have the characteristics of one individual stock. Therefore, a
trader might logically choose to evaluate options on an index using a traditional stock
option model, the Black-Scholes model for European options or the Cox-Ross-Ruben-
stein model for American options. In either case, it will be necessary to feed into the
model the usual information: time to expiration, exercise price, underlying price,
interest rates, volatility, and dividend payout. Unfortunately, the dividend payout
presents a problem which we have already touched upon in the discussion of stock
index futures. If the options are European, with no possibility of early exercise, the total
amount of dividend payout expected to expiration is sufficient for theoretical evaluation.
But if the options are American, where early exercise is a possibility, we need to know
the exact date of the dividend payout. There is, however, no one exact date since
dividends on different stocks are paid at different times. In order to accurately evaluate
American options, we need to create a matrix of dividend payouts with the dates and
amounts, and then feed this into our theoretical pricing model. Ifa trader wants an exact
evaluation of a stock index option, he will need software which is capable of exact
dividend calculations.
