
Using the bullish percent index
You can use the bullish percent index (BPI) to fine-tune and confirm trading
signals you see on the weekly index charts. The BPI is a powerful indicator
that shows the percentage of stocks that have generated buy signals compared
with the total number of stocks in a given index. This indicator originally was
used to track all the stocks on the NYSE, but it also can be applied to any
broad market index, including the S&P 500, the NASDAQ Composite, or even
the more narrowly defined NASDAQ 100 and sector indexes. BPI provides
fewer and better signals when evaluating larger groups of stocks.
The BPI is based on point-and-figure charts — probably the oldest and simplest
stock charting technique — and helps you evaluate the strength of the
market as a whole. Calculating the BPI is a bit daunting, but fortunately, it’s
published online. For example, you can find BPIs at Stockcharts.com, where
the current states of this indicator for the major indexes and several sector
indexes are displayed and interpreted. See http://stockcharts.com/
symsearch/index.html?$BP for details.
As an indicator, BPI works a bit like an oscillator (see Chapter 11). It displays
values ranging from 0 to 100 percent to identify oversold and overbought
market conditions. For example, when fewer than 30 percent of all stocks
are on a buy signal, the BPI shows that the market is oversold and ripe for
turnaround. When more than 70 percent of all stocks signal a buy, the BPI
shows the market is overbought and ripe for a downturn.
However, like individual stocks, broad market indexes can remain overbought or oversold for extended periods of time, so by themselves, BPI
readings below 30 percent or above 70 percent don’t necessarily represent
respective buy or sell signals. BPI can and does provide readings well above
70 percent and well below 30 percent for extended periods of time.
Changes in BPI levels are triggered by reversal patterns. A 6 percent change in
the stocks of a given index is required to trigger any changes (up or down) in
the BPI. These reversal patterns are interpreted to describe the state of the
market using six unique conditions that roughly correspond with the six
phases of the market described in the introduction to this chapter. Here are
the six states of the BPI:

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy
✓ Bull alert: Corresponds with the bullish transition phase. It’s triggered
when the BPI is less than 30 percent and reverses direction when 6
percent (or more) of all stocks change to buy signals.
✓ Bull confirmed: Corresponds with the bull market phase. When the BPI
indicator forms a higher high, a bull market is confirmed.
✓ Bull correction: Corresponds with the bullish pullback phase. This
condition occurs only after the BPI confirms a bull market and a minimum
of 6 percent of all stocks change from buy to sell signals. If the BPI is greater
than 70 percent, this change may lead to a bear alert (that’s up next).
✓ Bear alert: Corresponds with the bearish transition phase. It’s triggered
when the BPI is greater than 70 percent and reverses direction after 6
percent of all stocks change to sell signals.
✓ Bear confirmed: Corresponds with the bear market phase. When the BPI
indicator forms a lower low, a bear market is confirmed.
✓ Bear correction: Corresponds with the bearish pullback phase. This
condition occurs only after the BPI confirms a bear market and at least
6 percent of all stocks change from sell to buy signals. If BPI is less than
30 percent, this change may lead to a bull alert.
Although BPI is not a leading indicator, it gives you a good feel for the overall
health of the market. When used with broad-based indexes, the BPI doesn’t
speak often. After all, over 1,800 stocks are traded on the NYSE. For the BPI to
register a reversal, at least 6 percent (or approximately 112) of those stocks
must change from a buy signal to a sell signal (or vice versa). Actually, the
distinction’s a bit more subtle than that. A total of 112 more stocks must
change to sell signals than are changing to buy signals for the index to change
from bull confirmed to bull correction conditions.
The BPI for smaller stock indexes generates considerably more signals. A 6
percent change on the NASDAQ 100 requires only a balance of six stocks to
change from buy to sell signals. Although the BPI provides information about
the condition of these smaller indexes, you must use the signals with care.
We believe this indicator is best used with broader-based indexes such as the
NASDAQ Composite, the NYSE, or the S&P 500.

Selecting Your Trading Stock
After you’ve identified the dominant trend, the leading and lagging sectors,
and the current state of the business climate, it’s time to select stocks to
trade. Beyond general market conditions, two factors drive a stock’s price
higher or lower:
✓ The fundamental condition of a company’s business
✓ The technical condition of a company’s stock

213

214 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
We cover these topics in great detail in Parts II and III of this book, so in this
section, we highlight only a few important factors for you to consider when
selecting your trading stock. On the fundamental side, earnings matter more
than any other fundamental data. Traders pay particular attention to the rate
of earnings growth as characterized by the earnings per share (EPS) growth
rate. In general, the bigger the EPS growth rate, the better the stock price,
and vice versa. Stocks without earnings often make very dangerous trading
candidates for long-side trades. Although some special situations may merit
your consideration, stocks without earnings carry a special risk. Any hint of
unfavorable press sends the stock’s price reeling. Besides, the downside risk
is simply too great for our taste.

Exchange-traded funds
Up to this point in the chapter, we’ve mostly
talked about trading individual stocks, but at
times, you may want to consider trading a
basket of stocks. For example, say your indicators all suggest a new bullish transition or
bull market phase, but few, if any, stocks are
showing reliable trading patterns. You want to
enter the market with a small position to take
advantage of these relatively early signals, but
you can’t quite identify a good trading stock.
If that’s the case, you may want to try an
exchange-traded index fund, known as an
exchange-traded fund (ETF). An ETF is similar to
an index mutual fund but is traded on the stock
exchanges, just like shares of stock. However,
an ETF differs from a traditional mutual fund
in several important ways. For example, an
ETF order is filled at the price when the trade
is executed, not at the end of the trading day
like most mutual funds. Also, you can place
your ETF order just like any other stock order.
You may use market orders, limit orders, stop
orders, and stop-limit orders. And, unlike a
traditional mutual fund, you may short shares

of an ETF. See Chapter 14 for the mechanics of
selling short.
ETFs are available for indexes such as the
NASDAQ 100 (stock symbol QQQQ), the S&P 500
(stock symbol SPY), the Dow Jones Industrial
Index (stock symbol DIA), and even many narrowly focused stock sectors. Many brands of
ETFs are on the market, and they go by names
such as Select Sector SPDR (pronounced
“spider”), PowerShares, iShares, and so on.
You need to stick with ETFs that trade in high
volume. See www.sectorspdr.com or
www.morningstar.com/Cover/ETF.
html for additional information on ETF trading
volumes and on which stocks are included in
each ETF.
After you identify a new bullish transition, for
example, you may want to consider the NASDAQ
100 or the S&P 500, or perhaps other ETFs for
cyclical and tech stocks. Doing so enables you
to take a position in the market while continuing
to search for stocks that meet your fundamental
and technical criteria.

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy
You also need to consider the company’s size when selecting a trading
candidate. Although small companies can and sometimes do return outsized
trading profits, they also present problems for traders. Stocks of small
companies usually are lightly traded, which makes them difficult to buy and
even more difficult to sell. You can afford to be patient when entering a trade
but not when exiting a position, especially when the stock hits your stop-loss
price. Lightly traded shares make exiting a position difficult, because the
price is likely to fall quickly and dramatically when many traders are trying
to exit simultaneously. You’re bound to lose more of your precious trading
capital (when selling) or spend more of it (when buying) than you intended.
On the technical side, you want to trade the strongest stocks in the strongest
sectors. You want to enter positions in these high relative strength stocks as
they break out of trading ranges or reversal patterns. And you want to hold
them as long as they remain relatively strong compared with other stocks.

Trading Strategies
Categorizing the phases of the market enables you to adjust your trading
strategies based on current market conditions. The idea: Trade aggressively
when you’re confident in your market assessment, but protect your capital
when you’re uncertain. In this section, we present strategies for dealing with
various market phases.

Trading the bullish transition
When you first decide the market may be entering a bullish transition phase,
you need to use extreme caution when trading, because at this phase of the
market, your primary goal is preserving your capital. Your secondary goal is
getting in on the bull market, if it materializes.
You may take new positions during a bullish transition, but the situation is not
urgent, so you can be selective. You need to take small, partial positions
rather than full positions (an example is shown in the upcoming section “A
hypothetical trading example”) by
✓ Identifying the strongest stocks in the strongest sectors
✓ Looking for trading-range breakouts and other reversal signals

215

216 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Keep your stops very tight and honor them rigorously. Consider an ETF if
you have difficulty finding individual stocks that meet your fundamental and
technical criteria.

Trading in a bull market
In a bull market, your primary goal is to become fully invested. Your secondary
goal is capital preservation. Emphasize establishing long positions in your
trading. You shouldn’t take on new short positions. Buy breakouts and take
full positions, because your goal is to be 100 percent, or fully, invested. If you
have a margin account for leverage, now is the time to use it. (The mechanics
of using a margin when trading are discussed in Chapter 14.) You may loosen
your stops a bit, because doing so allows for more ebb and flow of higher
highs and higher lows.
The most reliable bull market signals occur during the early part of a bull
market — after a bullish transition rather than following a bullish pullback.
You may want to adjust your strategy to be a bit less aggressive following
later-stage bull market signals. For example, you may want to tighten your
stops a bit, especially when you’re using margin for leverage.

Trading the bullish pullback
A bullish pullback is a consolidation phase within a bull market in which your
trading strategy needs to continue looking for high-quality stocks that are
breaking out of new or subsequent trading range bases. When you decide
the market has entered a bullish pullback phase, you may want to tighten
your stops and seriously consider hedging your positions by using options,
especially when you’re using margin for leverage. Hedging is like buying
insurance. In this case, put options can be purchased to protect most of your
trading capital in case the market moves dramatically against you. The cost
of hedging depends on the amount of protection you buy. Options are discussed in Chapter 18.
A bullish pullback is still a bull market, so you can continue taking full positions on breakouts, but you need to be selective. Make sure that your new
and existing positions are the best-performing stocks in the best-performing
sectors. You need to become a bit more cautious when the particular bullish
pullback isn’t the first to occur during the current bull market.

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy

Trading the bearish transition
A bearish transition indicates the market may be transitioning from a bull
market to a bear market. You react to a bearish transition by
✓ Tightening stops on all your open positions
✓ Monitoring your positions closely
✓ Honoring your stops rigorously
✓ Exiting any long position at the first sign of trouble
You also need to consider hedging long positions by using options, as
discussed in Chapter 18. If you’re using margin for leverage, exiting failing
positions quickly is even more important.
If you are so inclined, you can begin looking for short sale candidates, but
only nibble at these trades. If you plan to short, take small positions and keep
your stops very tight. We discuss the mechanics of selling short in Chapter 14.

Trading in a bear market
When you’re certain a bear market has begun, don’t enter new long positions.
Your open positions are likely to hit their stops and be closed, but for the
ones that remain, tighten your stops and exit any existing long positions at the
first sign of trouble. Hedge any remaining long positions with put options.
If you’re inclined to short stocks, a confirmed bear market is the time to do it.
The mechanics of shorting stocks are discussed in Chapter 14. You may want
to take full-sized short positions and become fully invested on the short side.
(See the upcoming section “A hypothetical trading example,” for an example
of position sizing.) Note: A margin account is required for selling short. We
rarely use margin for leverage when trading short, but if you’re going to do it,
now is the time.

Trading the bearish pullback
A bearish pullback is a consolidation phase within a market that nevertheless
remains a bear market. As such, a bearish pullback is not a good opportunity
for taking new long positions. You need to tighten stops on existing short
positions, and consider hedging these positions using call options, especially
when you’re using margin for leverage. A bearish pullback is an opportunity

217

218 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
to take short-side profits and enter additional short positions when you see
new or subsequent downside breakout patterns (see Chapter 9). Confirm
that new and existing short positions are the worst-performing stocks in the
worst-performing sectors.

A hypothetical trading example
Here’s a hypothetical scenario. The market is trying to begin a new bull
market by entering a bullish transition phase. At this time, your $100,000
example portfolio is 100 percent in cash. Your goal: Establish ten positions by
the height of the bull market, which means that you plan to allocate $10,000
of your initial capital for each position.
When you begin seeing signs of a bullish transition, you’re likely to be champing at the bit to start taking positions, but you haven’t found stocks that fit
your trading criteria. Still, you’d like to participate in the new bull market,
and you’re willing to risk a small loss if the bull market doesn’t appear.
In this case, you may want to start by taking a small position, perhaps a
half-sized $5,000 position, using exchange-traded funds (ETFs) for the broad
market indexes and perhaps for a sector fund or two as they break out. For
example, you can take a $5,000 half-sized position in the NASDAQ 100 index
fund (QQQQ), with a similar commitment to the S&P 500 index fund (SPY),
and similarly sized positions in the cyclical and technical sector ETF. In all,
you’d have positions totaling $20,000, which is 20 percent of your capital,
committed to the market. That kind of commitment is appropriate for a relatively risky bullish transition phase.
As stocks break out of their trading-range patterns, you may add positions,
but you need to continue taking small positions until you’re certain the
market has changed to a bull market. You also need to set an upper limit to
the amount of capital that you’re willing to commit during a bullish transition
phase, perhaps no more than 40 percent or 50 percent of your total trading
capital.
If market conditions turn to a bull market, you then can start taking full positions and become fully invested. You may also want to reallocate your positions from the ETFs into high relative strength leading stocks. If you plan to
use margin as leverage, a bull market is the time to do it. In this case, you
could leverage your $100,000 of trading capital into a portfolio of stocks and
ETFs worth up to $200,000 or more as your portfolio grows (see Chapter 14
for more about trading on margin). You can either add to existing positions
or add new positions in leading stocks as they break out of trading-range
patterns. Whatever you decide, keep the number of positions small.

Chapter 13: Using Fundamental and Technical Analyses for Optimum Strategy
When the market consolidates into a bullish pullback phase, you need to
tighten your stops and consider hedging your positions. Doing so enables
you to use your stops to get out of underperforming stocks. If you’re stopped
out of a position, forget about it. If it’s a profitable trade, pay your taxes and
be pleased with your profits. If you’re leveraged, you want to get out of your
margined positions quickly whenever they move against you, so you don’t
give up your profits.
During a bullish pullback, you first must decide whether to hedge the portfolio, and then decide whether you want to hedge each individual position or
the portfolio as a whole. In general, you’re probably concerned more about a
marketwide downdraft than you are about a major stumble in any single position. If that’s the case, then hedging the whole portfolio with index options
makes sense. However, the larger the portfolio, the more sense it makes to
hedge your individual positions.
As a bullish pullback reverts back to a bull market, reallocate your capital
into the new leaders as they break out. After each bullish pullback, becoming
a bit more conservative is prudent. For example, you may tighten your
stops, use less leverage, or continue providing a hedge against a significant
downdraft.
When the bull market transitions to a bear market, you need to exit your long
positions when your stops are hit. You may continue to hold your positions
as long as they’re not losing money, but don’t lose your bull market profits. If
you want to sell short, the bear market is the time to do so.
Making profitable trades is significantly easier if you buy during bull markets and sell or sell short during bear markets. Subtleties, of course, may
exist. You may, for example, take long positions in defensive stocks, such as
utilities and financial companies, during bear markets. Some traders find it
profitable to hold a two-sided portfolio, where the best-performing stocks
are purchased and poorly performing stocks are simultaneously shorted,
even during a raging bull market, but our advice is to keep it simple. Become
proficient by trading with the dominant trend before trying to fine-tune your
strategy.

219

220 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks

Chapter 14

Executing Your Trades
In This Chapter
▶ Identifying the mechanics of a trade: Entering and exiting a position
▶ Grasping the nuances of selling short
▶ Staying on the right side of the regulators
▶ Understanding margin and leverage
▶ Remembering the tax man and avoiding the wash-sale rule

Y

ou’ve picked your stock and you’re ready to enter a position. As long
as you’re entering the position while the market is open, you have
some flexibility in the way your order is entered and executed. However, if
you cannot monitor the market during business hours, or if you’re entering
your order after the market is closed, you need to be much more precise
when placing your order and indicating the type of fill (or terms of the order)
you’re willing to accept. Otherwise, you’re likely to run into a nasty surprise
when you review your broker’s fill report.
This chapter reviews available alternatives when you enter an order to buy,
sell, or sell short, and how the choices you make can affect the trade. We also
review margin requirements, discuss how trading affects your tax return, and
identify situations in which you can run afoul of stock-trading regulations.

Entering and Exiting Your Trade
When it’s time to enter or exit a trade, you have to tell your broker what you
want to do. To do that, you enter an order with your broker. This order tells
the broker the number of shares and the symbol for the stock or security
you’re planning to trade. Your order also specifies the type of transaction
you’d like to execute and how you’d like the broker to handle your transaction.
See Chapter 2 for more about the types of orders available. We discuss your
choices for instructing your broker how to handle your order in this section.

222 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Before entering your trade order, you’ll probably want to check for a stock
quote. Ideally, your quote system provides information similar to that shown
in Figure 14-1.

Figure 14-1:
Quote
screen for
AT&T stock.

The fields depicted in Figure 14-1 are as follows:
✓ Description: The name of the stock and its symbol.
✓ Exchange: The exchange on which the stock is traded.
✓ Last Trade: The price recorded for the most recently executed trade
when the markets are open. It will be the same as the close price when
the markets are closed.
✓ Net Change: The change in price (+ or –) from the previous day’s close.
✓ Net Percentage Change: The change in price expressed (+ or –) as a
percentage difference between the previous day’s close and the current
closing price.
✓ Open: The price obtained for the first trade of the day.
✓ High: The highest trade price of the day.
✓ Low: The lowest trade price of the day.
✓ Previous Close: The last trade price for the previous day.
✓ Bid: The highest price someone is willing to pay to buy the stock.
✓ Bid Size: The number of shares being bid at the bid price.
✓ Ask (or offer): The lowest price someone has offered to accept to sell
the stock.
✓ Ask Size: The number of shares being offered at the ask price.
✓ Close: The last trade price for the day.
✓ Volume: The daily trading volume.
✓ P/E: The price/earnings ratio (see Chapter 6)
