Generally, most of us grow up believing that when we have to make a
decision, the more relevant information we can gather, the better our
decisions will be. This isn't necessarily true with trading, especially in the
beginning stages of one's career. In most market situations, there is an even
number of traders who have a propensity to buy and those who have a
propensity to sell or those who need to buy and want someone to take the
other side of the transaction and vice versa. Everyone will have his reasons
and rationalizations for all this trading activity, creating about as much
conflicting information as there are participants. Because there is so much
information and because so much of that information is conflicting, the
beginning trader will need specifically to limit his awareness of the market
information to which he allows himself to be exposed. More is not better; it
just creates confusion and overload that will ultimately lead to losses.
You need to start as small as possible and then gradually allow yourself to
grow into greater and greater amounts of market information. What you
want to do is become an expert at just one particular type of behavior
pattern that repeats itself with some degree of frequency. To become an
expert, choose one simple trading system that identifies a pattern,
preferably one that is mechanical, instead of mathematical, so that you
will be working with a visual representation of market behavior. Your
objective is to understand completely every aspect of the system—all the
relationships between the components—and its potential to produce
profitable trades. In the meantime, it is important to avoid all other
possibilities and information.
Out of all the combinations of behavior possible, you are going to limit
your focus of attention to just one combination. Consequently, you will be
letting all the other opportunities go by. Starting small and gradually
working into other combinations is a real exercise in discipline that has a
couple of important psychological benefits. First, you will be building a
base of confidence as you learn that you can, in fact, accurately assess what
will most likely happen next. It is much easier to gain this confidence if
you don't overwhelm yourself with the market's seemingly infinite
possibilities. Second, by passing up other opportunities that you are not an
expert at yet, you will be releasing yourself from any compelling desire to
trade. Any compelling behavior is usually the result of some fear. That fear,
in turn, will cause you to behave in many inappropriate ways.
If the idea of letting go of opportunities that don't fit into your
framework is troubling to you, then ask yourself, what is the rush? If you are
confident in your ability to transform yourself into a successful trader, what
difference could it make that you let go of some opportunities now for
educational purposes? Once you learn to become the trader you want to
be, you can then give yourself as much money as you desire. However, to
172

get to that point, your objective should be to plan your development in such
a way that you do the least amount of damage to yourself, both financially
and psychologically. Then after you have developed the appropriate skills,
taking money out of the markets can be as easy as almost everyone believes
it is before he started trading.
If, on the other hand, you end up doing a lot of damage to yourself,
you will have to undo that damage before you can accumulate wealth as a
trader. After the damage is done, it won't make any difference how much
you learn about the nature of the markets or how well you learn to
perceive an opportunity. There are many traders who end up becoming
expert market analysts but can't make a dime as traders because of all the damage
they did to themselves in the early part of their trading careers. What happens in
these situations is a trader's "past" will generate so much fear that he won't be
able execute his trades properly or not at all, regardless of how well he learned to
predict what the market will do next. Nothing is more frustrating than to know
what is going to happen next and not be able to do anything about it.
You need to understand that the ability to perceive an opportunity, based on
the quality of distinctions that you can make and your ability to execute a trade, are
not automatic functions of one another. Perception and execution are separate
skills. They can and do work in tandem, if there are no mental components
blocking execution. Otherwise, the "intent" to take advantage of what you
perceive as an opportunity may not have any inner support or the kind of inner
support that is necessary to execute your intent properly. If there are mental
obstacles preventing the proper execution of a trade, then learning how to
perceive better opportunities is not going to solve the problem.
So the object of this exercise is to help you learn how become an expert and
stay healthy while you are doing it. And when you do become one, there will be
much less standing in the way of your taking maximum advantage of your
perceptive skills. If you are already looking at or trading several markets and you
are not successful or not as successful as you desire, then I would suggest that you
scale back to just one market or two at the most. Don't expand until you
thoroughly understand the markets' characteristics.
STEP FOUR: LEARNING HOW TO
EXECUTE A TRADING SYSTEM FLAWLESSLY
The proper execution of your trades is one of the most fundamental components
of becoming a successful trader and probably the most difficult to learn. It is
certainly much easier to identify something in the market that represents an
opportunity than it is to act upon it. However, there are some good reasons why it
is so difficult to act on a trading signal other than what has already been identified
as mental obstacles. To understand these reasons, you need to understand the
nature of trading systems (defined as any methodology that consistently
identifies an opportunity to buy or sell with a potential profit in some future
moment), and how they interact with the markets and ourselves.
173

Most good trading systems, technical or otherwise, will take consistent
money out of the markets over the long run. Many of these good systems
have been available to the public for years, and yet, there is still a huge gap
between what is possible and what almost everyone ends up with. The
problem with trading systems is they define market behavior in limited
ways when the market can behave in an infinite combination of ways.
Systems mathematically or mechanically reduce relationships in human
behavior characteristics to percentage odds of what could happen next.
They can only capture a very limited number of these behavior
characteristics compared to the billions that are possible. Any identified
pattern may or may not be repeating itself with respect to the way the
pattern or relationship progressed when it was observed in the past.
Therefore, we never really know if it is valid or not until it has actually
completed itself. The big psychological problem here is that people have
difficulty acting on opportunities with probable outcomes.
Most people like to think of themselves as risk takers, but what they
really want is a guaranteed outcome with some momentary suspense to
make them feel as if the outcome had been in doubt. The momentary
suspense adds the thrill factor necessary to keep our lives from getting too
boring. When it comes right down to it, no one trades to lose, no one puts
on a trade believing it is going to be a loser, and all systems will definitely
have some percentage of losing trades. So it's difficult not to be tempted
into trying to guess which ones are going to be the losers and not
participate.
As most of you reading this book already know, trying to outguess your
trading system is an exercise in extreme frustration. Sometimes the system
will give you signals to trade in ways that are completely contrary to your
logic and reasoning. Sometimes the system will defy your reasoning and be
right, and sometimes you will agree with the system and it will be wrong.
You need to understand that technical trading systems are not designed to
be outguessed. What I mean is, they aren't designed to give you isolated
signals of an opportunity to be taken when it seems right. What they do is
mathematically define, quantify, and categorize past relationships in
collective human behavior to give you a statistically probable outcome of the
future.
As a comparison to trading, it is much easier to take risks and participate
in a gambling event with a purely random outcome based on statistical
probabilities, simply because it is random. What I mean is, if you risk your
money on a gambling event that you know has a random outcome, then
there's no rational way you could have predicted what that outcome would
be. Therefore, you don't have to take responsibility for the outcome if it
isn't positive.
Whereas, with trading, the future is not random, price movement,
opportunity, and outcomes are created by traders acting on their beliefs
and expectations of the future. Every trader contributes to the outcome of
174

the future by putting on and taking off trades in accordance with their
beliefs. Because traders actually create the future by collectively acting on
their beliefs about the future, the outcome of their actions is not exactly
random. Why else would traders try to outguess their systems, unless they
had some concept of the future and how that future will affect the markets?
This adds an element of responsibility to trading that doesn't exist with a
purely random event and that is difficult to avoid. This higher degree of
responsibility means that more of your self-esteem is at stake, making it
much more difficult to participate. Trading gives you all kinds of ways to
beat yourself up for all of the things you should have or could have
considered that would have resulted in a more satisfying outcome.
Furthermore, you don't trade in an information vacuum. You form your
expectations about the future with information technical systems don't take
into consideration. Consequently, this sets up a conflict between what your
intellect says should be happening and the purely mathematical means of
predicting human behavior afforded by your technical system. This is
precisely why technical systems are so difficult to relate to and execute.
People aren't taught to think in terms of probabilities—and we certainly
don't grow up constructing a conceptual framework that correlates a
prediction of mass human behavior in statistical odds by means of a
mathematical formula.
To be able to execute your trading systems properly, you will need to
incorporate two concepts into your mental framework—thinking in terms
of probabilities and correlating the numbers or the mechanics of your system
to the behavior. Unfortunately, the only way you can really learn these
things is actually to experience them by executing your system. The problem
is that rarely will the typical trader stay with his system beyond two or three
losses in a row, and taking two or three losses in a row is a very common
occurrence for most trading systems. This creates something of a paradox or
Catch 22. How do you do it if you don't believe it, and you won't learn to
believe it unless you do it long enough for it to become a part of your
mental framework? This is where you employ mental discipline to make
flawless execution a habit.
Exercise
Take some of the trading capital that you set aside for your education to buy
and trade a simple trading system with well-defined entry and exit points.
Make a commitment to trade this system exactly according to the rules. You
need to make a very strong commitment here and not play any games with
yourself. The object of this exercise is to work through any resistance you
may have to following your rules.
This system does not have to be expensive. You can get one out of many
of the books on technical analysis available today. I think it is important to
buy one instead of devising one of your own because it might be a little
easier to stay focused on the objectives of this exercise. With any system
175

you devise, you are naturally going to want to make money. Save it for
later, after you have learned how to execute properly.
You also need to find a system that suits your unique tolerance for
taking a loss. The amount of money you risk per trade should be an
amount that you are completely comfortable with, at least at first. If you
don't stay within this tolerance level, you will be, at the very least,
uncomfortable, in which case to whatever degree you are uncomfortable,
you shut down the learning process. When you are feeling pain, instead of
being focused on what the market is teaching you about itself and yourself,
you will be focused on information that will ease your pain. Which usually
results in a painful lesson.
Your objectives are to (1) learn the skill of flawless execution by learning
that you can follow the rules you set forth for yourself (I am defining
"flawless execution" as executing a trade immediately upon perception of an
opportunity; inclusive within opportunity is the opportunity to exit a losing
trade.) and (2) to incorporate a belief into your mental system about the nature
of probable outcomes so that you believe that you can make money in the long
run with your trading system, if, of course, you can execute it properly.
You will likely encounter many beliefs arguing against flawless execution.
Here are few suggestions to help you work through this resistance:
First, understand that this exercise (at least for most people) is not going to be
easy, so be easy on yourself. The more accepting you are of your mistakes, the
easier it will be to make the next attempt. If your child were learning how to ride
a bike, I'm sure you wouldn't scold him for falling off and tell him not to try
again. You would encourage him and eventually he'd learn. Give yourself the
same kind of understanding and consideration.
Second, taking all the signals generated by your system is the only way you
can get the firsthand experience you need to establish a belief in probable
outcomes, and relating the mathematics or the mechanics to the behavior. You
have to do it in spite of your resistance, and you have to do it long enough for
the system to become a part of your mental framework. When that happens, you
will have the force of habit working for you, and the struggle will cease. Just do
the best you can and look for ways to improve your performance. Constantly
keep in mind that what you are doing is more of an exercise in learning trading
discipline and the skill of flawless execution, which in the long run is far more
important than your immediate desire to make money. So keep your contract
size light. You can always increase it later, when you have learned to trust
yourself completely to always do what needs to be done without hesitation.
Stay with the exercise until it becomes second nature or a part of who you are.
As you gain in your confidence, you will learn more and consequently learn
how to make money as a trader. As you make money you will gain in your
confidence. This positive cycle will expand your ability to be successful just as
easily as a negative cycle will feed on itself to end in despair.

176

STEP FIVE: LEARNING TO THINK
IN PROBABILITIES
After you have mastered the more fundamental skills, in other words,
once you have acquired the discipline necessary to interact with the trading
environment effectively, you can start to use your reasoning skills and
intuitive powers to determine what the market is likely to do next. This will
entail learning to think in probabilities. What I mean by this is, if you can't
personally move the market, then you will want to be able to identify the
group that is demonstrating the greatest possibility of moving the market
and you will want to trade with that group. Or you will want to determine
the prevalent beliefs being expressed in the market and how those beliefs
will affect price movement. That identification process requires a detached
objective perspective, where you are watching and listening to what the
market is telling you, instead of being focused on what the market is doing
to you personally.
Remember, two traders willing to trade at a price make a market.
Whatever the extreme ends of human expression are is what the market is
capable of doing. For example, have you ever said, "The market can't break
contract lows, it's never been there before"? If you bought those lows based
on your belief of its impossibility, then consider that all it takes is one trader
who is willing to sell lower to make you wrong. The fact that the market did
it makes it right. You could have been a seller at the all-time lows and been
a one-tick winner when the next trader broke those lows, if you could have
perceived selling as an opportunity.
If prices were to penetrate those lows with any kind of followthrough, it
would indicate that there are plenty of traders who believe it wasn't going
higher. These sellers obviously acted on their beliefs with enough force to
outnumber the buyers available to take the other side of the trade.
Regardless of the criteria the sellers used to justify their actions, how
rational or irrational by anyone else's standards, nothing will alter the fact
the market traded lower. The fact that you believed it couldn't do it is of no
consequence, unless you can trade big enough numbers to reverse it.
Otherwise, you can either be with it or against it.
To help you learn how to be with the flow of the market, I pose a series
of questions that are designed to keep you focused in the "now moment"
to determine what is true about the market.
1. What is the market telling me at this moment?
2. Who is paying up to get in or get out?
3. How much strength is there?
4. Is momentum building?
5. Can it be measured relative to something?
6. What would have to happen to indicate the momentum is changing?
177

7. Is the trend weakening or is this a normal retracement?
8. What would show that? If the market has displayed a fairly
symmetrical type of pattern and that pattern has been disturbed, then
it is a good indication the balance of forces has shifted.
9. Are there any places where one side will definitely gain
dominance over the other? If that point is reached, it still may take
sometime for the other side to be convinced they are losers. How
long are you willing to give them to stampede out of their positions?
10. If they don't stampede out of their positions, what will that tell you?
11. What did traders have to believe to form the current pattern relative
to the past? Remember that people's beliefs don't change easily
unless they are extremely disappointed. People are disappointed when
their expectations aren't fulfilled.
12. What will disappoint the predominate force?
13. What is the likelihood of that happening?
14. What is the risk of finding out in a trade?
15. Is there enough potential for movement to make the trade worth the
risk?
We may never know what traders will in fact do. But we can determine
what they will likely do if certain things happen first. For example, if traders
push the price lower than the previous low, what will likely occur? Is this
new low significant enough to cause traders holding long positions to bail out?
Will it cause new shorts to enter the market or attract existing shorts to add to
their positions? New shorts may be attracted to the market, and old shorts will
add to their position. This price slide will stop when enough traders believe the
price is cheap relative to something. That reference point will likely be some
other previous old high or low.
If you can't determine the significance of any particular high or low or any other
significant reference point for that matter, then you have to ask yourself if it is
worth the risk of finding out How much room will you have to give the market to
define itself before it is evident that the flow of the market is not in the direction
of that trade?
Ask yourself this question: For this trade to be valid or continue to be valid,
the market shouldn't trade to what point? If it trades within that point, then the
trade still has potential for working. Beyond that point, it is no longer valid in
the direction that I started.
Keep in mind that the amount of price movement that you determine is
necessary for the market to define itself has to correspond with your emotional
tolerance to accept the dollar value of a loss that size. Otherwise, don't take the
trade regardless of how much potential you think it might have, unless you can
realistically change the foregoing parameters to fit your capacity for a potential
loss.
178

Let the market define itself and then apply whatever criteria you use to define
an opportunity. Identify your significant reference points and place your orders
on either side of the point; then wait for the market to do whatever it is going to
do. Try putting your orders in the market in advance of whatever you perceive as
having a high probability of occurring based on the existing market conditions.
By putting your orders in advance of some anticipated move, you will be
learning how to let the market work for you Placing your orders in advance will
also help to keep you from having an opinion, and you won't be subjecting
yourself to the moment-to-moment conflict inherent within all price movement.
Keep in mind that since the market is in perpetual motion, it puts you in a
position of having to make never-ending assessments of the current risk in
relationship to the current possibilities for reward. To do this effectively, you
will have to learn to observe the market as if you were not in a position. This
perspective will free you to take whatever action is appropriate for the situation
instead of hesitating, hoping, and wishing that the market will make you right.
The market doesn't make you right, you make yourself right. Your
inability to execute or the degree to which you hesitate after you perceive
an opportunity to get in or out of a trade or reverse your position will be an
excellent gauge as to how locked in you are mentally. Making note of these
occurrences of hesitation or immobility will give you an indication of the
exact state of your mental resources to execute. You need this information to
use as a reference point to build from.
When you are about to enter into a position, ask yourself, by imagining,
what the next five minutes or tomorrow (depending on your time frame)
would have to look like to validate your trade, to confirm that the trend is
still intact. What would the next five minutes or tomorrow have to look
like to indicate the opposite. Then, again, place your orders at the
appropriate price in advance of the market's getting there.
All these questions will keep reminding you that anything can happen,
and you will be preparing yourself in advance for those possibilities. Also,
if anything can happen, then of course, you will have to consider that there
will always be something you haven't taken into consideration, had
absolutely no awareness of or could have no prior knowledge of, for
example, such as how many traders may enter the market for the first time
with enough force to reverse its direction.
Keep in mind that prices move in the direction of the greatest force
(traders fulfilling their beliefs about the future). Or said in its converse
form, prices will move in the direction of the least resistance to the
prevailing force. Significant reference points give you the opportunity to
make high probability assessments of the degree of balance or imbalance
between the two forces, the point at which it is likely to shift, and in whose
favor.
By learning to identify significant reference points, you can determine
what each group will do based on what they already believe about future
value. If you can determine on a collective basis what will validate or
179
