
TRADING CHANNELS
As a trend moves, it likes to move inside a trading channel. A trading channel is described as the market moving at an up or down angle inside two
trend lines that create somewhat of a channel. The trend lines of the trading
channels act as both resistance and support. If any are moving up—or a
downtrend breaks a trend line and it stays in place—the trading channel
will usually shift. In Figure 6-18, you see how a trading channel has shifted
and how the centre uptrend line at one time was support for the market and
with the shifting of the trading channel, now became resistance for the
market in the new trading channel.

FIGURE 6-18

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

CHAPTER 6

TRENDS AND TREND LINES

111

THE VALUE OF TREND LINES
Using trend lines as part of your trading system, and in conjunction with
other indicators, increases your chances of success. Why? Because of convergence, where there are several things taking place at a single price point,
having several indicators could confirm and support trading decisions.

CONCLUSION
Uptrend and downtrend lines not only indicate market direction but also act
as levels of support and resistance. In a downtrend, trend lines are future
locations where the market may bounce back down. In an uptrend,
trend lines are future locations where the market may bounce back up.
Either way, they are just another little piece of the puzzle that increases the
probability of a continued move. The key is to always look for that convergence, along with a trend line bounce in the direction of a trend.
The following are always great tools to use when determining when to
enter this market:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Trading software that can help determine trend direction with use
of buy and sell signals
Bullish and bearish candlestick formations
Finding levels of support and resistance
The knowledge that past resistance many times becomes future
support, and vice versa
The knowledge that trend lines act as floors of support and ceilings
of resistance in the market and become visible locations for the next
bounce in the direction of the trend

The more information you can gather as to why the market should
bounce in a certain direction at a certain price point, the higher the probability for success. You now have five great trading tools to add to your
tool kit, with more to come in future chapters. Regardless of how great
a trade may look, it will always come down to trading within the equity
management rules, which you will be learning about in Chapter 12. Even if
you found a convergence with 15 reasons why the market should bounce in
your direction, if the trade does not meet the equity management requirements, you need to have the discipline to pass on the trade. Trading will
always be about risk versus your reward, just like life is.

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

A

7
P

T

E

R

BUY AND SELL
ZONES
T WAS 1984, the space shuttle was getting ready to lift off, and the
Kennedy Space Center called us up placing a laser photoprint order
for well over $100,000. It was the largest single order I had ever
received in my business career to date. I was so excited, I felt like
I had just won the lottery. Proud as a peacock, I called my friend
Brad Wagner and told him I had acquired VIP passes for the liftoff and
wanted him to come down and join me for this memorable event. The VIP
section sits only three miles from the launchpad, and when that shuttle
lifted off, I have to admit, it was one of the most awesome and amazing
events I have ever witnessed in my life. The sheer fact that people have been
able to figure out how to get that much weight off the ground is beyond my
comprehension, not to mention that even three miles away, when that
shuttle starts to lift off, you can feel the ground shake as if you were in an
earthquake and the air crackles like a diamond cutting glass.
Brad was twice my age, twice as smart, and a thousand times wealthier.
He was in construction and had done very well. I met him when I
lived in Hawaii, and we hit it off immediately. He was extremely smart,
wise, and financially successful. He not only had one of the most beautiful
homes in Hawaii, he also had several homes throughout America. We
stayed in touch with each other through the years, and I considered him one
of my mentors.

I

113
Copyright © 2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use.

114

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

My real motive for inviting him to the liftoff was that I wanted him to
see how I, too, was on my way to becoming successful—just like him. In
addition to being a mentor, he was more like a second dad to me. He knew
me when I was struggling to make ends meet and, for some reason, he took
me under his wing without judgment, constantly mentored me, and told me
I reminded him of himself when he was my age.
The day before liftoff, I took him with me in one of the company vehicles to deliver that $100,000 order. As we got in the vehcile to deliver the
prints, I didn’t mention a word about the amount of the invoice. I wanted to
wait and let him see the amount as we were checking it in. He was shocked
at the amount of the order. After we left, he said, “$100,000 is a lot of
money! Wow, you are doing great for your age!” Back then, $100,000 was
a lot of money and I was doing great for my age. What you learn with time
is that it is all relative. As the saying goes, “A billion dollars isn’t what it
used to be.”
I will never forget our ride back to the office. We came up to a toll
booth requiring a $1.00 payment, and I reached in my wallet and pulled out
a handfull of hundreds and gave one to the booth attendant. The attendant
asked, “Do you have anything smaller?”
I said, “No.”
Then he said, “Does your friend have anything smaller?”
Brad reached into his pocket and gave me a dollar bill and I paid the
attendant. As we drove off, Brad looked at me and said, “One of the most
valuable lessons you need to learn in your life is nothing lasts forever.”
I quickly responded, “What do you mean?”
He continued, “You see that wallet full of hundreds?”
“Yes,” I told him.
“Any fool can make money, but it takes a wise person to hold onto it.
Believe it or not, I wake up every day fighting to hold onto what I have. The
bigger question is . . .” and he paused, looked me in the eyes, and said, “how
long will you be able to hold onto what you have acquired so far?”
I wasn’t sure how to respond, I was caught between a wall of arrogance
and a wall of ignorance and felt I had better take the humility door to get
out. So I responded saying, “I don’t know, I was hoping you could help and
teach me.”
He said, “Look at the sky. Today it’s sunny, tomorrow it may be cloudy.
Today you’re happy and on top of the world with all those hundreds in your
pocket, but perhaps something will happen over the next few days that will
frustrate you and require you to use all those hundreds.” Then he repeated
what he said, “Just remember, nothing lasts forever.”

CHAPTER 7

BUY AND SELL ZONES

115

What he said next was equally important, but it didn’t sink in until
10 years later.
He continued, “Because nothing lasts forever, as things start to change
from good to bad, or from bad to good, nature will be fair and there will always
be signs that you will need to pay attention to. Those signs will give you a
heads-up of the change that is getting ready to take place. If you pay attention
to those signs, you can begin to make the necessary adjustments to either hold
onto what you are about to lose or aggressively start taking advantage of
getting out of the mess you are in.” Truer words were never spoken.
As you learn to trade, you must remember “nothing lasts forever.” The
fun and exciting times from learning to trade don’t last forever, and the frustrating bad times from not paying attention and taking losses will not last
either. Trends that start to take off and provide massive profits will not last
forever. They all come to an end, but what is important is to look for the
signs that can provide you with a heads-up of the end of a trend.

TRENDS
Forex trading is a financial game that is played 24 hours a day between the
bulls and the bears. It is a perpetual war where the bulls and the bears each
fight for control. As they fight for that control, they move in trends—
uptrends and downtrends.
If the candles are above the outer uptrend line, the bulls are in control
and have an 80 percent chance of maintaining it. If the candles are below
the outer downtrend line, the bears are in control and have an 80 percent
chance of staying in control. However, neither side will maintain control
forever. When the market decides to increase its speed up or down, it moves
above or below an inner trend line.
This fight for control goes on 24 hours a day, 5 days a week. It is an
amazing game to watch and a crazy environment in which to make a living.
In order to make money, however, you have to pick a side and take a position. You enter the market and get involved with something that is totally
out of your control. In order to make a consistent profit, you need to learn
the skill of properly tracking who is in control, which allows you to pick a
bullish or a bearish side.
Fortunately, with the click of a mouse, you can switch teams anytime 24
hours a day, as many times as you like. There are pips and profit to be made
on both sides and no one will think you are a traitor if you are a bull in the
morning, a bear in the afternoon, and a bull again at night.

116

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

If you are trading in any direction and the market is trending, as long as
it continues to trend in the direction in which you are trading, it is your
friend. Why is it your friend? Because you are making money. The minute
it starts to penetrate the trend line is the moment you need to remember
what my friend and mentor Brad said: “nothing lasts forever.” Start paying
attention to the signs and recognize that this trend may soon be coming to
an end. Then you need to start to tighten up your stops in order to protect
the profits you have made and hold onto what you have.
Figure 7-1 shows how the euro 60-minute chart has been trending up,
bouncing off of the uptrend line. It also demonstrates what a breaking of
the trend line looks like. The bulls are losing their market strength and the
bears are taking over by breaking the trend line.
As the control of the market shifts from bullish to bearish, or vice
versa, trend lines get broken. If you were bullish in this chart and you were
still holding onto your position as the market shift, the market would start
to take back all the profits it gave you.

FIGURE 7-1

EUR/USD (One-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 7

BUY AND SELL ZONES

117

BUY AND SELL ZONES
Trend lines divide buy zones from sell zones. A buy zone is the space above
a trend line, whereas a sell zone is the space below a trend line—up or down
(see Figure 7-2).
When the market is trading above any trend line, it is in the buy zone
and traders are looking for the best location to buy the market. When the
market is below the trend line, traders are looking for the best location to
short the market. If a trader is long and the market starts to break a trend
line, be it an inner, outer, or long-term trend line, the trader might consider
getting out or reversing his or her position. If a trader is looking at the
market going long and is waiting for the market to reverse, the best place to
start to consider going short is after the market has broken the uptrend line
and enters into the sell zone, as seen in Figure 7-1.

THE SELL ZONE
To help you recognize the signs to look for at the end of a trend, I want to
go through the process step-by-step as it enters the sell zone. Figure 7-3
(graphical illustration) and Figure 7-1 (the actual market) show how a

FIGURE 7-2

Trend Lines Divide
Buy Zones from Sell Zones

Buy Zone

Sell Zone

Buy Zone

Sell Zone
Copyright 2003 by.Market Traders Institute,Inc.

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

118

FIGURE 7-3

When the market enters the
SELL ZONE…
Buy Zone

Sell Zone

Copyright 2005 by.Market Traders Institute,Inc.

bearish candle has entered into the sell zone. But it is important to know
that as the market enters into the sell zone, if a bullish candle appears
immediately at the breaking of the trend line, instead of a bearish candle,
the market is still potentially bullish. Furthermore, if a bullish candlestick
formation appears shortly after the market enters into the sell zone, there is
a high probability that the market is still in an uptrend and the trading channel may be shifting.
A very important sign to consider when the market is breaking a trend
line is the angle of the trend line (see Figure 7-4). Traders think and act in
probabilities and percentages, constantly monitoring high probabilities or
high percentages against low probabilities or low percentages. When a
trend line is penetrated and the market enters into a buy or sell zone, the
angle of the trend line many times determines whether or not the market
will reverse.
When the market breaks the uptrend line and enters into the sell zone,
always take the time to check the angle of the trend line. The backside
of the uptrend line will now act as resistance. Should the market begin to
rally again, it will need to break through the backside of that trend line or
resistance. If the backside of the trend line is lower than the last high, there
is an 80 percent chance of a continued dip and a trend reversal. If the
backside of the trend line is higher than the last high, there is an 80 percent

CHAPTER 7

BUY AND SELL ZONES

119

FIGURE 7-4

The angle of the trend line may determine
the probability of the reversal

VS

Sell Zone
Sell Zone
Copyright 2005 by.Market Traders Institute,Inc

chance of a continued rally. As time moves, it moves up and resistance
moves with it. If it is higher than the last high, there is strong potential of a
continued rally, and there may be an uptrend shifting of the trading channel
as seen in Figure 7-6, but if it is lower than the last high, there is a good
chance of a fall (see Figure 7-5).
As the channel shifts, the buy and sell zones shift as well. The market
now enters into the sell zone of the old uptrend line and enters into the
buy zone of the new uptrend line. Just because the market enters into the
sell zone doesn’t mean the trend is dead. In Chapter 6, you learned about
inner and outer trend lines and that if the inner trend line is broken, the
market predominately moves to the outer trend line and then bounces
back up. The outer trend line is the one that carries the most weight in the
market.
The strongest sign of a reversal, or that the uptrend is dead, is when the
market retraces back to the latest level of major support. When the market
breaks the outer uptrend line, the odds shift from 80 percent continued bullish to 60 percent continued bullish and 40 percent continued bearish. When
the market returns to the major level of support, the market goes from
80 percent bullish to 80 percent bearish.

FIGURE 7-5

EUR/USD (Daily Chart)

FIGURE 7-6

USD/JPY (Four-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 7

BUY AND SELL ZONES

121

SHORTING THE MARKET WHEN IT ENTERS THE SELL ZONE
Despite the probabilities and percentages the market gives you, remember
that the market does what it wants when it wants—no matter what. The tools
you currently have at your disposal to predict the market’s next move include:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Trading indicators and systems
Candlestick formations
Support and resistance
Trends and trend lines
Buy and sell zones

Every trade involves risk and should be approached with proper equity management, which I will discuss in the coming chapters. If you want to short the
market when it enters the sell zone, you must address your potential loss,
should the trade not work out. I have always found that the best place to protect
yourself financially, should the trade not work out, is by placing your protective stop-loss order above the last high of resistance, as seen in Figure 7-7.
FIGURE 7-7

USD/JPY (One-Hour Chart)

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

122

You do not want to risk much more than that, and you don’t want to place
yourself in a position to be hoping the market comes back. If the bulls take
out the high, they will more than likely keep on going, taking out more
highs as they play this game. There may even be a shifting of the uptrend
channel, and you do not want to be trading against a trend. If the last high
of resistance does not meet your equity management requirements, wait
until the market rallies one last time and hits the backside of the uptrend
line, as illustrated in Figure 7-7.

THE BUY ZONE
The buy zone works exactly the same as the sell zone, but in the opposite
direction. Let me take you through the bending of a downtrend, step by
step, to enable you to see how the market enters the buy zone. Figure 7-8
shows how a bullish candle has entered into the buy zone. It is imperative

FIGURE 7-8

USD/JPY (One-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 7

BUY AND SELL ZONES

123

FIGURE 7-9

When the market enters the
BUY ZONE…

that you understand that as the market enters the buy zone, if a bearish
candle appears immediately at the break of the trend line (as seen in
Figure 7-9), the market could still potentially be bearish.
A very important sign to consider is the angle of the trend line when
the market is breaking a downtrend line as seen in Figure 7-10. When a
trend line is penetrated and the market enters a buy or a sell zone, the
angle of the trend line many times determines whether or not the market
will reverse.
When the market breaks the downtrend line and enters into the buy
zone, it is a good habit to check the angle of the trend line first. The backside of the downtrend line will now act as support. Try to determine if the
market were to dip further at that moment in time, would the backside of
the downtrend line be lower or higher than the last high? Should the market
begin to dip again, it will need to break through the backside of that trend
line of support. If the backside of the trend line is higher than the last low,
there is an 80 percent chance of a reversal and new rally. If it is lower, there
is an 80 percent chance of a continued dip, and perhaps a shifting in the
trading channel. The backside of the downtrend line acts as support, and as
time moves, it moves down and support moves with it. If it is lower than the
last low, there is the high probability of a continued dip and there may be a
downtrend shifting of the trading channel (see Figure 7-11). If it is lower

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

124

FIGURE 7-10

VS

FIGURE 7-11

USD/JPY (One-Hour Chart)

CHAPTER 7

BUY AND SELL ZONES

125

than the last high, there will be a high probability of a rally, as seen in
Figure 7-12.
It is interesting to note that as the downtrend channel shifts, the buy and
sell zones shift as well. The market now enters into the buy zone of the old
downtrend line and enters into the sell zone of the new downtrend line. Just
because the market enters into the buy zone doesn’t mean the trend is
dead. Don’t forget that if the inner downtrend line is broken, the market
predominately moves to the outer downtrend line and then bounces back
down. The outer downtrend line is the one that carries the most weight in
the market.
The strongest sign of a reversal, or that the downtrend is dead, is
when the market retraces back to the latest level of major resistance.
When the market breaks the outer downtrend line, the odds shift from
80 percent continued bearish to now 60 percent continued bearish and
40 percent continued bullish. It is when the market returns to the major
level of resistance that the market goes from 80 percent bearish to now
80 percent bullish.

FIGURE 7-12

USD/JPY (One-Hour Chart)

126

FIGURE 7-13

THE 10 ESSENTIALS OF FOREX TRADING

USD/JPY (One-Hour Chart)

GOING LONG IN THE MARKET WHEN IT ENTERS THE BUY ZONE
When the market enters the buy zone, you will want to enter going
long, placing a protective stop-loss order below the last low of support
(see Figure 7-13).

CONCLUSION
Knowing about buy and sell zones can significantly aid your trading success; however, not all trend-line breaks offer trading opportunities. To
become a good technical analyst, you need to be somewhat spatially intelligent—you need to be able to see things in a three-dimensional way and
envision the future moves of the market. You need to keep in mind that the
larger time frames control the movement of the smaller time frames. Not all
trends are clear, and not all buy and sell zones are clear. So if the market is
not clear to you, stay out.

CHAPTER 7

BUY AND SELL ZONES

127

It is amazing that common sense is really not that common. Be that as
it may, you need to use your common sense when trading.
One summer I was working in our office in Johannesburg, South Africa.
Behind our office is a beautiful park with a small stream and waterhole for
children to play in. One day I arrived at work during a massive rainstorm.
That gentle little stream behind the office had turned into roaring rapids, and
the waterhole was now engulfed. I thought to myself, “wow, the water was
crystal clear yesterday and today it looks extremely dangerous.”
If that waterhole was your favorite place to swim, and you had made
plans to go there after school with your friends but had found the muddy
water and rapids when you arrived, would you still jump in? I would hope
your common sense would tell you to stay out! The breaking of a trend line
offers a tremendous amount of temptation to get in the market and go with
the new trend. As a novice trader, don’t use one single reason to get in—
find as many reasons as you can.
When in doubt, stay out!

This page intentionally left blank

C

8

H

A

P

T

E

R

THE FIBONACCI
SECRET

T

HIS CHAPTER IS EXTREMELY DEAR to my heart because knowl-

edge of the Fibonaccis saved my financial life. You have no
idea how many times I wanted to throw in the towel because I
couldn’t figure out how the market works. Every new trader
has dreams, and those dreams can quickly turn into nightmares
when you don’t know what you are doing, which is why I am so adamant
about finding a mentor. I didn’t have a mentor, and my dreams quickly
turned into nightmares.
The name Leonardo Fibonacci was airmailed to me straight from
heaven. The understanding of his discoveries changed not only my trading
