
effects of the nickel, he was confident, would be quite astounding; but that lead might
always be applied with impunity. A piece of nickel was produced by the Doctor, about
three quarters of an ounce in weight, together with a piece of lead of the same shape and
smoothness, but somewhat larger. Elizabeth Okey was seated in a chair; and, by a few
passes and manipulations, was thrown into the state of "ecstatic delirium." A piece of
thick pasteboard was then placed in front of her face, and held in that situation by two of
the spectators, so that she could not see what was passing either below or in front of her.
Mr. Wakley having received both the nickel and the lead, seated himself opposite the girl,
and applied the lead to each hand alternately, but in such a manner as to lead her to
believe that both metals had been used. No effect was produced. The nickel magnetised
by Dr. Elliotson was, after a pause, applied in a similar manner. No results followed.
After another pause, the lead was several times applied, and then again the nickel. After
the last application of the nickel, the face of the patient became violently flushed, the
eyes were convulsed into a startling squint, she fell back in the chair, her breathing was
hurried, her limbs rigid, and her back bent in the form of a bow. She remained in this
state for a quarter of an hour.
This experiment was not considered a satisfactory proof of the magnetic powers of the
nickel; and Dr. Elliotson suggested that, in the second experiment, that metal should
alone be tried. Mr. Wakley was again the operator; but, before commencing, he stated
privately to Mr. Clarke, that instead of using nickel only, he would not employ the nickel
at all. Mr. Clarke, unseen by any person present, took the piece of nickel; put it into his
waistcoat pocket; and walked to the window, where he remained during the whole of the
experiment. Mr. Wakley again sat down, employing both hands, but placing his fingers in
such a manner, that it was impossible for any person to see what substance he held.
Presently, on applying his left hand, the girl's vision being still obstructed by the
pasteboard, Mr. Herring, who was standing near, said in a whisper, and with much
sincerity, "Take care, don't apply the nickel too strongly." Immediately the face of the girl
became violently red, her eyes were fixed in an intense squint, she fell back convulsively
in her chair, and all the previous symptoms were produced more powerfully than before.
Dr. Elliotson observed that the effects were most extraordinary; that no other metal than
nickel could produce them, and that they presented a beautiful series of phenomena. This
paroxysm lasted half an hour. Mr. Wakley retired with Dr. Elliotson and the other
gentlemen into an adjoining room, and convinced them that he had used no nickel at all,
but a piece of lead and a farthing.
This experiment was twice repeated with the same results. A third trial was made with the
nickel, but no effect was produced.
On the succeeding day the experiments were repeated upon both the sisters, chiefly with
mesmerised water and sovereigns. The investigation occupied about five hours, and the
following were the results:-1. Six wine glasses, filled with water unmesmerised, were placed on a table, and Jane
Okey being called in, was requested to drink from each of them successively. She did so,
and no effect was produced.

2. The same six glasses stood on the table, the water in the fourth having been subjected
for a long time to the supposed magnetic influence. She was requested in like manner to
drink of these. She did so, and again no effect was produced, although, according to the
doctrine of the magnetisers, she ought to have been immediately fixed on drinking of the
fourth.
3. In this experiment the position of the glasses was changed. There was no result.
4. Was a repetition of the foregoing. No result.
5. The water in all the glasses was subjected to the supposed magnetic influence from the
fingers of Dr. Elliotson, until, in his opinion, it was strongly magnetised. Still no result.
6. The glasses were filled up with fresh water unmesmerised. No result.
7. The water was strongly magnetised in each glass, and the girl emptied them all. No
result.
It would be needless to go through the whole series of experiments. The results may be
briefly stated. Sovereigns unmesmerised threw the girls into convulsions, or fixed them.
Mesmerised sovereigns sometimes did and sometimes did not produce these symptoms.
Elizabeth Okey became repeatedly fixed when drinking unmagnetised water; while that
which had been subjected to the powers of a supposed magnetic battery, produced no
results. Altogether twenty-nine experiments were tried, which convinced every one
present, except Dr. Elliotson, that Animal Magnetism was a delusion, that the girls were
of very exciteable imaginations, and arrant impostors.
Their motives for carrying on so extraordinary a deception have often been asked. The
question is easily answered. Poor girls, unknown and unnoticed, or, if noticed, perhaps
despised, they found themselves all at once the observed of all observers, by the really
remarkable symptoms of their disease, which it required no aid from magnetism to
produce. Flattered by the oft-repeated experiments and constant attentions of doctors and
learned men, who had begun by deluding themselves, they imagined themselves persons
of vast importance, and encouraged by degrees the whims of their physicians, as the
means of prolonging the consideration they so unexpectedly enjoyed. Constant practice
made them at last all but perfect in the parts they were performing; and they failed at last,
not from a want of ingenuity, or of a most wonderful power over their own minds, and by
their minds upon their bodies, but from the physical impossibility of seeing through a
thick pasteboard, or into the closed hands of Mr. Wakley. The exposure that was made
was complete and decisive. From that day forth, magnetism in England has hid its
diminished head, and affronted no longer the common sense of the age. M. Dupotet is no
more heard of, the girls Okey afford no more either wonder or amusement by their clever
acting, and reason has resumed her sway in the public mind.

A few more circumstances remain to be stated. Elizabeth Okey left the hospital; but was
re-admitted some weeks afterwards, labouring under ischuria, a fresh complaint,
unconnected with her former malady. As experiments in magnetism were still tried upon
her privately, notwithstanding the recent exposure and the all but universal derision of the
public, the House Committee of the hospital, early in December, met to consider the
expediency of expelling the girl. Dr. Elliotson, on that occasion, expressed his opinion
that it was necessary to retain her in the hospital, as she was too ill to be discharged. It
was then elicited from the nurse, who was examined by the Committee, that Okey, when
in the state of "magnetic delirium," was in the habit of prophesying the death or recovery
of the patients in the ward; that, with the consent of Dr. Elliotson, she had been led in the
twilight into the men's ward, and had prophesied in a similar manner; her predictions
being taken down in writing, and given in a sealed paper to the apothecary, to be opened
after a certain time, that it might be seen whether they were verified. Dr. Elliotson did not
deny the fact. The nurse also stated more particularly the manner in which the prophecies
were delivered. She said that, on approaching the bed of a certain patient, Okey gave a
convulsive shudder, exclaiming that "Great Jacky was sitting on the bedclothes!" On
being asked to explain herself, she said that Great Jacky was the angel of death. At the
bedside of another patient she shuddered slightly, and said "Little Jacky was there!" Dr.
Elliotson did not altogether discredit the predictions; but imagined they might ultimately
be verified by the death or recovery of the patient. Upon the minds of the patients
themselves, enfeebled as they were by disease and suffering, the worst effects were
produced. One man's death was accelerated by the despondency it occasioned, and the
recovery of others was seriously impeded.
When these facts became known, the Council of the College requested the Medical
Committee to discharge Okey and prevent any further exhibitions of Animal Magnetism
in the wards. The latter part of this request having been communicated to Dr. Elliotson,
he immediately sent in his resignation. A successor was afterwards appointed in the
person of Dr. Copland. At his inaugural lecture the students of the college manifested a
riotous disposition, called repeatedly for their old instructor, and refused to allow the
lecture to proceed; but it appears the disturbance was caused by their respect and
affection for Dr. Elliotson individually, and not from any participation in his ideas about
magnetism.
Extravagant as the vagaries of the English professors of magnetism may appear, they are
actual common sense in comparison with the aberrations of the Germans. The latter have
revived all the exploded doctrines of the Rosicrucians; and in an age which is called
enlightened, have disinterred from the rubbish of antiquity, the wildest superstitions of
their predecessors, and built upon them theories more wild and startling than anything
before attempted or witnessed among mankind. Paracelsus and Bohmen, Borri and
Meyer, with their strange heterogeneous mixture of alchymy and religion, but paved the
way for the stranger, and even more extravagant mixture of magnetism and religion, as
now practised in Germany. Magnetism, it is believed, is the key of all knowledge, and
opens the door to those forbidden regions where all the wonders of God's works are made
clear to the mind of man. The magnetic patient is possessed of all gifts -- can converse
with myriads of spirits, and even with God himself -- be transported with greater rapidity

than the lightning's flash to the moon or the stars, and see their inhabitants, and hold
converse with them on the wonders and beauties of their separate spheres, and the power
and goodness of the God who made them. Time and space are to them as if annihilated -nothing is hidden from them -- past, present, or future. They divine the laws by which the
universe is upheld, and snatch the secrets of the Creator from the darkness in which, to all
other men, it is enveloped. For the last twenty or thirty years these daring and
blasphemous notions have flourished in rank luxuriance; and men of station in society,
learning, and apparent good sense in all the usual affairs of life, have publicly given in
their adhesion, and encouraged the doctrine by their example, or spread it abroad by their
precepts. That the above summary of their tenets may not he deemed an exaggeration we
enter into particulars, and refer the incredulous that human folly in the present age could
ever be pushed so far, to chapter and verse for every allegation.
In a work published in Germany in 1817, by J. A. L. Richter, entitled "Considerations on
Animal Magnetism," the author states that in magnetism is to be found the solution of the
enigmas of human existence, and particularly the enigmas of Christianity, on the mystic
and obscure parts of which it throws a light which permits us to gaze clearly on the
secrets of the mystery. Wolfart's "Annals of Animal Magnetism" abound with similar
passages; and Kluge's celebrated work is written in the same spirit. "Such is the
wonderful sympathy," says the latter, "between the magnetiser and the somnambulist that
he has known the latter to vomit and be purged in consequence of medicine which the
former had taken. Whenever he put pepper on his tongue, or drank wine, the patient could
taste these things distinctly on her palate." But Kerner's history of the case of Madame
Hauffe, the famous magnetic woman, "Seer" or "Prophetess of Prevorst," Will give a
more complete and melancholy proof of the sad wanderings of these German "men of
science," than any random selections we might make from their voluminous works. This
work was published in two volumes, and the authenticity of its details supported by
Gorres, Eschenmeyer, and other men of character and reputation in Germany: it is said to
have had an immense sale. She resided in the house of Kerner, at Weinsberg; and being
weak and sickly, was very easily thrown into a state of somnambulism. "She belonged,"
says Kerner, "to a world of spirits; she was half spirit herself; she belonged to the region
beyond death, in which she already half existed. * * * Her body clothed her spirit like a
thin veil. * * * She was small and slightly made, had an Oriental expression of
countenance, and the piercing eyes of a prophet, the gleams of which were increased in
their power and beauty by her long dark eyebrows and eyelashes. She was a flower of
light, living upon sunbeams. * * * Her spirit often seemed to be separated from her
frame. The spirits of all things, of which mankind in general have no perception, were
perceptible to and operated upon her, more particularly the spirits of metals, herbs, men,
and animals. All imponderable matters, even the rays of light, had an effect upon her
when she was magnetised." The smell of flint was very agreeable to her. Salt laid on her
hand caused a flow of saliva: rock crystal laid on the pit of her stomach produced rigidity
of the whole body. Red grapes produced certain effects, if placed in her hands; white
grapes produced different effects. The bone of an elk would throw her into an epileptic
fit. The tooth of a mammoth produced a feeling of sluggishness. A spider's web rolled
into a ball produced a prickly feeling in the hands, and a restlessness in the whole body.
Glow-worms threw her into the magnetic sleep. Music somnambulised her. When she

wanted to be cheerful, she requested Kerner to magnetise the water she drank, by playing
the Jew's-harp. She used to say in her sleep, "Magnetise the water by seven vibrations of
the harp." If she drank water magnetised in this manner, she was constrained
involuntarily to pour forth her soul in song. The eyes of many men threw her into the
state of somnambulism. She said that in those eyes there was a spiritual spark, which was
the mirror of the soul. If a magnetised rod were laid on her right eye, every object on
which she gazed appeared magnified.
It was by this means that she was enabled to see the inhabitants of the moon. She said,
that on the left side of the moon, the inhabitants were great builders, and much happier
than those on the right side. "I often see," said she to her magnetiser, "many spirits with
whom I do not come into contact. Others come to me, and I speak to them; and they often
spend months in my company. I hear and see other things at the same time; but I cannot
turn my eyes from the spirits; they are in magnetic rapport with me. They look like
clouds, thin, but not transparent; though, at first, they seem so. Still, I never saw one
which cast a shadow. Their form is similar to that which they possessed when alive; but
colourless, or grey. They wear clothing; and it appears as if made of clouds, also
colourless and misty grey. The brighter and better spirits wear long garments, which hang
in graceful folds, with belts around their waists. The expression of their features is sad
and solemn. Their eyes are bright, like fire; but none of them that I ever saw had hair
upon their heads. They make noises when they wish to excite the attention of those who
have not the gift of seeing them. These noises consist of sounds in the air, sometimes
sudden and sharp, and causing a shock. Sometimes the sounds are plaintive and musical;
at other times they resemble the rustling of silk, the falling of sand, or the rolling of a
ball. The better spirits are brighter than the bad ones, and their voice is not so strong.
Many, particularly the dark, sad spirits, when I uttered words of religious consolation,
sucked them in, as it were; and I saw them become brighter and quite glorious in
consequence: but I became weaker. Most of the spirits who come to me are of the lowest
regions of the spiritual world, which are situated just above our atmosphere. They were,
in their life, grovelling and low-minded people, or such as did not die in the faith of
Jesus; or else such as, in expiring, clung to some earthly thought or affection, which now
presses upon them, and prevents them from soaring up to heaven. I once asked a spirit
whether children grew after death? 'Yes,' replied the spirit,' the soul gradually expands,
until it becomes as large as it would have been on earth. I cannot effect the salvation of
these spirits; I am only their mediator. I pray ardently with them, and so lead them by
degrees to the great Saviour of the world. It costs an infinity of trouble before such a soul
turns again to the Lord.'"
It would, however, serve no good purpose to extend to greater length the reveries of this
mad woman, or to set down one after the other the names of the magnetisers who
encouraged her in her delusions -- being themselves deluded. To wade through these
volumes of German mysticism is a task both painful and disgusting -- and happily not
necessary. Enough has been stated to show how gross is the superstition even of the
learned; and that errors, like comets, run in one eternal cycle -- at their apogee in one age,
at their perigee in the next, but returning in one phase or another for men to wonder at.

In England the delusion of magnetism may for the present be considered as fairly
exploded. Taking its history from the commencement, and tracing it to our own day, it
can hardly be said, delusion though it was, that it has been wholly without its uses. To
quote the words of Bailly, in 1784, "Magnetism has not been altogether unavailing to the
philosophy which condemns it: it is an additional fact to record among the errors of the
human mind, and a great experiment on the strength of the imagination." Over that vast
inquiry of the influence of mind over matter, -- an inquiry which the embodied intellect
of mankind will never be able to fathom completely, -- it will, at least, have thrown a
feeble and imperfect light. It will have afforded an additional proof of the strength of the
unconquerable will, and the weakness of matter as compared with it; another illustration
of the words of the inspired Psalmist, that "we are fearfully and wonderfully made." If it
serve no other purpose than this, its history will prove useful. Truth ere now has been
elicited by means of error; and Animal Magnetism, like other errors, may yet contribute
its quota towards the instruction and improvement of mankind.
THE END.

