
CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

180

[Vol. 19:1

are apt to make faulty decisions, and you should keep that in mind
as you make your own investment decisions.
D.

Owner Earnings and the Cash Flow Fallacy50

[Many business acquisitions require] major purchase-price accounting adjustments, as prescribed by generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The GAAP figures, of course, are the ones
used in our consolidated financial statements. But, in our view, the
GAAP figures are not necessarily the most useful ones for investors or managers. Therefore, the figures shown for specific operating units are earnings before purchase-price adjustments are taken
into account. In effect, these are the earnings that would have been
reported by the businesses if we had not purchased them.
A discussion of our reasons for preferring this form of presentation [follows. It] will never substitute for a steamy novel and definitely is not required reading. However, I know that among our
6,000 shareholders there are those who are thrilled by my essays on
accounting-and I hope that both of you enjoy [it].
First a short quiz: below are abbreviated 1986 statements of
earnings for two companies. Which business is the more valuable?

50 [Divided by hash lines: 1986; 1986 Appendix]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT
Company 0

181
Company N

(OOOs Omitted)

Revenues
.
Cost of Goods Sold:
Historical costs,
excluding depreciation. . . . . . . . . .. $341,170
Special non-cash inventory
costs
.
Depreciation of plant
8,301
and equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gross Profit
.
Selling & Admin. Expense . . . . . . . . .. $260,286
Amortization of Goodwill
.
Operating Profit
.
Other Income, Net
.
Pre-Tax Income
.
Applicable Income Tax:
Historical deferred and current
tax. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. $ 31,387
Non-Cash Inter-period
Allocation Adjustment
.
Net Income

.

$677,240

$677,240
$341,170
4,979(1)
13,355(2)
359,504
$317,736

349,471
$327,769
$260,286
595(3)
260,286
$ 67,483
4,135
$ 71,618

260,881
$ 56,855
4,135
$ 60,990
$ 31,387
998(4)

31,387
$ 40,231

32,385
$ 28,605

(Numbers (1) through (4) designate items discussed later in this section.)

As you've probably guessed, Companies 0 and N are the
same business-Scott Fetzer. In the "0" (for "old") column we
have shown what the company's 1986 GAAP earnings would have
been if we had not purchased it; in the "N" (for "new") column we
have shown Scott Fetzer's GAAP earnings as actually reported by
Berkshire.
It should be emphasized that the two columns depict identical
economics-i.e., the same sales, wages, taxes, etc. And both "companies" generate the same amount of cash for owners. Only the
accounting is different.
So, fellow philosophers, which column presents truth? Upon
which set of numbers should managers and investors focus?
Before we tackle those questions, let's look at what produces
the disparity between 0 and N. We will simplify our discussion in
some respects, but the simplification should not produce any inaccuracies in analysis or conclusions.
The contrast between 0 and N comes about because we paid
an amount for Scott Fetzer that was different from its stated net
worth. Under GAAP, such differences-such premiums or discounts-must be accounted for by "purchase-price adjustments."
In Scott Fetzer's case, we paid $315 million for net assets that were

182

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

carried on its books at $172.4 million. So we paid a premium of
$142.6 million.
The first step in accounting for any premium paid is to adjust
the carrying value of current assets to current values. In practice,
this requirement usually does not affect receivables, which are routinely carried at current value, but often affects inventories. Because of a $22.9 million LIFO reserve and other accounting
intricacies,s1 Scott Fetzer's inventory account was carried at a $37.3
million discount from current value. So, making our first accounting move, we used $37.3 million of our $142.6 million premium to
increase the carrying value of the inventory.
Assuming any premium is left after current assets are adjusted, the next step is to adjust fixed assets to current value. In
our case, this adjustment also required a few accounting acrobatics
relating to deferred taxes. Since this has been billed as a simplified
discussion, I will skip the details and give you the bottom line:
$68.0 million was added to fixed assets and $13.0 million was eliminated from deferred tax liabilities. After making this $81.0 million
adjustment, we were left with $24.3 million of premium to allocate.
Had our situation called for them, two steps would next have
been required: the adjustment of intangible assets other than
Goodwill to current fair values, and the restatement of liabilities to
current fair values, a requirement that typically affects only longterm debt and unfunded pension liabilities. In Scott Fetzer's case,
however, neither of these steps was necessary.
The final accounting adjustment we needed to make, after recording fair market values for all assets and liabilities, was the assignment of the residual premium to Goodwill (technically known
as "excess of cost over the fair value of net assets acquired"). This
residual amounted to $24.3 million. Thus, the balance sheet of
Scott Fetzer immediately before the acquisition, which is summarized below in column 0, was transformed by the purchase into the
balance sheet shown in column N. In real terms, both balance
sheets depict the same assets and liabilities-but, as you can see,
certain figures differ significantly.

51 [A LIFO reserve is the difference between the current cost to replace inventory and
the amount shown as the cost of inventory on a balance sheet. This difference can grow
significantly, especially during inflationary periods.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT
Company 0

183
Company N

(OOOs Omitted)
Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents
.
Receivables, net
.
Inventories
.
Other
.
Total Current Assets
.
Property, Plant, and Equipment, net ..
Investments in the Advances to
Unconsolidated Subsidiaries and Joint
Ventures
.
Other Assets, including Goodwill
.

Liabilities
Notes Payable and Current Portion of
.
Long-term Debt
Accounts Payable
.
Accrued Liabilities
.
Total Current Liabilities
.
Long-term Debt and Capitalized
..
Leases
Deferred Income Taxes
.
Other Deferred Credits
.
Total Liabilities
.
Shareholder's Equity
.

$ 3,593
90,919
77,489
5,954
177,955
80,967

$ 3,593
90,919
114,764
5,954
215,230
148,960

93,589
9,836
$362,347

93,589
34,210
$491,989

$ 4,650
39,003
84,939
128,592

$ 4,650
39,003
84,939
128,592

34,669
17,052
9,657
189,970
172,377
$362,347

34,669
4,075
9,657
176,993
314,996
$491,989

The higher balance sheet figures shown in column N produce
the lower income figures shown in column N of the earnings statement presented earlier. This is the result of the asset write-ups and
of the fact that some of the written-up assets must be depreciated
or amortized. The higher the asset figure, the higher the annual
depreciation or amortization charge to earnings must be. The
charges that flowed to the earnings statement because of the balance sheet write-ups were numbered in the statement of earnings
shown earlier:
1. $4,979,000 for non-cash inventory costs resulting, primarily,
from reductions that Scott Fetzer made in its inventories during 1986; charges of this kind are apt to be small or non-existent in future years.
2. $5,054,000 for extra depreciation attributable to the write-up of
fixed assets; a charge approximating this amount will probably
be made annually for 12 more years.
3. $595,000 for amortization of Goodwill; this charge will be
made annually for 39 more years in a slightly larger amount

184

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

because our purchase was made on January 6 and, therefore,
the 1986 figure applies to only 98% of the year.
4. $998,000 for deferred-tax acrobatics that are beyond my ability
to explain briefly (or perhaps even non-briefly); a charge approximating this amount will probably be made annually for 12
more years.
It is important to understand that none of these newly-created
accounting costs, totaling $11.6 million, are deductible for income
tax purposes. 52 The "new" Scott Fetzer pays exactly the same tax
as the "old" Scott Fetzer would have, even though the GAAP
earnings of the two entities differ greatly. And, in respect to operating earnings, that would be true in the future also. However, in
the unlikely event that Scott Fetzer sells one of its businesses, the
tax consequences to the "old" and "new" company might differ
widely.
By the end of 1986 the difference between the net worth of the
"old" and "new" Scott Fetzer had been reduced from $142.6 million to $131.0 million by means of the extra $11.6 million that was
charged to earnings of the new entity. As the years go by, similar
charges to earnings will cause most of the premium to disappear,
and the two balance sheets will converge. However, the higher
land values and most of the higher inventory values that were established on the new balance sheet will remain unless land is disposed of or inventory levels are further reduced.

* * * * *
What does all this mean for owners? Did the shareholders of
Berkshire buy a business that earned $40.2 million in 1986 or did
they buy one earning $28.6 million? Were those $11.6 million of
new charges a real economic cost to us? Should investors pay
more for the stock of Company 0 than of Company N? And, if a
business is worth some given multiple of earnings, was Scott Fetzer
worth considerably more the day before we bought it than it was
worth the following day?
If we think through these questions, we can gain some insights
about what may be called "owner earnings." These represent (a)
reported earnings plus (b) depreciation, depletion, amortization,
and certain other non-cash charges such as Company N's items (1)
and (4) less (c) the average annual amount of capitalized expenditures for plant and equipment, etc. that the business requires to
52 [The tax rule has changed.

See I.R.c. § 197.]

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

185

fully maintain its long-term competitive position and its unit volume. (If the business requires additional working capital to maintain its competitive position and unit volume, the increment also
should be included in (c). However, businesses following the LIFO
inventory method usually do not require additional working capital
if unit volume does not change.)
Our owner-earnings equation does not yield the deceptively
precise figures provided by GAAP, since (c) must be a guess-and
one sometimes very difficult to make. Despite this problem, we
consider the owner earnings figure, not the GAAP figure, to be the
relevant item for valuation purposes-both for investors in buying
stocks and for managers in buying entire businesses. We agree
with Keynes's observation: "I would rather be vaguely right than
precisely wrong."
The approach we have outlined produces "owner earnings"
for Company 0 and Company N that are identical, which means
valuations are also identical, just as common sense would tell you
should be the case. This result is reached because the sum of (a)
and (b) is the same in both columns 0 and N, and because (c) is
necessarily the same in both cases.
And what do Charlie and I, as owners and managers, believe is
the correct figure for the owner earnings of Scott Fetzer? Under
current circumstances, we believe (c) is very close to the "old"
company's (b) number of $8.3 million and much below the "new"
company's (b) number of $19.9 million. Therefore, we believe that
owner earnings are far better depicted by the reported earnings in
the 0 column than by those in the N column. In other words, we
feel owner earnings of Scott Fetzer are considerably larger than the
GAAP figures that we report.
That is obviously a happy state of affairs. But calculations of
this sort usually do not provide such pleasant news. Most managers probably will acknowledge that they need to spend something
more than (b) on their businesses over the longer term just to hold
their ground in terms of both unit volume and competitive position. When this imperative exists-that is, when (c) exceeds (b)GAAP earnings overstate owner earnings. Frequently this overstatement is substantial. The oil industry has in recent years provided a conspicuous example of this phenomenon. Had most
major oil companies spent only (b) each year, they would have
guaranteed their shrinkage in real terms.
All of this points up the absurdity of the "cash flow" numbers
that are often set forth in Wall Street reports. These numbers rou-

186

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

tinely include (a) plus (b)-but do not subtract (c). Most sales
brochures of investment bankers also feature deceptive presentations of this kind. These imply that the business being offered is
the commercial counterpart of the Pyramids-forever state-of-theart, never needing to be replaced, improved or refurbished. Indeed, if all U.S. corporations were to be offered simultaneously for
sale through our leading investment bankers-and if the sales
brochures describing them were to be believed-governmental
projections of national plant and equipment spending would have
to be slashed by 90%.
"Cash Flow," true, may serve as a shorthand of some utility in
descriptions of certain real estate businesses or other enterprises
that make huge initial outlays and only tiny outlays thereafter. A
company whose only holding is a bridge or an extremely long-lived
gas field would be an example. But "cash flow" is meaningless in
such businesses as manufacturing, retailing, extractive companies,
and utilities because, for them, (c) is always significant. To be sure,
businesses of this kind may in a given year be able to defer capital
spending. But over a five- or ten-year period, they must make the
investment-or the business decays.
Why, then, are "cash flow" numbers so popular today? In answer, we confess our cynicism: we believe these numbers are frequently used by marketers of businesses and securities in attempts
to justify the unjustifiable (and thereby to sell what should be the
unsalable). When (a)-that is, GAAP earnings-looks by itself inadequate to service debt of a junk bond or justify a foolish stock
price, how convenient it becomes for salesmen to focus on (a) +
(b). But you shouldn't add (b) without subtracting (c): though dentists correctly claim that if you ignore your teeth they'll go away,
the same is not true for (c). The company or investor believing
that the debt-servicing ability or the equity valuation or an enterprise can be measured by totalling (a) and (b) while ignoring (c) is
headed for certain trouble.

* * * * *
To sum up: in the case of both Scott Fetzer and our other businesses, we feel that (b) on an historical-cost basis-i.e., with both
amortization of intangibles and other purchase-price adjustments
excluded-is quite close in amount to (c). (The two items are not
identical, of course. For example, at See's we annually make capitalized expenditures that exceed depreciation by $500,000 to $1
million, simply to hold our ground competitively.) Our conviction

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

187

about this point is the reason we show our amortization and other
purchase-price adjustment items separately ... and is also our reason for viewing the earnings of the individual businesses . . . as
much more closely approximating owner earnings than the GAAP
figures.
Questioning GAAP figures may seem impious to some. After
all, what are we paying the accountants for if it is not to deliver us
the "truth" about our business. But the accountants' job is to record, not to evaluate. The evaluation job falls to investors and
managers.
Accounting numbers of course, are the language of business
and as such are of enormous help to anyone evaluating the worth
of a business and tracking its progress. Charlie and I would be lost
without these numbers: they invariably are the starting point for us
in evaluating our own businesses and those of others. Managers
and owners need to remember, however, that accounting is but an
aid to business thinking, never a substitute for it.

E. Intrinsic Value, Book Value, and Market Price 53
[Intrinsic value is] an all-important concept that offers the only
logical approach to evaluating the relative attractiveness of investments and businesses. Intrinsic value can be defined simply: It is
the discounted value of the cash that can be taken out of a business
during its remaining life.
The calculation of intrinsic value, though, is not so simple. As
our definition suggests, intrinsic value is an estimate rather than a
precise figure, and it is additionally an estimate that must be
changed if interest rates move or forecasts of future cash flows are
revised. Two people looking at the same set of facts, moreoverand this would apply even to Charlie and me-will almost inevitably come up with at least slightly different intrinsic value figures.
That is one reason we never give you our estimates of intrinsic
value. What our annual reports do supply, though, are the facts
that we ourselves use to calculate this value.
Meanwhile, we regularly report our per-share book value, an
easily calculable number, though one of limited use. The limitations do not arise from our holdings of marketable securities, which
are carried on our books at their current prices. Rather the inadequacies of book value have to do with the companies we control,
53

[Divided by hash lines: 1996 Owner's Manual; 1987; 1985; 1996.]

188

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

whose values as stated on our books may be far different from their
intrinsic values.
The disparity can go in either direction. For example, in 1964
we could state with certitude that Berkshire's per-share book value
was $19.46. However, that figure considerably overstated the company's intrinsic value, since all of the company's resources were
tied up in a sub-profitable textile business. Our textile assets had
neither going-concern nor liquidation values equal to their carrying
values. Today, however, Berkshire's situation is reversed: Our
March 31, 1996 book value of $15,180 far understates Berkshire's
intrinsic value, a point true because many of the businesses we control are worth much more than their carrying value.
Inadequate though they are in telling the story, we give you
Berkshire's book-value figures because they today serve as a
rough, albeit significantly understated, tracking measure for Berkshire's intrinsic value. In other words, the percentage change in
book value in any given year is likely to be reasonably close to that
year's change in intrinsic value.
You can gain some insight into the differences between book
value and intrinsic value by looking at one form of investment, a
college education. Think of the education's cost as its "book
value." If this cost is to be accurate, it should include the earnings
that were foregone by the student because he chose college rather
than a job.
For this exercise, we will ignore the important non-economic
benefits of an education and focus strictly on its economic value.
First, we must estimate the earnings that the graduate will receive
over his lifetime and subtract from that figure an estimate of what
he would have earned had he lacked his education. That gives us
an excess earnings figure, which must then be discounted, at an
appropriate interest rate, back to graduation day. The dollar result
equals the intrinsic economic value of the education.
Some graduates will find that the book value of their education exceeds its intrinsic value, which means that whoever paid for
the education didn't get his money's worth. In other cases, the
intrinsic value of an education will far exceed its book value, a result that proves capital was wisely deployed. In all cases, what is
clear is that book value is meaningless as an indicator of intrinsic
value.
An interesting accounting irony overlays a comparison of the
reported financial results of our controlled companies with those of

1997]

THE ESSAYS OF WARREN BUFFETT

189

the permanent minority holdings . . .. [These holdings] have a
market value of over $2 billion. Yet they produced only $11 million
in reported after-tax earnings for Berkshire in 1987.
Accounting rules dictate that we take into income only the
dividends these companies pay us-which are little more than
nominal-rather than our share of their earnings, which in 1987
amounted to well over $100 million. On the other hand, accounting rules provide that the carrying value of these three holdingsowned, as they are, by insurance companies-must be recorded on
our balance sheet at current market prices. The result: GAAP accounting lets us reflect in our net worth the up-to-date underlying
values of the businesses we partially own, but does not let us reflect
their underlying earnings in our income account.
In the case of our controlled companies, just the opposite is
true. Here, we show full earnings in our income account but never
change asset values on our balance sheet, no matter how much the
value of a business might have increased since we purchased it.
Our mental approach to this accounting schizophrenia is to ignore GAAP figures and to focus solely on the future earning
power of both our controlled and non-controlled businesses. Using
this approach, we establish our own ideas of business value, keeping these independent from both the accounting values shown on
our books for controlled companies and the values placed by a
sometimes foolish market on our partially-owned companies. It is
this business value that we hope to increase at a reasonable (or,
preferably, unreasonable) rate in the years ahead.
Historically, Berkshire shares have sold modestly below intrinsic business value. With the price there, purchasers could be certain (as long as they did not experience a widening of this discount)
that their personal investment experience would at least equal the
financial experience of the business. But recently the discount has
disappeared, and occasionally a modest premium has prevailed.
The elimination of the discount means that Berkshire's market
value increased even faster than business value (which, itself, grew
at a pleasing pace). That was good news for any owner holding
while that move took place, but it is bad news for the new or prospective owner. If the financial experience of new owners of Berkshire is merely to match the future financial experience of the
company, any premium of market value over intrinsic business
value that they pay must be maintained.

190

CARDOZO LAW REVIEW

[Vol. 19:1

Management cannot determine market prices, although it can,
by its disclosures and policies, encourage rational behavior by market participants. My own preference, as perhaps you'd guess, is for
a market price that consistently approximates business value.
Given that relationship, all owners prosper precisely as the business prospers during their period of ownership. Wild swings in
market prices far above and below business value do not change
the final gains for owners in aggregate; in the end, investor gains
must equal business gains. But long periods of substantial undervaluation and/ or overvaluation will cause the gains of the business
to be inequitably distributed among various owners, with the investment result of any given owner largely depending upon how
lucky, shrewd, or foolish he happens to be.
Over the long term there has been a more consistent relationship between Berkshire's market value and business value than has
existed for any other publicly-traded equity with which I am familiar. This is a tribute to you. Because you have been rational, interested, and investment-oriented, the market price for Berkshire
stock has almost always been sensible. This unusual result has
been achieved by a shareholder group with unusual demographics:
virtually all of our shareholders are individuals, not institutions.
No other public company our size can claim the same.
Ben Graham told a story 40 years ago that illustrates why investment professionals behave as they do: An oil prospector, moving to his heavenly reward, was met by St. Peter with bad news.
"You're qualified for residence", said St. Peter, "but, as you can
see, the compound reserved for oil men is packed. There's no way
to squeeze you in." After thinking a moment, the prospector asked
if he might say just four words to the present occupants. That
seemed harmless to St. Peter, so the prospector cupped his hands
and yelled, "Oil discovered in hell." Immediately the gate to the
compound opened and all of the oil men marched out to head for
the nether regions. Impressed, St. Peter invited the prospector to
move in and make himself comfortable. The prospector paused.
"No," he said, "I think I'll go along with the rest of the boys. There
might be some truth to that rumor after all."
In [the 1995] letter, with Berkshire shares selling at $36,000, I
told you: (1) Berkshire's gain in market value in recent years had
outstripped its gain in intrinsic value, even though the latter gain
had been highly satisfactory; (2) that kind of overperformance
