
223

54. HOW TO SET STOPS

C

D

E

B
A

FIGURE 54.2â•… S&P 500 and a 20-day New High–New Low Index. (Chart by TradeStation, programming by

Kerry Lovvorn)

A 2-ATR Trailing Stop following a Spike Bounce signal
A Spike Bounce signal (described in Chapter 34) occurs when the 20-day New High—New
Low Index drops below minus 500, indicating a bearish imbalance, and then rallies above
that level, showing that bulls are coming back. Spike Bounce signals are marked by vertical green arrows. Here S&P bars get colored green while the Spike Bounce signal is, in
effect, purple after it disappears. The red line trails two ATRs below the highs of the bars
of the S&P 500.
The Spike Bounce gives buy signals for the entire market, and this chart trails each buy
signal with a 2-ATR close-only stop (intraday crossovers don’t count—the market has to
close below the stop to activate it). Notice the very productive signals A, B, and C. The buy
signal E is still in effect at the time of this writing. The signal D resulted in a loss—there are
no universally profitable signals.

buy order for the day ahead at that distance below the EMA and keep adjusting it
every day. You will use a splash of noisy behavior to get a good entry into a trendfollowing trade.

Don’t Let a Winning Trade Turn into a Loss
Never let an open trade that shows a decent paper profit turn into a loss! Before you
put on a trade, start planning at what level you’ll begin protecting your profits. For
example, if your profit target for that trade is about $1,000, you may decide that a
profit of $300 will need to be protected. Once your open profit rises to $300, you’ll
move your protective stop to a breakeven level. I call that move “cuffing the trade.”
Soon after moving your stop to breakeven, you’ll need to focus on protecting
a portion of your growing paper profit. Decide in advance what percentage you’ll
protect.
For example, you may decide that once the breakeven stop is in place, you’ll protect a third of your open profit. If the open profit on the trade described above rises
to $600, you’ll move up your stop, so that the $200 profit is protected.

224

PRACTICAL DETAILS

These levels aren’t set in stone.You may choose different percentages, depending
on your level of confidence in a trade and risk tolerance.
As a trade moves in your favor, your remaining potential gain begins to shrink,
while your risk—the distance to the stop—keeps increasing. To trade is to manage
risk. As the reward-to-risk ratio for your winning trades slowly deteriorates, you
need to begin reducing your risk. Protecting a portion of your paper profits will
keep your reward-to-risk ratio on a more even keel.

Move Your Stop Only in the Direction of Your Trade
You buy a stock and, being a disciplined trader, put a stop underneath. That stock
rises, generating nice paper profits, but then it stalls. Next, it sinks a little, then a
bit more, and then goes negative, inching towards your stop. As you study the chart,
its bottom formation looks good, with a bullish divergence capable of supporting a
strong rally. What will you do next?
First of all, learn from your mistake of not having moved up your stop. That stop
should have been raised to breakeven a while ago. Failing that, your options have narrowed: take a small loss right away and be ready to reposition later—or continue to
hold. Trouble is you feel tempted to go for the third and utterly unplanned choice—
to lower your stop, giving your losing trade “more room.”
Don’t do it!
Giving a trade “more room” is wishful thinking, pure and simple. It doesn’t belong
in the toolkit of a serious trader.
Giving “more room” to a losing trade is like telling your kid you’ll take away his
car keys if he misbehaves, but then not following through. That’s how you teach him
that rules don’t matter and encourage even worse behavior. Standing firm brings
better long-term results.
The logical thing to do when a trade starts acting badly is to accept a small loss.
Continue to monitor that stock and be ready to buy it again if it bottoms out. Persistence pays, commissions are cheap, and professional traders often take several quick
stabs at a trade before it starts running in their favor.

Catastrophic Stops: A Professional’s Life Jacket
Soon after moving to a house near a lake I bought a kayak, and immediately went
shopping for a life jacket. All I had to do to be legal was to have a jacket in the
kayak—any cheap piece of junk would suffice. Still, I spent good money on a quality
jacket that felt snug and didn’t interfere with rowing when I wore it.
All I planned to do with that kayak was to paddle peacefully on a lake, not anywhere near white water or currents. I never expected to actually need that jacket.
Did I waste my money buying it? Well, if ever some motor boat clips me, then wearing a high-quality jacket can make the difference between life and death.
It’s the same with stops. They’re a nuisance and often cost you money. Still, there
will be a day when a stop will save your account from a life-threatening collision.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

55. IS THIS AN A-TRADE?

225

Keep in mind that a bad accident is much more likely in the market than on a lake.
That’s why it’s essential to use stops.
A “hard stop” is an order you give to your broker. A “soft stop” is an order you
keep in your head, ready to place it when needed. Beginners and intermediate traders must use hard stops. A professional trader, sitting in front of a live screen all day,
may use a soft stop if he has the discipline to exit when his system tells him to do it.
Still, accidents happen. A professional trader friend described how he fought
against a market reversal. His soft stop was set at a $2,000 loss level, but by the time
he threw in the towel and got out, his loss grew to $40,000—the worst of his trading
career. This is why, even if you don’t use hard stops on a regular basis, you should at
the very least use a “catastrophic stop” for every trade.
For any A-trade, whether long or short, draw a line on your chart where you absolutely do not expect that stock to go. Place your hard stop at that level and make
it GTC: “good ’til cancelled.” â•›That will be your catastrophic stop. Now you can play
with the luxury of soft stops. Paddle your kayak hard, knowing that you’re wearing
a reliable life jacket.
Had my friend whose $2,000 drawdown metastasized into a $40,000 loss used a
hard “catastrophic” stop, he would have taken only a relatively small loss, sidestepped
a disaster, and avoided the financial and psychological hurt of a shark bite.

Stops and Overnight Gaps: Only for the Pros
What will you do if your stock gets hit by a major piece of bad news after the market
closes for the day? Looking at pre-opening quotes the next morning, you realize that
it’ll open sharply lower, deep below your stop, promising massive slippage.
This is a rare occurrence, but it does happen.
If you’re a new or intermediate trader, there isn’t much you can do—just grit
your teeth and take your loss. Only coldly disciplined pros have an additional
option: day-trade your way out of that stock. Pull your stop, and after the stock begins
trading, handle it as if it was a day-trade you bought at the first tick of that morning.
Opening gaps are often followed by bounces, giving nimble traders an opportunity
to get out at a smaller loss. This doesn’t always happen—which is why most traders
should never use this technique.You may actually deepen your loss instead of reducing it.
Be sure to get out before the close. Your damaged stock may bounce today, but
tomorrow more sellers are likely to come in and drive it lower. Don’t let a bounce
lull you into a false hope of a reversal.

■■55. Is This an A-Trade?
Your performance in any field will improve if you take tests. Getting graded on them
will help you recognize your strengths and weaknesses. Now you can work on reinforcing what’s good and correcting what’s not.
Whenever you complete a trade, the market gives you three grades. It grades the
quality of your entry and exit, and most importantly, it delivers your overall trade grade.

226

PRACTICAL DETAILS

If you’re a swing trader and use a combination of weekly and daily charts, look for
your grades on the dailies. Your buy grade is based on the location of your entry,
relative to the high and low of the daily bar during which you bought.

Buy grade =

(high–buy point)
(high–low)

The closer to the bar’s low and the farther away from the bar’s high you buy, the
better your buy grade. Suppose the high of the day was $20, the low $19, and you managed to buy at $19.25. Entering those numbers into the formula gives you a buy grade
of 75%. If your buy grade is 100%, it means you bought at the bottom tick of the day.
That’s brilliant, but don’t count on it happening. If your buy grade is 0%, it means you
bought the top tick of the day. This is terrible and should serve as a reminder not to
chase runaway prices. I calculate my buy grade for every trade and consider anything
above 50% a very good result, meaning I bought in the lower half of the daily bar.
The following is the formula for your sell grade

Sell grade =

(sell point–low)
(high–low)

The closer to the bar’s high and the farther away from the low of the bar you sell,
the better your sell grade. Suppose the high of the day was $20, the low $19, and
you managed to sell at $19.70. Entering those numbers into the formula gives you a
sell grade of 70%. If your sell grade is 100%, it means you sold at the top tick of the
day. If your sell grade is 0%, it means you sold at the bottom tick of the day. This terrible grade should serve as a reminder to sell earlier instead of panicking. I calculate
my sell grade for every trade and consider anything above 50% a very good result,
meaning I sold in the upper half of the daily bar.
When evaluating any trade, most people assume that the amount of money they
make or lose in that trade reflects its quality. Money is important for plotting the
equity curve, but it’s a poor measure of a single trade. It makes more sense to rate
the quality of every trade by comparing what you’ve got to what was realistically
available. I find my trade grade by comparing points gained or lost in a trade to the
height of the daily chart’s channel measured on the day of the entry.

Trade grade =

(sell–buy)
(channel high–channel low)

A well-drawn channel contains between 90% and 95% of prices for the past 100
bars (see Chapter 22). You may use any number of channels—parallel to the EMA,
Autoenvelope, Keltner, or ATR channels—as long as you’re being consistent. A channel contains normal price moves, with only the extreme highs and lows protruding
outside it. The distance between the upper and the lower channel lines on the day you
enter a trade represents a realistic maximum of what’s available to a swing trader in
that market. Shooting for a maximum, though, is a very dangerous game. I consider
any trade that gains 30% or more of its channel height an A-trade.1 (Figure 55.1)
1

This term comes from the U.S. school grading system: A is excellent, B good, C mediocre, and D poor.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

227

55. IS THIS AN A-TRADE?

D
A

B

C

FIGURE 55.1â•… ADSK daily with 13- and 26-day EMAs and a 7% envelope. Impulse system with MACDHistogram 12-26-9. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Buy, Sell, and Trade Grades
This chart comes from my diary of a trade in Autodesk, Inc. (ADSK) while working on this
book (you saw my plan for this trade in Figure 38.1). I was piggybacking one of the Spike
picks, and my strategy here was “pullback to value.” ADSK had recently staged a deeper
than average pullback—notice a false downside breakout marked by a red arrow, followed
by a successful retest, marked with a green arrow.
Day A—Feb. 10, 2014, Monday: high $52.49, low $51.75, upper channel line $53.87,
lower $47.61 (we’ll need channel values to calculate the trade grade on exit). Bought
at $51.77. Buy grade = (52.49 − 51.77) / (52.49 − 51.75) = 97%.
Days B and C—Tuesday and Wednesday): rally continues, start moving up stop.
Day D—Thursday: high $54.49, low $53.39. Sold at $53.78. Sell grade = (53.78 − 53.39) /
(54.49 − 53.39) = 35%. Trade grade = (sell − buy) divided by channel height =
(53.78 – 51.77) / (53.87 − 47.61) = 32%.
My buy grade in this trade was unusually high, the sell grade below average, but the
overall trade grade was very good. Busy with the book, I traded only 200 shares, so my
profit, after commissions, was less than $400. Had I graded my trades by profits, this one
would be easy to overlook, but catching 32% of channel earned me an A.

A comment by Kerry Lovvorn at the 2012 annual reunion of SpikeTrade grabbed
my attention: he challenged all participants to define what he called ‘an A-trade’—a
setup that signals the likelihood of an excellent trade. “You have to define this pattern
for yourself,” he said. “If you don’t know what’s your ‘A-trade,’ you have no business
being in the market.”
I knew full well what my A-trades were—a divergence coupled with a false breakout or a pullback to value. Still, if I saw no A-trades on my screen, I’d go for B-trades,
and on a really slow day, reach for a C-trade.

228

PRACTICAL DETAILS

FIGURE 55.2â•… The Strategy box in the Trade Journal. (Source: SpikeTrade.com)

Whenever you plan a trade, be sure to specify what system you’ll use. Ask yourself whether this planned trade looks like an “A-trade” according to your system.
I use the words “system” and “strategy” interchangeably—both mean a trade plan. As
you can see from this snapshot of my trade journal’s Strategy box, taken in September
2013, I currently trade three systems. My main one is a “false breakout with a divergence.”
I also occasionally trade pullbacks to value—buying pullbacks during uptrends and shorting rallies in downtrends. On rare occasions, I trade against the extremes, buying severely
beaten down stocks or shorting stocks whose wild rallies are stalling.

Returning home from that reunion, I attached a plastic strip to one of my trading screens with the question: “Is this an A-trade?” Ever since then, I have it in front
of me whenever I place an order. The results came quickly: as the number of nonA-trades sharply declined, my equity curve began to rise at a steeper angle.
You need to have a clear idea of what would be a perfect setup for you,
“an A-trade.” Perfect doesn’t guarantee profits—there are no guarantees in the
market—but it means a setup with a strong positive expectation. It also means
something you’ve traded before with which you are comfortable. Once you know
what it is, you can start looking for stocks that exhibit that pattern.
One of the few advantages of a private trader over an institutional one is that we
can trade or not trade when we like. We have the luxury of being free to wait for
excellent setups. Unfortunately, most of us, in our eagerness to trade, throw away
this amazing advantage.
I’ve added the question “Is this an A-trade?” to my Tradebill, a trade management
form we’ll discuss in the next chapter. Whenever I see a potential trade, I ask myself
this question. If the answer is “yes,” I start calculating risk management, position sizing, and planning my entry. If the answer is “no,” I turn the page and go looking for
another pick. (Figure 55.2)
No matter how grand an idea or a stock tip, I will not trade it unless it fits into one
of my three strategies. Ideas come and go, fly or flop—but strategies stay and grow
better with age, as you learn how they perform under various market conditions.
Gradually, you may develop new strategies and drop others. You can see that the
ones I use are numbered 1, 4, and 7. The rest of the numbers were strategies I
stopped using.
Your system can be very mechanical or quite general, with just a few key principles, like my Triple Screen. Either way, you must know what your “A-trade” looks
like before you plan your next trade.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

229

55. IS THIS AN A-TRADE?

I’ll walk you through one of my strategies, but remember that you don’t have to
copy it (Figure 55.3). The way we trade is as personal as handwriting. Define a strategy that feels comfortable to you, test it, and then find a chart that perfectly represents
it. Print that chart and post it on a wall near your trading desk. Now you can search
for trades that look the way that chart looked on the day you entered that trade.

B

A

C

FIGURE 55.3â•… SLB daily with 13- and 26-day EMAs and a 6% envelope. Impulse system with MACDHistogram 12-26-9. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

False Downside Breakout with a Bullish Divergence
This chart, from my Trade Journal, shows a near-perfect example of a swing trade strategy
that I abbreviate as “01 FB + BD”—a false breakout with a bullish or bearish divergence.
Schlumberger, Ltd. (SLB) was in a well-established downtrend, and when it reached a new
low at A, it looked like just another bottom during a long and painful slide. I look at the entire
circled area of MACD-Histogram as a single bottom because it never crossed above the zero
line. In area B, the picture became more interesting: MACD-Histogram rallied above its centerline, “breaking the back of the bear.” The weekly Impulse system (not shown), which had been
red until then, turned blue, removing its prohibition of buying. In area C, SLB cracked to a
new low, but MACD declined to a much more shallow low, setting up for a bullish divergence.
Look carefully at the first blue bar after several red bars in area C. That’s where MACDHistogram ticked up, completing a bullish divergence. In addition, that bar rallied and
closed above the downside breakout level, marked by a purple dashed line: it marked
previous bars as a false downside breakout.
I bought during that bar (marked by a vertical green arrow), without waiting for it to
close, going long 2,000 shares at $60.80, with a stop at $59.12. Four days later, as prices
began approaching the upper channel line as well as the level of the previous top I started
taking profits. I sold 1,000 shares at $66.55 and the rest on the following day at $67 (both
marked by red arrows). I booked nearly $6 per share, for a total of $11,950 before commissions in five trading days. The system delivered a beautiful trade.
This is the chart I have in mind when looking for stocks and futures to trade. I want to
find those that have completed their bottom A and top B and are declining into what could
become bottom C. In the background, the Impulse system on the weekly chart cannot be
red because that would prohibit buying.

230

PRACTICAL DETAILS

In the next section, on trade planning, you’ll see how to use a form I named
Tradebill to make trading decisions more objective. Every trade has several parameters, and it’s easy to overlook some of them in the heat of action. Just as a pilot goes
through a preflight checklist, a trader needs to check his list before deciding to place
an order.

■■56. Scanning for Possible Trades
There are thousands of stocks out there, and in the days and weeks ahead, some
will rise, others fall, and some will fluctuate. Each stock will make money for traders whose systems are in gear with it—and lose money for the rest. Developing a
trading system or a strategy must come before scanning. If you don’t have a clearly
defined strategy, what will you scan for?!
Begin by developing a system that you trust. Once you have it, looking for trading candidates will become quite logical and straightforward. Looking at your list
of candidates, the first question about any pick will be “Is this an A-trade?” In other
words, is this pick close to your ideal pattern? If the answer is “yes,” you may start
working up a trade.
Scanning means reviewing a group of trading vehicles and zooming in on trading
candidates.Your scanning can be visual or computerized: you may flip through multiple charts, taking a quick glance at each, or else have your computer run through
that list and flag stocks whose patterns appeal to you. To repeat, defining a pattern
you trust must be your first step, scanning a more distant second.
Be sure to have realistic expectations for scanning. No scan can find you the needle
in a haystack—the one and only gem to trade. What a good scan does is bring up a
group of candidates on which to focus your attention.You can make that group bigger or smaller by loosening or tightening scan parameters. A scan is a time saver that
delivers potential candidates; it is not a piece a magic to free you from the necessity
of working up your picks.
Begin by describing what stocks you want to find. For example, if you’re a trendfollower, but don’t like chasing stocks, you may design a scan to find stocks whose
moving average is rising but the latest price is only a small percentage above that
average. You can write a scan yourself or hire someone to do it for you—there are
programmers who offer this service.
The raw list of stocks to be scanned can be as small as a few dozen or as large as
the S&P 500, or even Russell 2,000. I like looking for trading candidates on weekends, and depending on how much time I have, take one of the two approaches—one
lazy and the other hardworking. The lazy way, when my time is limited, is to review
Spikers’ picks for the week ahead. Spikers are the elite members of SpikeTrade.com,
and I figure that among a dozen picks by super-smart traders who compete for the
best pick of the week there ought to be a stock or two for me to piggyback. I examine
those picks, while adding my market opinion to the mix. Depending on my outlook
for the week ahead, I focus primarily on long or short candidates.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

231

56. SCANNING FOR POSSIBLE TRADES

The hard-working way consists of dropping all 500 components of the S&P 500
into my software and running a scan for potential MACD divergences. I’ve seen
many divergence scans, but never a reliable one—they all delivered too many false
positives and missed many good divergences. Then I realized that a divergence was
“an analog pattern”—clearly visible to a naked eye but hard to pick with digital processing. I turned to John Bruns, who built me a semiautomatic MACD divergence
scanner. Instead of looking for divergences, it scans for patterns that precede divergences and delivers the list of candidates to watch in the days ahead. (Figure 56.1)
Running my MACD divergence semiautomatic scan over the weekly and daily
charts of all 500 components of the S&P 500 takes only a minute, but the real work
begins when I review the lists of bullish and bearish candidates delivered by this scan.
First, I compare the sizes of bullish and bearish lists. For example, for several weeks
prior to writing this chapter, my scan for bullish divergences among the components
of the S&P 500 produced four to five candidates, while the scan for potential bearish
divergences returned between 70 and 80 stocks. This great imbalance indicated that
