
I think this risk may be taken in stride by the investor who, for a con-
siderable period of time, has already had the bulk of his stocks placed in
well-chosen situations. If properly chosen, these should by now have
already shown him some fairly substantial capital gains. But now, either
because he believes one of his securities should be sold or because some
new funds have come his way, such an investor has funds to purchase
something new. Unless it is one of those rare years when speculative buy-
ing is running riot in the stock market and major economic storm signals
are virtually screaming their warnings (as happened in 1928 and 1929), I
believe this class of investor should ignore any guesses on the coming
trend of general business or the stock market. Instead he should invest the
appropriate funds as soon as the suitable buying opportunity arises.

In contrast to guessing which way general business or the stock
market may go, he should be able to judge with only a small probabili-
ty of error what the company into which he wants to buy is going to
do in relation to business in general. Therefore he starts off with two
advantages. He is making his bet upon something which he knows to
be the case, rather than upon something about which he is largely guess-
ing. Furthermore, since by definition he is only buying into a situation
which for one reason or another is about to have a worthwhile increase
in its earning power in the near- or medium-term future, he has a sec-


When to Buy 103

ond element of support. Just as his stock would have risen more than
the average stock when this new source of earning power became rec-
ognized in the market place if business had remained good, so if by bad
fortune he has made his new purchase just prior to a general market
break this same new source of earnings should prevent these shares from
declining quite as much as other stocks of the same general type.

However, many investors are not in the happy position of having a
backlog of well-chosen investments bought comfortably below present
prices. Perhaps this may be the first time they have funds to invest. Per-
haps they may have a portfolio of bonds or relatively static non-growth
stocks which at long last they desire to convert into shares that in the
future will show them more worthwhile gains. If such investors get pos-
session of new funds or develop a desire to convert to growth stocks
after a prolonged period of prosperity and many years of rising stock
prices, should they, too, ignore the hazards of a possible business depres-
sion? Such an investor would not be in a very happy position if, later
on, he realized he had committed all or most of his assets near the top
of a long rise or just prior to a major decline.

This does create a problem. However, the solution to this problem
is not especially difficult—as in so many other things connected with
the stock market it just requires an extra bit of patience. I believe
investors in this group should start buying the appropriate type of
common stocks just as soon as they feel sure they have located one or
more of them. However, having made a start in this type of purchas-
ing, they should stagger the timing of further buying. They should
plan to allow several years before the final part of their available funds
will have become invested. By so doing, if the market has a severe
decline somewhere in this period, they will still have purchasing
power available to take advantage of such a decline. If no decline
occurs and they have properly selected their earlier purchases, they
should have at least a few substantial gains on such holdings. This
would provide a cushion so that if a severe decline happened to occur
at the worst possible time for them—which would be just after the
final part of their funds had become fully invested—the gains on the
earlier purchases should largely, if not entirely, offset the declines on
the more recent ones. No severe loss of original capital would there-
fore be involved.

There is an equally important reason why investors who have not
already obtained a record of satisfactory investments, and who have


104 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

enough funds to be able to stagger their purchases should do so. This is
that such investors will have had a practical demonstration, prior to
using up all their funds, that they or their advisors are sufficient masters
of investment technique to operate with reasonable efficiency. In the
event that such a record had not been attained, at least all of an investor's
assets would not be committed before he had had a warning signal to
revise his investment technique or to get someone else to handle such
matters for him.

All types of common stock investors might well keep one basic
thought in mind; otherwise the financial community’s constant worry
about and preoccupation with the danger of downswings in the busi-
ness cycle will paralyze much worthwhile investment action. This
thought is that here in the mid-twentieth century the current phase of
the business cycle is but one of at least five powerful forces. All of these
forces, either by influencing mass psychology or by direct economic
operation, can have an extremely powerful influence on the general
level of stock prices.

The other four influences are the trend of interest rates, the over-all
governmental attitude toward investment and private enterprise, the
long-range trend to more and more inflation, and—possibly most pow-
erful of all—new inventions and techniques as they affect old industries.
These forces are seldom all pulling stock prices in the same direction at
the same time. Nor is any one of them necessarily going to be of vast-
ly greater importance than any other for long periods of time. So com-
plex and diverse are these influences that the safest course to follow will
be the one that at first glance appears to be the most risky. This is to take
investment action when matters you know about a specific company
appear to warrant such action. Be undeterred by fears or hopes based on
conjectures, or conclusions based on surmises.



6
When to Sell

And When Not To

common stocks. He may want to build a new home or finance his

son in a business. Any one of a number of similar reasons can, from
the standpoint of happy living, make selling common stocks sensible.
This type of selling, however, is personal rather than financial in its
motive. As such it is well beyond the scope of this book. These com
ments are only designed to cover that type of selling that is motivated
by a single objective—obtaining the greatest total dollar benefit from
the investment dollars available.

I believe there are three reasons, and three reasons only, for the sale
of any common stock which has been originally selected according to
the investment principles already discussed. The first of these reasons
should be obvious to anyone. This is when a mistake has been made
in the original purchase and it becomes increasingly clear that the fac-
tual background of the particular company is, by a significant margin,
less favorable than originally believed. The proper handling of this
type of situation is largely a matter of emotional self-control.'To some
degree it also depends upon the investor's ability to be honest with
himself.

T= are many good reasons why an investor might decide to sell


106 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

‘Two of the important characteristics of common stock investment
are the large profits that can come with proper handling, and the high
degree of skill, knowledge, and judgment required for such proper han-
dling. Since the process of obtaining these almost fantastic profits is so
complex, it is not surprising that a certain percentage of errors in pur-
chasing are sure to occur. Fortunately the long-range profits from really
good common stocks should more than balance the losses from a nor-
mal percentage of such mistakes. They should leave a tremendous mar-
gin of gain as well. This is particularly true if the mistake is recognized
quickly. When this happens, losses, if any, should be far smaller than if
the stock bought in error had been held for a long period of time. Even
more important, the funds tied up in the undesirable situation are freed
to be used for something else which, if properly selected, should pro-
duce substantial gains.

However, there is a complicating factor that makes the handling of
investment mistakes more difficult. This is the ego in each of us. None
of us likes to admit to himself that he has been wrong. If we have made
a mistake in buying a stock but can sell the stock at a small profit, we
have somehow lost any sense of having been foolish. On the other hand,
if we sell at a small loss we are quite unhappy about the whole matter.
This reaction, while completely natural and normal, is probably one of
the most dangerous in which we can indulge ourselves in the entire
investment process. More money has probably been lost by investors
holding a stock they really did not want until they could “at least come
out even” than from any other single reason. If to these actual losses are
added the profits that might have been made through the proper rein-
vestment of these funds if such reinvestment had been made when the
mistake was first realized, the cost of self-indulgence becomes truly
tremendous.

Furthermore this dislike of taking a loss, even a small loss, is just as
illogical as it is natural. If the real object of common stock investment is
the making of a gain of a great many hundreds per cent over a period
of years, the difference between, say, a 20 per cent loss or a 5 per cent
profit becomes a comparatively insignificant matter. What matters is not
whether a loss occasionally occurs. What does matter is whether worth-
while profits so often fail to materialize that the skill of the investor or
his advisor in handling investments must be questioned.

While losses should never cause strong self-disgust or emotional
upset, neither should they be passed over lightly. They should always


When to Sell 107

be reviewed with care so that a lesson is learned from each of them. If
the particular elements which caused a misjudgment on a common
stock purchase are thoroughly understood, it is unlikely that another
poor purchase will be made through misjudging the same investment
factors. '

We come now to the second reason why sale should be made of a
common stock purchased under the investment principles already out-
lined in Chapters Two and Three. Sales should always be made of the
stock of a company which, because of changes resulting from the pas-
sage of time, no longer qualifies in regard to the fifteen points outlined
in Chapter Three to about the same degree it qualified at the time of
purchase. This is why investors should be constantly on their guard. It
explains why it is of such importance to keep at all times in close contact
with the affairs of companies whose shares are held.

When companies deteriorate in this way they usually do so for one
of two reasons. Either there has been a deterioration of management, or
the company no longer has the prospect of increasing the markets for
its product in the way it formerly did. Sometimes management deteri-
orates because success has affected one or more key executives. Smug-
ness, complacency, or inertia replace the former drive and ingenuity.
More often it occurs because a new set of top executives do not meas-
ure up to the standard of performance set by their predecessors. Either
they no longer hold to the policics that have made the company out-
standingly successful, or they do not have the ability to continue to
carry out such policies. When any of these things happen the affected
stock should be sold at once, regardless of how good the general market
may look or how big the capital gains tax may be.

Similarly it sometimes happens that after growing spectacularly for
many years, a company will reach a stage where the growth prospects of
its markets are exhausted. From this time on it will only do about as well
as industry as a whole. It will only progress at about the same rate as the
national economy does. This change may not be due to any deteriora-
tion of the management. Many managements show great skill in devel-
oping related or allied products to take advantage of growth in their
immediate field. They recognize, however, that they do not have any
particular advantage if they go into unrelated spheres of activity. Hence,
if after years of being experts in a young and growing industry, times
change and the company has pretty well exhausted the growth prospects
of its market, its shares have deteriorated in an important way from the


108 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

standards outlined under our frequently mentioned fifteen points. Such
a stock should then be sold.

In this instance, selling might take place at a more leisurely pace than
if management deterioration had set in. Possibly part of the holding might
be kept until a more suitable investment could be found. However, in any
event, the company should be recognized as no longer suitable for worth-
while investment. The amount of capital gains tax, no matter how large,
should seldom prevent the switching of such funds into some other situ-
ation which, in the years ahead, may grow in a manner similar to the way
in which this investment formerly grew.

There is a good test as to whether companies no longer adequately
qualify in regard to this matter of expected further growth. This is for
the investor to ask himself whether at the next peak of a business cycle,
regardless of what may happen in the meantime, the comparative per-~
share earnings (after allowances for stock dividends and stock splits but
not for new shares issued for additional capital) will probably show at
least as great an increase from present levels as the present levels show
from the last known peak of general business activity. If the answer is in
the affirmative, the stock probably should be held. If in the negative, it
should probably be sold.

For those who follow the right principles in making their original
purchases, the third reason why a stock might be sold seldom arises, and
should be acted upon only if an investor is very sure of his ground. It
arises from the fact that opportunities for attractive investment are
extremely hard to find. From a timing standpoint, they are seldom
found just when investment funds happen to be available. If an investor
has had funds for investment for quite a period of time and found few
attractive situations into which to place these funds, he may well place
some or all of them in a well-run company which he believes has def-
inite growth prospects. However, these growth prospects may be at a
slower average annual rate than may appear to be the case for some
other seemingly more attractive situation that is found later. The
already-owned company may in some other important aspects appear to
be less attractive as well.

If the evidence is clear-cut and the investor feels quite sure of his
ground, it will, even after paying capital gains taxes, probably pay him
handsomely to switch into the situation with seemingly better
prospects. The company that can show an average annual increase of
12 per cent for a long period of years should be a source of consider-


When to Sell 109

able financial satisfaction to its owners. However, the difference between
these results and those that could occur from a company showing a
20 per cent average annual gain would be well worth the additional
trouble and capital gains taxes that might be involved.

A word of caution may not be amiss, however, in regard to too read-
ily selling a common stock in the hope of switching these funds into a
still better one. There is always the risk that some major element in the
picture has been misjudged. If this happens, the investment probably will
not turn out nearly as well as anticipated. In contrast, an alert investor
who has held a good stock for some time usually gets to know its less
desirable as well as its more desirable characteristics. Therefore, before
selling a rather satisfactory holding in order to get a still better one, there
is need of the greatest care in trying to appraise accurately all elements
of the situation.

At this point the critical reader has probably discerned a basic
investment principle which by and large seems only to be understood
by a small minority of successful investors. This is that once a stock has
been properly selected and has borne the test of time, it is only occa-
sionally that there is any reason for selling it at all. However, recom-
mendations and comments continue to pour out of the financial com-
munity giving other types of reasons for selling outstanding common
stocks. What about the validity of such reasons?

Most frequently given of such reasons is the conviction that a gen-
eral stock market decline of some proportion is somewhere in the off-
ing. In the preceding chapter I tried to show that postponing an attrac-
tive purchase because of fear of what the general market might do will,
over the years, prove very costly. This is because the investor is ignoring
a powerful influence about which he has positive knowledge through
fear of a less powerful force about which, in the present state of human
knowledge, he and everyone else is largely guessing. If the argument is
valid that the purchase of attractive common stocks should not be
unduly influenced by fear of ordinary bear markets, the argument
against selling outstanding stocks because of these fears is even more
impressive. All the arguments mentioned in the previous chapter equal-
ly apply here. Furthermore, the chance of the investor being right in
making such sales is still further diminished by the factor of the capital
gains tax. Because of the very large profits such outstanding stocks
should be showing if they have been held fora period of years, this cap-
ital gains tax can still further accentuate the cost of making such sales.


110 COMMON STOCKS AND UNCOMMON PROFITS

There is another and even more costly reason why an investor
should never sell out of an outstanding situation because of the possi-
bility that an ordinary bear market may be about to occur. If the com-
pany is really a right one, the next bull market should see the stock mak-
ing a new peak well above those sd far attained. How is the investor to
know when to buy back? Theoretically it should be after the coming
decline. However, this presupposes that the investor will know when the
decline will end. I have seen many investors dispose of a holding that
was to show stupendous gain in the years ahead because of this fear of
a coming bear market. Frequently the bear market never came and the
stock went right on up. When a bear market has come, I have not seen
one time in ten when the investor actually got back into the same shares
before they had gone up above his selling price. Usually he either wait-
ed for them to go far lower than they actually dropped, or, when they
were way down, fear of something else happening still prevented their
reinstatement.

This brings us to another line of reasoning so often used to cause
well-intentioned but unsophisticated investors to miss huge future prof-
its. This is the argument that an outstanding stock has become over-
priced and therefore should be sold. What is more logical than this? Ifa
stock is overpriced, why not sell it rather than keep it?

Before reaching hasty conclusions, let us look a little bit below the
surface. Just what is overpriced? What are we trying to accomplish? Any
really good stock will sell and should sell at a higher ratio to current
earnings than a stock with a stable rather than an expanding earning
power. After all, this probability of participating in continued growth is
obviously worth something. When we say that the stock is overpriced,
we may mean that it is selling at an even higher ratio in relation to this
expected earning power than we believe it should be. Possibly we may
mean that it is selling at an even higher ratio than are other compara-
ble stocks with similar prospects of materially increasing their future
earnings.

All of this is trying to measure something with a greater degree of
preciseness than is possible. The investor cannot pinpoint just how much
per share a particular company will earn two years from now. He can at
best judge this within such general and non-mathematical limits as
“about the same,” “up moderately,” “up a lot,” or “up tremendously.”
As a matter of fact, the company’s top management cannot come a great
deal closer than this. Either they or the investor should come pretty


When to Sell 111

close in judging whether a sizable increase in average earnings is likely
to occur a few years from now. But just how much increase, or the exact
year in which it will occur, usually involves guessing on enough vari-
ables to make precise predictions impossible.

Under these circumstances, how can anyone say with even moder-
ate precision just what is overpriced for an outstanding company with
an unusually rapid growth rate? Suppose that instead of selling at twenty-
five times earnings, as usually happens, the stock is now at thirty-five
times earnings. Perhaps there are new products in the immediate future,
the real economic importance of which the financial community has
not yet grasped. Perhaps there are not any such products. If the growth
rate is so good that in another ten years the company might well have
quadrupled, is it really of such great concern whether at the moment
the stock might or might not be 35 per cent overpriced? That which
really matters is not to disturb a position that is going to be worth a
great deal more later.

Again our old friend the capital gains tax adds its bit to these conclu-
sions. Growth stocks which are recommended for sale because they are
supposedly overpriced nearly always will cost their owners a sizable cap-
ital gains tax if they are sold. Therefore, in addition to the risk of losing a
permanent position in a company which over the years should continue
to show unusual further gains, we also incur a sizable tax liability. Isn’t it
safer and cheaper simply to make up our minds that momentarily the
stock may be somewhat ahead of itself? We already have a sizable profit in
it. If for a while the stock loses, say, 35 per cent of its current market quo-
tation, is this really such a serious matter? Again, isn’t the maintaining of
our position rather than the possibility of temporarily losing a small part
of our capital gain the matter which is really important?
