
Tied to her husband by a long, long leash, all through the 1980s Susan Gutfreund had raced headlong up Fifth
Avenue, dragging the once-retiring, silver-haired CEO of Salomon behind her into international society.
Gutfreund came to tolerate and even enjoy it because, he said, she expanded his horizons. With Susan
blowing with the force of a nor’easter, he turned his rudder and ran into the wind. Modesty and thrift were
the first to go overboard.
“It’s so expensive to be rich,” the former flight attendant complained—perhaps facetiously but nonetheless
famously—to Malcolm Forbes.66 Susan’s party guests received chauffeur-delivered invitations tied with
yellow roses for events that featured four types of caviar. She chilled her perfume in a refrigerator next to her
bathtub. She yanked up her Chicago roots to become such a Francophile that her butler answered the phone
in French. She greeted First Lady Nancy Reagan, at their first meeting, “Bonsoir, Madame.” At the couple’s
River House living room in New York City, millions of dollars’ worth of French antiques sat atop a milliondollar rug. She redid Salomon’s executive meeting room, drenching it with so much passementerie and
ormolu that it “looked like a French bordello.”67 She wore the collection of designer Hubert de Givenchy,
who lived across the courtyard from the Gutfreunds’ eighteenth-century Paris pied-à-terre. In New York,
their righteously indignant neighbors sued them when an allegedly unauthorized crane appeared on their
penthouse terrace to hoist a twenty-two-foot, five-hundred-pound Christmas tree into the Gutfreunds’ living
room.68 Thus did Susan Gutfreund become 1980s Nouvelle Society’s most beloved object of parody. The
Gutfreunds graced magazine covers and Susan earned a role in Tom Wolfe’s roman à clef, The Bonfire of the
Vanities.69 Susan’s friends defended her, but however overdone the satire might be, nobody, not even her
husband, questioned that this outpouring of opulence had diverted his attention, at least a little bit.70
A corporate history published around this time included a telling remark. Instead of making a decision and
expecting others to follow, it said Gutfreund “liked to involve the people who would be affected” and “would
bend over backward to make them comfortable with what was to be done.” Nevertheless, wrote the author,
protesting a bit too heartily, Gutfreund “is in ultimate control” and “his decisions after consultations are
final.”71 In fact, some of Gutfreund’s former partners, now retitled “managing directors,” were mounting a
major challenge to his authority. Having kept their commitment to grow, they now blamed him for the
bloated costs and vied with one another for territory.
By the end of 1986, when earnings had begun to sink from the burden of the newly swollen payroll
—Salomon had increased its staff by forty percent that year—the managing directors nearly dethroned
Gutfreund in a coup. The firm’s largest shareholder, the South African company Minorco, grew impatient and
told Gutfreund it wanted to sell its block of stock. But when “nothing happened,” according to several of the
managing directors, and Salomon’s stock languished as the Dow rose forty-four percent, Minorco found its
own buyer: Ron Perelman, the feared corporate raider who had taken over Revlon.
The executive team did not want to work for Perelman and whomever he brought in at the top.72 Gutfreund
pushed the panic button and called Buffett, asking him to invest in Salomon as “white knight” to save
Salomon from Perelman—much as Buffett had saved Ralph Schey at Scott Fetzer from Boesky.73
Owning a company that sold vacuum cleaners was one thing. Even though Salomon was dominated by
trading, which Buffett liked, the firm was muscling its way into investment banking and had recently caved to
market pressure and set up a merchant banking business to finance takeovers using junk bonds, a technique
he despised. The firm was late to the highly competitive merger business, still a novice.74 In trying to launch
Salomon in these rough waters, Gutfreund seemed uncomfortable; he had aged visibly in just one year.75
Yet Salomon’s expertise in reshaping the bond market appealed to Buffett at a time when good stock ideas
had become scarce.76 While he denigrated junk bonds, he didn’t shun the takeovers that were done using
them. In fact, he opportunistically arbitraged those deals—shorting the stock of the acquirer and buying the
stock of the acquiree. Since Salomon’s bond arbitrage unit made most of the firm’s profits, the firm in fact
was an arbitrage machine, and he had a deep affinity and respect for this corner of Wall Street.

Moreover, Buffett’s nostrils had caught the rich warm scent of money, for Gutfreund had the air of
desperation. So he said that Berkshire would buy $700 million of Salomon preferred stock, as long as it made
fifteen percent.77 Gutfreund ordered his horrified employees to design a security that would deliver to
Buffett the kind of returns normally earned only on a junk bond. Over the weekend of Rosh Hashanah, the
Jewish New Year, when Gutfreund knew the observant Perelman would be neutralized, Buffett flew to New
York, and he and Gutfreund met at Salomon’s lawyers’ offices. Buffett walked in by himself, without a
briefcase or even a pad of paper in his hand. Over a handshake, he agreed to buy a preferred stock with a
nine percent coupon that would convert to common stock at the price of $38.78
The nine percent yield gave Buffett a premium return until the stock went to $38, when he had the right to
convert to equity. So the upside was unlimited. But if the stock went down, he had the right to “put” the
security back to Salomon and get his money back.79 The deal worked out to an expected fifteen percent
profit, on an investment that carried very little risk.80
The annual dividends on this preferred stock—$63 million—were more than Blue Chip and Berkshire had
spent on the Buffalo Evening News and See’s Candies together. Inside Salomon, people were outraged.81
They felt that Gutfreund had dithered on the Minorco request, then called Buffett in desperation, and had to
overprice the convertible as a result. And thus, for his huge fifteen percent return, Buffett was, as writer
Michael Lewis would later explain, making “only the safe bet that Salomon would not go bankrupt.”82
What the firm had bought with all this money was Buffett’s reputation, which came partly at the expense of
Gutfreund’s power. Along with the deal, Buffett and Munger each got board seats. Before signing the papers,
Buffett climbed aboard his new jet and flew to New York. He met Munger at One New York Plaza to inspect
Salomon.
Standing outside Gutfreund’s office next to the trading floor, he beheld The Room for the first time.
Hundreds of disheveled people sweated in front of tiny green screens. Most had phones glued to each ear as
they jostled, spat, puffed, and spun their way through multimillion-dollar deals. Curses and screams cut
through the low roar that filled the air. Above the scene hung a hazy fog. So many traders calmed their nerves
with tobacco, why bother to abstain? Everyone’s lungs were always filled with nicotine anyway.
Munger crossed his arms and turned to Buffett. “So, Warren,” he said. “You really want to invest in this,
huh?”
Buffett stood, gazing out through the haze over the pandemonium that he was about to buy. “Mmmmhmmmm,” he said, after a long pause.83

47
White Nights
New York City • 1987–1991

Observers stood slack-jawed that the Midas from Omaha had gilded the mighty Salomon Brothers with his
touch. Buffett—the burger-chomping billionaire next door, who drove an eight-year-old Cadillac, lived in his
original $31,500 house, and possessed few of the tokens of the rich and famous—owned a major investment
in a Wall Street bank.
He routinely railed against the Wall Street of which he was now very much a part. He wrote the Berkshire

shareholders excoriating the junk bonds used to finance takeovers—including Salomon’s—which, he said,
were “sold by those who didn’t care to those who didn’t think.”1 “I never talk to brokers or analysts,” he
said. “You have to think about things yourself…. Wall Street is the only place people ride to in a
Rolls-Royce to get advice from people who take the subway.”2 On the pages of the Washington Post, he had
decried the “casino society” that was making the corporate raiders rich. Why not tax one hundred percent of
the speculators’ profits?3 There was certainly a lot to tax. From 1982 to 1987, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average had streaked from 777 to 2,722. If you want to make money, he told business-school students, “hold
your nose and go to Wall Street.” But he was already there.
The image of Wall Street seducing a Midwestern populist into bed was too good to leave alone. Asked by a
reporter why he owned the largest single chunk of Salomon when Wall Street was such a sinkhole, Buffett
did not hesitate. He had placed his faith in one man. John Gutfreund, he said, “is an outstanding, honorable
man of integrity.”4
Buffett always did fall in love with people, and observers said he was noticeably in love with Gutfreund—at
first. Yet the man who once quit his job as a “prescriptionist” to escape the inherent conflict of interest with
his customers couldn’t shield himself with John Gutfreund from the basic fact that he owned part of an
investment bank, which was riddled with conflicts of interests with its customers. How had he gotten himself
into the—at best awkward—position of sitting on the board of such a company?5 It was as if, during a dry
spell, Buffett’s urge to make money had once again overwhelmed his high hopes, high aspirations, and high
principles. And as had been true throughout his life, whenever his avarice got the upper hand, trouble
followed.
At the time that Buffett invested in Salomon, the market was near a breaking point. In his shareholder letter
the previous March, he had said that money managers were so hyperkinetic they made “whirling dervishes
appear sedated.” He didn’t have a partnership to dissolve, but over the next few months he started dumping
stocks. He knew that as the market continued upward, part of what was driving it was a new invention, the
“S&P 500 future.” Salomon, like all major banks, now traded derivative contracts that were a way of betting
how high or low the index of S&P 500 stocks would be on a certain date.6 Derivative contracts work like
this: In the Rockwood Chocolate deal, the value of the futures contract was “derived from” the price of
cocoa beans on a certain date. If the beans turned out to be worth less than the price agreed to by the
contract, the person who had bought the futures contract as insurance “won.” Her losses were covered. If the
beans were worth more, the person who had sold the futures contract as insurance “won.” The contract
entitled him to buy the beans below the then-current market price.
Suppose that in the weight deal Buffett had made with Howie for the rent on his farm, he didn’t want to risk
Howie’s actually losing weight, which would drop the rent. Since this was under Howie’s control, Warren
might want to buy insurance from someone else. He could say to Susie, “Lookit, I’ll pay you a hundred bucks
today. If Howie loses twenty pounds and keeps it off for the next six months, you’ll pay me the two thousand
dollars of rent that I’ll lose. If he doesn’t keep it off for the whole six months, you don’t have to pay me the
rent and you get to keep the hundred bucks.” The index that determined the gain or loss was “derived” from
Howie’s weight, and whether or not Buffett would make such a deal was based on a handicap of the odds
that Howie would be able to lose the weight and keep it off.
Another example: Suppose that Warren made a deal with Astrid to give up eating potato chips for a year. If
he ate a potato chip he had to pay her a thousand bucks. This would not be a derivative contract. Warren and
Astrid were simply making a deal. Whether Warren ate a potato chip was not “derived from” anything. It
was under his own control.
However, if Astrid and Warren made that agreement and then Astrid paid Warren’s sister Bertie a hundred
bucks as insurance, in exchange for a thousand dollars if Astrid lost the bet, the deal with Bertie would be a
derivative contract. It would be “derived from” whether Warren ate the potato chips, which was not under
either Bertie’s or Astrid’s control. Astrid stood to lose the hundred bucks to Bertie if Warren didn’t eat the
chips, and Bertie would lose a thousand bucks if he did. “Derivatives,” therefore, are either a type of

insurance (for Astrid) or an outright gamble (for Bertie).7
Most people buying and selling derivative contracts do so based on an impersonal index, setting the contract
without ever meeting their counterparty. The S&P “equity index futures” that money managers were buying
as insurance in 1987 paid them back if the stock market fell below a certain level. People who assumed the
market would keep going up were often “gambling” by “selling” the insurance. They wanted income from the
premiums.
Buffett had written to Congress citing the risk inherent in these deals and urging regulation of this market as
long ago as 1982, but nothing changed.8 Since then, equity index futures had swarmed like gnats in July. If
stocks started to fall, all the bills would be presented to the sellers of insurance at once. They would have to
dump stocks to meet their claims. The buyers of the index futures, meanwhile, were often using them to
insure “program trades” that would sell automatically as the market fell, triggering a cascade of sales.
By the early fall the market got nervous, and began to stutter and stall. On Black Monday, October 19, 1987,
stocks plunged a record-breaking 508 points as everybody tried to squeeze through the keyhole at once. The
market came close to a trading halt, as it did in 1929, and suffered its largest one-day percentage drop in
history.9
***
The Buffett Group happened to be meeting on the third day of the avalanche, this time in Colonial
Williamsburg. Kay Graham had been put in charge of the arrangements, and she used Williamsburg’s
atmospheric celebration of America at its purest, most patriotic moment to elevate the meeting from its
formerly “slapdash, amateur effort by whoever,” as Buffett put it, to a whole new standard. The group was
chauffeured everywhere, and members who were used to bran flakes at breakfast woke to find “enough food
for a thousand people,” as one member described it, with chicken, steak, ham, and chicken livers served
alongside their eggs. Graham hired Carter’s Grove Plantation, a historic eighteenth-century mansion fronting
the James River, for a formal dinner one night and rented out a theater to screen a movie produced by Rick
Guerin, some of whose money had been funneled directly into Hollywood. As the events crescendoed, each
more elaborate than the last, the group was awestruck by the contrast with prior years, as well as by the
expense. “How wonderful of Kay to have us as her guests,” Chuck Rickershauser said, as everybody in
earshot nodded. On the final evening, Graham hired costumed chamber musicians to play Haydn during a
private dinner at the DeWitt Wallace museum.10
The topic planned for discussion as stocks were peaking had been “Is the Group finished with the market?”
Instead, with the market crashing around their ears, for three days Buffett, Tisch, Gottesman, Ruane,
Munger, Weinberg, and the others glowed like fireflies as they flickered in and out of the room, checking
stock prices and phoning their traders with controlled excitement. Unlike the many people devastated by
losses, they were buying stocks.11
When the avalanche survivors were dug out of the snow, however, Warren’s sister Doris—now living in
Fredericksburg, Virginia, the town she had fallen in love with when the family followed Howard to Congress
—turned out to be one of the many people who had been “selling” the insurance. She had sold what were
called “naked puts,” a type of derivative peddled by a Falls Church, Virginia, broker. Naked puts were
promises to cover somebody else’s losses if the market fell—“naked” because they were unclothed by
collateral and thus unprotected against loss.12 The broker had emphasized that the naked puts would provide
Doris with a steady stream of income, which she needed. It is hard to imagine that the broker gave her any
kind of realistic description of the risk she was taking, especially using a scary term like “naked put.” Doris
was unsophisticated about investing but highly intelligent, with a hard-nosed common sense. She had not
talked to Warren about the investment, however. He was famous for recommending only extremely safe,
low-return investments, like Treasury or municipal bonds, especially when counseling divorced women.
These were investments that he would never make himself. Doris had trusted him enough to become one of

his first partners; she trusted him implicitly when it came to investing for Berkshire. But that long-ago
childhood episode when Cities Service Preferred went down after he bought it for himself and Doris might
have loomed large in both their minds, had she asked him for advice. She didn’t ask.
Now, acting on her own, Doris had incurred losses so large that they wiped out her Berkshire stock and
threatened her with bankruptcy. Compounding her desperation, she had recommended the broker to some of
her friends and felt responsible for the money they had lost as well.
Doris romanticized her brother, viewed him as a protective figure, and kept a little shrine to him, featuring
miniature golf clubs, Pepsi bottles, and other symbolic accoutrements of his life. But when she had a
problem, instead of going to Warren, she called Susie as a go-between, as everyone in the family did. By this
time Doris had been married and divorced three times. She felt she had rushed into her first marriage out of
insecurity; her second had failed in part because she had felt coerced into it and thus hadn’t fought hard
enough to save it. Her third marriage, to a college professor in Denver, had been a terrible misjudgment. By
now, Doris had experienced a great deal of mistreatment in her life, but rather than letting it cow her, she
fought back. This time, however, she didn’t know what to do.
“You don’t ever need to worry,” Susie had told her about her brother after her third divorce. “He’ll always
take care of you.”
After she confessed to Susie what she had done and asked for help, Warren called her early on a Saturday
morning. He said that if he gave her the money to pay her creditors, it would only help the businesses to
whom she owed money—the counterparties whom she had insured. His logic was that they were speculators;
therefore he would not bail them out. As she realized that this meant he was not going to help her, she broke
out in a cold sweat and her legs started shaking. She was sure this meant that her brother despised her. He
felt, however, that his decision was simply rational.
“I could have given a couple million dollars to her creditors if I’d wanted. But, you know, the hell with
them. I mean, this broker woman who sold this stuff to Doris—she’d busted everybody in that particular
branch.”
Doris hoped that Susie would save her. Susie had so much money of her own, and Warren gave her so much
money, most of which she gave away. However, just as Susie had not given money to Billy Rogers for a
down payment on a house, she did nothing now to help Doris financially.
The story hit the Washington Post that the sister of “a highly successful investor” had done something
extremely dumb. Damaging Warren’s reputation was a serious transgression in the Buffett family, and
Doris’s timing was terrible. The Buffetts were still trying to recover from Billy Rogers’s fatal overdose just
seven months before, another event that had publicly bared the problems beneath the family’s wholesome
surface. Warren may have known—on some level—that he was rationalizing. Certainly he feared Doris’s ire;
when she felt threatened—like Kay Graham—Doris defended herself as if cornered. Warren, of all people,
genuinely understood his sister—but he could not tolerate shrill behavior from anyone, not even her. So he
retreated. He stopped calling, and nobody else in the family contacted Doris. She felt as though the family
had cut her off. Frightened at being abandoned and deeply wounded, Doris browbeat her mother for money
and loans to prevent her from losing her home.13 Ironically, the Federal Reserve had lowered interest rates,
companies were buying their own stocks, and the market was recovering quickly from the debacle, leaving
only victims like Doris behind in its wake. In a sort of panic, she married Al Bryant, the lawyer who was
helping her with her legal difficulties.
But behind the scenes, Warren was arranging to advance his sister $10,000 a month from the trust left by
Howard’s will. “That was more money than I have ever spent in my whole life,” she says. The tension
deescalated; they were able to speak. She was almost prostrate with gratitude—until she realized that this
was her own money, which she was simply being paid early. At the time, her share of the trust, having grown
from a little over 2,000 shares of Berkshire that were worth $30,000 in 1964, was valued at about $10
million. The trust was not structured to pay out until Leila died, when Doris and Bertie would receive the
money in four installments. As a further olive branch, however, her brother set up the Sherwood Foundation,

which paid out $500,000 a year in charitable gifts. Doris, Warren’s children, and Astrid could each allocate
$100,000 to any causes they chose. The annual income produced was as if her brother had put around $7
million into a trust for the five of them. Doris’s share, therefore, was almost as much as if Warren had given
her the money after all, but in a different form.
Of course, it was not in a form she could use to pay her debts or save her house—Warren never gave money
outright, only in an earmarked manner that he controlled. Still, as the storm subsided, Doris regained
perspective. She was grateful that he had gotten over his embarrassment and had helped her, in his own way.
She was acutely aware that without him she would have had nothing in the first place. As she scraped
together the money to pay her debts, their relationship gradually returned to normal, and the shrine stayed in
place on her wall.
The other victim of the crash that Buffett had to deal with was Salomon. Only three months after Berkshire’s
investment, he and Munger attended their first board meeting. The topic of the day was the slump in trading
and merger business at Salomon and the $75 million that Black Monday had cost the firm.14 Salomon faced
the cleanup from Black Monday weakened by the fact that, only days before the crash, Gutfreund, his
moon-shaped face impassive, had head-chopped even highly valued longtime employees, laid off eight
hundred people, and discontinued marginally profitable businesses such as commercial paper trading (a
backwater of the bond business) so abruptly that the disruption hurt relationships with some important clients
almost beyond repair.15 These and the losses from Black Monday were going to gouge a deep hole in the
shareholders’ pockets that year. And with that, Salomon’s stock fell into the tank.
The shareholders were suffering, yet the compensation committee—which Buffett had joined at the request
of its chairman, Bob Zeller—began to discuss lowering the price at which the employees’ stock options could
be exercised.
These options were rights to buy stock at a specified price in the future. If Salomon had been See’s Candies,
it would be as if Buffett paid the line workers partly in pieces of paper that gave them the right to buy candy
at a set price. If the price of candy kept going up every year, those pieces of paper kept increasing in value as
time went along.
However, right now the candy factory was having a bad year. See’s was going to lose money and its
employees would suffer a cut in wages. The compensation committee was talking about lowering the price
the workers would have to pay for candy to make up the difference. Buffett argued against this. The candy
factory belonged to the owners—the shareholders—not the employees.16 He wanted the employees’ share of
candy trimmed by exactly the amount that earnings had declined.17 The other members of the committee,
however, felt the workers had been promised candy worth a certain amount when Gutfreund announced their
packages a couple of months before, and when the candy went on sale, they were obligated to make up the
difference. Perhaps they were trying to forestall the traditional Wall Street bonus-day stampede that occurs
whenever people are unhappy: Take the money and run.
Buffett felt this was morally wrong. Since the shareholders weren’t getting their earnings, why should the
employees get their candy? The others outvoted him two to one. He was outraged.18 But his role on the
Salomon board was mostly titular. His advice was rarely sought and less often taken. Even though Salomon
stock by then was starting to recover, the repricing of the stock options, he says, “almost immediately” made
his investment in Salomon “way less attractive financially than it had been.
“I could have fought harder and been more vocal. I might have felt better about myself if I did. But it
wouldn’t have changed the course of history. Unless you sort of enjoy combat, it doesn’t make sense.”
Buffett’s willingness to do combat—even in a roundabout way—had diminished markedly since the days of
Sanborn Map, Dempster, and the Buffetting of Seabury Stanton.
“I don’t enjoy battles. I won’t run from them if I need to do it, but I don’t enjoy them at all. When it came to
the board, Charlie and I didn’t even vote against it. We voted yes. We didn’t even abstain, because
abstaining is the same thing as throwing down the gauntlet. And there were other things at Salomon. One
