Among standard accounts, some brokers allow only regular full standard
lots ($100,000), whereas others add the option of trading fractional or mini
lots. The initial capital requirement for standard or professional accounts is
much higher, ranging from $2000 to $50,000 and more, with different levels
in between, as well as added benefits or limitations, particularly with respect
to leverage, which is usually not higher than 100:1.

CHOOSING A BROKER
Finding the most appropriate broker is a task that shouldn’t be overlooked
because it can make all the difference between your success or failure in the
FOREX market. Speed of execution is paramount, but also honesty and
transparency have to be considered. Demo accounts are good for practicing
and acquiring trading skills, but they won’t allow you to gauge their performance and attitude in real life. The actual features come onto the scene
only after you open a real-money account.
I always say paper trade, paper trade, paper trade. You simply have to be
getting consistent results with your paper trading (demo trading) before
you can start using real money. Most investors, especially first-time traders
(“newbies”), tend to trade well on a demo and then lose it when they shift
over to a real or live account. Why is this? Simple. I have heard it all too
many times: “James, I made 20 plus trades without a looser. When I shifted
to a real account, I felt like every trade I made went against me.” Then I follow by saying, “Aren’t you doing the same thing” I usually hear: “Well, I
couldn’t do the exact same thing. It is real money.” Therein lies the difference in results. Paper trading is part of the learning process. Once you have
mastered it, then you can move on to a real account.
Some traders will pick this up faster than others; it could take you a few
weeks, months, or even years. That’s right, it could take you some time
before you are ready to trade real money. If you want to see the true success
of the FOREX market, you have to put some time in.
With the advent of the micro account, I have found that opening an
account with $25 to $150 is actually better than demo trading because you

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

39

are now learning with real money, and you are developing good trading
habits. Regardless of what you do, make sure that you practice your trading
plan prior to trading any large accounts with real money.
Not every broker is suited for every trading strategy. Thus it is quite difficult to choose the best FOREX broker for you. Some strategies, such as
scalping, will require extremely low spreads and swiftness of execution; for
other, longer-term strategies that involve overnight interest, swap will be a
major concern. Evaluation of the trading-platform software before making
a decision is important because there are significant differences among
them, and some might perform better than others, as well as offering different features, such as hedging capabilities on some of them and one-cancels-the-other (OCO) orders and if-then options on others. However, this is
only the means to access the broker’s services, which in reality is the most
important part and what has to be assessed in detail before you trust any
broker with your hard-earned money.
With the most recent FOREX oversight initiatives enacted within the
farm bill, changes are coming. As of this writing, not all the anticipated
changes have been implemented across the board. I would suggest that you
stay informed. The best way that I can help to keep you informed is to provide real-time updates and valuable FOREX information at your fingertips
through my Web site, www.JamesDicks.com.
It is easy to check a broker’s reputation over the Internet and, more
particularly, to see if the broker is regulated or not at least in its country
of origin. A good broker should comply with a few minimum basic
requirements.

REGULATION, REPUTATION, AND SIZE
Although the FOREX market is not regulated, because there is no central
exchange, individual brokers have to operate under a set of regulations
defined by every country’s own financial regulatory bodies. For example,
in the United States, a broker should appear as registered with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) as a futures commission merchant (FCM) and as a member of the National Futures Association (NFA).
The status of a broker can be verified directly with those organizations;
additionally, a broker should be showing a clean record with them. Some
brokers, especially offshore brokers, don’t possess any kind of financial
regulation, so they represent a risk in dealing with your money because
they could disappear and leave you with no legal recourse. Brokers in the
United Kingdom are regulated by the Financial Services Authority (FSA).

40

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

You should check carefully the kinds of regulatory bodies with which the
broker claims to be registered and verify if indeed it is a real financial regulatory institution or simply a business generic registration.
Currently, several U.S. FCMs allow you to choose if you would like to
open an account in the United States or overseas, most specifically in the
United Kingdom, which has good oversight as well.
The reason for doing this is that with the most recent changes, some
traders are electing to go overseas so that they can continue to trade the way
they want. One example of this is that in the United States, you can no
longer hedge your trades in the same account. Thus traders who like to use
hedging—a strategy that requires you to go long one currency and go short
the same currency at the same time—now will have to use multiple
accounts or go offshore.
If your broker is affiliated with any of the important exchanges, this
adds a significant qualification because it implies that the broker is larger
in size and thus has more representation on the markets, and it vouches for
longer-term expectations for its business life. Check, for example, for any
membership at the Chicago Board of Trade, the London Metal Exchange,
the New York Mercantile Exchange, or other commodity exchanges. Size
and years in business are extremely important because they further guarantee that there will be less of a chance that the broker falls into bankruptcy,
unlike a broker that is new and barely starting its activities. Having a large
number of customers and a bigger capitalization testifies to the broker’s
level of responsibility and commitment.
The reputation of a FOREX broker can be easily checked on Internet
by adding the word review, scam, or problems to the broker’s name in your
favorite search engine. Read the opinions of other traders on forums and
trading communities; do thorough research before entrusting your money
to any broker. You must have a great deal of confidence in your broker, and
this confidence has to be backed up by real facts, not just the advertising
hype (smoke and mirrors). Use a practice account for a while, prepare some
basic questions, and ask the broker’s customer-support team to gauge the
broker’s credibility and responsiveness.
I highly recommend that you deal only with certified brokerage firms.
Check the possible connection to banks or financial institutions. Although
there are not many brokers who will disclose the names of all their liquidity providers, investigate these relationships further. FOREX transactions
are mostly based on credit, and therefore, this is a very important element
in your research.

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

41

GUARANTEE OF PRICES AND FILLS
Quotes on currency pairs should be guaranteed, as well as the fills on
your stop-loss and limit orders. This is usually expressed as a “no slippage”
policy, where the price offered should be the same as that at which your
market or pending order will be transacted on entry as well as on exit. If
there are no clear rules on this subject, keep searching further. A good broker should have enough financial strength to meet these requirements and
guarantee the quoted prices, at least in normal market conditions.

HONESTY
How does your broker control prices? Are there blatant differences with
other price feeds in the industry? A dishonest broker can take advantage by
delaying entries and manipulating the price feed, showing a different price
or constantly requoting, slipping, and spiking prices.

LOCATION
Where is your broker located? If it is an offshore FOREX broker, is there
any kind of regulatory institution where it is duly registered and acknowledged? If not, how can you obtain a guarantee on your funds should the
broker file for bankruptcy? You might obtain some advantages with an offshore business with respect to taxes, but check first to see if it is really
worth the risk.

MINIMUM INITIAL DEPOSIT
It is usually safer to go with a broker that asks a low deposit for starter
accounts. Asking for higher amounts from the start, especially in the case
of retail brokers, can be a red flag. You should look for a broker that asks
for a small initial requirement, usually around $200 to $500, which is
designed for new traders to test the markets with a real account without
putting too much money on the line.

INTRODUCING BROKERS
As you start looking around for brokers, you will find numerous (actually,
lots) of introducing brokers (IBs). Most of an FCM’s business comes
from referrals, IBs spreading the word and introducing the customer to
an FCM. With the farm bill of October 2008, more oversight has been
placed on these IBs. Now, IBs must be registered with the NFA and have
sufficient net capital as set forth by the NFA. This adds a level of protection
to the consumer.

42

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

It is perfectly okay to use an IB; just do your due diligence. My registered IB is www.XpressFX.com. One of the benefits I have always discussed with my customers is that when using an IB, make sure that it is able
to assist in all your FOREX needs. For example, I have introduced more
traders to the retail FOREX market than any other person in the United
States. Because of this fact, I am able to assist my customers with much
more authority and resolve than any of my fellow IBs. When a customer
calls me, I can get the FCM on the phone right then and there and help
my customer get a resolution. The reason for this is that I simply have so
many customers that the FCM must listen to me. My goal is the longevity
of my customer, and I know that I will not remain in business if I can’t provide the service my customers deserve. Thus, when you are searching for a
broker, an FCM, or an IB, just be on the lookout for that personal touch that
is so hard to find these days.

CUSTOMER SERVICE
Good customer service is very important, especially when problems arise.
A broker should treat all its customers with the same level of professionalism and courtesy and be swift at providing orientation on complicated
matters and questions that could arise when markets are very volatile or
should a technical problem occur with the price feeds or connection to the
platform’s server. Since FOREX trading hours are continuous from Sunday to Friday afternoon, the broker’s customer service should be available
during the same time span, 24 hours a day, 5 days a week. IBs often will
piggyback the customer service of their FCMs when it comes to specific
trade questions. If you have any question about your closed or stopped-out
orders, you need to be able to receive a fast response independent of the
time of the day.
Some brokers offer an online chat support service; others have only a
phone-based support desk. Make a list of sensible questions, and take note
of the attitude and knowledge the support staff show when they answer.
They always should be courteous and eager to help and have appropriate
knowledge of common matters that arise in day-to-day transactions and
events. If you don’t feel totally comfortable with their answers or perceive
any doubtful behavior, keep looking elsewhere.

SPREADS AND SWAPS
FOREX overnight swap rates should be publicly available, either on the
broker’s Web site or via the trading platform. Some have fixed swaps;

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

43

others vary slightly every day depending on price fluctuations and number
of transactions. Check for any excessive difference with regard to the usual
calculation of overnight interest.
The spread is the amount of money a broker makes on every transaction its customers perform. If the difference between the bid and offer
prices is low, the broker’s service is cheaper, and the profit value will be
higher. It is always better to choose a broker with lower spreads.
I always like to say that you get what you pay for. Keep in mind
that just because you get the tightest lowest spreads in the industry doesn’t
that mean you are not paying somewhere else. IBs and FCMs are in business to make money—profit is not a dirty word—but everyone has to
make money or it is not a good opportunity. You will just have to use good
due diligence or a referral to find the best place to trade. I go to great
lengths to make sure that the FCMs to which I refer customers from
www.XpressFX.com are the best.
Also keep in mind that some brokers, in order to provide the tightest
spreads, are now charging commissions—a fee to get in and a fee to get
out—similar to the equities markets. IBs are usually paid a fee for the customers they introduce to the FCM. This will have no impact on you as a
trader unless otherwise stated. IBs get paid out of the spread, so if you use
an FCM that has a too-wide spread on the EUR/USD, that spread is too
wide whether you use an IB or not; you just get an extra layer of customer
support for the same 2-pip spread. Again, in some cases (which have to be
disclosed), an FCM actually may increase the spread to compensate the IB
for its referral. I do not allow this to be part of my IB; just check the spreads
yourself or ask.

MARGIN-REQUIREMENT RULES
Examine your broker’s margin requirements and margin-call rules carefully. At what level will your position be liquidated should the price take a
plunge or rise against your direction’ Some brokers will close all positions
without warning, whereas others will issue some notification that the
account is near the limit they have set.

LEVERAGE LEVEL
The leverage levels can vary a lot from one broker to another, but they are
usually in a range from 50:1 to 500:1. A higher leverage can be somewhat
risky but can give you more opportunities to obtain a bigger profit. A small
initial capital investment will require a higher leverage. (Take note that

44

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

with leverage comes risk, but with risk comes reward and, of course, the
potential for loss.)

TRADING PLATFORM
You can find a wide array of trading software among brokers, from simple
Web-based platforms to more complex applications that have to be downloaded. You also will find mobile platforms that give you the opportunity
to trade or monitor your positions while you are on the go. Practically all
brokers offer practice accounts that are an exact replica of the live trading
platform so that you can familiarize yourself with the interface and test
its features.
The platform should be professional-looking and easy to understand and
operate. Not all of them have the same tools available, but a good FOREX
broker should have at least charts that update in real time, technical analysis
tools, and alerting capability. Some of them also include news feeds.
When I first started trading, I used one of the most complicated trading
platforms known to humankind, or so I thought. I set out to develop an
easy-to-use trading platform based on simple-to-use technical indicators
with color-coded graphics. Today, the platform has many variations and
includes advanced charting capabilities. I refer to it more as a learning
environment than as a software platform because it has education and training integrated into it. The platform will take a beginning trader and walk
him or her right through the various steps to becoming a professional currency trader. There are numerous FCMs out there that are currently using
my technology, and there are more every day. You can find out more or
download a free trial at www.JamesDicks.com.

CURRENCY PAIRS
A good broker will offer a good variety of instruments to choose from and
will provide the currency pairs that interest you the most. A good broker
also will have other types of instruments, such as metals, indexes, or commodities, as well as certain exotic currency pairs, which will allow you to
widen your options and build a more diversified portfolio.

AUTOMATION CAPABILITIES
Some trading platforms allow users to run automated trading strategies
through an external application programming interface (API) or with its
functions integrated directly from inside the software. If you are interested
in this trading style, you should look for a broker that offers automation
capabilities that are easy to implement.

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

45

In addition to the basic requirements that you will have to go through
and examine, you also need to know that there are two major types of
FOREX brokers: the retail brokers or market makers and the electronic
communications networks (ECNs).
I have developed a code premiere advisor language (PAL); this allows
me to integrate automated trading strategies into my trading platform,
including the ability of the customer to write his or her own automatic strategy or transfer one that may have been running on another system. The wave
of the future surely will be automated/program trading. The big institutors
have used this type of trading for many years, and now you have the same
capabilities. You can find all sorts of trade robots out there, but I haven’t
found any with adequate support yet.

MARKET MAKERS
Market makers have a dealing desk. The broker usually acts as a counterpart for almost every transaction made by traders. Brokers hedge their
own risk by opening trades in the opposite direction for the same amount.
Very few orders are sent to their liquidity providers because most of the
trades they handle are under the minimum standard lot requirement from
the banks. Bigger positions can be hedged in-house, transferred to
another associated market maker, or transacted directly with the liquidity
provider through pooling of funds and opening a position directly with
the bank. Orders are matched or covered one with another; for example,
if one trader is selling and another is buying the same currency pair,
any difference in quantities is assumed by the broker. This often leads
to conflicts of interest: When the trader wins, the broker can lose, and
vice versa. To protect themselves, some brokers widen the spreads, use
slippage, or even ‘disconnect’ the trading server during heavy volatility
caused by economic news.
Because of program trading and more retail customers in the FOREX
market, most FCMs have found it difficult at best to trade against their customers. What they know, and what you are seeing, is that if a customer sees
his or her FCM playing any of these sorts of games (i.e., wide spreads, off
quotes, etc.), he or she simply will leave and go to a new FCM. Thus the
FCMs are off-laying their trades directly to the Interbank, the source of the
trillions of dollars of turnover. This allows the FCM to focus on proving the
best possible trading environment, one with a lot fewer conflicts of interest.
The Interbank market is so big that it is less likely to be concerned with the
average retail trader making money because the amount is so insignificant
in the face of total daily turnover.

46

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

You still will have FCMs managing their books as I mentioned earlier.
If you and I took opposite positions on the EUR/USD, the FCM would have
a balanced book, and one of us would lose and one of us would make
money. The broker makes the spread on both sides. This is an ideal situation for the broker and certainly an acceptable business practice. However,
what happens if we both go long the EUR? Then the broker has a unbalanced book. Three things will happen: Either the broker will hold the trade
and thus trade against the customer, or it will go out into the marketplace to
offset the position either in full or at a percentage to minimize its risk, or it
simply will offload the transaction directly to the Interbank. The goal is to
have as many customers as possible so that the broker has a better chance
of having a balance book and making the spread on both sides. There is
nothing wrong with the FCM making money as long as you understand the
process and don’t get manipulated along the way. Education and knowledge are the keys to success. I am happy that you are reading this book and
have put your trust in me to help fill that FOREX knowledge you need to
achieve success as a FOREX trader.

ECNS
ECN-type brokers do not have a dealing desk. The broker serves as an
intermediary to connect traders with the banks but does not take the trades
itself. Such brokers usually charge a commission on every transaction
because they do not profit from hidden charges on the spreads. They also
do not manipulate spreads and prices, those being the quotes received
directly through the Interbank. The spreads are usually lower than those of
market makers, and this is an advantage for scalping strategies. However,
the spreads are not fixed and can experience huge variations during volatile
conditions. An ECN environment is conducted according to real market
prices, and such prices can be moving very fast based on the availability of
buyers and sellers. There is no price guarantee. However, you have the
advantage of being able to see the real market with total transparency and
actual quotes and volume of transactions being made. ECN operation is
most like the banks at Level II, but the ECN is still functioning as an intermediary. Additionally, you probably will need a higher capitalization for
ECN trading because most ECNs allow only full-lot transactions and offer
a lower leverage than retail brokers.
On the NASDAQ, when a trader places an order to buy or sell stock
they are placed through many different market makers and other market
participants. Level II is a more detailed look into who has what interest in
a particular stock. Level II will show you the best bid and ask prices giving
