
Russia, however, was merely a sideshow at the time. In 1989, the United States had become obsessed with
the possibility that the whole country would be eclipsed by the rising sun of Japan. Salomon had invested
large sums in Japan and was doing well in its start-up business there, which had grown rapidly to hundreds of
employees and was making money under its head, Deryck Maughan, who had wisely given local talent the
reins. Buffett, who generally did not buy foreign stocks and who believed Japanese stocks in particular to be
outrageously expensive, had shown little interest in anything related to Japan. Katharine Graham, however,
had developed a fascination with Akio Morita, one of the world’s most brilliant businessmen. Morita was
chairman of Sony, one of the world’s most successful corporations. Graham brought the two men together at
one of her dinners, but they did not click.
Finally, during one of Buffett’s trips to New York, Morita-san held a small dinner for Graham, Buffett, and
Meg Greenfield at his Fifth Avenue apartment overlooking the Metropolitan Museum. Buffett, who seemed
slightly mystified by Graham’s interest in this powerful, visionary man—observing grudgingly that Graham
“was sort of enchanted by Morita”—agreed to go.
Buffett had never eaten Japanese food but knew it might be problematic. He went to plenty of events where
he touched nothing more than the dinner rolls. He could easily go seven or eight hours at a time without
eating. He disliked offending his hosts, however, and as his reputation had grown, he found that there was no
way to fake eating by cutting things up and moving them around. People noticed.
One side of the Moritas’ apartment had a sweeping view of Central Park, the other a sweeping view of the
sushi kitchen. A highlight for guests was the opportunity to watch the four chefs preparing the elaborate meal
behind a glass window.
As they were seated for dinner, Buffett looked at the chefs. What was this going to be like? he wondered. As
guest of honor, he was seated facing the kitchen. There were chopsticks on a little stand and tiny cruets and
miniature bowls of soy sauce. He already knew he didn’t like soy sauce. The first course was brought out.
Everyone slurped it down. Buffett mumbled an excuse. He motioned for his full plate to be taken away. The
next course arrived. Buffett could not identify it but looked at it with dread. He saw that Meg Greenfield,
who had eating habits similar to his, also was having difficulties. Mrs. Morita, seated next to him, smiled
politely and barely spoke. Buffett gurgled another excuse. He nodded again for the waiter to remove his
plate. As his untouched dishes returned to the kitchen, he was sure the chefs noticed.
The waiter brought out another unidentifiable course of something that looked rubbery and raw to him. Kay
and the Moritas tucked in with enthusiasm. Mrs. Morita smiled politely once again when he offered a third
excuse. Buffett squirmed. He liked his steaks bloody but did not eat raw fish. The waiter cleared the plates.
The chefs kept their heads down. Buffett was sweating. He was running out of excuses. The chefs looked
busy, but he was sure they must be peeking sideways from behind the glass to see what he would do. Course
after course arrived, and each of his plates went back, untouched. He imagined that he heard a slight buzz
from the kitchen. How many more courses could there possibly be? He had not realized there were this many
things on the planet that could be eaten raw. Mrs. Morita seemed slightly embarrassed for him, but he wasn’t
sure, because she smiled politely all the time and said so little. Time crawled more slowly with each course.
He had been counting, and the number of courses now exceeded ten. He tried to make up for his culinary
lapses with witty, self-deprecating conversation about business with Morita-san, but he knew he was
disgracing himself. Even in the middle of his bonfire of embarrassment, he could not help but think longingly
of hamburgers. He was sure that the beehive in the kitchen was humming louder with every plate he sent
back. By the end of fifteen courses, he had still not eaten a bite. The Moritas could not have been more
polite, which added to his humiliation. He was desperate to escape back to Kay’s apartment, where popcorn
and peanuts and strawberry ice cream awaited him.
“It was the worst,” he says about the meal he did not eat. “I’ve had others like that, but it was by far the
worst. I will never eat Japanese food again.”
Meanwhile, hundreds of Salomon employees who would have crawled up Fifth Avenue on their knees
blindfolded to eat this same dinner with the Moritas were instead dining at high-priced Japanese restaurants
and mutinying over the size of their huge bonus checks. The hugeness of their checks was not the point. It

was the hugeness of their checks compared with others’ huge checks that mattered. Buffett and Munger
knew little of the trouble fomenting at Salomon. Meriwether’s arbs had been agitating for more money. The
former college professors, hired away from salaries of $29,000, felt they were subsidizing money-losing
departments like equity investment banking. They viewed sharing their profits as “socialist.”41 The arbs
could have made more on their own. They wanted a cut of the hundreds of millions they earned for the
firm.42 Although he was so shy that he had trouble maintaining eye contact, Meriwether now became the
world’s most aggressive and successful bonus pimp. Gutfreund caved and gave the arbs fifteen percent of
what they made,43 which meant they had the potential to come away with much more money than the
traders, who shared their bonus pool. The deal was made in secret between Gutfreund and Salomon’s
president, Tom Strauss; the board never knew, nor did other employees at Salomon—yet.
By 1991, Buffett and Munger had been through a series of disappointments and setbacks at Salomon. The
financial results they got were not always up-to-date. Staff demands for bonuses continued to spiral. They
disagreed with much of what went on in the boardroom. The stock price had not moved for eight years.
Earnings were down $167 million, mostly because of employees’ pay.
Buffett, having so far let Munger be the Appointed Bad Guy, now roused himself, met with the executive
committee, and told them to cut back. Yet when the final bonus pool number came through, it was $7 million
higher than before. Under the new formula that Meriwether, as bonus-pimp, had procured for his arb boys,
one of them, Larry Hilibrand, got a raise from $3 to $23 million.44 When word of Hilibrand’s bonus leaked to
the press, some of his colleagues went crazy with envy and felt cheated—the millions they were making
forgotten.
Buffett himself had no problem with the arbs’ bonuses. “I believe in paying talent,” he says, “but not, as
Charlie would say, as a royalty on time.” The arrangement was like a hedge fund’s fee structure and bore
some resemblance to his old partnership.45 It would put more pressure on the rest of the firm to perform.
What he objected to was not being told. He objected even more to the fact that other people did not get
haircuts for their lack of performance. Gutfreund had showed a better sense of proportion than most of his
traders, opting to take a thirty-five percent pay cut, in line with the decline in earnings.46 This helped him
with Buffett, who thought Gutfreund had more class than his employees. But Buffett’s sense of decency was
so offended by the employees’ greed that he overcame his natural inertia and voted against the bonuses for
the traders. He was overruled. When word of Buffett’s “no” vote raced through the hallways of Salomon,
people were outraged. A billionaire who loved money had called them greedy.
Buffett considered Salomon a casino with a restaurant out front.47 The restaurant was a loss-leader. The
traders—especially Meriwether’s people—were the casino: the purity of risk-taking done without conflicts of
interest. That was the part of the business Buffett liked, and the new pay system was designed to keep the
arbs from bolting.48 But by trying to operate the firm under two distinct pay systems, as if it really were a
casino with a restaurant out front, Gutfreund had driven a rift through Salomon’s heart.
Now Meriwether and Hilibrand asked Gutfreund for permission to approach Buffett to buy back his
convertible preferred stock. The terms were so rich that it was costing Salomon too much. They were no
longer under threat of a takeover. Why pay for Buffett’s protection? Gutfreund said they could talk to
Buffett and try to convince him he was better off without the preferred stock. When approached, Buffett said
that he was amenable. But having Buffett as an investor must have made Gutfreund feel more secure, for in
the end he got cold feet.49
Thus, Buffett was held to his original deal. Having invested both Berkshire’s $700 million and his own
reputation in John Gutfreund, by 1991 it was too late to back out.

48

Thumb-Sucking, and Its Hollow-Cheeked Result
New York City • 1991

On Thursday afternoon, August 8, 1991, Buffett was driving to Reno, Nevada, from Lake Tahoe on his
annual weekend with Astrid and the Blumkin boys. He always looked forward to this trip and was in a
relaxed and jovial mood. John Gutfreund’s office had called him that morning. Where will you be tonight
between nine p.m. E.S.T. and midnight? they asked. We want to talk to you.
Thinking this was really unusual, he said he was going to a show. They told him to call Wachtell, Lipton,
Rosen & Katz, the law firm that represented Salomon, at seven-thirty p.m. Hmm, he thought. Maybe they’re
going to sell the firm. It sounded like good news to him. The stock was trading around $37, close to $38, the
price at which his preferred stock would convert to common, and he could take his profits and be done with
Salomon. Gutfreund, who had a long-standing habit of calling him for advice, might need help in negotiating
terms.
Buffett and company whiled away the afternoon in Reno. Buffett reminisced. In 1980 he had been offered
the entire contents of a Reno landmark, the Harrah Collection from the National Automobile Museum: 1,400
cars covering acres and acres, a 1932 Rolls-Royce salamanca, a 1922 Mercedes Targa Florio Racer, a 1932
Bugatti coupe, a 1955 Ferrari, a 1913 Pierce-Arrow. It would have cost him less than a million dollars for the
whole collection. He had wavered, then passed. A few years later, part of the collection—hundreds of
cars—had been gradually auctioned for a total of $69 million. One car, the Bugatti Royale, had recently been
sold to a Houston real estate developer for $6.5 million.
By seven-thirty p.m., they had returned to Lake Tahoe. “We got to the hotel and the rest of them went into
the dining room of the steak house. I told them, ‘This may take a while.’ I found a pay phone outside on the
wall and dialed in to the number they gave me.” Buffett expected to be connected with Gutfreund, but
Gutfreund was on a plane from London, where he had been trying to save the firm’s mandate in an
investment banking deal for British Telecom. His flight had been delayed, and Buffett sat on hold for quite a
while as a conversation took place on the other end about whether to wait for him to arrive before
continuing. Finally Tom Strauss and Don Feuerstein got on the phone to tell Buffett what was going on—or a
version of it, anyway.
Tom Strauss, forty-nine years old, was there to protect Gutfreund’s flank. He had been appointed Salomon’s
president five years earlier, during the Great Purge of 1987.1 Responsible for the firm’s international
business, he was also charged with the Sisyphean task of licking the perennially lagging equity division into
shape. As recent history showed, however, management was not a skill cultivated at Salomon. The warlords
reported straight to Gutfreund, to the extent that they reported to anyone at all. Their clout came from their
groups’ production of revenues. Strauss might be technically president of Salomon, but he had been promoted
so high that he now floated distantly above the trading floor like a helium balloon. Periodically, the warlords
batted him out of the way.
Don Feuerstein, the head of Salomon’s legal department, had once played an important role at the SEC and
was regarded as an excellent technical lawyer.2 He was Gutfreund’s consigliere, nicknamed POD, the
“Prince of Darkness,”3 for the behind-the-scenes dirty work he did. Salomon’s warlords, accustomed to
doing whatever the hell they wanted, worked through lawyers who reported to Feuerstein, including Zachary
Snow, the assistant general counsel assigned to the trading operations. The warlord structure made the legal
department both powerful and weak; it stewarded the firm’s franchise in much the way that everything
happened at Salomon: by catering to factions and reacting to events. Salomon’s trading culture had
embedded itself so strongly that even Feuerstein was a trader, lovingly operating a wine syndicate on behalf
of several managing directors. His fax machine constantly spewed forth notices of wine auctions that were a
profitable sideline for the syndicate’s participants, its product more traded and collected than drunk.4

This evening no one was toasting anything, however. Feuerstein knew that Buffett and Gutfreund were
friends. He felt awkward giving sensitive information to Buffett when Gutfreund should have been in on the
call. Using a set of “talking papers,” he and Strauss told Buffett that “a problem” had arisen. A Wachtell,
Lipton investigation had uncovered the fact that Paul Mozer, who ran Salomon’s government-bond
department, had broken the Treasury Department’s auction-bidding rules several times in 1990 and 1991.
Mozer and his deputy, who was complicit, were now suspended, and the firm was notifying the regulators.
Who the hell is Paul Mozer? Buffett wondered.
Paul Mozer, thirty-six years old, had been swooped up by New York from selling bonds in the Chicago
office. He was as intense as a laser beam and started his day before the sun came up, parked in front of a
trading screen in his bedroom taking a call from London, then galloped a couple of blocks from his tiny
apartment in Battery Park City over to Salomon’s enormous new trading room, housed in the gleaming
pink-granite space of 7 World Trade Center. There he stared at another set of screens until past sunset, and
oversaw twenty traders, most of whom towered over his short, wiry frame. Mozer was smart and hyperaggressive, but he also struck people as frustrated and insecure, an odd duck. Although he’d grown up on
Long Island, he seemed like a greenhorn from the Midwest among the slick New Yorkers. He had been one
of Meriwether’s arbitrage boys until Craig Coats, the head of the government desk, resigned and he was
asked to take over. Now he still worked for Meriwether, but was on the outside looking in at his former gang.
Gutfreund, who was under pressure from Buffett and the board to improve the numbers, had added the
foreign-exchange department to Mozer’s duties; in a few months he had turned a “black hole” around and
made it profitable.5 So Gutfreund had reason to be grateful to Mozer.
While Mozer could be abrasive and condescending, as though he considered other people morons compared
to himself, those who worked closely with him were fond of him. Unlike people on Salomon’s infamous
mortgage desk, he did not abuse trainees by hurling food at them or sending them racing out the door to buy
twelve pizzas at a time. Sometimes he even talked to the trainees.
For his labors, Mozer had been paid $4.75 million that year. It was a lot of money, but it was not enough.
Mozer was World Cup–competitive, and Mozer was pissed. Something had snapped in him when he found
out that his former colleague, Larry Hilibrand, had gotten 23 million bucks from a secret pay deal. He used to
earn more than the arb boys,6 and he now went “ape-shit.”7 He copped such an attitude that he demanded
that his department not be audited—as if, somehow, oversight did not apply to him.8
Mozer was one of a few dozen men who communed regularly with the U.S. government on its financing
needs, talking to the Federal Reserve staff nearly every day and dining quarterly with Treasury Department
bureaucrats at the Madison Hotel. Representing Salomon as a “primary dealer,” he offered the government
market chatter and advice and, in turn, stood first in line as its largest customer whenever the government
wanted to sell debt, like a member of the College of Cardinals who sat at the right hand of the Pope.
Only the primary dealers could buy bonds from the government. Everyone else had to do it by submitting
bids through the primary dealers, who acted as brokers. This gave the dealers the clout that goes with access
and enormous market share. Knowing the needs of both their clients and the government, the dealers clipped
off a profit from the gap that lay between the supply and the demand. But with that position of power went a
commensurate dose of trust. The government expected primary dealers to behave like cardinals who were
celebrating Mass. Yes, they drank first from the communion cup, but they must not get loaded and embarrass
the Church.
As an auction neared, the primary dealers would work the phones, polling customers to gauge their appetite
for bonds. Mozer’s sense of how hot the market was running translated into Salomon’s bid. A few seconds
before the clock struck one p.m. on the appointed day, the dealers phoned “runners,” who stood by a wall of
phones at the Federal Reserve Building downtown, waiting to scribble down orders by hand and dash to the
Fed clerk’s wooden box, where they jammed them inside. At the stroke of one p.m., the clerk placed his hand
over the slot. That ended the auction. The government had used this antiquated system for decades.

The inherent tension of the market lay in the opposing interests of the Treasury and the dealers regarding
pricing and amounts. The Treasury auctioned only a certain amount of bonds and wanted the highest price,
while the dealers wanted to pay just enough in the auction to win a larger share than anyone else yet no more
than necessary, for that would hurt their profit on resale. So finely calibrated were these bids that the traders
used increments of 1/1,000th of a dollar. That sounds like almost nothing, but clipping off 1/1,000th of
enough dollars amounted to a fortune. On $100 million, it was worth $100,000. On a billion dollars, it was
worth $1 million. Because government bonds were less profitable than mortgages and corporate bonds,
Treasury bonds had to be traded in blocks this size in order for the dealers and money managers to make
enough money for it to be worth their while.
Dovetailing with the need for such large trades was the government’s need to work with large dealers—those
who knew the market well and had the power to distribute a lot of bonds. Salomon was the largest dealer by
far. In the early 1980s, the Treasury had allowed any individual firm to buy up to half of a given bond issue
for its own account. Salomon commonly “couped” an auction this way, then held on to the bonds long
enough to “squeeze” anybody who was “short” Treasuries—having bet that prices would fall—because there
were no bonds available for short-sellers to buy to cover their positions. Prices shot up, the short-sellers
screamed, the trading floor erupted in cheers, and Salomon gloated over its huge profits and swung a big stick
as the King of Wall Street. Couping the auctions fattened the usually thin profits on government bonds and
sent a heady mist of testosterone drifting above the formerly stodgy section where the humdrum
government-bond traders sat at their desks.
In response to grumbling, the Treasury lowered the limit and said no individual dealer could buy more than
thirty-five percent, which made it harder to coup the auction. Smaller squeezes still occurred, but Salomon no
longer owned the market unchallenged. Naturally, the new rule was unpopular at Salomon. Since the total of
bids exceeded all the bonds on offer, the Treasury also prorated everyone, which meant a firm that wanted
thirty-five percent had to bid more than thirty-five percent, a juggling act.
Thus in various ways the clampdown made it harder to profit at the government desk at Salomon. The mist of
testosterone did not dissipate, however. Mozer tested the Treasury’s patience twice in 1990, bidding more
than one hundred percent of all the bonds to be issued. Michael Basham, who ran the auctions, told him not
to do it again. Mozer was sent to an “apology breakfast” with Bob Glauber, an undersecretary of the
Treasury. He squeaked out some words but did not exactly apologize. He claimed that overbidding was in the
government’s best interest because it increased demand for bonds.9 Not mollified, Basham changed the rules
so that no individual firm could even bid more than thirty-five percent for its own account. The limit on bids
meant Salomon might not even get its full thirty-five percent limit of bonds.
Now Feuerstein read Buffett a copy of a Salomon press release to be issued the next morning, which was
being explained to all board members that night. It described how Mozer had responded to this stare-down
with Basham. He had proceeded to submit unauthorized bids in excess of the government’s bidding limit in
the December 1990 and February 1991 auctions.
Feuerstein gave Buffett a scripted version of events and told him that he had already spoken at length with
Munger, who was at his cabin in Minnesota.10 Munger had said to him something about thumb-sucking and
added, “People do that all the time.”11 Buffett recognized the term “thumb-sucking” as a Mungerism for
procrastination but wasn’t terribly concerned. Feuerstein did not mention anything else discussed in the
lengthy conversation with Munger, and Buffett did not ponder whose thumb was being sucked. Seven or
eight minutes later he got off the phone, recognizing that this wasn’t the good news for which he had been
hoping but not feeling alarmed enough to call Munger immediately. He’d check in with Munger over the
weekend, he decided, but for now he was going to enjoy Lake Tahoe. Then he wandered back to join Astrid
and the Blumkins in the dining room, where they were having a steak before seeing Joan Rivers and Neil
Sedaka perform.
While Buffett was watching the show, John Gutfreund’s plane from London finally landed. Gutfreund,
Strauss, and Feuerstein had a conversation late that evening with Richard Breeden and Bill McLucas, top
