
Again, however, the short-term technical picture takes priority. We'll see if this works.
Column 11: COMMENTS, POST MORTEM
Trade worked, support held, weaker resistance gave way, no clear fundamental driver though a
number of possible ones. Just speculation. Switched to trailing stop and achieved better than 1:3
rrr, which I hope will compensate for those trades in which my trailing stop takes me out before
achieving at least 1:2 rrr.
Column 12: SCREENSHOT ENTRY and EXIT
Includes a reference to a page in the trade journal with the screenshot shown in Figure 5.7 of the
chart for a visual record which at times, when reviewed later, yields clues about why things did
or didn't work out or hints that I didn't pick up originally.
FIGURE 5.7 EURUSD Weekly Chart, January 2, 2011, to August 14, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

It can include handwritten or other additional comments, observations, or questions for future
investigation. For example, look at this same chart later with some momentum indicators like DBBs,
MA crossovers, or others, to see if there were additional clues I didn't see at the time.

No. 2: Your Overall Business Plan
This is the other, bigger picture plan you'll need to make though it comes later than the trading journal
shown previously, which you should be keeping from your first practice account trades.
This comes later, after you've had enough study and practice trading on demo accounts to have an
idea about how to answer some of the following. If at that point you decide you want to pursue trading
as a serious money-making venture, you need to make a business plan.
Much of this business plan will be similar in most ways to any business plan, for example:
Qualifications/skills your staff (you) possess to justify success, and if others are needed, how to
attain them. Some skills you'll still need to learn yourself, others can be bought via paid
information services. Some can be attained from your circle of trader contacts either in person or
via online forums or email contact. If you want exposure to different kinds of trading, you may
allocate time and funds to invest with a proven pro through one of the social networks mentioned
in Chapter 11.
Time allocated, day or week.
Trading capital.
Equipment or training costs.
Training period.
Profit goals.
Your market niche: trading style, and so on.
Assorted goals: profitability, education.
Feedback methods and periodic review of whether these goals are met and what you'll do if they

are or aren't met.
Again, you'll need a number of months' background before you can answer some of these. That's
okay; you can always adapt your plan as you learn more.
As with any business, management must review monthly or quarterly performance to measure
progress and identify what's going well and what needs fixing. You are management.

WHAT CONDITIONS DO YOU NEED FOR SUCCESS?
We conclude this chapter with a review and another look at the commonly neglected questions that
you need to ask yourself to understand what kind of trading style and conditions you need to succeed.
If you don't clarify these questions, you may find yourself doing everything else right yet somehow
dissatisfied even if you're successful.
Are you an extrovert? Do you prefer to learn by doing rather than by reading? Do you want to hear
what others are doing and thinking? You may progress better by hanging out in online trade forums or
virtual (or actual) trading rooms. Being shut in a quiet room doing research online or from other
sources may leave you drained and bored.
Are you more of an introvert, scholar, or natural systems builder? Do you find most chat rooms or
forums filled with more noise than signal, so you've no patience for sorting through mounds of
mindless half-baked ideas to find a few pearls of serious, well-thought-out ideas? You'll progress
better by researching the best books, online sources, or courses to take.
If you need a lot of action and don't mind risk, you'll gravitate to shorter-term day trading styles.
Though we don't urge these for beginners, some succeed with this kind of trading, especially if they've
enough RAMM skills and the discipline needed to implement them and survive the learning period. If
you're averse to risk and more patient, you'll gravitate to longer-term trading methods.
If you're not the introspective type and don't have a clear idea, then you need to invest some time to
find out because you'll get a better idea of what trading or investing suits you. Being aware of the
questions we've raised at the beginning of this chapter on trader psychology will help. Knowing the
question is halfway to the answer. Experimenting with different trading methods via a demo account
will go a long way to helping you.
For those with the time and money, you can find online trader coaches who might provide the
answers in less time.

SAFETY IN NUMBERS: BUILD A TEAM
You'll reduce your mistakes and increase your rate of progress if you've both mentors and colleagues
with whom you can evaluate trading or investing ideas. This powerful combination is standard
operating practice in most kinds of professional education (in law and business schools these roles
are filled by professors and study groups).
As we'll discuss in Chapter 11, it's easier than ever to find them without even needing to leave your
home via the advent of online trader forums and social trading networks.
As with any fruitful marriage or partnership, you want your teammates to share similar goals. That
is, short-term high-risk traders should seek out their own kind, as should longer-term more risk-

averse traders, and long-term investors seeking to diversify their assets by currency exposure as well
as by asset and sector type.
Ideally, your like-minded mentors and colleagues should offer talents and perspectives that differ
from yours, so that your collective wisdom is greater than the sum of your individual members. For
example, technicians seek out fundamentalists—those focused on Europe pair up with those more
familiar with U.S. or Asian markets, etc. Alternatively, scholars can focus on reading a wide range of
analysis and charts, and seek out less academic types with trader and other financial industry contacts.
Those who are more verbally inclined and read a lot of fundamental analysis would benefit from
contact with more quantitative types who want to build algorithms.

Notes

1. Mary Buffett and David Clark, “The Tao of Warren Buffett” (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2006).
2. Forbes, “Forbes' 400 Richest Americans” (September 2011), www.forbes.com.
3. Alex Howe, “The 15 Best Things Paul Tudor Jones Has Ever Said About Trading,” Business
Insider (September 2011), www.businessinsider.com/the-tk-best-things-paul-tudor-jones-has-eversaid-2011-8#at-the-end-of-the-day-the-most-important-thing-is-how-good-are-you-at-risk-control15#ixzz1l9omVe7j.
4. John Tierney, “Do You Suffer From Decision Fatigue?” New York Times (August 2011),
http://mobile.nytimes.com/article?a=829776&f=37.
5. Boris Schlossberg, “Three Men Doing Time in Israel Prison Are Up for Parole” (August 2011),
www.fxstreet.com/education/trading-strategies/forex-trading-strategy/2011/08/19/
6. Joe Weisenthal, “If You Had Bought Swiss Franc in 1970…” Business Insider (August 2011),
www.businessinsider.com/if-you-had-bought-swiss-franc-in-1970-2011-8.
7. Jeremy Wagner and Timothy Shea, “How Much Capital Should I Trade Forex With?” (December
2011),
www.dailyfx.com/forex/education/trading_tips/daily_trading_lesson/2011/12/22/how_much_capital
8. Just enter the search term “screen capture” into your preferred search engine for the latest free
versions of such popular software packages as ScreenHunter, Snagit, and so forth.

CHAPTER 6
Essentials of Fundamental Analysis
This chapter will cover:
Using Fundamental Analysis (FA) and Technical Analysis (TA) Together
An Overview of FA: Main Fundamental Drivers of Forex Trends
News Trading: Day Trading on Short-Term Fundamentals
FA Basics: Easy to Understand, Hard to Apply
Therefore, Get Thee to an Analyst
Combining FA and TA: An Example
While technical analysis (TA) focuses solely on patterns in price movements with no attempt to
discern what drives them, fundamental analysis (FA) does the opposite. It attempts to identify all the
economic, social, and political forces that affect supply and demand for an asset, and ideally, use
them to forecast its future price.
Leaving aside the debate over which is more important, the practical fact is that you need both.
Here's the short version of how you combine them.
Use FA to attempt to forecast both the longer term trend and the short term market reaction to news
events, and plan your overall strategy accordingly. However, its very hard to know when deeper
fundamentals will actually start to influence price movements.
Therefore, use TA to time entries and exits. It may not tell you much about what's behind a given
trend or chart pattern, but it's great for telling you when price has actually started to move, how
markets are actually behaving, how they're feeling, how strongly they're feeling it, and what is a low
or high price for a particular period.
TA vastly improves your ability to buy low and sell high over a given period because it tells you
about the likely s/r areas and their relative strength. However, in the long run it's the fundamental
drivers of currency supply and demand that are behind those price patterns and s/r levels, so your
ability to forecast them over many weeks, months, or years depends on your FA skills, or those of the
analysts you trust and follow.
In the most general sense, fundamentals influence a currency pair's price through their influence on:
The macroeconomic conditions of its relevant countries and regions. If China is doing well, the
Chinese Yuan Renminbi (CNY) and the currencies of its chief materials suppliers like Australia
tend to be strong relative to those with no China connection.
Overall market sentiment. When markets feel optimistic or anticipate growth, those pairs with
base currencies that have much higher risk rankings than their counter currencies, like the
AUDJPY or NZDCHF tend to perform best. Under the opposite conditions, those pairs
underperform, so you'd sell (or short) them, and buy pairs with the opposite characteristics, like
the USDCAD. That general sentiment can determine a currency's performance even if the driver

of that sentiment has no direct relation to the currency. For example, a great U.S. economic news
or earnings report could easily fuel a rally in risk assets that would benefit risk currencies like
the EUR far more than the USD.
Not surprisingly, in periods of global economic expansion, the risk currencies like the Australian
Dollar (AUD) form long-term uptrends against most other currencies. In times of contraction, the safe
haven currencies can trend higher for long periods against the risk currencies.
This last point is critical for longer-term buy-and-hold investors. In addition to their usual need to
consider safety, return, and sector diversification, they'll need to consider what currency exposure
they want. For example, in periods of expansion, those with portfolios of stocks, bonds, real estate,
or other assets will favor such assets with exposure to the healthiest risk currencies with the
firmest uptrends. During down years, they'll favor assets tied to the better safe haven currencies.
For day traders, fundamental analysis is almost irrelevant except that daily news announcements to
the extent that these events may influence prices during their short holding periods or when they
attempt to trade news events (covered below).

USING FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS (FA) AND
TECHNICAL ANALYSIS (TA) TOGETHER
We gave you the short version earlier. Let's review it and then delve into greater detail.
Most traders and investors use some combination of technical analysis and fundamental analysis.
Here's how we combine the two forms of analysis in combination.
In sum, first use FA for determining your big picture view of what kinds of currencies or other
assets should do better over a given period, and TA for determining when and at what price to enter
and exit positions. Once you have an idea of what kinds of risk or safety assets should be best for
buying or selling, you will use TA for determining entries and exits and for determining which
specific pairs or other assets offer the best risk-reward ratios (rrrs) in your chosen time frame.
Technical analysis tells you where there's strong support for safe entries, where price shouldn't
move much against you if support holds as you expect it should. If it doesn't, you find out quickly and
get out with a small loss via a well-placed stop loss order. TA tells you where price is likely to hit
resistance and where you should plan on closing some or all of the position or at least plan to switch
to a trailing stop to lock in profits.
Understand, however, that over the longer term, your charts are pictures of market reactions to the
fundamental factors we'll discuss next. Most of the time, fundamentals are the drivers of the
multiweek and longer movements you see on the charts.1
So, use fundamental analysis for forecasting trends for the coming weeks, months, and years,
and use TA for timing your entries and exits.
Some additional warnings about FA and the need to combine it with TA include:
1. Good FA is time consuming and very often inaccurate, even if you have the requisite
background. Therefore, until you're experienced, you'll need to read a lot of analysis from
professionals who have the time and skills to boil it down for you. Over time, you'll learn which
analysts to follow on a regular basis. We recommend a few starting points for finding them in

Appendix A.
2. Timing the effects of fundamentals on currency prices is very difficult—often impossible—due
to the number of possible fundamental influences on forex prices. For example:
Many top analysts were calling for a drop in Japanese stocks years before they began their
20-year (and counting) decline around 1990.
Similarly, the fundamental picture for Japanese and U.S. government bonds has been
troubling for many years as both nations continue to pile on debt, yet neither has begun their
anticipated long-term downtrend.
The problems of the Euro-zone (EZ) and of the excessive debt loads of the peripheral economies
were known for years before a December 2009 default in tiny Dubai focused markets on sovereign
debt trouble in the European Union (EU) and sparked the 2010 outbreak of Europe's sovereign debt
and banking crisis. As of this writing, the seemingly “inevitable” wave of sovereign defaults has been
repeatedly delayed since it was recognized in early 2010, as the ECB and Fed ignore their own rules
and prior ways of operating in order to ward off economic collapse. For a variety of reasons that
can't continue forever, no one can tell whether the end is a matter of weeks, years, or decades away.
In other words, no matter how compelling our fundamental analysis may be, we don't open or close
positions until price actually starts moving accordingly, because it often never does. That's because,
in the words of legendary economist John Maynard Keynes: “The market can stay irrational longer
than you can stay solvent.”2
In sum, though fundamentals drive trends in the long term, we use TA to determine entries and exits.
No matter how logical or inevitable a coming trend may appear to be, those who don't wait for
technical confirmation that their predicted move has begun, risk losses from getting into a trade too
early or too late.
However, anyone who trades purely based on TA (except perhaps for day traders), without any
reference to the bigger fundamental picture, risks missing critical information that will not show up on
a chart until it's too late.
For example, consider the EURUSD weekly chart shown in Figure 6.1.
FIGURE 6.1 EURUSD Weekly Chart, May 30 to September 4, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

For the period covered in Figure 6.1, based on simple technical evidence, it appears that we may
be approaching another good buying opportunity because price is pulling back to a strong support
level comprised of
The 1.4000 level
The well-established rising trend line from June 6, 2010
However, an awareness of how seriously the EU sovereign debt and banking crisis was worsening
would likely cause a conservative trader to defer opening a long position. Greece's second bailout
package was in doubt, a longer-term default looking more likely, and markets were expressing doubts
about the creditworthiness of the other weaker EZ economies and of the stability of the EU banking
system.
In the weeks that followed, that support didn't hold, and the EURUSD trend continued to follow the
EU's deteriorating fundamentals lower, as shown in the chart in Figure 6.2.
FIGURE 6.2 EURUSD Weekly Chart, May 30 to November 4, 2001
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Figure 6.3 is another example of why anyone except day traders needs to pay attention to
fundamentals.
FIGURE 6.3 EURCHF Weekly Chart, December 21, 2008, to September 11, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

According to the EURCHF weekly chart in Figure 6.3, the pair is in a strong, well-established
downtrend. This trend was halted by rumors of coming Swiss National Bank (SNB) intervention to
prop up the Euro versus the Swiss Franc (CHF), which had become so strong it was hurting Swiss
exports to the EZ. The rumors proved true when on September 6, the SNB began a massive EURCHF
buying campaign aimed at pushing the pair up to 1.2000 and keeping it there.
Regardless of whether you believed this unilateral intervention would work, it was an important
consideration for anyone contemplating opening a new long-term position in the EURCHF. It would
be important for any U.S. dollar (USD) or Japanese Yen (JPY) trader because the CHF is a fellow
safe haven currency. Until this intervention, the CHF had been the market's favorite safe haven

currency in the prior months because Switzerland's finances were better than those of the other safe
haven currency nations, the United States and Japan. The SNB was taking away the long CHF trade,
which would drive safe haven demand to the USD and JPY.
The point is that fundamental analysis matters because fundamental factors like those just cited are
what ultimately drive longer term trends.
In sum, everyone but the day traders need a firm grasp of fundamental analysis, so here's an
overview. As always, you can find lots more via an online search. For more on an overview of
fundamental analysis, use search terms like:
“Fundamental Analysis” AND forex.
“Fundamental Analysis” AND forex trading.
“Fundamental Analysis” AND long-term forex trends.
Forex AND introduction, and after clicking on some search results, select sections on
fundamental analysis.
For more on specific topics, substitute these for the forex-related terms in the above suggestions.
See the Binary Options Appendix on the website for specific suggestions.

AN OVERVIEW OF FA: MAIN FUNDAMENTAL
DRIVERS OF FOREX TRENDS
The eight classic fundamental drivers of forex trends are, in order of importance:
1. Overall risk appetite
2. Short-term interest rates
3. Macroeconomic data and indicators
4. Geopolitics
5. Capital and trade flows
6. Merger and acquisition (M&A) activity
7. Short-term illiquidity: A lack of buyers and sellers
8. Government and central bank special interventions in times of crisis
Let's look briefly at each one.

Overall Risk Appetite
The most influential fundamental factor that determines the fate of a currency pair in a given period is
overall risk appetite, otherwise known as market sentiment or, in plain English, whether markets are
feeling optimistic or pessimistic.
If they're feeling optimistic, be it over a period of hours, weeks, or longer, risk assets tend to rise
and safe haven or safety assets tend to fall, and vice versa.
Here are the obvious questions:
What creates this overall market sentiment?
How do traders and investors gauge it? What do they watch to determine whether markets favor
risk or safety assets at a given moment or planned holding period?

The purported causes of market optimism or pessimism are debated and discussed daily in the
financial media. Over time, you'll develop your own preferred sources of news and analysis and will
form your own opinions or at least a core group of analysts you trust. Sometimes the causes of the
market's mood are clear, other times they aren't. However, the actual mood of the market is typically
quite clear, even when its underlying cause is not. Look at the charts of the following risk appetite
barometers, note the price action and trend, and you'll have a reliable picture of whether markets are
optimistic (showing risk appetite) or pessimistic (showing risk aversion).

Risk Appetite Barometers
There are many, of varying degrees of effectiveness and sophistication. Here we'll provide just a few
that are very easy to use and find. They usually provide a reliable picture of whether markets are
feeling optimistic or pessimistic. That information in turn can tell you a lot about how almost any
asset class should be performing in a given period.
The S&P 500 Index (S&P 500)
Major sovereign bond prices or Credit Default Swap (CDS) spreads
Indexes of the major currencies
Growth-related commodity prices like copper and oil
Gold and silver for gauging confidence in the most widely held forms of cash, the USD and EUR

The S&P 500 Index (S&P 500)
If I had to choose one measure of market sentiment, this would be it. If it's moving higher, expect risk
assets and currencies (led by the AUD, then NZD, CAD, EUR and GBP) to follow it higher. Expect
safe haven assets and currencies (led by the JPY, then USD and CHF) to do the opposite and move
lower.
For a variety of reasons, major stock indices are considered the single most important indicator of
global risk appetite. Though there is some room for debate about which index is best in which
circumstances, the S&P 500, the largest cap index of the world's largest economy, tends to be the
most popular single barometer of risk, and it also enjoys a degree of self-fulfilling prophecy power.
In other words, markets follow it intensively, so it has influence. Its big drawback is that though its
futures may trade around the clock, the index itself is open only during EST work hours. If you trade
during Asian or European market hours, you'll want to choose a leading index for that market as a
supplement, like the Nikkei, Shanghai, or Hang Seng (Hong Kong) for Asia, or the Deutscher Aktien
Index (DAX), CAC for Europe, or one of the numerous composite indexes for these regions.
Global indexes tend to move together over time, so no matter which ones you choose, you'll tend to
get the same general result over the course of a few days. The trading day starts in Asia, followed by
Europe, then the Americas. Each region's major index's “default behavior” is to continue in the
direction of the region before it, unless they encounter either
important news that changes market sentiment
significant technical s/r levels that block further progress as traders believe the current picture is
now fully priced in and doesn't yet justify a break past these levels.
For example, if U.S. stock indexes close strongly, we would expect Asia to open strong and stay
