
10

Foreword
In early 2003, I was attending an online trading conference in an effort to educate active traders on a new class of products called security futures. I had joined
OneChicago after having been in the managed money business for more than 20 years because I believed that these products would enhance equity trading in the cash,
futures, and options markets. Having avoided these events for many years, I was surprised when I had the pleasure of listening to someone who was incredibly
articulate and thoughtful. I said to myself, “He really gets it.”
John Carter was not speaking about security futures; rather, he was presenting his intellectual framework and approach to trading. It was a method to which I could
relate strongly, so I introduced myself. We spoke at length on many subjects, including the idea that his methodology could be applied to security futures and that
successful trading is one long journey, not a destination. John became an early supporter of and trader on OneChicago, another indication of his innovativeness. We
have continued to exchange ideas, and therefore I was honored when John asked me to review Mastering the Trade.
I judge a book on trading according to one simple criterion: have I learned something new? Mastering the Trade not only introduces new concepts, but is insightful
and easy to read. This is indeed a rare combination in the trading literature. In addition, John stresses that there is neither a single approach nor a single answer to
successful trading. In fact, he emphasizes that before one can be a profitable trader, one must fully understand one’s own personality. Every decision, from the holding
period of a trade to the amount of one’s capital to risk per trade, is a reflection of the trader’s inherent preference curves. In fact, Mastering the Trade begins by
emphasizing the importance of the proper approach to trading prior to discussing methodology.
Once the book turns its attention to the process of trading, it sparkles once again. Regardless of how long one has been in the markets, there are new approaches or
enhancements to existing ones that I find quite beneficial. For example, from an active participant in the stock index futures markets, John’s unique application of
extreme tick readings is very insightful. I can then decide whether to apply it to my own trading, test it further, or ignore it entirely. The beauty of trading is that there
is not one size that fits all, and John does not try to force fit his ideas on anyone. They are presented, discussed, and then demonstrated. Amazingly enough, not every
trade is always a winner. The setup is a probability outcome that, if followed over time, should lead to trading success. That is the essential message that John drills
repeatedly. Bad trades happen all the time; it is how one reacts to them that determines one’s future success.
Another point that Mastering the Trade makes is that there is no single answer to the question: should one be short or long a market? There are always valid reasons
to be both ways. The markets provide some clues, but one’s trading style needs to provide the rest. That is why John shows how to use everything from monthly
charts to one-minute pivots. A full-time trader should have different volatility and risk parameters from one who can examine the market only before the open and after
the close.
Trading is an emotionally debilitating business. One can always explain yesterday perfectly. The weekly trader says, “If I had only followed the one-minute chart, I
would not have gotten caught in that position.” The one-minute, intraday trader says, “If I had only leaned against that weekly pivot point, I wouldn’t have gotten
stopped out, and I would have had a huge winner.” John doesn’t play this game. He applies an intellectually honest process to trading, suggests risk/reward setups,
and then lets the markets do the rest. Remember, the market is always right. It is the analysis or setup that is wrong.
Mastering the Trade reinforces what successful traders intuitively do every time they place a position: trade small, stay in the game, and try to let time be your ally.
Losing streaks are bound to occur, but knowing that they will occur and living through them are two different things. Diversify across markets. Some setups will be
working well in a market and then stop. The market hasn’t changed or the setup failed; the more opportunities, the greater the chance of success. But if one is trading
too large, then one may not be able to initiate the next trade after a series of losses. John is very helpful in outlining what unit sizes to trade.
I would suggest studying the list of markets recommended and being prepared to participate in many of them. We all have a tendency to pick and choose the setups
in those markets for which we have a predefined bias. The message of Mastering the Trade is that the setups are objective and can help eliminate the emotional battles
that are constantly being fought. Today a single-stock future will look great on a chart, but the setup will indicate that it is time to sell. If you are looking for excuses
not to follow the signal, then don’t buy Mastering the Trade. However, if you are tired of saying, “I knew this would happen,” but you do not have anything to show
for that knowledge, then John Carter’s new book is an outstanding place to start a realistic, grounded approach to mastering the trade!

PETER BORISH
Chairman, OneChicago
Former Head of Research for Paul Tudor Jones

11

Introduction
The best lesson I’ve ever learned about short-term trading happened while I was on a white-water rafting trip. Eight of us were in the raft when it hit a rock and
flipped, launching us into the air like a catapult and sending everyone headfirst into the icy water. Half of us remembered that, in the event of a spill, we needed to stay
calm and position ourselves on our back, feet facing downstream. We zipped around rocks and through cascades of water, eventually dragging ourselves safely ashore.
An hour passed before we learned what had happened to the rest of the group. For them, a rescue operation went into effect, and the end result was a gashed leg, a
concussion, and a near drowning. Later, when speaking to the other group, I learned that all of them had experienced a type of brain freeze. They could see the danger
around them. They knew they were in trouble. They even knew that they needed to act, to do something. But they literally could not make a decision about what
action they should take. So, they took the one option left to them: they froze like the proverbial deer in the headlights and did nothing. In the absence of a decisive path
of action, the river grabbed them by their lapels and, like an angry pimp with bills to pay, slapped them senseless.
I remember one member of the group saying, “That river was out to get me!” Extreme paranoia and self-centeredness aside, the river was not out to get anyone. It
did what it was supposed to do: move quickly and rapidly through a canyon in order to get to the ocean. The riders who understood the nature of the river were
prepared and took the roller-coaster journey in stride. The riders who fought this trend got thrashed.
The similarities between this event and a typical trading day are nearly identical. The unprepared trader (newbie) is in the same situation as the unprepared whitewater rafter. In the event of extreme conditions, both will freeze, and both will be lucky to survive the experience. One bad trade can wipe out months or years of
profits.
Professional traders make money not because they are right more often than not, but because they know how to take advantage of all the “fresh meat” that is sitting
out there in the form of amateur, unprepared traders. “Fresh meat” refers to anyone who has been trading for less than 10 years. That said, many traders never make
the leap, and remain in this victim-like state all of their trading lives. The minority who endure and join the ranks of consistently winning traders are the ones who have
learned the following truths:
• The financial markets are naturally set up to take advantage of and prey upon human nature. As a result, markets initiate major intraday and swing moves with as few
traders participating as possible. A trader who does not understand how this works is destined to lose money.
• Traders can know more about a market than anyone else in the world, but if they apply the wrong methodology to their trading setups, they will lose money.
• Traders can know more about an indicator or group of indicators than anyone else in the world, but if they apply the wrong methodology to those indicators, they
will lose money.
• Traders can know exactly what they are doing, but if they are trading the wrong market for their personality, they will lose money.
• Traders can know exactly what they are doing, but if they apply the same strategies that they used to make themselves successful in other areas of their life, they will
lose money.
Without this knowledge, a trader is like a wounded antelope in the center of a pride of lions: it is not a question of “if” the antelope is going to get torn to shreds and
swallowed, but rather of “when.” For a trader without this knowledge, the possibility of ruin is not a question of “if.” It’s only a matter of “when.”
Nevertheless, even with the odds stacked against them, each year tens of thousands of unprepared traders flock to the markets like lemmings to the sea, their heads
filled with visions of easy cash, first-class tickets, and telling their boss to go pound sand. By the time most of them sense the spark of an idea that would have allowed
them to understand how trading really works, they have already flung themselves over the cliff and are plunging toward the rocks below. All they have to show for
their hard work is ample amounts of frustration and despair, perhaps a furious spouse, and a trading account that has been ravished and ripped off by a professional.
Trading is not about everyone holding hands, belting out the lyrics to John Lennon’s Imagine, and making money together. The financial markets are truly the most
democratic places on earth. It doesn’t matter if a trader is male or female, white or black, American or Iraqi, Republican or Democrat. It’s all based on skill.
The only way to become a professional trader is to obtain an edge, a weapon that can separate you from the rest of the migrating sheep. That edge is gained by
utilizing specific chart setups and trading methodologies that take into account the five key points listed previously, as well as the psychology of the trader taking the
other side of the trade. Without this, as you enter the revolving door to the financial markets, filled with excitement and anticipation, the predators are merely licking
their lips, because what they see is a slab of freshly cured meat, ripe for the eating. And feast they will.

Who Should Read This Book?
This book discusses a unique approach to the markets that focuses on the underlying reasons that really cause market prices to move; it is applicable to trading stocks,
stock options, futures, and forex. In reality, markets don’t move because they want to, they move because they have to. M argin calls, stop runs, and psychological
capitulation all force a series of rapid-fire market orders in a very short period of time. These generate sharp intraday moves lasting from a few minutes to a few hours,
and, on a bigger scale, swing moves that last for a few days to a few weeks. These moves inflict pain on a lot of traders who do not understand how this process
works. Yet, there is always a group of traders who profit from these moves. This book discusses specific ways to get positioned “on the other side of the trade” in
order to take advantage of these moves, relying on a unique interpretation of many classical technical analyses and chart patterns.
M ore specifically, in discussing strategies, the book gives exact entry, exit, and stop loss levels for the intraday trading of stocks, options, ETFs, various futures and
commodity markets, and the forex currency markets. Strategies focus on daytrading, swing-trading, and position-trading various markets and asset classes.
It is my hope that traders at all levels of experience will welcome this book’s broad market overview and specific trading strategies. Beginners will be treated to a nohype reality check on how the markets really work, will be introduced to clear concepts and trade setups, and will come to understand why newer traders are destined
to lose money until they grasp the basic market mechanics that are constantly happening behind the scenes. They will also understand how they are repeatedly taken
advantage of.
It is my goal that intermediate traders will appreciate the knowledge included in this book, which is designed to take them to the next level of trading. In addition, I
hope that professional traders and other market insiders will find that this book is able to clarify some of the truths that they have instinctively found to be true, in
addition to providing fresh ideas to improve their bottom line. Stock traders who have never traded E-mini futures or forex will learn how these markets work and how
to get enough information to decide whether the addition of these markets would be appropriate for their own trading. They will learn how the futures markets affect
specific stocks and will thus be able to better position themselves to profit from their stock trading.
12

Day traders will learn why relying on indicators alone is a losing game, discover specific strategies for getting into a trade early, and learn the differences that will let
them know when to bail and when to hang on for the ride. Swing traders and pure stock pickers will learn how to read the ebbs and flows of the market, and know
whether they should be focusing on the long or the short side. Investors who are overseeing their retirement accounts will discover specific ideas for timing their
investments on a monthly and quarterly basis in order to improve their returns. While this book is aimed at full-time traders, there are special sections throughout the
book that focus on individuals who are working full time and are able to trade only part time. This does have advantages if it is done correctly.
While I feel that this work will be a welcome addition for anyone who is interested in the financial markets, it is important to realize that it assumes a working
knowledge of the basics. There won’t be a chapter discussing the nuances of support and resistance, or a chapter with 25 examples explaining the differences between
an uptrend and a downtrend. While I’m going to spend a chapter on option plays and I dig into some basic option strategies, it’s not my intention to cover all the
different ways in which options can be utilized. In other words, if it has already been written about, or if it can be Googled, then it won’t be rehashed here. This book
focuses on new concepts that have not been written about before. That said, the work does provide an introductory chapter on futures and forex trading and the types
of markets that are focused on in this book. If you’re not sure what a bond tick is worth, or what 10 euro pips mean to your P&L, then this section is for you. I will
also discuss websites and other books that are great for getting up to speed.
In addition to specific trading setups, the book discusses practical aspects of trading, such as the type of hardware and software to use, money management
allocation, and developing a game plan that fits the trader’s personality. Finally, there is a strong focus on specific information that can be used during the next trading
day.

A Few Notes on This Updated Edition
I first wrote this book during most of 2005. While I still utilize many of the techniques described in the original book, I’ve updated some of them, thrown out others,
and added techniques, chapters, and examples that are completely new. I’m the first to admit that I had mixed feelings about updating the book. A common question I
receive is something along the lines of, “If these trading strategies are working for you, why in hell would you want to share them, and aren’t you worried that once
everyone starts using them, they will become less effective?” Those are fair questions. One of the casualties of writing Mastering the Trade was “the 3:52 trade,”
which was one of my favorite setups for a long time. As more people read the book and started doing that trade, it became less and less effective. The main issue was
that it was a low-volume setup at a specific time of day, so it didn’t take a lot of additional volume pouring into the trade to make it less effective. I’ve had to toss that
one out and replace it with an “end-of-day trade” that is based more on market internals. However, I left this chapter in the book because it illustrates very clearly who
is on the opposite side of a trade. Understanding this will lead you to find similar situations in other markets into the closing bell. The rest of the setups haven’t been
affected. M uch of this has to do with the markets I’m trading, which are highly liquid. Hedge funds are too big to do these setups on an intraday basis, and there aren’t
enough retail traders out there to move these markets and offset what the hedge funds are doing. In addition, in working with traders over the years, I’ve learned that
even if you do show a trader a winning setup, about seven trades into that setup, she will start tweaking the parameters to fit her own personality—especially if the
setup loses money two times in a row (hey, I can tweak that so it doesn’t happen again!). The net result is that there isn’t a massive button being pushed every time
one of my setups fires off.
In terms of, “Why in hell would I want to share them?” I’m not totally sure. Although I enjoy writing, putting together a book is a huge ordeal and requires a lot of
time, focus, and commitment. I meet a lot of people who tell me that one day they, too, would like to write a book, although most of them have yet to get started. I
don’t blame them a bit—it’s a bitch! From talking to other writers who have published books in multiple areas of interest, I’ve discovered a trend: the only way a book
will get written by your own hand (that is, without using a ghostwriter) is if you feel obsessed to push it out of your body. For whatever reasons, I had to get
Mastering the Trade out of my head the first time around, and the same feeling emerged six years later when I realized that I had to get these updates I kept thinking
about out of my head as well.
I suspect the reasons are both short-term and stupid as well as long-term and lasting. By short-term and stupid, I mean things like being able to say, “Look, M a, I
wrote a book” (although I don’t think she’s read it yet; it’s too technical). M edium-term, the book has helped our online research business, which will grow only so
long as we are putting out high-quality, straightforward information. Longer-term, I fully realize that one day, a day that’s going to sneak up on me much sooner than
I’d like (hey, it doesn’t seem like that long ago that I was a teenager), I’m going to die. M aybe this is a way to have a part of me still live on long after I’m rotting in the
ground. I don’t know anything about my great-grandfather. M aybe this is a way for my great-great-grandkids to get to know me a little bit. And if they do decide to
trade, hopefully I can share with them enough information so that they can cut their learning curve way down. Trading evokes painful lessons. If my great-greatgrandkids can read this book and pick up a few things that help them navigate the path toward being successful traders (with a minimal amount of screaming at their
computers in frustration), then I’ve accomplished what I’ve set out to do.
I’m grateful for everyone who has read the book and truly gotten something out of the material and my own lessons along the way. I meet a lot of people at Traders
Expos who have read the book, and I’ve signed copies and heard the stories. This book isn’t for people who are looking for the Holy Grail of trading, or for some
simple system that they can trade mechanically for the rest of their lives. It’s for people who are going down the path of testing their trading skills and personality
against the market. It’s a day-to-day process, which is what makes trading for a living so damn interesting. In the end, I’m flattered and grateful than anyone would
deem this work important enough to read, learn from, or critique. It’s truly an honor.
In terms of specifics, there are simply things in the original book that needed to be updated. The first two chapters have been updated with extended and more indepth thoughts on the psychology of trading. The chapter on technology, of course, had to be expunged and updated. One gig of RAM just ain’t what it used to be.
Technology continues to change at a lightning pace. The chapter on commodity descriptions also had to be updated. After this, there is one chapter on market profile
that I threw out—there are entire books on the subject. Since the book was first published, I’ve done a lot with reversion bands, trend bars, waves, and a few other
strategies. These are included in this updated edition. One of the biggest pieces of feedback I received concerned the section on health—and I’ve continued on that trend
and updated that section as well as continuing to act as the proverbial guinea pig.
Trading and life are tightly intertwined. The better you understand yourself, the more likely it is that you will be able to find a market, a strategy, and an overall
trading philosophy that best fit your personality. Let’s dive in.

Written April 9, 2011, London, Leister Square, Costa Coffee shop at the corner of Wardour Street and Shaftesbury Avenue during the London Traders Expo.
(What a cool place to write about trading!)

13

PART I

TRADER’S BOOT CAMP
How Do the Markets Work and What Are the Best
Ways to Get Mentally Prepared for Successful
Trading and Investing?
I don’t want the cheese; I just want to get out of the trap.
SPANISH PROVERB
