
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

32

platforms support all possible asset classes, including stocks, futures, currencies, and options. For example, the popular MetaTrader is for currencies
trading only. It is especially difficult for these platforms to trade strategies that involve arbitrage between different asset classes, such as between
futures and stocks or currencies and futures. The open-source IDEs are better able to handle these situations. As Table 1.2 indicates, most IDEs can
trade a variety of asset classes. But, as usual, the most flexible solution in this
respect is a stand-alone program written outside of any IDE.
Beyond asset classes, many special-purpose platforms also place restrictions on the type of strategies that they support even within one asset class.
Often, simple pairs trading strategies require special modules to handle. Most
lower-end platforms cannot handle common statistical arbitrage or portfolio
trading strategies that involve many symbols. Open-source IDEs do not have
such restrictions, and, of course, neither do stand-alone programs.
What about high(er)-frequency trading? What kind of platforms can support this demanding trading strategy? The surprising answer is that most
platforms can handle the execution part of high-frequency trading without
too much latency (as long as your strategy can tolerate latencies in the 1- to
10-millisecond range), and since special-purpose platforms as well as IDEs
typically use the same program for both backtesting and execution, backtesting shouldn’t in theory be a problem either.
To understand why most platforms have no trouble handling highfrequency executions, we have to realize that most of the latency that needs
to be overcome in high-frequency trading is due to live market data latency,
or brokerage order confirmation latency.
1. Live market data latency:
For your program to receive a new quote or trade price within 1 to
10 milliseconds (ms), you have to colocate your program at the exchange or in your broker’s data center (see Box 1.2); furthermore,
you have to receive a direct data feed from the exchanges involved, not
from a consolidated data feed such as SIAC’s Consolidated Tape System
(CTS). (For example, Interactive Brokers’ data feed only offers snapshots of market data every 250 ms.)
2. Brokerage order confirmation latency:
If a strategy submits limit orders, it will depend on a timely order status confirmation before it can decide what to do next. For some retail
brokerages, it can take up to six seconds between the execution of an
order and your program receiving the execution confirmation, virtually

BOX 1.2

Colocation of Trading Programs

(Continued )

33
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

The general term colocation can mean several ways of physically locating
your trading program outside of your desktop computer. Stretching the
definition a bit, it can mean installing your trading program in a cloud server or
VPS (virtual private server) such as Amazon’s EC2, slicehost.com, or gogrid.
com. The advantage of doing so is to prevent power or Internet outages
that are more likely to strike a private home or office than a commercial data
center, with its backup power supply and redundant network connectivity.
Colocating in a cloud server does not necessarily shorten the time data take
to travel between your brokerage or an exchange to your trading program,
since many homes or offices are now equipped with a fiber optics connection
to their Internet service provider (e.g., Verizon’s FiOS in the United States, and
Bell’s Fibe Internet in Canada). To verify whether colocating in a virtual private
server (VPS) actually reduces this latency, you would need to conduct a test
yourself by “pinging” your broker’s server to see what the average round
trip time is. Certainly, if your VPS happens to be located physically close to
your broker or exchange, and if they are directly connected to an Internet
backbone, this latency will be smaller. (For example, pinging the Interactive
Brokers’ quote server from my home desktop computer produces an average
round trip time of about 55 ms, pinging the same server from Amazon’s EC2
takes about 25 ms, and pinging it from various VPSs located near Interactive
Brokers takes about 16 to 34 ms.)
I mention VPS only because many trading programs are not so computationally intensive as to require their own dedicated servers. But if they are,
you can certainly upgrade to such services at many of the hosting companies
familiar with the requirements of the financial trading industry such as Equinix
and Telx, both of whom operate data centers in close proximity to the various
exchanges.
If your server is already in a secure location (whether that is your office
or a data center) and is immune to power outage, then all you need is a
fast connection to your broker or the exchange. You can consider using
an “extranet,” which is like the Internet but operated by a private company,
which will guarantee a minimum communication speed. BT Radianz, Savvis,
and TNS are examples of such companies. If you have a large budget, you
can also ask these companies to build a dedicated communication line from
your server to your broker or exchange as well.
The next step up in the colocation hierarchy is colocating inside your
brokerage’s data center, so that quotes or orders confirmation generated
by your broker are transmitted to your program via an internal network,
unmolested by the noise and vagaries of the public Internet. Various brokers
that cater to professional traders have made available colocation service:
examples are Lime Brokerage and FXCM. (Because of colocation, clients
of Lime Brokerage can even receive direct data feeds from the NYSE at a

BOX 1.2 (Continued )
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

34

relatively low rate, which, as I mentioned before, is faster than the consolidated
SIAC CTS data feed.)
The ultimate colocation is, of course, situating your trading server at the
exchange or ECN itself. This is likely to be an expensive proposition (except
for forex ECNs), and useful only if you have a prime broker relationship, which
allows you to have “sponsored access” to connect to the exchange without
going through the broker’s infrastructure (Johnson, 2010). Such prime broker
relationships can typically be established only if you can generate institutionallevel commissions or have multimillion-dollar account. The requirements as
well as expenses to establish colocation are lower for forex prime brokers and
ECNs. Most forex ECNs including Currenex, EBS, FXall, and Hotspot operate
within large commercial data centers such as Equinix’s NY4 facility, and it is
not too expensive to colocate at that facility or sign up with a VPS that does.
Some traders have expressed concern that colocating their trading
programs on a remote server exposes them to possible theft of their
intellectual property. The simplest way is eliminate this risk is to just store
“executables” (binary computer codes that look like gibberish to humans)
on these remote servers, and not the source code of your trading algorithm.
(Even with a MATLAB program, you can convert all the .m files to .p files
before loading them to the remote server.) Without source codes, no one
can know the operating instructions of running the trading program, and no
one will be foolish enough to risk capital on trading a black-box strategy of
which they know little about. For the truly paranoid, you can also require an
ever-changing password that depends on the current time to start a program.

ensuring that no high-frequency trading can be done. Even if your brokerage has order confirmation latency below 10 ms, or if they allow
you to have direct market access to the exchanges so you get your order
status confirmation directly from the exchanges, you would still need
to colocate your program with either your broker in the former case,
or with the exchange in the latter case.
Practically any software program (other than Excel running with a
VB macro) takes less than 10 ms to submit a new order after receiving
the latest market data and order status updates, so software or hardware
latency is usually not the bottleneck for high-frequency trading, unless
you are using one program to monitor thousands of symbols. (Concerning this last point, see Box 1.3 for issues related to multithreading.) But
backtesting a high-frequency strategy is entirely a different matter. To do
this, you will be required to input many months of tick data (trades and
quotes), maybe on many symbols, into the backtesting platform. Worse,
sometimes you have to input level 2 quotes, too. Just the quantity of

BOX 1.3

Multithreading and High-Frequency Trading of Multiple Symbols
Multithreading for a trading platform means that it can respond to multiple
events (usually the arrival of a new tick) simultaneously. This is particularly
important if the program trades multiple symbols simultaneously, which is
often the case for a stock-trading program. You certainly don’t want your buy
order for AAPL to be delayed just because the program is deciding whether to
sell BBRY! If you write your own stand-alone trading program using a modern
programming language such as Java or Python, you won’t have any problem
with multithreading because this ability is native to such languages. However,
if you use MATLAB, you will need to purchase the Parallel Computing Toolbox
as well; otherwise, there is no multithreading. (Even if you purchase that
Toolbox, you are limited to 12 independent threads, hardly enough to trade
500 stocks simultaneously!) But do not confuse the lack of multithreading
in MATLAB with the “loss of ticks.” If you write two “listeners,” A and B, in
MATLAB to receive tick data from two separate symbols, because the fact
that listener A is busy processing a tick-triggered event doesn’t mean that
listener B is “deaf.” Once listener A has finished processing, listener B will
start to process those tick events that it has received while A was busy, with
no lost ticks (Kuznetsov, 2010).

35
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

data will overwhelm the memory of most machines, if they are not handled in special ways (such as using parallel computing algorithms). Most
special-purpose backtesting platforms are not designed to be especially
intelligent when handling this quantity of data, and most of them are not
equipped at all to backtest data with all of bid/ask/last tick prices (and
sizes) nor level 2 quotes either. So backtesting a high-frequency strategy
usually requires that you write your own stand-alone program with special customization. Actually, backtesting a high-frequency strategy may
not tell you much about its real-life profitability anyway because of the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle that I mentioned before.
Besides high-frequency trading, news-driven trading often causes all
but the top-end special-purpose platforms to stumble. News-driven
trading by definition requires as input a machine-readable news feed.
Most special-purpose platforms do not have this capability, and neither
do most open-source IDEs. Exceptions include Progress Apama, which
incorporates both Dow Jones and Reuters machine-readable news feed,
and Deltix, which integrates Ravenpack’s News Sentiment data feed.
Among IDE’s, Marketcetera offers a newsfeed from benzinga.com
(which is unlikely to match the speed of delivery of Bloomberg, Dow
Jones, and Reuters). If you are writing your own stand-alone trading

program, you have the flexibility of connecting to these news feed either using the news provider’s API (e.g., both Dow Jones and Thomson
Reuters have made available their machine-readable news through an
API) or simply read a news XML file ftp’ed to your hard-drive periodically by the news provider. If you are news trading at high frequency, the
former expensive solution is an absolute necessity. Otherwise, there are
much more affordable solutions from vendors such as Newsware. I will
discuss more on the topic of event-driven trading in Chapter 7.

Does the Platform Have Complex
Event Processing?

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

36

Complex event processing (CEP) is a fashionable term to describe a program
responding to an event instantaneously and taking appropriate action. The
events that concern us are usually the arrival of a new tick, or the delivery
of a news item. For an algorithmic trader, one important point is that the
program is event driven, and not bar driven. That is, the program does not
go poll prices or news items at the end of each bar and then decide what to
do. Because CEP is event driven, there is no delay between the occurrence
of an event and the response to it.
If instantaneity is the only strength of CEP, then we can just use the socalled callback functions that almost every brokerage API provides. A callback function is also triggered whenever a new tick or news item arrives,
and based on this new data we can perform all kinds of computations and
determine whether to submit an order. This is easy when the rule required
is simply “moving average of the price over the last hour.”
But what if the rules are “complex,” such as “sell when the order flow in
the last half hour is positive, the price is above the moving average, the volatility is low, and an important news item just arrived”?
What if the rule involves many clauses like during, between, afterwards, in
parallel when applied to the sequence of events? According to CEP aficionados,
it is much more succinct to express these complicated rules using a CEP language than a traditional programming language. But what about the argument
that trading rules should be simple to avoid data-snooping bias? Their answer
is that they are not data mining the data to find arbitrary rules, but simply
implementing rules that seasoned traders already know are profitable. I am not
entirely convinced by their arguments, but if you are, you should know that
Progress Apama mentioned above is distinguished by their CEP technology.
Certain free, open-source IDEs have CEP, too, as you can see from Table 1.2.

KEY POINTS
• Backtesting is useless if it is not predictive of future performance of a
strategy, but pitfalls in backtesting will decrease its predictive power.
• Eliminating pitfalls:
• A platform that uses the same program for both backtesting and live
executions can eliminate look-ahead bias.
• Out-of-sample testing, cross-validation, and high Sharpe ratios are
all good practices for reducing data-snooping bias, but none is more
definitive than walk-forward testing.
• Simple models are a simple cure for data-snooping bias.
• “Why did my model generate a ‘short’ signal for THQI on 2012/7/9? Oh,
that’s because I forgot to adjust its historical prices for a 1:10 reverse
stock split!”
• “Did your model just buy the stock CMC? Are you sure it didn’t forget to
adjust its historical prices because today is its ex-date for dividends?”
• “I see that your model is long only. Did you make sure your data don’t
have survivorship bias?”
• “The backtest of your mean-reverting stock-trading model using closing
prices is excellent, but expect a deflation of the results if you test it again
using primary exchange data.”

• “This high-frequency stock-trading model looks good on backtest, but I
wonder if it incorporated uptick rules for their short trades.”
• “Your futures calendar spread model uses the differences in price to form
the spread. Why are you back-adjusting your prices using returns gap?”
• “Why is it that my mean-reverting intraday futures spread performed so
well in backtest but so poorly in live trading? Oh, I should have used tickbased instead of bar-based data for my backtest.”
• “Your backtest of this momentum strategy seems to be without any
pitfalls. But just because it performed well before 2008 doesn’t mean it
will perform well afterward.”
• Statistical significance of backtests:
• “What do you mean by saying that the expected APR of this strategy is
10 percent and is statistically significant to within 1 percent?” Answer:
“It means by running the strategy on 10,000 simulated price series with
the same length and the same first three moments as the historical price
series, there are only 100 sample series where the APR is equal to or
greater than 10 percent.”
(Continued )

37
BACKTESTING AND AUTOMATED EXECUTION

• “Your model performed brilliantly during November 2008. But did it short
a lot of financial stocks back then? Don’t forget that short sales of those
stocks were banned.”

• “What do you mean by saying that the expected APR of this strategy is
10 percent and is statistically significant to within 1 percent?” Alternative
answer: “It means by randomizing the entry dates of my trades, there is
only 1 in 100 random permutations where the APR is equal to or greater
than 10 percent.”
• Which backtest platform to pick?
• “I am a brilliant mathematician starting a fund with $50 million to invest,
but I don’t know how to program. What trading platform should I use?”
Pick an institutional special-purpose platform like Deltix, QuantHouse,
Progress Apama, or RTD Tango.
• “I am an experienced, discretionary, independent trader, and I want to
automate my strategies. What trading platform should I use?” Pick a retail
special-purpose platform like MetaTrader, NinjaTrader, Trading Blox, or
TradeStation.
• “I am a quant who is great with strategy research using MATLAB.
But how should I implement these strategies and go ‘live’?” Try
exchangeapi.com’s quant2ib API for Interactive Brokers, quant2tt for
Trading Technologies, www.pracplay.com for other brokers, or MATFIX for
FIX connections.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

38

• “I am a good C++, C#, and Java programmer, but I hate dealing with
low-level connections to the brokerage, and I hate having to rewrite my
connections every time I change brokers.” Try one of the IDEs such as
Marketcetera, TradeLink, AlgoTrader, or ActiveQuant.
• Automating executions:
• “I want to colocate my trading program at a data center to reduce my
order confirmation latency below 10 ms.” Are you sure your broker has an
order confirmation latency shorter than 10 ms?
• “I am colocated at Amazon’s EC2. Market data fed to my trading
programs should be much more up-to-date than getting them at my
desktop PC.” Not necessarily: EC2’s server may be farther away (in
Internet distance) from your broker’s data server than your desktop PC.
• “I am using MATLAB’s Parallel Computing Toolbox, and I run my
program on a GPU. Therefore, I can trade all 500 stocks in the SPX
simultaneously.” Even with MATLAB’s Parallel Computing Toolbox, you
are limited to handling 12 stocks simultaneously. Writing your own Java
or Python program will allow true multithreading on a graphics processing
unit (GPU).
• “My IDE isn’t CEP enabled. I can’t really run a tick-based trading
strategy.” Even platforms that are not CEP enabled often have callback
functions that enable your program to be triggered by ticks.

CHAPTER 2

The Basics of
Mean Reversion
W

hether we realize it or not, nature is filled with examples of mean
reversion. Figure 2.1 shows the water level of the Nile from 622 ad
to 1284 ad, clearly a mean-reverting time series. Mean reversion is equally
prevalent in the social sciences. Daniel Kahneman cited a famous example:
the “Sports Illustrated jinx,” which is the claim that “an athlete whose picture
appears on the cover of the magazine is doomed to perform poorly the following season” (Kahneman, 2011). The scientific reason is that an athlete’s
performance can be thought of as randomly distributed around a mean, so
an exceptionally good performance one year (which puts the athlete on the
cover of Sports Illustrated) is very likely to be followed by performances that
are closer to the average.
Is mean reversion also prevalent in financial price series? If so, our lives as
traders would be very simple and profitable! All we need to do is to buy low
(when the price is below the mean), wait for reversion to the mean price,
and then sell at this higher price, all day long. Alas, most price series are
not mean reverting, but are geometric random walks. The returns, not the
prices, are the ones that usually randomly distribute around a mean of zero.
Unfortunately, we cannot trade on the mean reversion of returns. (One
should not confuse mean reversion of returns with anti-serial-correlation
of returns, which we can definitely trade on. But anti-serial-correlation of
returns is the same as the mean reversion of prices.) Those few price series
that are found to be mean reverting are called stationary, and in this chapter
we will describe the statistical tests (ADF test and the Hurst exponent and
Variance Ratio test) for stationarity. There are not too many prefabricated

39

FIGURE 2.1 Minimum Water Levels of the Nile River, 622–1284 ad

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

40
prices series that are stationary. By prefabricated I meant those price series
that represent assets traded in the public exchanges or markets.
Fortunately, we can manufacture many more mean-reverting price series
than there are traded assets because we can often combine two or more
individual price series that are not mean reverting into a portfolio whose
net market value (i.e., price) is mean reverting. Those price series that can
be combined this way are called cointegrating, and we will describe the
statistical tests (CADF test and Johansen test) for cointegration, too. Also,
as a by-product of the Johansen test, we can determine the exact weightings
of each asset in order to create a mean reverting portfolio. Because of this
possibility of artificially creating stationary portfolios, there are numerous
opportunities available for mean reversion traders.
As an illustration of how easy it is to profit from mean-reverting price
series, I will also describe a simple linear trading strategy, a strategy that is
truly “parameterless.”
One clarification: The type of mean reversion we will look at in this chapter may be called time series mean reversion because the prices are supposed
to be reverting to a mean determined by its own historical prices. The tests

and trading strategies that I depict in this chapter are all tailored to time series mean reversion. There is another kind of mean reversion, called “crosssectional” mean reversion. Cross-sectional mean reversion means that the
cumulative returns of the instruments in a basket will revert to the cumulative return of the basket. This also implies that the short-term relative returns of the instruments are serially anticorrelated. (Relative return of an
instrument is the return of that instrument minus the return of the basket.)
Since this phenomenon occurs most often for stock baskets, we will discuss
how to take advantage of it in Chapter 4 when we discuss mean-reverting
strategies for stocks and ETFs.
■ Mean Reversion and Stationarity
