
XXII

Clifton P. Kane was the head of a prosperous commission
house with branches in eleven cities and customers by the
hundreds. His firm had acted as managers for more than
one pool in the past.
Senator Gordon, who held seventy thousand shares, was
an exceedingly wealthy man. His name was as familiar to
the readers of the metropolitan press as though he had
been sued for breach of promise by a sixteen-year-old
manicurist possessing a five-thousand-dollar mink coat
and one hundred and thirty-two letters from the
defendant. He had started his nephews in business as
brokers and he was a special partner in their firm. He had
been in dozens of pools. He had inherited a large interest
in the Midland Stove Company and he got one hundred
thousand shares of Consolidated Stove for it. He had been
carrying enough to disregard Jim Barnes' wild bull tips
and had cashed in on thirty thousand shares before the
market petered out on him. He told a friend later that he
would have sold more only the other big holders, who were
old and intimate friends, pleaded with him not to sell any
more, and out of regard for them he stopped. Besides
which, as I said, he had no market to unload on.
The third man was Joshua Wolff. He was probably the
best known of all the traders. For twenty years everybody
had known him as one of the plungers on the floor. In
bidding up stocks or offering them down he had few
equals, for ten or twenty thousand shares meant no more
to him than two or three hundred. Before I came to New
York I had heard of him as a plunger. He was then trailing
with a sporting coterie that played a no limit game,
whether on the race track or in the stock market.
They used to accuse him of being nothing but a
gambler, but he had real ability and a strongly developed
aptitude for the speculative game. At the same time his
reputed indifference to highbrow pursuits made him the
hero of numberless anecdotes. One of the most widely
circulated of the yarns was that Joshua was a guest at what
313

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

he called a swell dinner and by some oversight of the
hostess several of the other guests began to discuss
literature before they could be stopped. A girl who sat next
to Josh and had not heard him use his mouth except for
masticating purposes, turned to him and looking anxious
to hear the great financier's opinion asked him, "Oh, Mr.
Wolff, what do you think of Balzac?"
Josh politely ceased to masticate, swallowed and
answered, "I never trade in them Curb stocks!"
Such were the three largest individual holders of
Consolidated Stove. When they came over to see me I told
them that if they formed a syndicate to put up some cash
and gave me a call on their stock at a little above the
market I would do what I could to make a market. They
promptly asked me how much money would be required.
I answered, "You've had that stock a long time and you
can't do a thing with it. Between the three of you you've got
two hundred thousand shares, and you know very well that
you haven't the slightest chance of getting rid of it unless
you make a market for it. It's got to be some market to
absorb what you've got to give it, and it will be wise to have
enough cash to pay for whatever stock it may be necessary
to buy at first. It's no use to begin and then have to stop
because there isn't enough money. I suggest that you form
a syndicate and raise six millions in cash. Then give the
syndicate a call on your two hundred thousand shares at
$40 and put all your stock in escrow. If everything goes
well you chaps will get rid of your dead pet and the
syndicate will make some money."
As I told you before, there had been all sorts of rumours
about my stock-market winnings. I suppose that helped,
for nothing succeeds like success. At all events, I didn't
have to do much explaining to these chaps. They knew
exactly how far they'd get if they tried to play a lone hand.
They thought mine was a good plan. When they went away
they said they would form the syndicate at once.
314

XXII

They didn't have much trouble in inducing a lot of their
friends to join them. I suppose they spoke with more
assurance than I had of the syndicate's profits. From all I
heard they really believed it, so theirs were no
conscienceless tips. At all events the syndicate was formed
in a couple of days. Kane, Gordon and Wolff gave calls on
the two hundred thousand shares at $40 and I saw to it
that the stock itself was put in escrow, so that none of it
would come out on the market if I should put up the price.
I had to protect myself. More than one promising deal has
failed to pan out as expected because the members of the
pool or clique failed to keep faith with one another. Dog
has no foolish prejudices against eating dog in Wall Street.
At the time the second American Steel and Wire Company
was brought out the insiders accused one another of
breach of faith and trying to unload. There had been a
gentlemen's agreement between John W. Gates and his
pals and the Seligmans and their banking associates. Well,
I heard somebody in a broker's office reciting this
quatrain, which was said to have been composed by John
W. Gates:
The tarantula jumped on the centipede's back and
chortled with ghoulish glee:
"I'll poison this murderous son of a gun. If I don't he'll
poison me!"
Mind you, I do not mean for one moment to imply that
any of my friends in Wall Street would even dream of
double-crossing me in a stock deal. But on general
principles it is just as well to provide for any and all
contingencies. It's plain sense.
After Wolff and Kane and Gordon told me that they had
formed their syndicate to put up six millions in cash there
was nothing for me to do but wait for the money to come
in. I had urged the vital need of haste. Nevertheless the
money came in driblets. I think it took four or five

315

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

installments. I don't know what the reason was, but I
remember that I had to send out an S O S call to Wolff and
Kane and Gordon.
That afternoon I got some big checks that brought the
cash in my possession to about four million dollars and the
promise of the rest in a day or two. It began at last to look
as though the syndicate might do something before the
bull market passed away. At best it would be no cinch, and
the sooner I began work the better. The public had not
been particularly keen about new market movements in
inactive stocks. But a man could do a great deal to arouse
interest in any stock with four millions in cash. It was
enough to absorb all the probable offerings. If time urged,
as I had said, there was no sense in waiting for the other
two millions. The sooner the stock got up to $50 the better
for the syndicate. That was obvious.
The next morning at the opening I was surprised to see
that there were unusually heavy dealings in Consolidated
Stove. As I told you before, the stock had been waterlogged
for months. The price had been pegged at $37, Jim Barnes
taking good care not to let it go any lower on account of
the big bank loan at $35. But as for going any higher, he'd
as soon expect to see the Rock of Gibraltar shimmying
across the Strait as to see Consolidated Stove do any
climbing on the tape.
Well, sir, this morning there was quite a demand for the
stock, and the price went up to $39. In the first hour of the
trading the transactions were heavier than for the whole
previous half year. It was the sensation of the day and
affected bullishly the entire market. I heard afterwards
that nothing else was talked about in the customers' rooms
of the commission houses.
I didn't know what it meant, but it didn't hurt my
feelings any to see Consolidated Stove perk up. As a rule I
do not have to ask about any unusual movement in any
stock because my friends on the floor brokers who do
business for me, as well as personal friends among the
316

XXII

room traders—keep me posted. They assume I'd like to
know and they telephone me any news or gossip they pick
up. On this day all I heard was that there was
unmistakable inside buying in Consolidated Stove. There
wasn't any washing. It was all genuine. The purchasers
took all the offerings from $37 to $39 and when
importuned for reasons or begged for a tip, flatly refused
to give any. This made the wily and watchful traders
conclude that there was something doing; something big.
When a stock goes up on buying by insiders who refuse to
encourage the world at large to follow suit the ticker
hounds begin to wonder aloud when the official notice will
be given out.
I didn't do anything myself. I watched and wondered
and kept track of the transactions.
But on the next day the buying was not only greater in
volume but more aggressive in character. The selling
orders that had been on the specialists' books for months
at above the pegged price of $37 were absorbed without
any trouble, and not enough new selling orders came in to
check the rise. Naturally, up went the price. It crossed $40.
Presently it touched $42.
The moment it touched that figure I felt that I was
justified in starting to sell the stock the bank held as
collateral. Of course I figured that the price would go down
on my selling, but if my average on the entire line was $37
I'd have no fault to find. I knew what the stock was worth
and I had gathered some idea of the vendibility from the
months of inactivity. Well, sir, I let them have stock
carefully until I had got rid of thirty thousand shares. And
the advance was not checked!
That afternoon I was told the reason for that opportune
but mystifying rise. It seems that the floor traders had
been tipped off after the close the night before and also the
next morning before the opening, that I was bullish as
blazes on Consolidated Stove and was going to rush the
price right up fifteen or twenty points without a reaction,
317

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

as was my custom that is, my custom according to people
who never kept my books. The tipster in chief was no less a
personage than Joshua Wolff. It was his own inside buying
that started the rise of the day before. His cronies among
the floor traders were only too willing to follow his tip, for
he knew too much to give wrong steers to his fellows.
As a matter of fact, there was not so much stock
pressing on the market as had been feared. Consider that I
had tied up three hundred thousand shares and you will
realise that the old fears had been well founded. It now
proved less of a job than I had anticipated to put up the
stock. After all, Governor Flower was right. Whenever he
was accused of manipulating his firm's specialties, like
Chicago Gas, Federal Steel or B. R. T., he used to say: "The
only way I know of making a stock go up is to buy it." That
also was the floor traders' only way, and the price
responded.
On the next day, before breakfast, I read in the morning
papers what was read by thousands and what undoubtedly
was sent over the wires to hundreds of branches and outof-town offices, and that was that Larry Livingston was
about to begin active bull operations in Consolidated
Stove. The additional details differed. One version had it
that I had formed an insiders' pool and was going to
punish the overextended short interest. Another hinted at
dividend announcements in the near future. Another
reminded the world that what I usually did to a stock I was
bullish on was something to remember. Still another
accused the company of concealing its assets in order to
permit accumulation by insiders. And all of them agreed
that the rise hadn't fairly started.
By the time I reached my office and read my mail before
the market opened I was made aware that the Street was
flooded with red-hot tips to buy Consolidated Stove at
once. My telephone bell kept ringing and the clerk who
answered the calls heard the same question asked in one
form or another a hundred times that morning: Was it true
318

XXII

that Consolidated Stove was going up? I must say that
Joshua Wolff and Kane and Gordon and possibly Jim
Barnes handled that little tipping job mighty well.
I had no idea that I had such a following. Why, that
morning the buying orders came in from all over the
country orders to buy thousands of shares of a stock that
nobody wanted at any price three days before. And don't
forget that, as a matter of fact, all that the public had to go
by was my newspaper reputation as a successful plunger;
something for which I had to thank an imaginative
reporter or two.
Well, sir, on that, the third day of the rise, I sold
Consolidated Stove; and on the fourth day and the fifth;
and the first thing I knew I had sold for Jim Barnes the
one hundred thousand shares of stock which the Marshall
National Bank held as collateral on the three-million-fivehundred-thousand-dollar loan that needed paying off. If
the most successful manipulation consists of that in which
the desired end is gained at the least possible cost to the
manipulator, the Consolidated Stove deal is by all means
the most successful of my Wall Street career. Why, at no
time did I have to take any stock. I didn't have to buy first
in order to sell the more easily later on. I did not put up
the price to the highest possible point and then begin my
real selling. I didn't even do my principal selling on the
way down, but on the way up. It was like a dream of
Paradise to find an adequate buying power created for you
without your stirring a finger to bring it about, particularly
when you were in a hurry. I once heard a friend of
Governor Flower's say that in one of the great bull-leader's
operations for the account of a pool in B. R. T. the pool
sold fifty thousand shares of the stock at a profit, but
Flower & Co. got commissions on more than two hundred
and fifty thousand shares and W. P. Hamilton says that to
distribute two hundred and twenty thousand shares of
Amalgamated Copper, James R. Keene must have traded
in at least seven hundred thousand shares of the stock
319

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

during the necessary manipulation. Some commission bill!
Think of that and then consider that the only commissions
that I had to pay were the commissions on the one
hundred thousand shares I actually sold for Jim Barnes. I
call that some saving.
Having sold what I had engaged to sell for my friend
Jim, and all the money the syndicate had agreed to raise
not having been sent in, and feeling no desire to buy back
any of the stock I had sold, I rather think I went away
somewhere for a short vacation. I do not remember
exactly. But I do remember very well that I let the stock
alone and that it was not long before the price began to
sag. One day, when the entire market was weak, some
disappointed bull wanted to get rid of his Consolidated
Stove in a hurry, and on his offerings the stock broke
below the call price, which was $40. Nobody seemed to
want any of it. As I told you before, I wasn't bullish on the
general situation and that made me more grateful than
ever for the miracle that had enabled me to dispose of the
one hundred thousand shares without having to put the
price up twenty or thirty points in a week, as the kindly
tipsters had prophesied.
Finding no support, the price developed a habit of
declining regularly until one day it broke rather badly and
touched $32. That was the lowest that had ever been
recorded for it, for, as you will remember, Jim Barnes and
the original syndicate had pegged it at $37 in order not to
have their one hundred thousand shares dumped on the
market by the bank.
I was in my office that day peacefully studying the tape
when Joshua Wolff was announced. I said I would see him.
He rushed in. He is not a very large man, but he certainly
seemed all swelled up with anger, as I instantly discovered.
He ran to where I stood by the ticker and yelled, "Hey?
What the devil's the matter?"
"Have a chair, Mr. Wolff," I said politely and sat down
myself to encourage him to talk calmly.
320

XXII

"I don't want any chair! I want to know what it means!"
he cried at the top of his voice.
"What does what mean?"
"What in hell are you doing to it?"
"What am I doing to what?"
"That stock! That stock!"
"What stock?" I asked him.
But that only made him see red, for he shouted,
"Consolidated Stove! What are you doing to it?"
"Nothing! Absolutely nothing. What's wrong?" I said.
He stared at me fully five seconds before he exploded:
"Look at the price! Look at it!"
He certainly was angry. So I got up and looked at the
tape.
I said, "The price of it is now 31-¼."
"Yeh! Thirty-one and a quarter, and I've got a raft of it."
"I know you have sixty thousand shares. You have had it
a long time, because when you originally bought your Gray
Stove "
But he didn't let me finish. He said, "But I bought a lot
more. Some of it cost me as high as 40! And I've got it yet!"
He was glaring at me so hostilely that I said, "I didn't
tell you to buy it."
"You didn't what?"
"I didn't tell you to load up with it."
"I didn't say you did. But you were going to put it up "
"Why was I?" I interrupted. He looked at me, unable to
speak for anger. When he found his voice again, he said,
"You were going to put it up. You had the money to buy it."
"Yes. But I didn't buy a share," I told him.
That was the last straw.
"You didn't buy a share, and you had over four millions
in cash to buy with? You didn't buy any?"
"Not a share!" I repeated.
He was so mad by now that he couldn't talk plainly.
Finally he managed to say, "What kind of a game do you
call that?"
321

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

He was inwardly accusing me of all sorts of unspeakable
crimes. I sure could see a long list of them in his eyes. It
made me say to him: "What you really mean to ask me,
Wolff, is, why I didn't buy from you above $50 the stock
you bought below $40. Isn't that it?"
"No, it isn't. You had a call at $40 and four millions in
cash to put up the price with."
"Yes, but I didn't touch the money and the syndicate has
not lost a cent by my operations."
"Look here, Livingston" he began. But I didn't let him
say any more.
"You listen to me, Wolff. You knew that the two
hundred thousand shares you and Gordon and Kane held
were tied up, and that there wouldn't be an awful lot of
floating stock to come on the market if I put up the price,
as I'd have to do for two reasons: The first to make a
market for the stock; and the second to make a profit out
of the call at $40. But you weren't satisfied to get $40 for
the sixty thousand shares you'd been lugging for months
or with your share of the syndicate profits, if any; so you
decided to take on a lot of stock under $40 to unload on
me when I put the price up with the syndicate's money, as
you were sure I meant to do. You'd buy before I did and
you'd unload before I did; in all probability I'd be the one
to unload on. I suspect you figured on my having to put the
price up to $60. It was such a cinch that you probably
bought ten thousand shares strictly for unloading
purposes, and to make sure somebody held the bag if I
didn't, you tipped off everybody in the United States,
Canada and Mexico without thinking of my added
difficulties. All your friends knew what I was supposed to
do. Between their buying and mine you were going to be
all hunky. Well, your intimate friends to whom you gave
the tip passed it on to their friends after they had bought
their lines, and the third stratum of tip-takers planned to
supply the fourth, fifth and possibly sixth strata of suckers,
so that when I finally came to do some selling I'd find
322

XXII

myself anticipated by a few thousands of wise speculators.
It was a friendly thought, that notion of yours, Wolff. You
can't imagine how surprised I was when Consolidated
Stove began to go up before I even thought of buying a
single share; or how grateful, either, when the
underwriting syndicate sold one hundred thousand shares
around $40 to the people who were going to sell those
same shares to me at $50 or $60. I sure was a sucker not
to use the four millions to make money for them, wasn't I?
The cash was supplied to buy stock with, but only if I
thought it necessary to do so. Well,I didn't."
Joshua had been in Wall Street long enough not to let
anger interfere with business. He cooled off as he heard
me, and when I was through talking he said in a friendly
tone of voice, "Look here, Larry, old chap, what shall we
do?"
"Do whatever you please."
"Aw, be a sport. What would you do if you were in our
place?"
"If I were in your place," I said solemnly, "do you know
what I'd do?"
"What?"
"I'd sell out!" I told him.
He looked at me a moment, and without another word
turned on his heel and walked out of my office. He's never
been in it since.
Not long after that, Senator Gordon also called. He, too,
was quite peevish and blamed me for their troubles. Then
Kane joined the anvil chorus. They forgot that their stock
had been unsalable in bulk when they formed the
syndicate. All they could remember was that I didn't sell
their holdings when I had the syndicate's millions and the
stock was active at $44, and that now it was $30 and dull
as dishwater. To their way of thinking I should have sold
out at a good fat profit.

323

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Of course they also cooled down in due time. The
syndicate wasn't out a cent and the main problem
remained unchanged: to sell their stock. A day or two later
they came back and asked me to help them out. Gordon
was particularly insistent, and in the end I made them put
in their pooled stock at 25-¼.
My fee for my services was to be one-half of whatever I
got above that figure. The last sale had been at about $30.
There I was with their stock to liquidate. Given general
market conditions and specifically the behaviour of
Consolidated Stove, there was only one way to do it, and
that was, of course, to sell on the way down and without
first trying to put up the price, and I certainly would have
got stock by the ream on the way up. But on the way down
I could reach those buyers who always argue that a stock is
cheap when it sells fifteen or twenty points below the top
of the movement, particularly when that top is a matter of
recent history. A rally is due, in their opinion. After seeing
Consolidated Stove sell up to close to $44 it sure looked
like a good thing below $30.
It worked out as always. Bargain hunters bought it in
sufficient volume to enable me to liquidate the pool's
holdings. But do you think that Gordon or Wolff or Kane
felt any gratitude? Not a bit of it. They are still sore at me,
or so their friends tell me. They often tell people how I did
them. They cannot forgive me for not putting up the price
on myself, as they expected.
As a matter of fact I never would have been able to sell
the bank's hundred thousand shares if Wolff and the rest
had not passed around those red-hot bull tips of theirs. If I
had worked as I usually do—that is, in a logical natural
way I would have had to take whatever price I could get. I
told you we ran into a declining market. The only way to
sell on such a market is to sell not necessarily recklessly
but really regardless of price. No other way was possible,
but I suppose they do not believe this. They are still angry.
I am not. Getting angry doesn't get a man anywhere. More
324
