
Poor Strategy
The fact that forex is a zero-sum game is clearly a liability, but from another
perspective, this reality can also be viewed as a plus. Simply, there is always
the possibility of generating profits, regardless of the current market
environment. The failure to do so may imply faults in your trading strategy.
After excessive leverage (a pitfall that will be reiterated in Chapter 11), the
biggest strategic mistake committed by novice traders is overtrading. In fact,
overtrading can bring to mind any number of related mistakes. Scalping,
opening and closing positions too quickly without adequate thought and
preparation, immediately comes to mind. Another example is trading too
many positions at the same time. Regardless, quantity is not a substitute for
quality. Increasing the size, frequency, and diversity of your trades is a recipe
for disaster, not profits. In addition, while trading different currency pairs
simultaneously as part of a broad-based strategy can reflect savvyness, it also
exudes foolishness. When you first begin trading, stick to a handful of
currency pairs and try to hold each position for a sustained period of time. If
you find that you are able to manage multiple positions without becoming
schizophrenic, then you can allow yourself greater latitude. Finally, there is
no rule that says you need to be in the market at all times. If the market is
gyrating wildly or your strategy is not producing any clear signals, consider
staying on the sidelines and playing the waiting game.
The next strategic pitfall that stymies many beginner traders involves an
overreliance on someone else’s strategy. Especially when you are first
starting out, you may be enticed by advertisements that promote managed

233

234

Chapter 10 | Pitfalls and Risks
accounts, signal services, and robots, because of the fantastic profits that they
promote. In my opinion, you should view such promises skeptically; if it
seems too good to be true, it probably is. Ask yourself: Why would someone
with a profitable trading system sell it to the public when he could just as
easily keep it—and the chestful of profits that it purportedly generates—to
himself? In short, blindly using systems that trade for you or merely provide
trading ideas are not recommended. If you want to be a successful trader, you
need to educate yourself and practice. If you aren’t confident enough or
comfortable with the risks to trade on your own, buy a managed or passive
ETF or mutual fund. It’s that simple.
The same goes for the thousands of technical reports and free signals that are
published by most forex portals and forex brokers on an intraday basis. For
novice traders, there is a real danger of information overload. These reports
may contain a few nuggets of wisdom but probably also contain a handful of
haphazard stabs and filler. Treat these ideas as you would any other source of
information, as mere factors in your overall trading strategy. Before trading
on the tips of others—regardless of their credentials—scrutinize them closely
and backtest whenever possible.
As Albert Einstein once said, “the important thing is not to stop questioning.”
While this advice probably wasn’t in reference to forex strategy, the fact
remains that a diligent, probing trader is a good trader. Market conditions are
always changing, and so should your strategy continue to evolve. I
mentioned earlier that I have interviewed many professional traders that
recorded their most profitable trades during the credit crisis, a period when
the markets went haywire and all previous trading wisdom was thrown out
the window. Forget trading signals and robots. Ask them what their secret
was, and they will tell you that the years they spent educating themselves and
trading beforehand enabled them to accurately and confidently assess the
prevailing conditions—whatever they may be—and to trade accordingly.

Forex Addiction
Many of the pitfalls that I discussed above are merely a manifestation of an
underlying disorder: forex addiction. I’m not using this term tongue-incheek. Trading forex (or any other security, for that matter) has many
properties that make it addictive: immersive environment, fast pace, large
amounts of money on the line, and so forth. For those that are looking for an
escape from the daily rigors of life, stimulation in an otherwise dull routine,

Forex for Beginners
or a vehicle for diverting compulsive gambling tendencies, forex offers an
easy outlet. It’s available 24 hours a day from the privacy and convenience of
your home. Best of all, it’s completely legal.
Sadly, if and when you reach the point of actual addiction, it will already be
too late. You will have ceased being accountable, even to yourself. You will
trade compulsively and randomly, over very short time periods. You will
trade with ever increasing amounts of money (and leverage), even as your
account balance dwindles. You will become irrationally hopeful that a big
win is just around the corner and fail to heed the warning signs and learning
opportunities that come with losing trades. You probably won’t quit until
your account balance falls below the sanctioned minimum or you have
mentally hit rock bottom, or both.
There are a handful of steps that you can take to avoid becoming addicted to
forex. First of all, limit the amount of time that you spend trading forex or
even thinking about forex. Make an effort to trade over longer time frames
and, in turn, make fewer overall trades. Don’t trade in thin markets, and don’t
feel compelled to have an open position(s) at all times. Spend more time
doing research and planning strategy than executing trades. Try to set
reasonable trading goals and quash any hopes of windfall profits and
fabulous wealth. Approach forex from the standpoint that it is a
business—not a game.
If you can’t sleep at night because you are mulling your losses, if you feel
compelled to monitor all of your open positions in real-time, if you find that
your trading habits are becoming less disciplined and more idealistic, you
should take some time off. In the end, if you ever reach the point where you
depend on forex for your emotional well-being, you need to walk away
and/or seek professional help.

Broker/Credit Risk
The next category of risk that I want to elucidate is not as easy to hedge:
broker risk. Bank accountholders have the FDIC. Equity traders are
guaranteed recourse by the Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC)
and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). If HSBC or E*Trade
went bankrupt tomorrow, the US government would by and large protect
your money and investments.

235

236

Chapter 10 | Pitfalls and Risks
Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for forex, which lacks a centralized
marketplace and a clearinghouse (for retail trades). You must simply put
your trust in the integrity of your broker and hope that the execution prices
that you receive are fair and in line with actual market movements.
Since the financial crisis, the NFA has made great strides in regulating the
forex industry. All brokers are held to strict standards and must meet specific
registered capital thresholds. Complainants are finding that restitution is
forthcoming in cases of clear malpractice. Still, the fact that such malpractice
remains rampant speaks volumes about the state of the industry. Lawsuits
have alleged flagrant improprieties that strike at the very core of the way in
which forex brokers operate. Spreads are still somewhat arbitrary, and
execution is far from transparent, even among the most reputable brokers.
Liquidity may dry up during news releases, and slippage (in which orders are
filled at prices worse than indicated quotes) is common, even among
reputable brokers. If your broker declares bankruptcy, you will simply have
to get in line with everyone else as an unsecured creditor and pray for the
return of the funds in your account. It doesn’t exactly inspire confidence that,
in their risk disclaimers, most brokers won’t even vouch for the information
on their own websites and that they disavow all responsibility for the
repercussions of any inaccuracies.
Among unregistered and offshore brokers, the situation is almost certainly
worse. They probably engage in front-running (by trading their own accounts
in advance of your orders) and may even manipulate trading, targeting your
stop levels in order to lock in your losses. Given the abundance of Ponzi
schemes and other scams that have been uncovered in the financial industry
since 2008, it wouldn’t surprise me if certain unregistered brokers were also
bucket shops, pretending to execute orders without actually doing so. With
these brokers, you will find that it is easy to deposit funds but nearly
impossible to withdraw them.
At least there are now established channels for seeking redress in cases of
broker malfeasance. If you encounter any questionable activity, the first step
is to contact your broker. If that fails, you should file a formal complaint with
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). The NFA also has an
arbitration program, which has been known to mete out reparations to
wronged accountholders. Even the court system has become amenable to
accountholder rights, as evidenced by several class action lawsuits against
brokers in recent years.

Forex for Beginners
Ultimately, the best way to protect oneself is to open an account with a
registered broker. Beyond that, just try to be vigilant. I know it’s asking a lot
to suggest that in addition to monitoring the markets and plotting strategy,
you should also monitor your broker. If you have the opportunity, check
FXintel.com from time to time to make sure that your broker’s spreads are
consistent with its competitors. If you suspect impropriety, check out some
forex forums (see Appendix) in order to ascertain whether other traders have
similar suspicions. If you are at all uncertain, don’t hesitate to contact your
broker and even the CFTC or NFA if necessary. You’d be surprised that they
care about your opinion.

Online Trading Risk
The final few risks to trading forex are more mundane but no less serious.
First, there is online trading risk. The advantage of trading through an online
platform is convenience. The disadvantage is that when your platform
becomes unavailable, you will be vulnerable to losses. In the event of a
power outage, Internet disruption, or server error, you will be unable to open
new positions or close existing positions electronically. While this sounds
far-fetched, most brokers acknowledge that their platforms crash from time
to time. Mobile trading platforms take convenience to the next level but may
still have some bugs and lack the same array of features offered by your
desktop platform.
As part of your framework for risk management, you should plan for this
possibility. If you have stops in place, you may be unaffected. Either way,
you should make sure that you have your broker’s phone number handy so
that you can make orders by telephone if need be. Make sure that your
Internet connection is stable, and use a surge protector to protect your
computer from electrical disruptions.

Interest Rate/Rollover Risk
Interest rates can strongly affect the profitability of your account. Most
currency pairs are characterized by interest rate differentials, which generate
rollover debits and credits for the position holder. Sometimes these
differentials are quite small (less than 1%), which may be the case when a
pair contains two major currencies. However, differentials can also be quite
large, which is common in pairs that involve emerging currencies. In these

237

238

Chapter 10 | Pitfalls and Risks
cases, rollover may exceed 5% on an annualized basis. If you factor in
hypothetical leverage of 5:1, this would be equivalent to $2,500 per year on a
$10,000 account. Such a windfall would be cause for celebration, as long as
you’ve opened a long position in the currency with the higher interest rate. If
such a large amount of rollover were being subtracted from your account
balance, however, you probably wouldn’t be so happy.
The best way to protect yourself against costly rollover debits is to monitor
them constantly and make sure that you are aware of any interest rate
changes. If you have a long position in a currency pair for which the
differential is negative (or a short position on a pair with a positive
differential), you should make sure you understand the resulting impact on
your account balance. In this case, you will lose money every day that the
pair doesn’t appreciate. On the flipside, you should understand that there is
no free lunch in rollover. The theory of interest rate parity suggests that a
positive interest rate differential (i.e., rollover credit) should eventually be
accompanied by currency depreciation.

Country/Political Risk
The final risk in forex is that the country that prints each currency ultimately
gets to decide how that currency can be exchanged. Governments can and do
manipulate the money supply and impose rules that may be unfavorable to
currency investors. They may engage in policies that spur inflation and
impose capital controls that tax all short-term (currency) speculation. Central
banks may intervene in forex markets without warning, causing exchange
rates to jump by hundreds of PIPs or more. In some cases, there are
difficulties in selling the currency (such as the Chinese yuan), while for other
currencies there are doubts as to whether they will even continue to exist
(namely the euro).
As a retail trader, there really isn’t much that you can do to guard against the
possibility that a currency will structurally depreciate or even disappear.
Instead, pay close attention to political developments and relevant news
releases so that you can anticipate potential changes before they happen. You
may want to (temporarily) avoid dealing with currencies for which there is a
large degree of uncertainty.

Forex for Beginners

Conclusion
As should now be clear, the risks in forex are real and numerous. The
currencies themselves carry risk. Your broker carries risk. The central bank
and monetary authority that issued the currency is a risk. In the end,
however, all of these risks can be alleviated. Ironically, the one liability that
is most difficult for you to hedge against is yourself. In Chapter 11, the final
stop on this educational journey, I will look at this risk in more detail and
offer some guidance on how to maximize your chances of success and avoid
becoming just another sad forex statistic.

239

240

Chapter 10 | Pitfalls and Risks

CHAPTER

11
Successful
Investing
Practical Measures and Intangible
Skills That Distinguish Good
Investors from Bad Traders
It is an incontrovertible fact of forex that the majority of traders lose.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that most traders fail fast and fail big, emptying
their accounts just as quickly as they opened them and moving on to other
pursuits. While this reality is certainly lamentable, it suggests that a select
group of traders must be achieving some degree of consistent success.
In the previous chapter, I offered an overview of the risks that are unique to
currency markets, as well as the accompanying pitfalls that ensnare traders.
In this final section, these pitfalls will be turned on their heads and seen from
the collective standpoint of those that manage to avoid them—and earn
consistent profits doing so.
I will close this saga with a discussion of investor psychology—not the kind
that moves the markets, but the kind that will ultimately impact whether you
win or lose in forex. In the end, it isn’t luck that will see you through your
first day, your first month, and your first year of trading, but discipline and
even a little bit of virtue.

Chapter 11 | Successful Investing

A Final Note on Leverage
I have already gone to great pains to convey the dangers of over-leveraging
your trading account. Spend a few minutes browsing forex chat rooms, and
you will be inundated with horror stories involving too much leverage. Do
not kid yourself into thinking that you will be exceptional. Hedge funds and
banks, with deep pockets and access to inside information, failed en masse
during the credit crisis due in no small part to about 35:1 leverage. Simply, if
you trade with excessive leverage, you will almost certainly come to regret it.
Part of the blame rests with the regulatory authorities and the brokers
themselves for even tempting traders with miniscule margin requirements.
Even at 50:1 (reduced from 200:1), maximum leverage levels are still
inappropriately high. This point is underscored by Table 11-1, which shows
how equity capital declines exponentially with leverage as a result of
consecutive losing trades. Based on these parameters, after eight consecutive
losing trades, your account balance will have slipped by a modest 2%. With
50:1 leverage, however, your account balance would have fallen to 67% of
its original level after only three losing trades. And this assumes that you had
enough sense to cut your losses after a mere decline of 25 PIPs (an
equivalent decline of only 0.25% on a major currency pair)!
Table 11-1. After consecutive 25 PIP losses (on positions involving major currency pairs),
equity capital declines in proportion to leverage.
Leverage
1:1

5:1

10:1

20:1

30:1

40:1

50:1

60:1

70:1

80:1

90:1

100:1

1

99.75

98.75

97.50

95.00

92.50

90.00

87.50

85.00

82.50

80.00

77.50

75.00

2

99.50

97.50

95.00

90.25

85.50

81.00

76.50

72.25

68.00

64.00

60.00

56.25

3

99.25

96.25

92.75

85.75

79.25

73.00

67.00

61.50

56.25

51.25

46.50

42.25

4

99.00

95.00

90.25

81.50

73.25

65.50

58.50

52.25

46.25

41.00

36.00

31.75

5

98.75

94.00

88.00

77.50

67.75

59.00

51.25

44.25

38.25

32.75

28.00

23.75

6

98.50

92.75

86.00

73.50

62.75

53.25

45.00

37.75

31.50

26.25

21.75

17.75

7

98.25

91.50

83.75

69.75

58.00

47.75

39.25

32.00

26.00

21.00

16.75

13.25

8

98.00

90.50

81.75

66.25

53.50

43.00

34.25

27.25

21.50

16.75

13.00

10.00

Remaining Capital (%)

Consecutive Losses

244

As I explained in Chapter 8, there are certainly advantages to trading with
more equity capital. Namely, you won’t need as much leverage, which means
that you can actually do a better job at controlling risk. However, forex is

Forex for Beginners
ultimately a high-risk activity, and you should only invest money that you
can afford to lose. Rather than risk unaffordable losses, you would be wise to
trade a mini or micro account (which require less leverage) until you have a
substantial amount of money saved up and can meet the equity capital
requirements to open a standard account. Remember that minimum balance
and margin requirements are marketing tools that are used by brokers to
generate more business from hacks that really have no business trading forex.
If you only have $50 (the minimum required by some brokers) set aside to
trade forex, do yourself a favor and simply wait.
To drive this point home, let’s look at three hypothetical traders with varying
amounts of trading capital, per Table 11-2. With only $50, Trader A is
limited to a micro account. With $4,000, Trader B opts for a standard
account. With $5,000, Trader C can afford a standard account, but he opts for
the mini account instead. All three traders are new to forex and decide to err
on the side of caution when placing their first order.
Table 11-2. Three hypothetical traders experience varying losses on the same position, as the
result of having selected different account types.

Trader A

Trader B

Trader C

Trading Capital

$50

$4,000

$5,000

Account Type

Micro

Standard

Mini

Minimum Transaction Value

$1,000

$100,000

$10,000

Leverage

20:1

25:1

2:1

100-PIP Loss on Position

($10)

($1,000)

($100)

% Loss of Trading Capital

20.0%

25.0%

2.0%

% of Trading Capital
Remaining

80.0%

75.0%

98.0%

Having opened the same long EUR/USD position, all three traders suffer
losses when the pair declines by 100 PIPs. Despite employing the minimum
amount of leverage required by their account balances, both Trader A and
Trader B experience devastating losses. As a result, they will have to take on
even larger leverage on future trades, and they may never even reach the
breakeven level. Trader C, meanwhile, experienced only modest losses, in
relative terms, and will live to trade again.

245

246

Chapter 11 | Successful Investing

Demo Account
All forex traders (especially those with short time frames) should spend
weeks or months honing their skills and fine-tuning their trading plans with a
demo account. You can test out different strategies and see what works and
what doesn’t. You can experiment with automated trading strategies riskfree. You can implement different kinds of risk-management systems and
gauge their effectiveness.
You should set goals for your demo account and move on to a real account
only upon reaching those goals. For example, only when 7 out of every 10
trades are profitable, or only when you have achieved a monthly return of
5%, or only after you are consistently clearing 100 PIPs per winning trade
will you allow yourself to put real money on the line. In short, you should
delay the transition to a real-money trading account until you are supremely
confident that forex trading will be a gainful pursuit for you, and not one
minute earlier. Given that many forex brokers offer demo accounts that never
expire, there is truly no rush.
Of course, you must make sure that you understand that demo account
trading will be very different from trading with an actual account. The
currencies and the spreads are the same. Your strategy will generally be the
same. What’s different is that when real money is on the line, you will learn
how quickly confidence can give way to fear. For me, the best analogy is
Ping-Pong. When going through warm-up volleys, I find that I am both
aggressive and confident, dominating my opponent. When the game begins,
and points are suddenly on the line and my ego hangs in the balance, I
inevitably shrink into defensive mode and allow my opponent to beat me
through attrition. The point is that when there is something at stake—whether
victory in a Ping-Pong match or your risk capital—it is much more difficult
to stick to a plan and remain even-keeled. As a result, you should establish
higher thresholds for profitability with your demo account. A win rate of
55% with a demo account may be equivalent to 45% in a real account—the
difference between success and failure. If you find that you can’t handle the
stress of a real account and your performance has worsened significantly
compared to your demo account, you should take a step back. If you need to
return to your demo account, then so be it.
