
Overvalued intangible assets
When you think of a company’s assets and read about them in Chapter 6,
actual property the company owns that can be touched or seen probably
comes to mind. But those types of assets, called tangible assets, are only one
part of what a company owns. Companies also have what are called intangible assets, or items believed to have value that cannot be seen or touched.
When intangible asset values are inflated, fundamental analysts might believe
a company to be worth more than it is in reality.

25 506455-ch18.indd 291

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

292 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Many fundamental analysts completely disregard intangible assets when measuring the book value of a company. Since many of these assets probably
couldn’t be sold if the company were to be liquidated, it’s often safe to leave
them out of your analysis.

Massive big-bath and “one-time” charges
One commonly used trick by companies is the so-called big-bath restatement.
When a company is about to report a poor quarter, it makes it really bad.
A company’s management writes down the value of assets or pays some
expenses ahead of time, which makes the current results look really bad. But
by getting all this bad news out, the company sets itself up for the illusion of
a better future. Best of all, some investors automatically look past one-time
charges, assuming they’re just unusual events. But the fact is, these restatements can have a profound effect on inflating a company’s future profits.
Be especially skeptical of companies, sometimes called chronic restaters,
which seem to be regularly declaring big one-time charges. One-time charges
are supposed to be just that. If you see them occurring frequently, you should
wonder why.

Low “Quality” earnings
Accounting rules are supposed to make a company’s financial statements
more reflective of reality. For instance, companies are expected to book revenue when a sale is made, not necessarily when cash is received on the sale.
Booking revenue this way ensures that the revenue is matched up with the
costs incurred to generate that revenue.
But this accounting technique, while of merit, can open the doors to manipulation. Companies can push the limits of accounting by padding the financial
statements with revenue and earnings that have no connection whatsoever
to cash actually received or spent. Companies that do this are considered to
have earnings of low quality. The statement of cash flows is a fundamental analyst’s best weapon in finding and steering clear of companies with low-quality
earnings. I give you complete instructions on how to perform this quality of
earnings detection analysis in Chapter 7.

Increasing borrowing, or leverage
If the bear market and credit crunch that began in 2007 taught investors anything, it’s the danger of borrowing too much. The same lesson was learned by
investors. Some companies, including Bear Stearns and Lehman Bros., had
so much exposure to debt, or leverage, they were unable to hold themselves
together when business turned south.

25 506455-ch18.indd 292

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

Chapter 18: Avoiding Investment Blow-Ups with Fundamental Analysis

293

And while entirely legal, debt can also distort some of the popular measures
fundamental analysts consider when evaluating companies’ profitability.
Return on equity, a commonly used financial ratio used to measure the effectiveness of a management team, is especially vulnerable to distortion from
the use of debt. You can read about return on equity, and how it’s skewed by
debt, in Chapter 8.
General Electric is an example of how some investors may not have fully
understood how debt can have a big-time influence on fundamental analysis.
GE’s return on equity in March 2009, based on its financial returns from the
previous 12 months, was a respectable 16.3, says Thomson Reuters. That was
right in line with the industry’s average of 17.8.
But if you look at the company’s return on assets, a financial ratio which strips
away the effect of leverage, you get a different picture. GE’s return on assets
during the same time period was 2.3, well below the industry’s average return
on assets of 5.2. GE’s use of debt caused return on equity to be relatively
high, even though its return on assets was relatively low at the same time.
Again, nothing is illegal about borrowing, and I’m not suggesting at all that it
is. Debt can be a critical portion of a company’s total capital structure, since it
tends to be cheaper to borrow than to issue stock. But it’s a crime for a fundamental analyst not to pay attention to the effect of a company’s debt.

25 506455-ch18.indd 293

9/24/09 10:41:07 PM

294 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis

25 506455-ch18.indd 294

9/24/09 10:41:08 PM

Chapter 19

Marrying Fundamental Analysis
with Technical Analysis
In This Chapter
▶ Realizing the differences between fundamental and technical analysis
▶ Getting familiar with the primary tools used by technical analysts
▶ Understanding what to look for in stock price charts and how they can aid fundamental

analysis
▶ Using the options market to see the true demand for stocks

B

uying the right stock at the wrong time is often worse than buying the
wrong stock to begin with. Many beginning investors get frustrated
after studying a stock’s financial statements, the analysts’ and media reports,
and valuation information, only to end up losing money anyway.
And that’s the big drawback of fundamental analysis. Just because a stock
might appear to be cheap doesn’t mean it will rally anytime soon. And just
because a company’s historical fundamentals look strong doesn’t mean its
business can’t deteriorate and put the company in jeopardy. On the flip side,
sometimes companies that look like real dogs can turn things around and surprise investors on the upside. Don’t forget, too, that no matter how good you
might be performing fundamental analysis, your assumptions might be off,
leading to poor investment decisions.
These complications of fundamental analysis are big reasons why some
investors consider adding a dose of technical analysis to their technique.
Technical analysis, the study of patterns in stock prices, is used by investors
who think they can use the opinions of other investors to see something in a
stock’s future.
Marrying technical analysis with fundamental analysis, in some ways, is
like trying to mix oil and water. They’re very different approaches. But even
fundamental analysts may improve their understanding of the way a stock
behaves by taking a closer look at its technicals, or indicators technical analysts pay attention to.

26 506455-ch19.indd 295

9/24/09 10:41:56 PM

296 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
Understanding Technical Analysis
If you’ve ever seen an investors’ desk that’s covered with all sorts of charts
with squiggly lines or computer screens displaying graphs, you may have
found a technical analyst.
Technical analysts are often called chartists because they spend their time
poring over stock price charts. These charts show where a stock price has
been over time and how many investors have bought or sold the stock.
Technical analysts believe historical patterns in a stock price’s movement
can give solid clues about where the stock might be headed in the future.
It’s important to remember many academics take strong exception to technical analysis. Studies have shown a stock price’s movement in the short term is
tied to news events, which are random. Stock price charts, academics say, tell
you nothing other than what a price was in the past. Longer-term stock prices
respond to a company’s earnings and cash flow, which are not predicted by
anything on a stock price chart, many academics insist.
Sometimes it does seem technical analysts get a bit carried away with the
art of their craft. Some technical analysts read stock price charts almost like
a clairvoyant studies the lines on a client’s palm. With that said, technical
analysis is often mentioned by investors, so it’s worth knowing a bit about.
More importantly for fundamental analysts, though, is that some of the methods used by technical analysts may be useful for investors who are focused
on revenue and earnings.

Reading the stock price charts
The primary tool used by technical analysts is the stock price chart. These
charts, available on just about any financial Web site, usually plot a stock’s
closing price every day. Charts usually come in several forms, including the:
✓ Line: Most of the stock price charts you see are usually line charts. Line
charts, as their name implies, are simply a connect-the-dots line linking
the closing prices of a stock each trading day.
✓ High-Low-Close: Line charts are simple, but they do obscure some of
the relevant data from trading. If you look at a line chart, there’s no way
to know how high or low stock prices got each day. The High-Low-Close
chart, shown in Figure 19-1, attempts to solve this shortcoming of line
charts. On each trading day, there’s a vertical bar, with the top portion
representing a stock’s high price and the bottom, the low. Then there’s a
line through the middle of the bar showing the price at which the stock
closed.

26 506455-ch19.indd 296

9/24/09 10:41:56 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

297

✓ Candlestick: Candlestick charts pack even more information than line
or high-low-close charts. Candlestick charts not only show you a stock’s
high, low and close, but also its open price. A stock’s open price is the
very first price in a trading day that buyers and sellers agreed upon. The
indicator on a candlestick chart looks like a rectangle with a vertical line
protruding from the top, to mark the stock’s high, and from the bottom,
to mark the low. You can take a look at a sample in Figure 19-2.
High

Close

Figure 19-1: Open
High-Low
Close.
Low
High
Open

Figure 19-2:
Candlestick
chart.

Close
Low

What technical analysts are
looking for in the charts
If you’ve ever heard a technical analyst speak, it might seem like a bit of
voodoo. Usually, technical analysts have a pen or marker in hand, start scribbling all over a price chart and talk about all sorts of patterns that they see. If
you’ve ever been to a star-gazing presentation at an observatory, you probably

26 506455-ch19.indd 297

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

298 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
get an idea of what it’s like hearing a technical analyst describe a stock chart.
Technical analysts try to connect dots on charts to find patterns they say can
be revealing about a stock’s future. Technical analysts are looking for several
things in the charts, including:
✓ Price patterns: If there’s one thing that technical analysts fixate on,
it’s the shape of the charts. Technical analysts think investors, being
human, follow predictable cycles of fear and greed. These emotions
cause stock prices to follow predictable scripts, or patterns, that may
indicate where the stock is headed.
✓ What other people see: Even if you do all the fundamental research possible, you can still be dead wrong. Technical analysts attempt to look
at a stock chart to either confirm or deny their belief about a stock’s
future. If a stock is in free fall, technical analysts would assume other
investors know something they don’t and would avoid it.
✓ Support and resistance levels: Through the constant tug-of-war
between buyers and sellers, a stock attempts to settle at a price investors agree upon. Sometimes a stock will have difficultly breaking beyond
a high point, or resistance level, and will routinely bounce off a low point,
called a support level.
✓ Momentum: Technical investors often try to capitalize on the tendency
of some stocks to gain steam either going up or heading down. If a stock
starts to rally, technical investors take notice and assume those in the
know expect the company to report something positive.

A technical analysts’ dictionary
If you ever find yourself speaking with a technical analyst, I’ll warn you, you might need to
bring a decoder ring. Technical analysts use all
sorts of sometimes funny sounding words and
terms to describe certain patterns that might
appear on a stock-price chart. These terms
are extremely useful for technical analysts
because they can, very quickly, describe the
ups and downs of a stock in a way that others
can instantly picture and know what they’re
talking about.
These terms remind me a bit of the names of constellations in the heavens. If someone points at the
Big Dipper in the sky, you know to look for a certain pattern of seven stars that looks like a soup
ladle. Similarly, when a technical analyst says a

26 506455-ch19.indd 298

stock pattern is showing a head and shoulders
pattern, you know to look for a stock that has risen
and fallen three times in a way that appears like a
person’s shoulder, head and other shoulder.
Just as there are countless names for constellations, there’s practically an endless supply
of terms to describe patterns in stock prices.
Besides head and shoulders, there’s the cup
and handle, neckline and throwback, just to
name a few. All these terms mean very specific things to the technical analyst. If you’re
interested in finding out more about these patterns, and what they mean, you might check out
Technical Analysis for Dummies (Wiley).

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

299

How technical analysis differs
from fundamental analysis
Technical analysts and fundamental analysts are diametrically opposed to
one other. Get enough fundamental and technical analysts together in one
room, and a fight is sure to break out. Technical analysts believe all information about a stock that’s worth knowing is reflected in its stock price. Taking
the time to study a company’s fundamentals is a waste of time, a pure technical analyst would argue, because everyone else has access to the same information and has either bought or sold the stock already.
Fundamental analysts, on the other hand, claim technical analysts fall victim
to groupthink and fixate over changes in stock prices that tell investors nothing about the future. What’s more, fundamental analysts claim stock prices
can get overvalued when investors become too optimistic about a stock and
push its price above or below the company’s intrinsic value. You can learn
how to calculate a stock’s intrinsic value in Chapter 11.

Blending Fundamental
and Technical Analysis
While fundamental and technical analysis couldn’t be more philosophically
opposed to each other, there are ways to marry the two approaches together.
In fact, the shortcomings of both fundamental and technical analysis, in some
ways, balance each other out.
A few ways to potentially boost your fundamental analysis success using
techniques from technical analysis include:
✓ Cutting your losses: One of the fatal flaws of many pure fundamental
analysts is stubbornness. Fundamental analysts urge investors to do
their homework, buy a stock and hold on for dear life no matter what
happens. But during the ugly bear market that kicked off in 2007, many
fundamental analysts learned the hard way that stocks can go to zero, or
at least get very close.
One thing technical analysts are often very good at is cutting their
losses. When technical analysts buy a stock, they often have a stock
price in mind that they’ll sell at if things go south. Knowing how to cut
your losses short can be vital when investing in individual companies’
stocks, which is a risky endeavor. Some technical analysts suggest investors sell a stock if it falls 10% or more from their purchase price.

26 506455-ch19.indd 299

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

300 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
✓ Improving your timing: Some fundamental analysts like to buy stocks
and just hang on. But sometimes stubbornness can be expensive. For
instance, you might be sitting on a stock that’s not moving, while the
rest of the stock market charges ahead. Technical analysis attempts
to help you avoid sitting still when there’s money to be made in other
stocks.
✓ Helping you to spot manias: Because technical analysis is so focused
on what other investors are doing and what they’re paying for a stock,
it can help alert a fundamental analyst to manias and bubbles. Knowing
when other investors are getting overly enthusiastic about a stock can
be a good clue to explain why a valuation might be getting overly lofty.

Using stock prices as your
early-warning system
Even a lifelong fundamental analyst, who looks at technical analysis as glorified palm reading, may still benefit from the art of reading charts. When
forecasting how a company’s revenue or earnings might look like a year from
now, fundamental analysts need to take educated guesses at what shape the
economy or the company’s industry will be in.
Watching stock prices can be useful in helping a fundamental analyst form
an opinion about the future. Since stock prices tend to foreshadow economic
reality three, six or nine months in advance, paying attention to stock price
movements may tell fundamental analysts something about what the economy might look like.
Monitoring industry sectors, as described in Chapter 16, may be especially
helpful. If you start noticing shares of companies that make durable goods,
or high-ticket items like houses and cars, falling, that may very well be a tipoff that investors expect the economy to slow. That’s useful information you
might consider when forecasting a company’s future earnings growth.

Looking up historical prices
Even if the technical analysis tools discussed in this chapter seem a little too,
well, out there for you, you can still benefit from charts and historical stock
price data. Oftentimes, you might find yourself wanting to know what a stock
price was in the past. Perhaps you want to look up your cost basis in a stock,
or how much you paid for it when you originally bought it. You’ll need to
know your stock basis to measure your capital gain or loss for tax purposes.
You may also want to know what a stock price was, say, a year ago so you can
measure how well or poorly a stock has done.

26 506455-ch19.indd 300

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

Chapter 19: Marrying Fundamental Analysis with Technical Analysis

301

When you want to look up a historical stock price, it’s time to break out the
stock price chart. Most online Web sites let you plot stock prices going back
in history so you can see what a stock price was in the past. All the major
financial Web sites let you pull up historical stock charts.
Since so many investors ask me for tips on looking up historical stock prices,
I’ll step you through one way to accomplish this task. If you’re looking to get
a stock’s price in the past, here’s how you’d do it using the Money section of
USATODAY.com:
1. Log onto the Money section of USATODAY.com.
Enter money.usatoday.com into your Web browser.
2. Enter the stock’s ticker symbol.
Scroll down a bit until you see an area to enter the stock symbol on the
left-hand side of the page. Click the Go button.
3. Launch the historical stock quotes engine.
Click on the “Historical quotes” option on the green navigation bar.
4. Choose the date you’re interested in.
Enter the date into the blank and click the Get Quote button. The system
will tell you the stock’s high, low and closing price on that day.

The Primary Tools Used
by Technical Analysts
Just as fundamental analysts pore over financial ratios and statements, technical analysts have indicators they examine as well. Many of the indicators
technical analysts focus on are tied directly to a company’s stock price or
trading history. You might review some of the items that technical analysts
pay attention to and determine how to best implement them in your fundamental strategies.

Getting into the groove
with moving averages
One of the first things most technical analysts plot on a stock chart is the
moving average. The moving average tells you what a stock’s average price
has been over a set period of time. Moving averages can be calculated for any
period of time, but technical analysts usually use the following time periods:

26 506455-ch19.indd 301

9/24/09 10:41:57 PM

302 Part IV: Getting Advanced with Fundamental Analysis
✓ 10-day moving average. The stock’s average price over the past two weeks.
✓ 50-day moving average. The stock’s average price over the past quarter.
✓ 200-day moving average. The stock’s average price over the past year.
Technical analysts compare a stock’s current price to its moving average. If
the stock price is greater than the moving average, that’s considered to be a
bullish signal for the market. If the current stock price is less than the moving
average, that’s a bearish signal.
If you’re going to choose a moving average to pay attention to, you should
go with the 200-day. Technicians get very cautious when a stock price falls
below the 200-day moving average, and may wait on the sidelines before
buying back in until the stock rises above the 200-day moving average. When
a stock falls below the 200-day moving average, that means that every investor who bought the stock within the past year, on average, is losing money. If
the stock creeps upward, many of these disappointed investors are eager to
dump the stock, making it difficult for the stock to rise.

Keeping an eye on trading volume
Technical analysts are very interested in a stock’s price and the trend of the
price. But most technical analysts also pay close attention, too, to how much
trading volume is occurring. Trading volume measures how much investors
are buying or selling a stock. If buyers and sellers are furiously trading shares
back and forth, then trading volume is considered to be high, or active.
When trading volume is active, technical analysts figure they can trust the
price movement to a greater degree. For instance, imagine a stock that soars
to break into new high ground, but on low trading volume. A technical analyst
would be skeptical of the move higher, since a relatively small group of investors powered it. Similarly, if trading volume is heavy, that tells the technical
analyst there’s a great deal of volume, or conviction, behind the trade.
Table 19-1 summarizes the way a fundamental analyst might couple reading
volume with price movements.
