
ALGORITHMIC TRADING

174

g = F T CF /2 = 2.1,

(8.3)

where we have also assumed that the risk-free rate is 0. Now, let’s say
our brokerage tells us that we are allowed a maximum leverage of 2.

FIGURE 8.1 Constrained Growth Rate g as Function of F2

Example 8.2 (Continued)
So the leverages for the strategies have to be reduced to 0.95 and
1.05, respectively. The growth rate is now reduced to
g =∑

2
i=1

(

) = 0.82.

(8.4)

(Equation 8.3 for g applies only when the leverages used are
optimal.)
But do these leverages really generate the maximum g under our
maximum leverage constraint? We can find out by setting F1 to Fmax
− F2, and plot g as a function of F2 over the allowed range 0 to Fmax = F2.
It is obvious that the growth rate is optimized when F2 = Fmax = 2.
The optimized g is 0.96, which is higher than the 0.82 given in
Equation 8.4. This shows that when we have two or more strategies
with very different independent growth rates, and when we have
a maximum leverage constraint that is much lower than the Kelly
leverage, it is often optimal to just apply all of our buying power on
the strategy that has the highest growth rate.
175

g( f ) = 〈log(1 + fR)〉,

(8.5)

where 〈…〉 indicates an average over some random sampling of the unlevered return-per-bar R(t) of the strategy (not of the market prices) based on
some probability distribution of R. (We typically use daily bars for R(t), but
the bar can be as long or short as we please.) If this probability distribution
is Gaussian, then g( f ) can be analytically reduced to g( f ) = fm − f 2m2/2,
which is the same as Equation 8.4 in the single strategy case. Furthermore,
the maxima of g( f ) can of course be analytically determined by taking the

RISK MANAGEMENT

paper and arrive at another optimal leverage, though the formula won’t be
as simple as Equation 8.1. (This is true as long as the distribution has a finite
number of moments, unlike, for example, the Pareto Levy distribution.)
For some distributions, it may not even be possible to arrive at an analytic
answer. This is where Monte Carlo simulations can help.
The expected value of the compounded growth rate as a function of the
leverage f is (assuming for simplicity that the risk-free rate is zero)

BOX 8.1

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

176

derivative of g( f ) with respect to f and setting it to zero.This will reproduce
the Kelly formula in Equation 8.1 and will reproduce the maximum growth
rate indicated by Equation 8.3 in the single strategy case. But this is not our
interest here. We would like to compute Equation 8.5 using a non-Gaussian
distribution of R.
Even though we do not know the true distribution of R, we can use the
so-called Pearson system (see www.mathworks.com/help/toolbox/stats
/br5k833-1.html or mathworld.wolfram.com/PearsonSystem.html) to
model it. The Pearson system takes as input the mean, standard deviation,
skewness, and kurtosis of the empirical distribution of R, and models it as
one of seven probability distributions expressible analytically encompassing
Gaussian, beta, gamma, Student’s t, and so on. Of course, these are not the
most general distributions possible. The empirical distribution might have
nonzero higher moments that are not captured by the Pearson system and
might, in fact, have infinite higher moments, as in the case of the Pareto Levy
distribution. But to capture all the higher moments invites data-snooping
bias due to the limited amount of empirical data usually available. So, for
all practical purposes, we use the Pearson system for our Monte Carlo
sampling.
We illustrate this Monte Carlo technique by using the mean reversion
strategy described in Example 5.1. But first, we can use the daily returns in
the test set to easily calculate that the Kelly leverage is 18.4. We should keep
this number in mind when comparing with the Monte Carlo results. Next,
we use the first four moments of these daily returns to construct a Pearson
system and generate 100,000 random returns from this system. We can use
the pearsrnd function from the MATLAB Statistics Toolbox for this. (The
complete code is in monteCarloOptimLeverage.m.)
We assume that the strategy daily returns are contained in the Nx1 array
ret. We will use the first four moments of ret to generate a Pearson system
distribution, from which any number of simulated returns ret_sim can be
generated.
moments={mean(ret), std(ret), skewness(ret), kurtosis(ret)};
[ret_sim, type]=pearsrnd(moments{:}, 100000, 1);

In the code, ret contains the daily returns from the backtest of the strategy, whereas ret_sim are 100,000 randomly generated daily returns with
the same four moments as ret. The pearsrnd function also returns type, which

BOX 8.2

indicates which type of distribution fits our data best. In this example, type
is 4, indicating that the distribution is not one of the standard ones such as
Student’s t. (But we aren’t at all concerned whether it has a name.) Now we
can use ret_sim to compute the average of g( f ). In our code, g( f ) is an inline
function with leverage f and a return series R as inputs.
An inline function for calculating the compounded growth rate based on
leverage f and return per bar of R.
g=inline(‘sum(log(1+f*R))/length(R)’, ‘f’, ‘R’);

BOX 8.3

Plotting g( f ) for f = 0 to f = 23 reveals that g( f ) does in fact have a maximum somewhere near 19 (see Figure 8.2), and a numerical optimization
using the fminbnd function of the MATLAB Optimization Toolbox yields an
optimal f of 19, strikingly close to the Kelly’s optimal f of 18.4!
Finding the minimum of the negative of the growth rate based on leverage
f and the simulated returns ret_sim (same as finding the maximum of the
positive growth rate).

optimalF=fminbnd(minusGsim, 0, 24);

Of course, if you run this program with a different random seed and
therefore different series of simulated returns, you will find a somewhat
different value for the optimal f, but ideally it won’t be too different from
my value. (As a side note, the only reason we minimized −g instead of maximized g is that MATLAB does not have a fmaxbnd function.)
There is another interesting result from running this Monte Carlo optimization. If we try f of 31, we shall find that the growth rate is −1; that is,
ruin. This is because the most negative return per period is −0.0331, so any
leverage higher than 1 / 0.0331 = 30.2 will result in total loss during that
period.

Optimization of Historical Growth Rate
Instead of optimizing the expected value of the growth rate using our analytical probability distribution of returns as we did in the previous section,

177
RISK MANAGEMENT

minusGsim=@(f)-g(f, ret_sim);

FIGURE 8.2 Expected Growth Rate g as Function of f.

BOX 8.4

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

178

one can of course just optimize the historical growth rate in the backtest
with respect to the leverage. We just need one particular realized set of
returns: that which actually occurred in the backtest. This method suffers
the usual drawback of parameter optimization in backtest: data-snooping
bias. In general, the optimal leverage for this particular historical realization
of the strategy returns won’t be optimal for a different realization that will
occur in the future. Unlike Monte Carlo optimization, the historical returns
offer insufficient data to determine an optimal leverage that works well for
many realizations.
Despite these caveats, brute force optimization over the backtest returns
sometimes does give a very similar answer to both the Kelly leverage and
Monte Carlo optimization. Using the same strategy as in the previous section, and altering the optimization program slightly to feed in the historical
returns ret instead of the simulated returns ret_sim.
Finding the minimum of the negative of the growth rate based on leverage f
and the historical returns ret.
minusG=@(f)-g(f, ret);
optimalF=fminbnd(minusG, 0, 21);

we obtain the optimal f of 18.4, which is again the same as the Kelly optimal f.

Maximum Drawdown

Using my function calculateMaxDD (available on http://epchan.com/book2)
to compute maximum drawdowns with different leverages on the same
simulated returns series ret_sim.
maxDD=calculateMaxDD(cumprod(1+optimalF/7*ret_sim)-1);

Of course, setting the leverage equal to this upper bound will only prevent the simulated drawdown from exceeding the maximum allowed, but it
will not prevent our future drawdown from doing so. The only way to guarantee that the future drawdown will not exceed this maximum is to either
use constant proportion insurance or to impose a stop loss. We will discuss
these techniques in the next two sections.
It is worth noting that this method of estimating the maximum drawdown is based on a simulated series of strategy returns, not the historical
strategy returns generated in a backtest.We can, of course, use the historical
strategy returns to calculate the maximum drawdown and use that to determine the optimal leverage instead. In this case, we will find that we just need

179
RISK MANAGEMENT

BOX 8.5

For those portfolio managers who manage other people’s assets, maximizing the long-term growth rate is not the only objective. Often, their clients
(or employers) will insist that the absolute value of the drawdown (return
calculated from the historic high watermark) should never exceed a certain
maximum. That is to say, they dictate what the maximum drawdown can be.
This requirement translates into an additional constraint into our leverage
optimization problem.
Unfortunately, this translation is not as simple as multiplying the unconstrained optimal leverage by the ratio of the maximum drawdown allowed
and the original unconstrained maximum drawdown. Using the example in
the section on optimization of expected growth rate with simulated returns
ret_sim, the maximum drawdown is a frightening –0.999. This is with an
unconstrained optimal f of 19.2. Suppose our risk manager allows a maximum drawdown of only half this amount. Using half the optimal f of 9.6
still generates a maximum drawdown of –0.963. By trial and error, we find
that we have to lower the leverage by a factor of 7, to 2.7 or so, in order to
reduce the magnitude of the maximum drawdown to about 0.5. (Again, all
these numbers depend on the exact series of simulated returns, and so are
not exactly reproducible.)

to decrease the unconstrained optimal f by a factor of 1.5 (to 13) in order to
reduce the maximum drawdown to below −0.49.
Which method should we use? The advantage of using simulated returns
is that they have much better statistical significance. They are akin to the
value-at-risk (VaR) methodology used by major banks or hedge funds to
determine the likelihood that they will lose a certain amount of money over
a certain period. The disadvantage is the maximum drawdown that occurs
in the simulation may be so rare that it really won’t happen more than once
in a million years (a favorite excuse for fund managers when they come to
grief). Furthermore, the simulated returns inevitably miss some crucial serial correlations that may be present in the historical returns and that may
persist into the future. These correlations may be reducing the maximum
drawdown in the real world. The advantage of using the historical strategy
returns is that they fully capture these correlations, and furthermore the
drawdown would cover a realistic life span of a strategy, not a million years.
The disadvantage is, of course, that the data are far too limited for capturing
a worst-case scenario. A good compromise may be a leverage somewhere in
between those generated by the two methods.

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

180

■ Constant Proportion Portfolio Insurance
The often conflicting goals of wishing to maximize compounded growth
rate while limiting the maximum drawdown have been discussed already.
There is one method that allows us to fulfill both wishes: constant proportion portfolio insurance (CPPI).
Suppose the optimal Kelly leverage of our strategy is determined to be f.
And suppose we are allowed a maximum drawdown of −D.We can simply set
aside D of our initial total account equity for trading, and apply a leverage of f
to this subaccount to determine our portfolio market value. The other 1 − D
of the account will be sitting in cash. We can then be assured that we won’t
lose all of the equity of this subaccount, or, equivalently, we won’t suffer a
drawdown of more than −D in our total account. If our trading strategy is
profitable and the total account equity reaches a new high water mark, then
we can reset our subaccount equity so that it is again D of the total equity,
moving some cash back to the “cash” account. However, if the strategy suffers
losses, we will not transfer any cash between the cash and the trading subaccount. Of course, if the losses continue and we lose all the equity in the trading subaccount, we have to abandon the strategy because it has reached our

BOX 8.6

Computing Growth Rate Using CPPI
Assume the return series is ret_sim and the optimal leverage is optimalF, both
from previous calculations. Also assume the maximum drawdown allowed is
–D = –0.5.
g_cppi=0;
drawdown=0;
D=0.5;
for t=1:length(ret_sim)
g_cppi=g_cppi+log(1+ ret_sim (t)*D*optimalF*(1+drawdown));
drawdown=min(0, (1+drawdown)*(1+ ret_sim (t))-1);
end
g_cppi=g_cppi/length(ret_sim);

181
RISK MANAGEMENT

maximum allowed drawdown of −D. Therefore, in addition to limiting our
drawdown, this scheme serves as a graceful, principled way to wind down a
losing strategy. (The more common, less optimal, way to wind down a strategy is driven by the emotional breakdown of the portfolio manager.)
Notice that because of this separation of accounts, this scheme is not
equivalent to just using a leverage of L = fD in our total account equity.
There is no guarantee that the maximum drawdown will not exceed −D
even with a lowered leverage of fD. Even if we were to further impose a stop
loss of −D, or if the drawdown never went below −D, applying the leverage
of fD to the full account still won’t generate the exact same compounded
return as CPPI, unless every period’s returns are positive (i.e., maximum
drawdown is zero). As long as we have a drawdown, CPPI will decrease order size much faster than the alternative, thus making it almost impossible
(due to the use of Kelly leverage on the subaccount) that the account would
approach the maximum drawdown –D.
I don’t know if there is a mathematical proof that CPPI will be the same
as using a leverage of f D in terms of the long-run growth rate, but we can
use the same simulated returns in the previous sections to demonstrate that
after 100,000 days, the growth rate of CPPI is very similar to the alternative
scheme: 0.002484 versus 0.002525 per day in one simulation with D = 0.5.
The main advantage of CPPI is apparent only when we look at the maximum
drawdown. By design, the magnitude of the drawdown in CPPI is less than
0.5, while that of the alternative scheme without using stop loss is a painful
0.9 even with just half of the optimal leverage. The code for computing the
growth rate using CPPI is shown in Box 8.6.

Note that this scheme should only be applied to an account with one
strategy only. If it is a multistrategy account, it is quite possible that the
profitable strategies are “subsidizing” the nonprofitable ones such that the
drawdown is never large enough to shut down the complete slate of strategies. This is obviously not an ideal situation unless you think that the losing
strategy will somehow return to health at some point.
There is one problem with using CPPI, a problem that it shares with the
use of stop loss: It can’t prevent a big drawdown from occurring during
the overnight gap or whenever trading in a market has been suspended.
The purchases of out-of-the-money options prior to an expected market
close can eliminate some of this risk.
■ Stop Loss

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

182

There are two ways to use stop losses. The common usage is to use stop
loss to exit an existing position whenever its unrealized P&L drops below a
threshold. But after we exit this position, we are free to reenter into a new
position, perhaps even one of the same sign, sometime later. In other words,
we are not concerned about the cumulative P&L or the drawdown of the
strategy.
The less common usage is to use stop loss to exit the strategy completely
when our drawdown drops below a threshold. This usage of stop loss is awkward—it can happen only once during the lifetime of a strategy, and ideally
we would never have to use it. That is the reason why CPPI is preferred over
using stop loss for the same protection. The rest of this section is concerned
with the first, more common usage of stop loss.
Stop loss can only prevent the unrealized P&L from exceeding our selfimposed limit if the market is always open whenever we are holding a position. For example, it is effective if we do not hold positions after the market
closes or if we are trading in currencies or some futures where the electronic market is always open except for weekends and holidays. Otherwise,
if the prices “gap” down or up when the market reopens, the stop loss may
be executed at a price much worse than what our maximum allowable loss
dictates. As we said earlier, the purchases of options will be necessary to
eliminate this risk, but that may be expensive to implement and is valuable
only for expected market downtime.
In some extreme circumstances, stop loss is useless even if the market
is open but when all liquidity providers decide to withdraw their liquidity

183
RISK MANAGEMENT

simultaneously. This happened during the flash crash of May 6, 2010, since
modern-day market makers merely need to maintain a bid of $0.01 (the
infamous “stub quote”) in times of market stress (Arnuk and Saluzzi, 2012).
This is why an unfortunate sell stop order on Accenture, a company with
multibillion-dollar revenue, was executed at $0.01 per share that day.
But even if the market is open and there is normal liquidity, it is a matter of controversy whether we should impose stop loss for mean-reverting
strategies. At first blush, stop loss seems to contradict the central assumption of mean reversion. For example, if prices drop and we enter into a
long position, and prices drop some more and thus induce a loss, we should
expect the prices to rise eventually if we believe in mean reversion of this
price series. So it is not sensible to “stop loss” and exit this position when the
price is so low. Indeed, I have never backtested any mean-reverting strategy
whose APR or Sharpe ratio is increased by imposing a stop loss.
There is just one problem with this argument: What happens if the mean
reversion model has permanently stopped working while we are in a position? In finance, unlike in physics, laws are not immutable. As I have been
repeating, what was true of a price series before may not be true in the
future. So a mean-reverting price series can undergo a regime change and
become a trending price series for an extended period of time, maybe forever. In this case, a stop loss will be very effective in preventing catastrophic
losses, and it will allow us time to consider the possibility that we should just
shut down the strategy before incurring a 100 percent loss. Furthermore,
these kinds of “turncoat” price series that regime-change from mean reversion to momentum would never show up in our catalog of profitable mean
reversion strategies because our catalog would not have included meanreverting strategies that failed in their backtests. Survivorship bias was in
action when I claimed earlier that stop loss always lowers the performance
of mean-reverting strategies. It is more accurate to say that stop loss always
lowers the performance of mean-reverting strategies when the prices remain
mean reverting, but it certainly improves the performance of those strategies
when the prices suffer a regime change and start to trend!
Given this consideration of regime change and survivorship bias, how
should we impose a stop loss on a mean-reverting strategy, since any successfully backtested mean-reverting strategy suffers survivorship bias and
will always show lowered performance if we impose a stop loss? Clearly, we
should impose a stop loss that is greater than the backtest maximum intraday drawdown. In this case, the stop loss would never have been triggered in
the backtest period and could not have affected the backtest performance,

yet it can still effectively prevent a black swan event in the future from leading to ruin.
In contrast to mean-reverting strategies, momentum strategies benefit
from stop loss in a very logical and straightforward way. If a momentum
strategy is losing, it means that momentum has reversed, so logically we
should be exiting the position and maybe even reversing the position. Thus,
a continuously updated momentum trading signal serves as a de facto stop
loss. This is the reason momentum models do not present the same kind of
tail risk that mean-reverting models do.
■ Risk Indicators

ALGORITHMIC TRADING

184

Many of the risk management measures we discussed above are reactive:
We lower the order size when we incur a loss, or we stop trading altogether
when a maximum drawdown has been reached. But it would be much more
advantageous if we could proactively avoid those periods of time when the
strategy is likely to incur loss. This is the role of leading risk indicators.
The obvious distinction between leading risk indicators and the more
general notion of risk indicators is that leading risk indicators let us predict
whether the next period will be risky for our investment, while general risk
indicators are just contemporaneous with a risky period.
There is no one risk indicator that is applicable to all strategies: What is a
risky period to one strategy may be a highly profitable period for another. For
example, we might try using the VIX, the implied volatility index, as the leading risk indicator to predict the risk of the next-day return of the buy-on-gap
stock strategy described in Chapter 4. That strategy had an annualized average
return of around 8.7 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 1.5 from May 11, 2006, to
April 24, 2012. But if the preceding day’s VIX is over 35, a common threshold
for highly risky periods, then the day’s annualized average return will be 17.2
percent with a Sharpe ratio of 1.4. Clearly, this strategy benefits from the socalled risk! However, VIX > 35 is a very good leading risk indicator for the
FSTX opening gap strategy depicted in Chapter 7.That strategy had an annualized average return of around 13 percent and a Sharpe ratio of 1.4 from July
16, 2004, to May 17, 2012. If the preceding day’s VIX is over 35, then the day’s
annualized average return drops to 2.6 percent and the Sharpe ratio to 0.16.
Clearly, VIX tells us to avoid trading on the following day.
Besides VIX, another commonly used leading risk indicator is the TED
spread. It is the difference between the three-month London Interbank
