
validly skip all breaks that do not qualify as such, without feeling upset

if they do follow through.

Granted, since there are no absolutes in trading, at times there can

exist a thin line between a "proper" break and its premature counter­
part. As a rule of thumb, the bigger the total pattern and the stronger
its relevant barrier, the more work to be done by the assailers to crack
it convincingly. There is never a specific minimum of bars required, but
the fatter the buildup (say, at least four bars), the better we can form
ourselves an idea on who is likely to come out on top in the squeeze. In
a pullback reversal, on the other hand (as opposed to a bigger pattern
breakout) , the break in the turn may set up much faster and it may
take no more than a single bar for a setup to earn validity status. (Will
be taken up later in this chapter.)
Situations like the one above show us also that it isn't necessary to
always work with a nondebatable pattern line and a perfect signal bar
to match it. The general idea is to trade off the most cmcial bar in the

barrier area. Sometimes we may even find our entry before the pattern
boundary is visibly broken, but more common is for the signal bar to
either line up with the barrier or reside slightly out, as was the case
with bar 8.

88

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

Note: When trading off a signal bar that is sticking out, we do not
want this bar to be overly tall, or produce an entry too far away from
the broken pattern line. While nothing is ever carved in stone, always
a preferable condition in a pattern break scenario is to have the stop
reside inside the pattern; this will allow for a pullback to test back the
broken barrier without immediately getting shaken out.
Countless charts in this guide will show that if you trade from build­
up, it is absolutely doable to come in with a 10 pip stop and a 20 pip
target. Surely, in the early stages of your price action journey, it may
not always be so evident to tell the difference between an indisputable
entry and one that can be deemed a little premature still, but this is
hardly your immediate concern. Way more crucial to your bottom line--­
at any stage, really-is to learn to recognize the wagers of the unsavory
kind. In other words, rather than aiming to maximize the positive, more
essential is to minimize the negative. And it is an easier task as well.
Protect your account from unnecessary setbacks and chances are good
it will grow pleasantly over time as you grow along with it.
Let's check out some more examples.

89

Understanding Price Action
IFig 5.41

www.ProReal1ime.com

eur/usd 5-minute

'335

, .33

10 ProReaCTime.com

,3;00

12
14:00

,�oo

17:00

'8:00

Figure 5.4 The first half of this chart shows another triple-arch forma­
tion on top of a pattern line. The short below bar 1 0 represents a rather
straightforward pattern break venture, but there is an element involved
that deserves some extra attention; it is the issue of the adverse round
number magnet.
The three bullish turnaround bars ( 1 , 2 and 3) perfectly illustrate
the pull of a round number magnet. Bears may have had the best of
the action in terms of overall pressure, this had not kept the bulls from
putting in this triple-bottom variant. To understand the concept of the

adverse magnet, and the dangers involved, consider for a moment the
fate of a bear who had opened a short, say, somewhere around 13:30.
But check out also what happened to a bull who let himself get trapped
into longing the re-break of the round number, for example in bar 4 or
5. Both parties fell prey to the pull of the adverse magnet (adverse in
terms of their positions taken) .
The point is that we need to be extra cautious when aiming to trade

away from a round number level. It is quite different from trading to­
wards one. Especially in the early stages of a round number fight, the
price action can be very fickle and this can be a dangerous environment
to pick sides, even in line with dominance. Should these skirmishes
persist, at some point the price action will probably start to tighten up,
possibly showing more failures on one side than the other; that is a
good sign to start paying more attention again.
What were the giveaways that led to the short below bar 1 O? First
off, the chart was rather bearish on the whole (25ema sloping down,

90

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

most bars closing below it) , which meant there was work to be done for
the bulls should they want to change things in their favor. Very indica­
tive, therefore, were the four consecutive failures to retake possession of
1 .33 (4, 5, 7 and 9). Equally interesting was the triple-arch formation on
top of the pattern line, progressions 2-5-6, 6-7-8 and 8-9- 1 0 . The last
arch represented a squeeze variant, with bar 9 and 10 caught between
pattern line support and round number resistance. Thus, the bearish
close of bar 10 not only highlighted the failure of the latest bull attack
in bar 9, it also rounded a lower top in a triple-arch formation, while
setting up as a signal bar right on pattern line support.
From all this, it was fair to deduce that the magnetic pull of the
round number was wearing thin and that prices were about "ready" to
move away from it. But do note that it had taken several hours for this
to materialize.
Despite the perforation of the pattern line, bulls came out to defy
the break below bar 1 0 . Because of this counterpressure, our entry bar
(underneath the arrow) closed right back in the pattern line level; and
the next bar, too, managed to keep both bull and bear in suspense for
another five minutes ( 1 1 , a tiny inside bar) . Was it fear of the pending
US Open ( 1 5 :30) that kept the bears from aggressively playing the sell
side here? Reasons are never relevant. It is interesting to see, though,
that once bar 1 1 was taken out at the bottom, bearish reservations were
promptly cast aside and the market quickly tanked (inside bar break) .
It didn't take long for bears to find out that this victory was one of
the shorter variety. On the good side, it looks like our trade may have
reached its 20 pip target before the sudden bullish turnaround took
place; as much as this demonstrates the benefits of working with a set
target that isn't over the top, we cannot dismiss the element of luck in
this particular venture. It is important to grasp, though, that all trade
examples in this guide merely serve an educational purpose in context
of probability; an individual outcome by itself, good or bad, is essen­
tially irrelevant.
Although we will take up the particulars of unfavorable conditions
in more detail in Chapter 7, it will probably not surprise the reader that
the tiny bull-flag 13- 14 made for a poor continuation setup on the bull

91

Understanding Price Action
side. After all that pulling and pushing in the round number earlier
on, it just wasn't very likely that bears would now give up on the area
without a good fight first. Not favoring the bull side either were the small
features of the flag in relation to the rather big pole ( 12- 13). As to the
flagpole itself, since this move had emerged quite "suddenly" from well
below the 25ema, the prospects for immediate bull-side continuation
were already not that great to begin with (no buildup to back up the
shift in dominance).
Obviously, not all charts comply with "technical logic". It takes little
experience in the market to understand that anything can and at some
point will happen and for this reason all suspicions regarding price
action are basically out of line. Very important, though, is not to get
carried away by the game plan of others when our own is being defied.
In other words, it is one thing to accept that a non-buildup turnaround
can indeed flip a chart around without much protest, it is quite another
to trade such a move for continuation. And certainly so when aiming
for 20 pip, which is a substantial move on the 5-minute. In this light,
it requires little contemplation to skip the long offer on the break of bar
14. We just don't trade that.
But how about two hours down the line. Considering the length of
progression 15-18, a much bigger bull-flag, the action clearly let on
that bulls had taken control of the chart. But there is something odd
about this flag, too, and that is the total absence of bearish aggres­
sion. There had been exactly one brief contrarian attempt to gun for
the round number magnet ( 15- 16), a plan that was quickly abandoned
at the first signs of support. From that moment on, bears had not even
tried to challenge the 25ema for over an hour, which then led to the
forming of the flag.
In a strong trending market, flat and lengthy flag progressions are
very common and we should definitely try to trade them for continua­
tion when given the chance; but how bullish was this chart, really? Or
to put it differently, if we decide to pass up on the offer above bar 14,
for a lack of technical backup, but accept the trade above bar 18, then
where exactly is it that the line between skipping and trading a break
is drawn?

92

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

Alas, there can be no single answer to this puzzle. Since no chart
situation will ever show up exactly as before, each breakout event is
always a matter of personal interpretation. When confronted with a
"borderline" case, probably one of the hardest things to do is to trust
your eyes and trade (or skip) what you see-not what you think. This
chart provides a good example. Technically seen, the bearish pressure
had been fended off successfully by the bulls, but the chart itself still
wasn't very bullish. And for as long as that obnoxious round number
magnet had not been properly tested back, our fellow participants may
have cherished similar reservations regarding the upside potential. With
such reasoning in mind, it is only logical to at least have felt a pang of
discomfort when confronted with the break above bar 1 8 .
O n the other hand, if we look a t the facts, the 15- 1 8 progression cer­
tainly was a decent flag hanging from a decent pole ( 1 2 - 1 5) and it had
lasted long enough to prove the bulls dominant. Furthermore, the bars
in it had built up considerable tension prior to the upside break. In the
final stages of it, there had been two bear attempts to escape the dread­
ed squeeze, and both had instantly failed (false lows at 1 7 and 18). With
the pattern line sloping down, the 2 5ema sloping up, and prices caught
in-between, what else can a breakout trader do but pay his respects to
price action and thus fire long on the break of bar 1 8 .
But this i s definitely not my favorite setup. (Note also that the flag
break came about in the often slow and tricky US lunch-hour doldrums,
18:00-20:00 CET.)

93

Understanding Price Aaion

OProRe«Time.CQm

11:00

1200

13:00

14;00

W¥rN.ProRealTlme.com

eur/usd &.minute

IFig 5.51 1 .38

15:00

16:00

17:00

Figure 5.5 Charts like this do not leave much room for argument as to
which side of the market to shun. By the time prices hit the low of 1 ,
the environment had sent out a clear warning that bulls had no place
defying this tide for at least some hours to come. That is not to say that
profits cannot be made on the long side in a bear market, but it is no
easy chore to rake in 20 pip targets. And why swim against the tide
when you can surf along with it.
An excellent example of how to get yourself in trouble is depicted
by the false high at 2 . By forcing an upside break, bulls tried to defy
the implications of the bear-flag progression 1-2. Not a good idea in a
bear market, and right in the 25ema to boot. Bears didn't waste time
destroying the bullish dreams (3).
Countering the bull break at 2 is a well-known contrarian tactic that
we can refer to as trading a break for failure. It rightfully leans on the
premise that a break against dominance is sooner reprimanded than
respected. In Chapter 7 on Skipping Trades and Trading Breaks for
Failure, we will have a closer look at how to take advantage of these
"foolish" breaks, but at this stage, our first priority is not to get trapped
in one ourselves.
But trend traders, too, need to pay attention to detail. False breaks
at the "poor" side of the market do not necessarily make for great wa­
gers at the other. Bar 3, for example, the bearish powerbar that had
crushed the bullish breakout, positioned itself as a terrible signal bar
for sell-side purposes. It was way too tall to set up a high-odds break
of its own, right in the lows of the market: even a "harmless" pullback

94

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break

to the 25ema magnet (very common) would already have taken out our
stop.
This shows us also that even when the market has one-way pressure
written all over it, it still takes careful planning to trade along the path
of least resistance. Looking for a continuation break in the low of a bear
rally (or in the high of a bull rally) is seldom a smart idea. On balance,
the best follow-through potential is found either in the turn of a sub­
stantial pullback, or on the break of a lengthy sideways range ( 1 - 1 1 )
When anticipating a break o f a bearish pattern, always handy is to
run a pattern line beneath the lows of most relevance. In this chart,
the false bear spike in bar 4 (bottoming tail) is ignored in favor of later
touches. And what a beautiful line it was. In pattern break tactics, these
indisputable boundaries are always a big plus because they leave virtu­
ally no room for debate as to when they are broken.
Of equal beauty were the numerous arches on top of it. The three
most prominent were progressions 1 -2-4, 4-5-6 and 6 through 1 1 . In
its entirety, this was a giant bear-flag hanging from the tall pole of the
UK morning bear rally.
If we zoom in on the last arch, we can see that the 6- 1 1 progression
contained a number of smaller arches itself. And notice also how all of
them gradually went down in size until things finally worked up to a
boiling point in the apex of the pattern. With the bars caught between
the pattern line on one side and the 25ema on the other, the last mini
arch was a textbook squeeze. Do we need more giveaways as to the bull­
ish predicament?
But there were more clues to be found. Earlier on, starting with the
false high at 5 , bulls had failed to reach the round number magnet
and then kept on failing at 7, 8, 9 and 1 0 . Such a series of lower tops
will not likely have boosted the confidence of bullish sideliners anytime
soon, nor that of bulls already in the market. The last failure, the false
high at 10, was particularly interesting, since it was a failed attempt to
break away from a bearish squeeze. By now we have already seen plenty
of evidence that if such an attempt fails, it is often a harbinger of utter
demoralization.
Bar 1 1 , a tiny inside bar with its false high neighbor, filled up the

95

Understanding Price Action
remammg space between the pattern line and the moving average.
Something had to give.
Looking closely, we can see that the actual entry on the short below
bar 1 1 may not literally have broken the pattern line yet; in fact, the
entry was right on it. However, with the break setting up so well and
considering the "ripeness" of the bear-flag, I truly believe there is no
reason to postpone entry on a short like this and run the risk of missing
the collapse. Of course, since nothing is ever set in stone, an alterna­
tive tactic could be to wait for an extra pip or so to see the pattern line
broken first, and then fire short. But it would have been overly prudent,
if not a mistake, to have waited for another bar to fatten up the squeeze.
In an earlier discussion concerning Figure 5.3, the latter tactic was sug­
gested (waiting for bar 8), simply because the situation asked for some
more buildup to set up the trade properly. Not so in the chart above.
As to the low of our signal bar ( 1 1 ) , pleasant also was to see it match
up with the low of bar 10, allowing this short to take off from a double­

bar break. Evidently, a double-bar setup shows more tension than a
single-bar setup, since the low or high in question holds up not for
five but for ten minutes. Any extra tension preceding a breakout will
sooner help follow-through along than obstruct it. Furthermore, to take
out our stop on this short, bulls had to crack the squeeze progression
on the upside again. In the light of all their earlier failures, that would
have demanded quite some bravery to pull off. All this rendered prices
highly vulnerable to bearish aggression. To top it off, let us not forget
to mention the favorable magnet of the 1 .37 round number, about 25
pip below.
I hope that most of what we have addressed so far regarding the
regular pattern break setup has been quite easy to follow and that it
radiates a certain technical logic. The main thing to take away from
these examples is to understand the importance of sufficient buildup,
partiCUlarly when trading breaks with tight stops.

96

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Pullback

Pattern Break Pullback

While a regular pattern break setup is certainly not a rarity to come
across, plenty of breakouts take place without offering an acceptable
entry on first go. Sometimes there is just too little buildup prior to per­
foration; at other times the pattern line is debatable, the signal bar
uncomfortable, or maybe the price action too feverish or lackluster.
Whatever the reason, in many an instance we have no choice but to step
away from the initial break. Yet this doesn't necessarily render the event
totally untradable. By keeping close track of the post-breakout action,
we may still be offered a chance to hop on board in second instance.
Two such situations deserve our full attention. The first is when
prices, after breaking out, start to cling around the broken barrier, not
knowing whether to follow through or prove the break false; obviously,
this is an indication of defender's resilience, but at the same time it
shows that the attacking parties are not so easily demoralized either; for
as long as this fight persists (buildup), there is still a reasonable chance
for the market to break away in line with the earlier break.
The other situation of interest is when prices do follow through on
the original breakout, but then pull back to challenge the area of the
broken barrier.
Either situation knows many subtle variants and all could set up a
trade in line with the original break. Our task, therefore, is to see if we
can locate within the post-breakout action a valid signal bar from which
break to take position. We can refer to this entry technique as trading
the pattern break pullback setup.

97

Understanding Price Action
WWtN.ProReaffime.com

eur/usd 5-minute

1.385

2
OProRetiTIne.com
09:00

1noo

11:00

12:00

13;00

14:00

Figure 5.6 The short below bar 9 completes the total concept of a skipped

break, a pullback, a ceiling test and a second-instance entry based on
the pattern break pullback setup. Before we examine the details of the
trade, it may be interesting to briefly compare this chart with the previ­
ous one, Figure 5 . 5 . Despite the striking similarities on the whole, the
differences between a tradable and non-tradable break (in first instance)
couldn't be better illustrated. In the foregoing chart, prior to breaking
down, prices had built up tension on top of the pattern line and this
allowed us to play the break upon occurrence. In our current chart,
prices broke away from a cluster formation that resided welL away from
the pattern boundary (progression 6-7, middle-part of an M-pattern).
Due to the "sudden" collapse, the break in bar 8 did not allow for a regu­
lar pattern break entry. But our chances to participate were not lost.
The price action on top of the pattern line shows the unmistakable
features of a bear-flag formation: a slightly tilted progression hanging
sideways from a strong bear pole ( 1 -2). In such a pattern, a series of
ascending lows may give off an impression of demand. But the buy­
er beware; if the trending pole from which the flag is hanging is any
good, we can rest assured that bears won't sit idly by and watch their
dominance undone. A popular ploy is to wait for the bulls to run out of
breath in the higher region of the flag and then unleash upon them a
quick wave of selling. Fine examples of this contrarian practice can be
spotted at 3 and 5 (false highs) .
There is a widespread notion among technical traders, and not with­
out merit, that the extent of follow-through on a flag breakout often

98

Chapter 5

Trade Setups - Pattern Break Pullback

mimics the length of the pole from which the flag is hanging. We can
refer to this as the pole-flag-swing principle (a lightning symbol, if you
wish). Whether or not one fully abides by this premise, the break of a
decent flag pattern is always worthy of attention. So let's have a look at
how this one came about.
Ironically, just prior to the event, after four hours of pushing and
pulling within the flag, bulls had finally managed to stay on top of the
25ema for a number of consecutive bars (6-7), but then the tables sud­
denly turned (bar 8).
Note also that it was a false high in bar 7 that set the stage for the
flag breakout at the other end. As bears jumped in and bulls jumped
out, powerbar 8 completed the right leg of an M-pattern reversal (45-6-7 -8). With the 6-7 middle-part hanging ominously above, sideline
bulls no longer bothered to defend the pattern line as done on previous
touches. Prices sank straight through.
This leaves us to examine the details of the pattern break pullback
entry below bar 9 . For starters, pullback 8-9 had retraced about 50/60
percent of the breakout swing 7-8. In doing so, bar 9 had not only put
in a triple with the pattern line extension, the round number and the
25ema, the high of this bar had put in a ceiling test with the lows of the
6-7 block. Notice also that even though bar 9 had bullishly perforated
the pattern line from below, its close was back outside of the pattern,
and very bearish to boot. This clearly let on that both bull and bear had
cleverly made use of the 8-9 bounce, the former to sell out, the latter to
sell in.
In technical terms, bar 9 set up a valid second-instance short, but
there is one little issue here that almost spoilt the fun. This signal bar
stood relatively tall, which meant that the entry was offered quite a few
pip away from a potential retest of the adverse round number magnet.
That can be tricky for our stop. However, let us not discard any such
offer too easily. When the technical picture speaks highly in favor of im­
mediate continuation, as it did above, it is perhaps a risk worth taking
(a personal call, of course). After all, should only one out of three such
wagers follow through as anticipated, this would still yield a neutral
result on balance (when applying a risk/reward ratio of 1 : 2).Needless
