
It takes a mental leap to lay one candle over another and imagine what the result may be. The 30 minute chart
does this for us, and in addition, and perhaps more importantly, if we had a position in the market, the 30 minute
chart is instantly more recognisable as possible weakness than the 15 minute. So two benefits in one.
If putting two candles together to create one is difficult, putting six candles together is almost impossible, and
yet this is the same price action represented on the 5 minute chart. The market then moves into consolidation,
which again is much easier to see on the slower time frame chart than the faster ones, and I have deliberately
left the pivot points off these charts, so that the charts remain as clear as possible.
The next point is this. In displaying a slower time frame above, this also gives us a perspective on the
'dominant' trend. If the dominant trend is bullish on the 30 minute chart, and we decide to take a position on our
15 minute chart which is bullish, then the risk on the trade is lower, since we are trading with the dominant
trend. We are trading with the flow, and not against the flow. Swimming with the tide and not against it.
If we take a position that is against the dominant trend in our slower time frame, then we are counter trend
trading, and two conditions then apply. First, the risk on the trade is higher, since we are trading against the
dominant trend of our lower time frame, and second, we are unlikely to be holding the position long, since the
dominant trend is in the opposite direction.
In other words, what we are trading here is a pull back or a reversal. There is nothing wrong with this, as
everything in trading is relative. After all a reversal on a daily chart might last several days. It is all relative to the
time frame.
The third reason for using multiple charts is that this also gives us a perspective on changes in trend as they
ripple through the market, this time in the opposite direction. The analogy I use here is of the ripples in a pond.
When you throw a pebble into the centre of a small pond, as the pebble hits the water, the ripples move out and
away before they eventually reach the edge of the pond. This is what happens with market price action.
Any potential change in trend will be signalled on our fast time frame chart. This is where you will see sudden
changes in price and volume appear first. If this is a true change, then the effect will then appear on the primary
chart, which in this case is the 15 minute chart, before the change ultimately ripples through to our 30 minute
chart, at which point this change is now being signalled on the dominant chart.
This is how to trade, as we constantly scan from the slower to the faster and back again, checking and looking
for clues and confirming signals between the three time frames, with VPA sitting at the centre of our analysis.
Even if you ultimately decide that VPA is not for you, trading using multiple time frames is a powerful approach
which will give you a three dimensional view of the market. You can have more than three, but for me three is
sufficient, and I hope will work for you as well.
Finally to end this chapter, I would like to include a short section on the candle patterns I have found work, and
work consistently. And you will not be surprised to learn, all these patterns work particularly well with price
support and resistance, as well as price congestion.
By watching for these candle patterns whenever the market is in a consolidation phase and preparing for a
move, coupled with VPA and multiple time frame analysis, this will add a further dimension to your trading. And
the patterns I would like to consider here are the falling triangle, the rising triangle, pennants and finally triple
tops and bottoms.

Fig 11.13 Falling triangle – 5 Minute Chart
Let’s start with the falling triangle as shown in Fig 11.13 above. As the name suggests, a falling triangle pattern
is a sign of weakness. We can see immediately from the volume, that we are in a congestion phase, but in this
case the market is also moving lower. Each attempt to rally is seen as a series of lower highs, and is a clear
signal of weakness. If this market is going to break anywhere, there is a strong chance that it will be to the
downside, since each attempt to rally is becoming weaker and weaker in terms of the high of the candles. The
floor of the congestion area is very well defined, and any sustained break below here will be signalled with
volume.
As with all price patterns, the falling triangle appears in all time frames and on all charts, and we must always
remember Wyckoff's rule of cause and effect. If the cause is large then the effect will be equally large. In this
case we are looking at a 5 minute chart, but this type of congestion will often appear on daily and weekly charts
and is immensely powerful in generating new trends, or reversals in trend, on the breakout.

Fig 11.14 Rising triangle – Daily Chart
Fig 11.14 is from the daily chart of the EUR/USD, and as we can see the rising triangle is a bullish pattern. In
this example the market is moving higher and testing the same ceiling level, with the low of each candle slowly
rising, signalling a market that is bullish. After all, if the market were bearish, then we would see the lows of
each candle falling. Instead the lows are rising, suggesting positive sentiment in the market, and as we
approach the ceiling (or resistance), then we are prepared for the subsequent breakout, which is confirmed with
volume. Once clear of resistance, the ceiling becomes support, and gives us a natural price barrier for
positioning stop losses as we take a trade.
The third pattern in this series is the pennant, so called as it resembles a pennant flag on a mast.

Fig 11.15 Pennant pattern – Monthly Chart
Here in Fig 11.15 is an example of a candle pattern on a much longer time frame and is from the monthly chart
for Microsoft and shows an EXTREMELY long congestion phase, but look at the contraction in the price action
just prior to the final break out.
The pennant pattern is so called as it resembles a flag on a flagpole. The pattern is created by a series of lower
highs above, as the market tries to rally, coupled with higher lows below. As we can see on the Microsoft chart,
here we have a stock which is struggling to break higher, yet is not prepared to fall. It is this tension in the price
action which creates this unique pattern. Again as with all these formations, the law of cause and effect applies,
and in the case of the pennant the longer the tension continues, the more the price action creates what I call a
'coiled spring'.
In other words, the energy stored and built up in the price action is suddenly released in an explosive breakout.
The problem is, that with this kind of pattern, unlike the previous two, there is generally no clue as to which way
the price is likely to break. Nevertheless, it is a great pattern for trading direction-less strategies with options, but
for trend trading, we simply have to be patient and wait for the break out.
The last two patterns in this set are reversal signals and ones I am always looking for. The market has risen or
fallen, and is now testing support or resistance. As with the patterns already mentioned, these also occur in all
time frames and on all charts and I want to start with some examples of markets which have run into resistance
and are struggling to move higher.

Fig 11.16 Triple Top – Daily Chart AUD/USD
Fig 11.16 is an example of a classic triple top pattern from the daily chart of the AUD/USD, where we can see
the pair has tested the 1.0600 level on three separate occasions. This region has been tested several times
over the last few years, but in the last year it has been tested three times, failing on each occasion. And here
there are two opportunities.
First a position to the short side should our VPA and multiple time frame analysis confirm this view. Second, if
the market breaks above this region, then this will build an extremely strong platform of support, if this ceiling is
eventually breached.
The opposite of a triple top is a triple bottom.

Fig 11.17 Triple Bottom – EUR/CHF Hour Chart
In a triple bottom pattern, the market is testing support, and each time bouncing off. Our example of a triple
bottom is taken from the hourly chart for the EUR/CHF (Euro Swiss) currency pair where we can see a classic
formation of this pattern.
As with the triple top, there are two trading scenarios. The first is a long position, validated by VPA or wait for a
break and hold below the support region, for a short trade. Any follow through to the short side would then
provide strong resistance overhead.
The good news is that we see all these patterns in every instrument and market. In bonds, commodities,
equities and currencies, and in all time frames.
These patterns all have one thing in common - they are creating trading opportunities for us by signalling two
things. First, an area where the market is in congestion, and second, a market that is either building a ceiling of
price resistance or a floor of price support. From there will come the inevitable breakout, signalling a trend
reversal, or a continuation of trend, and from there, all we need to do is to validate the move using VPA, and of
course VAP, which will highlight these areas for us visually on our charts.
Now in the final chapter of the book I would like expand on some of the latest developments in volume based
trading techniques. After all, the approach and basic concepts have changed little in the last 100 years, so
perhaps it’s time for some new developments!

Chapter Twelve
Volume And Price – The Next Generation
My biggest winnings were not in dollars but in the intangibles: I had been right, I had looked ahead and
followed a clear cut plan.
Jesse Livermore (1877-1940)
I began this book by stating that there is nothing new in trading, and indeed this is certainly true in terms of
volume. Its foundations were laid by the iconic traders of the last century, and since then, little has changed.
The methodology remains as valid today, as it was then. The only changes have been in technology and
markets. Other than that, we use the same principles as they used, all those years ago.
However, that said, as a devotee of volume, I am constantly looking for developments in this analytical
approach to the market, which has formed the cornerstone of my own trading career. I would be foolish to ignore
them. After all, candlesticks were virtually unheard of in Western trading before the 1990’s - now they are the
‘de facto’ standard for technical traders.
Therefore in this final chapter, I would like to introduce you to some of the latest developments in volume and
price analysis, which are both new and innovative. I have not used these myself, so cannot comment on their
validity, but feel it is important to present them here, and as this book is updated in future versions, I can then
add further chapters as these techniques develop and perhaps incorporate them into my own trading.

Equivolume Charts
The volume price approach termed ‘equivolume’ was developed by Richard Arms and first published in his
book, Volume Cycles In The Stock Market, written in 1994. The concept is one in which volume is considered to
be more important than time, and as such the X axis of the chart is replaced with volume, whilst the Y axis
remains as before with price. The principle idea is that in adopting this approach in presenting the price and
volume relationship on the chart, this emphasizes the relationship, with volume moving to the chart itself, where
it joins price, rather than as an isolated indicator at the bottom of the chart. As a result, and with the change in
the X axis from time, to volume, the ‘time’ element is removed and the focus is then solely on the volume price
relationship.
This relationship is then presented in the form of ‘boxes’. The vertical element of the box, in other words the
height, is simply the high and low of the session in terms of price. The horizontal element is volume, which of
course varies, as to whether this is ultra high, high, medium or low, which in turn means that the width of each
box varies. On our chart we no longer have candles, but a series of boxes, both narrow and fat, tall and short
which then represent the direct relationship between volume and price in a very visual way, but with the time
element removed. The time element is still there, but on a separate axis below, otherwise it would be
impossible to know where we are on the chart.
As Arms himself said:
‘if the market wore a wristwatch, it would be divided into shares, not hours’
and indeed in some ways this sums up the concept of trading on tick based charts which I mentioned in an
earlier chapter. After all, time is a man made concept, and something the markets can and do ignore. The
beauty of trading on a tick chart is that it is the market dictating the ‘speed’ of the market. In other words, on a
tick chart, we are trading in harmony with the market. When we move to a time based chart, it is we who are
dictating to the market our chosen timeframe, a subtle but important difference. On a tick chart we trade at the
speed of the market - on a time based chart we don’t.
This same philosophy can be applied to equivolume, which attempts to remove the rather ‘false’ aspect of time
from the analysis, to create a purer and more meaningful relationship between the two elements of volume and
price.
Let’s take a look at how these boxes are created and what they actually tell us about the volume price
relationship. Below is a schematic in Fig 12.10

Fig 12.10 Equivolume Boxes
Remember, the X axis for each box is volume and the Y axis is price, so if we look at box 1, here we have a
narrow but tall box. In other words, the volume has been low, but the price action has been wide, so this might
be equivalent to a wide spread up candle on low volume, so an anomaly.
Next to this in box 2, we have the opposite, where we have a small change in price, and remember we are
talking here about the high and the low, and NOT the open and the close, coupled with a large amount of
volume. This too might be equivalent to an anomaly where we have above average or high volume and a
narrow price spread.
Box 3, might be considered representative of a ‘normal’ volume and price relationship, with good volume
supporting a solid price change. Finally in box 4, we have extremes of both volume and price. The box is wide,
so above average volume and the price is wide as well, so clearly effort and result are in agreement here, as
they are in box 3.
The color of the boxes is dictated by the close. When the close is above the previous close, then the box is
painted black, and when the close is below the previous close, then it is painted red.
In order to maintain aspect ratios and to keep the charts meaningful, the volume is then normalized by dividing
the actual volume for that period, by the total of all the volume displayed on the chart. Whilst time has been
removed from the boxes themselves, it still appears, to help keep the chart in context for the trading session.
Whilst it is difficult to imagine trading using these boxes and moving away from candlesticks, many of the
techniques I have explained in this book will still apply, as they are equally valid. The focus using this approach
is on the box, its shape, and location within any trend. Breakouts from congestion are just as important for
equivolume trading as with more conventional VPA, and here we might expect to see what is often referred to
as a “power box”, which is high volume and wide price. In VPA terms, above average volume and a wide

spread candle on the breakout from congestion. The principles are much the same, it’s the display which is very
different.
At this point let me add my own personal thoughts here.
Whilst I like the concept of showing the price and volume together on one ‘box’ which instantly reveals whether
we have a high/low combination, anomalies, or an average/average combination which may be normal, the
issue I have is the removal of time. After all, as Wykcoff himself stated, it is the cause and effect which holds the
key to the development of the trend. In other words, time is the third element of the volume and price
relationship. Remove time, and the approach becomes two dimensional, and not three dimensional, and as I
hope I have made clear throughout the book, the longer a market is in a consolidation phase, then the greater
will be the consequent trend once the market breaks out. Consolidation phases are where trends are born or
pause before moving on, and if you remove the time element, then to me, this removes one of the pillars of
Volume Price Analysis which is the judgment of the power of any subsequent trend.
This is just my own personal view, and I would encourage you to explore the idea of equivolume further for
yourself. The other issue is that candlestick analysis no longer plays a part, but help is at hand here, with
candle volume charts.

Candle Volume Charts
Candle volume charts are exactly as they sound, and are a hybrid version of equivolume and traditional
candlestick charts. In other words, the ‘box’ of equivolume is then laid over a candlestick with the traditional
open, high, low and close, to create a unique chart. This charts displays candles of varying width and height
due to the volume aspect, but with the upper and lower wicks added. A combination of both approaches which
is shown in the schematic below in Fig 12.11

Fig 12.11 Candlevolume Chart

A little more recognizable! On these charts the candles are now all different widths to reflect the volume on each
candle, with the price action represented vertically as usual, but with the open, high low and close displayed.
On this chart we see our traditional wicks to the top and bottom of each candle. This is not an approach I have
studied personally in any great detail, but it may have some advantages, and at least overcomes what I
consider to be one of the big drawbacks with equivolume, namely the lack of time, which I believe is
fundamental to any VPA approach. However, I always keep an open mind, and if any readers of this book have
used candlevolume and have found this system helpful, please do drop me a line and send me your thoughts
and comments. You can never stop learning in trading!

Delta Volume
Finally just to round of this chapter on the ‘future’ for Volume Price Analysis, there are two further approaches to
analyzing volume which are gaining some traction, and these are delta volume and cumulative delta volume.
In simple terms delta volume refers to the difference in volumes between those contracts that trade at the ‘ask’
and those that trade at the ‘bid’. In other words, orders that are sell orders and those that are buy orders, with the
net difference between the two then displayed as ‘delta’. For example, if the software calculates on one bar, that
there have been 500 contracts sold at the bid and only 200 contracts bought at the ask, then this would
represent a net difference of 300 contracts sold. Any indicator measuring delta volume would then display this
as a negative volume bar of -300 and generally these appear as shown in the schematic below in Fig 12.12

Fig 12.12 Delta Volume
From this schematic the delta volume gives an indication of the net difference between the buying and the
selling as the market moves higher and lower. In other words, yet another way of interpreting the volume and
price relationship. This approach is ideally suited to those markets where there is an open exchange, such as
for futures and equities.

Cumulative Delta Volume
Finally cumulative delta volume collects all the delta data and adds each subsequent bar to that of the previous
bar - summing the totals in other words, and then presents this as a series of bars, to provide a perspective on

the daily or intra day price action. In other words, it attempts to give a perspective on the strength of the buying
or selling associated with the price action.
Delta and cumulative delta are relatively new in the world of Volume Price Analysis and as such, neither is
generally available free as a standard indicator. This may change in the future, and as we move forward over
the next few years, I believe that delta and its derivatives may be increasingly adopted for certain markets. One
market that springs to mind in particular is for E mini traders in indices, where it all started for me!
I have now reached the end of the book. It is a book I have wanted to write for many years, and finally found the
time to do just that. I have tried to explain everything as carefully as I can, with what I hope are some clear
examples, and now it is for you to practise reading the charts and applying these techniques for yourself.
I hope I have managed to convince you of the power of volume and price, and the potential success that awaits
if you are prepared to adopt this methodology. It does require a little time to master but, in my opinion, is worth
the effort. However, I would urge you again, NOT to spend thousands of dollars on software which suggest that
VPA can be done for you. It won't. VPA is a technique that takes time, effort and patience, but once you have
grasped the basic concepts then the rest falls into place very quickly.
Volume and price together are the only indicators that truly reveal market sentiment and the activity of the
insiders. Without it you are trading blind. With it, everything is revealed. There is no hiding place with VPA.
Finally, I would, of course, like to thank you for purchasing this book, and if you do have any comments,
questions or suggestions I would be delighted to hear from you. You can contact me on my personal email at
anna@annacoulling.com and I guarantee that you will receive a reply. This book is based on my own personal
trading experience, and from what I found has worked for me over the years.
If you have enjoyed the book, naturally I would be grateful if you could spread the word, to help other traders
who may still be struggling to understand how and why the markets behave in the way they do. I would really
appreciate a review on Amazon, which will help others to find this book more easily. So thank you in advance.
This is the first of several books that I will be publishing over the coming months. This is the second, and I have
recently published another entitled ‘A Three Dimensional Approach To Forex Trading which explains how to
forecast forex market behavior using the combined power of relational, technical and fundamental analysis.
This will be followed by ‘A Simple Guide to Forex Trading Using MT4’. And I am also writing a book in
collaboration with my husband David ‘ A Complete Guide to Binary Options’, all of which you will be able to find
on my personal site at http://www.annacoulling.com
Further books are planned, as there are many aspects of trading (and investing) that I have not covered.
Once again, thank you so much, and may I wish you every success in your own trading journey towards
becoming a master forex trader.
Warmest regards, and many thanks again
