
Setting Stops

Serious traders place stops the moment they enter a trade. As time passes,
stops need to be adjusted to reduce the amount of money at risk and to protect a bigger chunk of profit. Stops should be moved only one way - in the
direction of the trade. We all like to hope that a trade will succeed-and a
stop is a piece of reality that prevents traders from hanging on to empty
hope.
When you are long, you may keep your stops in place or raise them but
never lower them. When you are short, you may keep your stops in place or
lower them but never raise them. Cutting extra slack to a losing trade is a
loser's game. If a trade is not working out, it shows that your analysis was
flawed or the market has changed. Then it is time to run fast.
Serious traders use stops the way sailors use ratchets- to take out the
slack in their sails. Losers who move stops away from the market vote in
favor of fantasy and against reality.
Learning to place stops is like learning to drive defensively. Most of us
learn the same techniques and we adjust them to fit our personal styles. The
following are the basic rules for placing stops.
1. Stop-Loss Order

Place your stop the moment you enter a trade. Trading without a stop is
like walking down Fifth Avenue in Manhattan without pants on. It can be
done, I have seen people do it, but it is not worth the trouble. A stop will
not protect you from a bad trading system; the best it can do is slow down
the damage.
A stop-loss order limits your risk even though it does not always work.
Sometimes prices gap through a stop. A stop is not a perfect tool but it is the
best defensive tool we have.

48. EXITING TRADES

267

M e n you go long, place your stop below the latest minor support level.
When you go short, place a stop above the latest minor resistance (see
Section 20). The Parabolic system (see Section 44) moves the stops in the
direction of the trade, depending on the passage of time and changes in
prices. If you use the Triple Screen trading system (see Section 43), place
your stop after entering a trade at the extreme of the past two days' range.
Avoid all trades where a logical stop would expose more than 2 percent of
your equity. This limit includes slippage and commissions.
2. Break-Even Order

The first few days in a trade are the hardest. You have done your homework, found a trade, and placed an order. It has been filled, and you placed a
stop-loss order. There is not much else you can do-you are like a pilot
strapped into his seat for takeoff. The engines are blasting at full power, but
the speed is low, and there is no room to maneuver-just sit back and trust
your system.
As soon as prices start to move in your favor, move your stop to a breakeven level. When the takeoff is completed, your flight is at a safer stage.
Now you get to choose between keeping your money or gaining more,
instead of choosing between a loss and a gain.
As a rule, prices have to move away from your entry point by more than
the average daily range before you move your stop to a break-even level. It
takes judgment and experience to know when to do it.
When you move a stop to a break-even level, you increase the risk of a
whipsaw. Amateurs often kick themselves for "leaving money on the
table." Many amateurs allow themselves only one entry into a trade. There
is nothing wrong with re-entering a trade after getting stopped out.
Professionals keep trying to get in until they get a good entry, using tight
money management.
3. Protect-Profit Order

As prices continue to move in your favor, you have to protect your paper
profits. Paper profit is real money- treat it with the same respect as money
in your wallet. Risk only a portion of it, as the price of staying in the trade.
If you are a conservative trader, apply the 2 percent rule to your paper
profits. This protect-profit order is a "money stop," protecting your equity.

268

RISK MANAGEMENT

Keep moving it in the direction of the trade so that no more than 2 percent of
your growing equity is ever exposed.
More aggressive traders use the 50 percent rule. If you follow it, half the
paper profit is yours and half belongs to the market. You can mark the highest high reached in a long trade or the lowest low reached in a short trade,
and place your stop halfway between that point and your entry point. For
example, if prices move 10 points in your favor, place a stop to protect 5
points of profit.
If in doubt, use the Parabolic system (see Section 44) to help you adjust
your stops. When you are not sure whether to stay in a trade or not, take
profits and re-evaluate the situation from the sidelines. There is nothing
wrong with exiting and re-entering a trade. People think much more clearly
when they have no money at risk.

After the Trade

A trade does not end when you close out your position. You must analyze it
and learn from it. Many traders throw their confirmation slips into a folder
and go looking for the next trade. They miss an essential part of growing to
become a professional trader - review and self-analysis.
Have you identified a good trade? Which indicators were useful and
which did not work? How good was your entry? Was the initial stop too far
or too close? Why and by how much? Did you move your stop to a breakeven level too early or too late? Were your protect-profit stops too loose or
too tight? Did you recognize the signals to exit a trade? What should you
have done differently? What did you feel at the various stages of the trade?
This analysis is an antidote against emotional trading.
Ask yourself these and other questions and learn from your experiences.
A cool, intelligent analysis does you more good than gloating about profits
or wallowing in regrets.
Start keeping a "before and after" notebook. Whenever you enter a position, print out the current charts. Paste them on the left page of your notebook and jot down your main reasons for buying or shorting. Write down
your plan for managing the trade.
When you exit, print the charts again and paste them on the right page of
your notebook. Write down your reasons for exiting and list what you did
right or wrong. You will have a pictorial record of your trades and thoughts.
This notebook will help you learn from the past and discover blind spots in
yyour thinking. Learn from history and profit from your experiences.

Afterword

One hot summer, in the mountains of northern Italy, I sat down to draft the
first outline of this book. Two and a half years later, on a frigid January in
New York City, I printed out its last chart. I wrote and rewrote this book
three times, to make it clearer and to reflect my growing experience.
I have changed as a person, and my methods continue to evolve. If I could
work on this manuscript for another two and a half years, it would become a
different book, but it is time to let go.

Pulling the Trigger
Traders sometimes confide in me that they have trouble "pulling the trigger''- buying or selling when their methods tell them to go long or short. I
had this problem once, for a very short time. My friend Lou, to whom this
book is dedicated, helped me get rid of it.
One Sunday afternoon I mentioned to Lou that I saw several attractive
trades but doubted I'd take any of them the following week because I had
recently gotten beat up in the markets. Lou, who is usually cool and mildmannered, suddenly began yelling. "I want you to trade at the opening on
Monday!" I did not feel like trading-I was afraid of losing. "I don't give a
shit whether you win or lose - trade tomorrow at the open!" I seldom trade at
the open, but I could trade 10 minutes later, looking for an opening range
breakout. "10 minutes is OK, but trade tomorrow!"
I thought about what had happened and realized what my problem was. I
was like a skier at the top of the hill who had taken a bad spill and was afraid
to go down again. Whatever my technique, if I was afraid to go downhill, I
could not be a skier.
Fear of placing an order is the biggest problem that a serious trader can

RISK MANAGEMENT

Keep moving it in the direction of the trade so that no more than 2 percent of
your growing equity is ever exposed.
More aggressive traders use the 50 percent rule. If you follow it, half the
paper profit is yours and half belongs to the market. You can mark the highest high reached in a long trade or the lowest low reached in a short trade,
and place your stop halfway between that point and your entry point. For
example, if prices move 10 points in your favor, place a stop to protect 5
points of profit.
If in doubt, use the Parabolic system (see Section 44) to help you adjust
your stops. When you are not sure whether to stay in a trade or not, take
profits and re-evaluate the situation from the sidelines. There is nothing
wrong with exiting and re-entering a trade. People think much more clearly
when they have no money at risk.

After the Trade

A trade does not end when you close out your position. You must analyze it
and learn from it. Many traders throw their confirmation slips into a folder
and go looking for the next trade. They miss an essential part of growing to
become a professional trader - review and self-analysis.
Have you identified a good trade? Which indicators were useful and
which did not work? How good was your entry? Was the initial stop too far
or too close? Why and by how much? Did you move your stop to a breakeven level too early or too late? Were your protect-profit stops too loose or
too tight? Did you recognize the signals to exit a trade? What should you
have done differently? What did you feel at the various stages of the trade?
This analysis is an antidote against emotional trading.
Ask yourself these and other questions and learn from your experiences.
A cool, intelligent analysis does you more good than gloating about profits
or wallowing in regrets.
Start keeping a "before and after" notebook. Whenever you enter a position, print out the current charts. Paste them on the left page of your notebook and jot down your main reasons for buying or shorting. Write down
your plan for managing the trade.
When you exit, print the charts again and paste them on the right page of
your notebook. Write down your reasons for exiting and list what you did
right or wrong. You will have a pictorial record of your trades and thoughts.
This notebook will help you learn from the past and discover blind spots in
yyour thinking. Learn from history and profit from your experiences.

Afterword

One hot summer, in the mountains of northern Italy, I sat down to draft the
first outline of this book. Two and a half years later, on a frigid January in
New York City, I printed out its last chart. I wrote and rewrote this book
three times, to make it clearer and to reflect my growing experience.
I have changed as a person, and my methods continue to evolve. If I could
work on this manuscript for another two and a half years, it would become a
different book, but it is time to let go.

Pulling the Trigger

Traders sometimes confide in me that they have trouble "pulling the trigger" - buying or selling when their methods tell them to go long or short. I
had this problem once, for a very short time. My friend Lou, to whom this
book is dedicated, helped me get rid of it.
One Sunday afternoon I mentioned to Lou that I saw several attractive
trades but doubted I'd take any of them the following week because I had
recently gotten beat up in the markets. Lou, who is usually cool and mildmannered, suddenly began yelling. "I want you to trade at the opening on
Monday!" I did not feel like trading-I was afraid of losing. "I don't give a
shit whether you win or lose - trade tomorrow at the open!" I seldom trade at
the open, but I could trade 10 minutes later, looking for an opening range
breakout. "10 minutes is OK, but trade tomorrow!"
I thought about what had happened and realized what my problem was. I
was like a skier at the top of the hill who had taken a bad spill and was afraid
to go down again. Whatever my technique, if I was afraid to go downhill, I
could not be a skier.
Fear of placing an order is the biggest problem that a serious trader can

2 70

AFTERWORD

have. There is no way to handle this problem with ease and comfort. It has to
be handled hard, by a sheer effort of will, which is why Lou yelled at meas a friend.
You need to design a system or borrow one from this book and adapt it to
your needs. Skiers do a little practice on a bunny slope, and you can papertrade. Design a sensible money management plan, using the 2 percent rule.
Limit your monthly losses to the maximum of 6 percent or 8 percent of your
risk capital. At this point you are like a skier, ready at the top of the hill.
Push off when your system flags you to go! Push off now!
If you do not go downhill when the flag comes down, you might as well
sell your skis and take up golf or raise goldfish. In other words, forget about
trading.
Now you have a system, you've learned money management rules, you
know the psychological rules for cutting losses. Now you must trade. Can
you? Traders try to weasel out of making this decision. They papertrade for
years, buy automatic trading systems, and so on. Several traders have even
asked me to hypnotize them. These games must end. It is time to make an
effort of will!
Consider this book my friendly yell at you.

The Endless Trail

Markets change, new opportunities emerge, and old ones melt away. Good
traders are successful but humble people - they always learn. Being a trader
is a lifelong challenge.
I hope this book helps you to grow as a trader. If you have read this far,
you must be serious about your work. Take this book for what it is- a
description of what's on one trader's mind and how he goes about solving
problems that all of us face. Take the ideas that appeal to you, and shape
them to fit your style.
If you believe that being a trader is worth the effort-as I decided years
ago- my best wishes to you. I continue to learn, and like any trader, I
reserve the right to be smarter tomorrow than I am today.

Acknowledgments

After finishing a project of several years, I owe a sweet debt of gratitude to
hundreds of persons- teachers, friends, and clients. If you do not see your
name here, please forgive me, and I'll thank you in pcrson the next time we
meet.
Thanks, first of all, to all the clients of Financial Trading Seminars, Inc.
Often a phone would ring and a trader would ask for "Dr. Elder's book." The
book was not written yet, not advertised anywhere-but clients expected a
book from me. That was terrific encouragement.
Writing a book was a hard job, but it helped me organize my thoughts and
become a better trader. Two friends provided a soft push at the birth of this
project. First, Tim Slater invited me to seminars in Asia, and then Martin
Pring introduced me to people at WEFA, which led to a conference in Italy.
Walking with Tim through Snake Alley to a smoky restaurant in Taipei and,
a few months later, sitting in a cafe in Milan with Martin, I felt friendly but
unmistakable pressure to organize my thoughts and start writing.
The blank screen of a word processor seemed huge and forbidding. To get
the job rolling, I offered a number of seminars and taped some of them.
Those transcripts helped me flesh out the ideas for this book. Thanks to all
the analysts and traders in New York and Toronto, London and Singapore
who came to my seminars, listened, and asked hundreds of questions. Some
were experts whose comments forced me to stretch my mind farther than I
expected; others were beginners whose questions served as a reminder to
keep my feet on the ground. I hope you are all making money trading.
Three persons, a colleague and two patients, have opened my mind to the
idea of 12 Steps - a major factor in my improvement as a trader. Thank you,
Dagmar O'Connor, Jim S., and Kathy H. (Kathy died last year, after a long
battle with cancer, and visiting her for months in a hospice reinforced my
belief that there are values more important than money.) Thanks to the pro-

272

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

fessional traders who came to consult with me as a psychiatrist and entrusted
me with their confidence. You reinforced my conviction that if you get your
head in order, money tends to flow in.
Great thanks to everybody who works for my company, Financial Trading
Seminars, Inc. It is a unique group of people-intelligent, dynamic, and fun
to be with. Each has been selected from dozens if not hundreds of applicants -you are the best. Thanks especially to our managers - Carol Keegan
Kayne and Inga Boguslavsky. Carol helped me edit every chapter. We had
many passionate arguments about the language, most of which Carol won,
and if you have any complaints about the clarity of this book, I'll give you
her number.
Once the manuscript was ready, I divided it into a dozen sections and
mailed each to a top expert in the field. These busy and successful people
found time to review several chapters each and suggested many improvements. In addition to the friends already mentioned, they included Gerald
Appel, Stephen Briese, Ralph Cato, Mark Douglas, John Ehlers, Perry
Kaufman, Tony Plummer, Fred Schutzman, Bo Thunman, Ralph Vince, and
David Weis. Thank you for being so generous with your time and advice. If
the market is a minus-sum game, then having friends like you is an especially big plus!
Thanks to the analysts who wrote before me. It was often hard to find who
was first- there is a thicket of conflicting claims in our field. As Henry
Kissinger once said, "Academic fights are so bitter because the stakes are so
small." Most charts in this book were drawn using CompuTrac software on
an IBM-compatible and imported into PageMakerB for the Macintosh.
Thanks to Norbert Rudek for helping to set up the system and for unstinting
phone support. Thanks to the editors at Barron 's, Futures, Technical Analysis
of Stocks and Commodities, Futures and Options World, and other magazines for encouraging me to write articles and book and software reviews - it
was a good training for the book.
Many thanks to Stephen Reibel, M.D., a fellow psychiatrist and a former
boss at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center for covering my practice. I can
go and teach all over the world knowing that my patients in New York are in
good hands.
Lou Taylor, to whom this book is dedicated, has offered a treasury of
superb ideas. I wish he would write a book. His wise advice made a huge
difference at several important turning points. My family, especially Miriam,
Nicole, and Danny, provided cheerful support and a happy diversion from
business.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

2 73

Finally, I want to thank my friend from way back when, Nicolai
Gorbunoff. A scientist, he was destroyed by the Soviet system when I was
but a teenager. In the closed, Communist party-dominated world that we
lived in, he planted a simple but revolutionary idea in my mind: that the only
standard for research and work was the "world class." You had to strive to be
among the best in the world, or else it did not pay to try. Thank you Nicolai,
and thank you, all my friends.
New York
November 1992

Dr. Alexander Elder

Sources
I

Angel], George. Winning in the Futures Market (1979) (Chicago: Probus Publishing,
1990).
Appel, Gerald. Day-Trading with Gerald Appel (video) (New York: Financial
Trading Seminars, Inc., 1989).
Arms, Richard W., Jr. The Arms Index (Homewood, IL: Business One Irwin, 1988).
Babcock, Bruce, Jr. The Dow Jones Irwin Guide to Commodity Trading Systems
(Homewood, IL: Dow Jones Irwin, 1989).
Balsara, Nauzer J. Money Management Stategies for Future Traders (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1992).
Belveal, L. Dee. Charting Commodity Market Price Behavior (1969) (Homewood,
IL: Dow Jones Irwin, 1989).
Bullish Review Newsletter, Rosemount, MN.
Club 3000 Newsletter, Augusta, MI.
CompuTrac Software Manual (1982) (New Orleans, LA: CompuTrac, 1991).
Davis, L. J. "Buffet Takes Stock," The New York Times, April 1, 1990.
Diamond, Barbara, and Mark Kollar. 24-Hour Trading (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1989).
Douglas, Mark. The Disciplined Trader (New York: New York Institute of Finance,
1990).
Edwards, Robert D., and John Magee. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends (1948)
(New York: New York Institute of Finance, 1992).
Ehlers, John. MESA and Trading Market Cycles (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1992) .
Elder, Alexander. Directional System (video) (New York: Financial Trading
Seminars, Inc., 1988).
-. Elder-ray (video) (New York: Financial Trading Seminars, Inc., 1990).
-. MACD & MACD-Histogram (video)(New York: Financial Trading Seminars,
Inc., 1988).
.
"Market Gums," Futures and Options World London, September 1990.
-. Relative Strength Index (video) (New York: Financial Trading Seminars, Inc.,
1988).
-. Stochastic (video) (New York: Financial Trading Seminars, Inc., 1988).

276

.

SOURCES

Technical Analysis in Just 52 Minutes (video) (New York: Financial
Trading Seminars, Inc., 1992).
-. "Triple Screen Trading System," Futures Magazine, April 1986.
-. Triple Screen Trading System (video) (New York: Financial Trading Seminars,
Inc., 1989).
-. William %R (video) (New York: Financial Trading Seminars, Inc., 1988).
Elliott, Ralph Nelson. Nature's Law (1946) (Gainesville, GA: New Classics Library,
1980).
Engel, Louis. How to Buy Stocks (1953) (New York: Bantam Books, 1977).
Freud, Sigmund. Group Psychology and the Analyst of the Ego (1921) (London:
Hogarth Press, 1974).
Friedman, Milton. Essays in Positive Economics (Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press, h 3 ) .
Frost, A. J., and R. R. Prechter, Jr. Elliott Wave Principle (Gainesville, GA: New
Classics Library, 1978).
Gallacher, William. Winner Takes All - A Privateer's Guide to Commodity Trading
(Toronto: Midway Publications, 1983).
Gann, W. D. How to Make Profits in Commodities (Chicago: W. D. Gann Holdings,
1951).
Garland, Trudi Hammel. Fascinating Fibonacct (Palo Alto, CA: Dale Seymour
Publications, 1987).
Granville, Joseph. New Strategy of Daily Stock Market Timing for Maximum Profit
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1976).
-. The Book of Granville; Reflections of a Stock Market Prophet (New York:
St. Martin's Press, 1984).
Greenson, Ralph R. "On Gambling" (1947), in Explorations in Psychoanalysis
(New York: International Universities Press, 1978).
Greising, David, and Laurie Morse. Brokers, Bagmen & Moles (New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1991).
Havens, Leston. Making Contact (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1986).
Hurst, J. M. The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1970).
Kannerman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. "Choices, Values, and Frames," American
Psychologist, 39(4) (April 1984), 341-350.
Kaufman, Perry. The New Commodity Trading System and Methods (New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1987).
Kleinfield, Sonny. The Traders (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1983).
Lefevre, Edwin. Reminiscences of a Stock Operator (1923) (Greenville, SC: Traders
Press, 1985).
LeBon, Gustave. The Crowd (1897) (Atlanta, GA: Cherokee Publishing, 1982).
