
SUMMARY
This chapter has presented many examples of the trading templates from Chapter 6.
Though much deeper analysis was possible in every case, most of the comments focus
on the most important and most repeatable elements of these patterns. These are not examples and models to be followed slavishly, but nearly all traders will find they can adapt
these ideas and concepts to their own styles and techniques. In particular, the broad ideas
for managing exposure in developing trades and for clearly defining the risk for all initial
trade entries are nearly universal to all markets, time frames, and trading styles.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c10

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:1

Printer: Hamilton Printing

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

PART IV

The Individual,
Self-Directed
Trader

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

CHAPTER 11

The Trader’s Mind

If you open yourself to insight, you are at one with insight and you
can use it completely.
If you open yourself to loss, you are at one with loss and you can accept
it completely.
—Daodejing (ca. 6 BCE)

t one point or another, everyone who has interactions with the market asks oneself, “Why is trading so hard?” There are legitimate reasons why trading should
be difficult: markets are highly random; whatever edge we can find is eroded by
competition from smart, well-capitalized traders; some traders work within various constraints; and markets are subject to very large shocks that can have devastating effects
on unprepared traders. Even so, it seems like something else is going on, almost like we
are our own worst enemies at times. What is it about markets that encourages people to
do exactly the wrong thing at the wrong time, and why do many of the behaviors that
serve us so well in other situations actually work against us in the market?
Part of the answer lies in the nature of the market itself. What we call “the market”
is actually the end result of the interactions of thousands of traders across the gamut of
size, holding period, and intent. Each trader is constantly trying to gain an advantage over
the others; market behavior is the sum of all of this activity, reflecting both the rational
analysis and the psychological reactions of all participants. This creates an environment
that has basically evolved to encourage individual traders to make mistakes. That is an
important point—the market is essentially designed to cause traders to do the wrong
thing at the wrong time. The market turns our cognitive tools and psychological quirks
against us, making us our own enemy in the marketplace. It is not so much that the
market is against us; it is that the market sets us against ourselves.
These issues are particularly relevant to the individual, self-directed trader who has
few limits placed on his or her behavior and is faced with the nebulous job description

A

347

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

348

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

of “making money.” Traders in institutional settings have many advantages over the individual, not the least of which is that the institutional framework places many restrictions
on their actions. These constraints, along with guidance from management and implicit
mentoring from senior traders, provide a strong framework for shaping behavior and
make new traders in these settings less vulnerable to some of the common psychological stresses and errors. Furthermore, many institutional traders have specific, clearly
defined roles such as executing and managing complex sets of hedges, or managing inventory and flow resulting from customer orders. These traders are not faced with the
broad task of beating the market and can become quite skilled at their jobs without fully
conquering all of the psychological challenges of trading.
One word of warning: Though we now turn our focus to psychological elements of
trading, positive thinking, meditation, visualization, and correct psychology can take you
only so far. You absolutely must have an edge in the market to make money. For most
styles of trading, it is impossible to apply that edge well without the proper psychological skills, but those psychological tools are not, by themselves, an actual trading edge.
This chapter begins with a look at how the market turns some of our reasoning ability
against us and how we become our own worst enemies in the market. Next, we look at
intuition and flow, which are essential components of top-level trading for many traders.
In particular, the flow experience is an important part of both performance and skill development. The chapter ends with some concrete suggestions for developing an environment that allows the developing trader to work to overcome some of the more common
psychological errors.

PSYCHOLOGICAL CHALLENGES
OF THE MARKETPLACE
The psychological demands of trading are almost unique in the human experience. First,
there are serious consequences for making errors; trading decisions are high-risk decisions. Even if losses are limited so that no one trade can hurt us badly, it is a rare trader
who can face 10 losses in a row without significant pain and suffering—even traders
with secure institutional jobs may be in trouble after a string of losses. Furthermore,
losses do not always result from bad decisions, and, even more ominously, bad decisions
sometimes lead to good outcomes. This is a reflection of the randomness in the market
environment, but it is very difficult to hone skills and to develop intuition when results
cannot always be clearly tied to actions.
Furthermore, every trading decision you will ever make is always made with insufficient information. We never know everything there is to know about any trade, and,
no matter how good our research is, there are many things that are simply unknowable.
Even if you somehow could accumulate every relevant piece of information, known and
unknown, there is always the possibility that a large order could be dumped into the market with unpredictable results—anything can happen in the market. In addition, many

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

The Trader’s Mind

Printer: Hamilton Printing

349

trading decisions must be made quickly and under pressure. There are certainly types of
trading for which this is less true, but the actual decision to do something always comes
down to one point in time. Someone has to pull the trigger, and risk management decisions sometimes have to be made on the fly in response to developing market action.
This is the trading environment—high-risk decisions, made under pressure with insufficient information. Seen in this light, the reasons for some of the psychological challenges
become clearer.

EVOLUTIONARY ADAPTATIONS
Many of the cognitive tools we possess may be relics from earlier times in our development as a species; though they might have been helpful in prehistory, they often fail us
completely in modern life. For instance, the adrenaline flood associated with the fightor-flight response might have been useful in fleeing from a saber-toothed tiger. It is easy
to see how natural selection might have strengthened this response: If there were early
humans who didn’t have it, they became lunch. In modern life, this same response leads
to road rage, bar fights, constant stress, and a whole list of endocrine-related diseases.
This is who we are as a species. It is not possible to be completely free from these quirks,
because they are part of the very fabric of our being; we are, and always will be, vulnerable to making certain kinds of mistakes in certain situations. The best we can do is to be
aware of these biases and errors and to attempt to counteract them; but be clear on this
point—you cannot fix them.

Perceiving Patterns in Randomness
Have you ever seen faces in clouds, or shapes in the wood grain of finished furniture?
Ever heard voices murmuring, just out of the range of perception, when you hold a
seashell up to your ear? These are universal experiences, and they most likely come
from a slight misfiring of some powerful cognitive machinery. For instance, processing
and recognizing faces is actually an extremely complex task, but nearly all humans can
do this naturally and instantaneously. There are specific areas of the brain that have
evolved to deal with this complex task, but the same areas of the brain will also take
random patterns in clouds and force them into the structure of human faces. From an
evolutionary perspective, there was no payoff for being able to properly process random
data, no reason that natural selection would have preserved this skill. Instead, humans
who could quickly process faces and manage social interactions with their peers were
probably far more likely to survive in prehistory than were early humans who did not
excel at these skills.
We are pattern recognition machines. Our brains are so good at recognizing patterns that they will readily create patterns where none exist. We attempt to make order
out of chaos by imposing structured patterns on randomness. Traders often do not fully

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

350

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

appreciate this fact—they do not understand that much of what they see in the market,
no matter how convincing the pattern looks and feels, could simply be due to random
fluctuations in the market. It is impossible to overestimate the seriousness of this bias.

Heuristics
A heuristic is a rule of thumb, a cognitive shortcut that can quickly find the answer to a
problem that might otherwise be intractable. They are extremely fast and efficient; there
are some problems that can be solved in seconds or minutes heuristically that would
require hours or days of rational analysis. The root of heuristic thinking is the ability
to relate new experiences to old, already processed information—“Oh, this looks like
that.” We learn, think, and deal with the outside world by generalizing and filing our
experiences into broad categories, and when new situations are encountered we relate
them back to these broad categories. In the market, we are likely to relate situations and
patterns to groups of patterns that we have previously created or noticed, whether or not
there is a valid link between the two sets.
Heuristics are useful or even essential for traders, but it is important that they are
built from valid information and are carefully trained. Left unchecked, incorrect heuristics can be created and reinforced in the highly random market environment. For instance, one trader might have a heuristic that leads him to pay breakouts of the previous
day’s high in stock index futures, because he can remember many examples of good
winning trades. Another trader, who has actually done the research, might have the correct heuristic, which in this case, would be to fade those highs. Both traders can make a
trading decision quickly, but the trader whose intuition is based on correct principles of
market behavior will make the right decision.

Shifting Blame
If you spend any time at all around traders, you will hear language like this: “Oh, they got
my stop again.” “That guy screwed me again. Can you believe that?” “Oh, they always do
that. That’s criminal! How can they always do this to me?” Traders tend to blame their
losses on some great, nefarious, unseen them that is manipulating the markets behind
the scenes—the U.S. government buying stock futures (the “Plunge Protection Team”),
the floor traders manipulating markets, high-frequency trading (HFT) algorithms stealing from traders, or big banks heedlessly pushing markets around. Some or all of these
things may happen, but here is the point: it doesn’t matter. You would perceive this intentionality in the market whether it exists or not. You would feel a great unseen them,
because of the way your brain is wired. They may or may not be real, but your perception
of a third party manipulating the market says much more about your own cognition than
about the market itself.
Markets are blatantly manipulated at times, of this there is no doubt. However, market action is the end result of the competing activity of tens of thousands of traders,

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

The Trader’s Mind

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

351

across many time frames, with different objectives and perspectives; everything is folded
into the patterns of market behavior and much of it nets out to noise. Rather than being
angry when a market ticks your stop, either accept it as a natural event or, if your stop
was placed incorrectly, modify your behavior. If this type of unwanted outcome happens
frequently enough that you are this unhappy with it, you are probably doing something
that is against the nature of the market. It is a simple choice: continue to deflect and to
be angry at the way the market moves, or align yourself with it.

Fight or Flight
The fight-or-flight response is an amazing physiological adaptation. In times of great
stress or danger, hormones flood our bloodstream, and our bodies and minds are transformed. Our breathing and heart rate speed up, and blood vessels contract in our extremities so that oxygen is routed to essential areas. This is the response that lets little old
ladies lift cars off children or allows soldiers to continue in battle oblivious to grievous
wounds. All of this is well known, but what a lot of people do not realize is that the way
we perceive outside information also undergoes a profound shift under the fight-or-flight
response—our hearing is impaired and our vision actually narrows. Tunnel vision is not
just a figure of speech—it is a perceptual reality in response to stress.
In times of physical danger, this response can be a lifesaver, but the problem in modern society is that we have these same fight-or-flight responses to nonphysical stresses.
There is only a flood of hormones, but it is not followed by fighting or running. Our bodies
transform to prepare for action, but then we sit at our desk and maybe squeeze a stress
ball if we’re really worked up. Nothing in the history of our evolution has prepared us for
this situation, and the hormonal flood becomes a constant stress on our systems. Traders
experience dramatic emotional swings and the stress of this fight-or-flight response constantly, sometimes several times in a single hour, all through the trading day. The effects
of this response on our minds are fairly well known, but the cumulative impact on our
bodies is much less well understood. Traders must master their emotions well enough to
minimize their exposure to this hormonal barrage that can impair perception, wear on
the body, and cause great damage to trading accounts.
Aggression: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly Most people believe that aggressiveness is a desirable quality for traders, and many outsiders have the impression
that trading desks are populated exclusively by Red Bull–pounding, hyperaggressive
20-somethings. There is a grain of truth to this; these types are often attracted to the
challenge and perceived glamour of being a trader, but there may be a difference between the kind of people who are initially attracted to the profession and those who
survive. Aggression is a legitimate trading skill, but it must be disciplined and controlled.
If you find yourself in a situation where you are on tilt or otherwise out of control, the
first step in fixing the problem is recognizing that you are there. This requires a degree of
self-awareness than few new traders possess; it is the nature of this state of mind that it

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

352

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

blinds you to everything except your anger and aggression toward the market. If you find
yourself in this state, on the edge of losing control, realize that you are now in a very elite
group of self-directed traders, the vast majority of whom will never achieve the clarity
needed to evaluate their mental state. The first thing you need to do is to stop whatever
you are doing; you cannot make good decisions when you are on tilt. Your brain is in a
chemically compromised state—you are not in your right mind, and that is not a figure
of speech. It is not just that you are making bad decisions; the situation is actually much
worse—you are incapable of making good decisions in this state because the chemical
balance of your body has been altered. As you mature as a trader, you will find yourself
here less often, but it is good to have some concrete ideas and actions you can take when
you find yourself on tilt:

r Stop trading.
r If you are a short-term trader, immediately exit any position that is showing a loss,
and place breakeven or better stops on any other open trades. Even if you are a
trader who does not normally place stops in the market, you do now. This is a special
situation, and the objective is to remove yourself from the decision process for a
period of time.
r Stand up and move around. Take a break, and go for a walk outside. If it is cold,
maybe go for a walk without a coat. You don’t want to be comfortable; you want to
be jarred out of your mental state.
r Exercise. Go to the gym or do something physical.
r Have a non-trading-related conversation with another person. Trading is an isolating
experience, even if you are surrounded by other traders. Sometimes we get so stuck
inside our heads that a normal two-minute conversation can do wonders. Talk to the
clerk at Starbucks. Call your mom. Do whatever it takes to break the cycle.
r Write something with pencil and paper. At least for me, there is some kind of magic
in pencil and paper; it is not the same to type on a keyboard. As for what to write,
it might be a good idea to write in your trading journal, but even a grocery list will
work. Just write.
r Breathe deeply. If you can slow your body down and get control of your physiology,
the mind will follow. Meditation can be another powerful tool.
r When you have cooled down and are ready to trade, do one insignificant trade of a
very small size. Monitor your psychological reactions to that one trade. If you aren’t
ready to go back in the game, you will know.
r If you fail the previous test and are still rattled, take a longer break. There may be
some cases where you need to take a break lasting weeks or months. If so, do not
think about the lost opportunity; focus on the damage you will not do by trading
when you are compromised.
These are guidelines, but they have been useful for me and for many of the traders I
have worked with over the years. You will find your own list over time, but breaking the
destructive cycle before it has a serious effect on your trading account is the key.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

The Trader’s Mind

353

COGNITIVE BIASES
This chapter opened with the question “Why is trading so hard?” It seems that it should
be easier than it actually is: we acknowledge that markets are extremely random and
that there is a very small component of actionable trading signals in market data, but
it is there. Why is it not possible to devise simple ways to capture this edge and watch
profits accumulate in the trading account? This actually does describe the best highlevel trading, but few individual traders ever get to that stage. One of the reasons is that
the evolutionary adaptations and heuristics we just discussed result in some consistent
cognitive biases. We are practically designed to make trading mistakes. Though these
skills do serve useful purposes, unchecked they work just as effectively to ensure our
failure as traders. Most traders enter the marketplace with no awareness of the handicaps
and weaknesses they bring into the arena, and they are doomed to failure before they
even begin. The first step in combating these biases is knowing that they exist and that
they will unavoidably color every interaction with the market. A partial list of some of
the more common cognitive biases follows.

Gambler’s Fallacy
The gambler’s fallacy stems from faulty intuition about random processes. After observing deviations in a random process, most people will be inclined to think that future
deviations in the opposite direction are more likely. For instance, someone betting that
a coin would flip heads might be inclined to increase the bet size after a few consecutive
tails, or a trader might increase risk on trades after a string of losers. In both cases, they
would feel that a win was somehow overdue. At the risk of oversimplifying, most of the
problem comes from the fact that runs or streaks are much more common in random
data than most people would expect; this single fact is responsible for many of the faulty
intuitions we have about randomness.
It is also worth considering that there are cases in which the gambler’s fallacy must
be modified in market situations. The market is not always a flip of a fair coin. Markets
exist in different regimes (e.g., trends or trading ranges, high- or low-volatility conditions,
etc.) and certain kinds of trades will have strings of wins or losses in those conditions. It
is important to understand the math and the theory, but it is equally important to understand where reality might deviate from those theoretical principles.

Biases Concerning Losses
Consider the following two scenarios. In each, you have a choice between taking the
certain payout or loss and playing the game of chance:
1. You are given the choice between a certain $100 win and a 20 percent chance of

making $1,000 with an 80 percent chance of winning nothing.
2. You are given the choice between a certain $100 loss and a 20 percent chance of

losing (having to pay) $1,000 with an 80 percent chance of losing nothing.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-c11

JWBT634-Grimes

354

May 11, 2012

8:32

Printer: Hamilton Printing

THE INDIVIDUAL, SELF-DIRECTED TRADER

In these cases, it is easy to evaluate the expected values, which tell us which are the
correct choices to make probabilistically. In the first game, the winning game, the chance
scenario has an expected value of $200 (0.2 × $1,000), which is twice the certain payout.
There is no doubt that the correct course of action is to play the game of chance, rather
than taking the certain $100. The same math applies for the losing scenario: a certain loss
of $100 compared to an expected value of a $200 loss for the game of chance.
Logically, the correct course of action is clear: play the game of chance in the winning scenario instead of taking the certain gain, and take the certain loss in the second
scenario. Most people, and even most traders, are inclined to do exactly the opposite
in both cases. They will want to lock in the certain gain and will prefer to take their
chances on the loss because there is some chance that they can avoid the loss altogether.
This results in suboptimal decisions with respect to position management and exiting
both winners and losers. Many traders will take small wins and will hold on to a loss in
the hope that it will come back and they can somehow at least break even. There is good
justification for the old adage to “cut your losers and let your winners run,” but many
traders find this difficult to do in practice.
Another related problem, especially for newer traders, is that many traders find it
difficult to calibrate their perception of risk inherent in a stop. Nearly all traders would
prefer a small stop on a trade to a wide stop, with the idea that it is better to take a small
loss than a big one. If you are properly and consistently sizing positions, there really is
no such thing as a low-risk trade; every trade will have a consistent impact on the bottom
line regardless of the distance to the stop point, but there certainly are low-probability
trades. A tight stop may have such a high probability of being hit that it is, for all intents
and purposes, a nearly certain loss. Over a large sample size, this is actually a very highrisk stop, even though it might be a loss of only a few pennies at a time.
