the 200 hour MA is broken and the trend to the upside begins in earnest.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c09

228

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:31

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

FIGURE 9.10 EURUSD Trends Higher but Corrects Modestly

The most significant correction occurs after the move from point 1 to
point 2. The trend higher had moved from a low of 1.2192 to a high of
1.2611. A top is in place (at 2), and a trend line is broken. This signals a correction is likely. Any bullish positions should be closed. The correction targets become previous consolidative lows, and the 38.2 percent Fibonacci
retracement at the 1.2451 level.
The subsequent correction finds support at the previous corrective
low, but falls well short of the 38.2 percent correction level at point A.
The failure to move lower leads to a continuation of the trend move
higher. Traders could reestablish long positions with risk limited to the correction low.
Figure 9.11 shows the continuation of the trend move. The trend remains above the 100 hour MA, but momentum is starting to fade as the
price approaches the new high at 1.2722.
We learned from the daily chart example that if a significant trend
move does not have a correction of 38.2 percent, the conditions exist for a
potential countertrend move.
The same logic can be applied when looking at an hourly chart. In our
example, the EURUSD trended higher with no significant corrections of
38.2 percent or more. The price remained above the 100 hour MA, keeping
the bullish bias, but momentum seems to be fading. The slopes of the trend
lines are flatter; the ranges are smaller.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c09

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:31

Printer: Yet to come

Fibonacci Retracements: The Hybrid Tool

229

FIGURE 9.11 Trading the Countertrends

Nevertheless, as long as the bias remains bullish, traders should not
sell. If the bias moves from bullish to bearish, however, there is a technical
reason to trade. With a reason to trade, risk can be defined. Traders should
explore the idea of trading the countertrend.
In Figure 9.11, there are several reasons to anticipate a correction and
potential countertrend move:

r The low to high move took the price up 529 pips from 1.2193 to 1.2722
in seven trading days. This is a significant move for the time period.

r There are trend lines (dashed lines in Figure 9.11) that have been developed over a few trading days, giving them borderline significance. A
move below the trend lines changes the bias from bullish to bearish.
r Risk from selling against the trend can be defined by using the trend
lines. A sale on a break of either of the trend lines gives a reason to do
the trade and a reason to get out. If the price moves back above the
trend line, the short countertrend position should be closed.
Another thing that can encourage the countertrend trade is the map of
the targets on the downside. In this trade example:

r The 100 hour MA is a target (at point A).
r The 200 hour MA (at point C) is the next target.
r The 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement level is the third target.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c09

JWBT439-Michalowski

230

January 18, 2011

19:31

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

All the targets line up, one after another, giving the trader a step-bystep progression. The steps provide confidence along the countertrend, and
stop levels should the market reverse back to the upside. If, for instance,
the price moves below the 100 bar MA but reverses back above the MA line,
the trader has a reason to exit the short position.
In addition, since the trend has not had a significant correction of
38.2 percent for the entire trend move higher, a move toward the 38.2 percent retracement at 1.2520 is anticipated. This would target a potential
countertrend profit of around 130 pips.
Trade 1
Trade: A countertrend sell is established on a move below the second trend line at 1.2651. The first trend line was already broken
at 1.2675, giving a bearish bias. The second line being broken is a
confirmation of the bias.
Risk: Risk is limited to a move back above the upper trend line at
1.2675 (24 pips). Risk can get moved down as targets are passed.
Targets: The 100 hour MA at 1.2614 (at A) and the 200 hour MA at
1.2562 (at C) are the first two targets. The main countertrend target, since the trend higher has not had a significant correction,
would be the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement at 1.2520. Below
those levels, the 1.2480 (low from July 6) and 1.2458 (50 percent
retracement) are other downside targets.
Result: The market price ends up testing the 100 hour MA level and
finds initial support (A). This is the first major test of the key MA
since the bias turned bullish at 1.2272. True to form, the price
bounces 35 to 40 pips off the MA level. However, the move cannot
extend back to the trend lines, and when the price breaks below
the MA at point B, this increases the trader confidence in the countertrade. From there the next target becomes the 200 hour MA at
1.2562 (point C). The price moves easily below this target. From
there the market tests the key 38.2 percent retracement at 1.2520.
Is there a reason to buy against the Fibonacci retracement borderline level and reestablish the trend trade? Yes, of course there is. Reasons
include:

r The corrective move down covered 202 pips in the span of two trading
days. The correction was orderly but not overly aggressive. The trade
yielded a maximum profit of 131 pips (from 1.2651 to 1.2520). Initial
risk was 24 pips.
r Although the price was below the 100 and 200 hour MA, the trend
higher was still the major trend.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c09

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Fibonacci Retracements: The Hybrid Tool

19:31

Printer: Yet to come

231

r The two MAs also could provide confidence in the move back higher
just like they provide confidence in the countertrend. Getting above
the 200 hour MA negates the bearish bias, and moving back above the
100 hour MA puts the bulls fully back in charge.
r Risk was clearly defined against the 38.2 percent Fibonacci level. If the
price were to move back below the Fibonacci borderline level, a new
short could be reestablished with the next target being the 50 percent
retracement level.
Trading countertrends can be done on any chart time frame. Any trend
move of significance in terms of time and direction that has not corrected
38.2 percent during that trend is a candidate for a countertrend move. Be
aware and the rewards of the trends and countertrends can be yours.

USING THE TOOLS TO YOUR
BEST ADVANTAGE
If you can attack the major currency trends higher or lower, you will do
very well as a trader. If you can avoid the pain of the corrections and
reestablish trend positions at low-risk borderline levels, you will do even
better as a trader. If you can anticipate a countertrend and target profit
levels and profit from the trading against the trend, you will be a star of
currency trading.
Fibonacci retracements are the hybrid tool that allows traders to use
the corrections in a trend to their advantage.
I have now outlined the major tools I use for attacking currency trends.
The book’s final two chapters will put the pieces together and show how
each tool supports the others in the trend-trading process.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c09

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

232

19:31

Printer: Yet to come

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 10

Preparing for
the Trade

ttacking currency trends successfully is all about having a firm foundation that includes a mission statement and a game plan. Secondary
to having those, you need rules and tools in place to support your
mission statement and game plan. It is about understanding what the market is telling you. Is the market trending or nontrending, and what do those
things mean? How do corrections fit in the picture? How can you benefit
when a market corrects? How do you enter or exit a trade and why? What
do you look for when the trade blotter is blank?
Clues to help answer these questions have already been presented
throughout the book. In the next two chapters, we’ll bring the pieces together. How do the three charts—five-minute, hourly, and daily—work
and complement each other? How do the three tools—100 and 200 bar
MAs, trend lines, and Fibonacci retracements—work and complement
each other? How do we define risk and manage trades along the way? How
do we dance the dance of a trend trade? Along the trend journey, I will
show what signals to look for, what the good entry points are, how to manage the trade, what the good exit points are, and when it’s a good time to
reestablish a trade.
There is no set step-by-step process for how a trade may progress from
start to finish. The markets are simply not that consistent, nor static. What
is most consistent in trading currencies is that the focus should be on controlling and defining risk. Understanding risk is the most important thing a
trader needs to know. If risk is understood, fear can be controlled.

A

233

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

234

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

From there the focus turns toward attacking currency trends. In order
to attack the trend, you need a risk-defined entry. Your tools are meant to
show where that entry point exists. Furthermore, it’s important that you
use unambiguous tools that tell you bullish on one side and bearish on the
other. Manage the trend so you can stay on it and know when it is time to
exit. Hopefully, the exit will come when the account is nice and fat.
At the very least, following these steps will prevent you from blowing
through account equity. The best scenario is that you will ride and attack
the currency trends. Not all trades will be nice trend trades that accumulate
vast fortunes in your trading accounts, because markets don’t always do
what you think they should do. However, you can limit your losses and
improve your gains if you are well prepared to trade the trends.

FIRST THINGS FIRST
Like anyone, if I do not have a trade on, I am searching for one. Trading
successfully is about being patient. The good news is I do find there are
opportunities most days to define risk, keep risk to a minimum, and execute successful trades that might not trend for a long time but still provide
decent returns. I outline those on my commentary pages and in my daily
video e-mails for FXDD each day.
The real money, however, is made trading the longer trends. Trends
are fast and directional and make traders the most money with the least
amount of risk. These are the trades that will make or break your year.
There are three steps you must take at the outset of any trade and they
are to define the direction of the trend (is the trend transitioning into a
nontrend or vice versa?), choose the currency pair you want to trade, and
pick which time periods (or charts) to use.

Defining the Direction of the Trend
Typically, a trend trade sets itself up to trend. It does this by nontrending.
The nontrending market will transition into a trend market. It still is the
best way I know to anticipate a trend. If a major league baseball player can
anticipate a fastball and get it pitched where he wants it, he has a better
chance of hitting a home run. The same is true for traders. Nontrending
markets are a way to anticipate a fastball.
Not all trends last for hundreds and even thousands of pips. I never
know when a trend may end. I may trade a trend that only lasts a day
or even less. Even on the longer trends, there are of course periods of

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

JWBT439-Michalowski

Preparing for the Trade

January 18, 2011

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

235

corrections on the five-minute charts that can take you off the trend highway for a period before putting you back on that road again.
You prepare for a trend. You anticipate a trend. Then when you get on
a trend, the job becomes staying on the ride for as long as you can go. Be
greedy and watch the account balance fatten up like a pig. Then, when the
market cannot go any farther, when the pig cannot get to the trough for
his food, slaughter the position and get out. And start looking for the next
opportunity because trends do transition into nontrends.

Choosing a Currency Pair
My approach to my charts is the same every day. There are no changes.
The toolbox has the same tools in it each day. I look at three charting time
periods for clues: five-minute, hourly, and daily. I plot the 100 and 200 bar
simple moving averages (MAs), trend lines, and most relevant Fibonacci
retracements on each. I look for the clues the market is giving, and if something stands out as a favorable risk/reward opportunity, I will look to act.
Once I’m in the trade, the task becomes managing. Then exiting.
Since the EURUSD is the most liquid currency, I will use it as the currency for the trend-trading demonstration. Note, however, that the same
analysis can be used on most any currency pair.
I do use the EURUSD for a purpose, though. In addition to being the
most liquid, it has a good high-to-low trading range of about 100 to 130 pips
per trading day, and its bid-to-ask spread is the narrowest; it is the benchmark for all other currency pairs. Since the United States and Eurozone
are similar in economic makeup, the economic bias tends to alternate from
one to the other. Sometimes it favors the Eurozone; sometimes it favors
the United States. However, the economic trend tends to stay the same for
a while. This allows the pair’s price to trend one way, then when the economic bias changes, reverse and trend the other way. For these reasons the
EURUSD is the best currency pair for my mission statement. If you don’t
focus attention each day on the EURUSD, you should.
How many currencies should you trade or follow? Trade and follow
are two different things. You should look to trade around three, but they
don’t have to be all at once, and you can switch around. There are currencies where the economic story is more in focus. I want to concentrate on
them. As a result, I will follow more currencies than I trade. If there is a
commodity story, watch the technical trend of the AUDUSD. If there is an
oil story, USDCAD can be a pair to focus on.
If the U.K. has inflation, and the Bank of England has to go on a tightening spree, pay attention. If the U.K. has inflation but growth is slowing, it
may not be the best time to trade the GBPUSD. The USDJPY may be under
pressure because of the inherent trade balance issues, but if the Bank of

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

236

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

Japan intervenes (or threatens to intervene), the currency pair goes off my
radar because it carries too much risk.
If risk is increased and a surprise attack or counterbalancing events
might make a currency chart look more like an EKG graph, be smart and
follow the currency pair, but don’t trade it.

Picking Your Charts
As discussed earlier in the book, I look at three time periods, or charts,
when I trade: the five-minute, hourly, and daily charts. Some people mistakenly think that the five-minute chart is used to scalp intraday, the hourly
is for intermediate-term trading decisions, and the daily is for long-term position trading, but that is not the case.
I look at all three in tandem so that I can follow the key levels in each.
Those key levels are borderlines where risk is defined and limited. Those
borderlines become the points where trades are entered. They become the
targets on the trend that the market price must pass to keep the trend momentum intact. They become exit levels as well.
Why bother with all three time periods and not just focus on one? Well,
other traders do, but I don’t. There are traders who focus only on the fiveminute chart. I want to know where they are executing their borderline
trades and what levels are important to them. There are also traders who
focus only on the hourly chart. If the price is approaching the 100 hour MA
on their chart, I want to be aware of that key borderline. Finally, there are
traders who focus only on the daily chart. I want to know when the trend
line of the chart they are looking at is being broken.
I want to see what each group of traders is focused on when it looks
at the charts for the EURUSD, GBPUSD, USDJPY, USDCAD, and so on.
Failure to do so ignores groups who may be influencing the market action
at a price. Have you ever wondered why the price stopped cold at a certain
price level? It is usually some key technical level that a group of traders
defended.
So the purpose of looking at all three time periods is to be aware of the
key borderline levels for each one. Then when I do my trade analysis, I will
be more in touch with the best level for a profitable trading opportunity.
That level may just be the start of a trend.

ANALYZING THE CHARTS
I will start my analysis of what I look for when preparing to enter a trade by
looking at each of the time period charts: the daily, hourly, and five-minute.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

JWBT439-Michalowski

Preparing for the Trade

January 18, 2011

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

237

As mentioned, I will use the EURUSD as the currency of choice. The
charts are all from September 10, 2010. The same questions will be asked
each time: What trades are developing and why? What are the risks, and
ultimately, what trades are entered into and why?
From there, I will map out the how to manage the trade and how to
look for exits along the way by looking at key points along the trend. The
analysis will bring together the tools and key concepts outlined in the book.
Trading successfully is about using tools in tandem with each other.
The 100 and 200 bar MAs, trend lines, remembered lines, and Fibonacci
retracements all work together along with the three chart time periods to
define the trend, keep risk under control, manage the trade, and give reasons to exit the trade.

The Daily Chart
The daily chart typically has two purposes. One is to give a macro view of
a currency pair’s direction and bias. The second purpose is to provide key
borderline levels that a trader can use to target, enter, or exit trades.
Figure 10.1 shows the typical macro view of a currency pair using the
daily chart. The chart also includes a typical chart setup I may include on
the chart. All the charts in the analysis in this chapter and the next will be
set up in the way I would set them up if I were trading them live.

FIGURE 10.1 The Longer-Term View of the EURUSD Is Looking More Bearish

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

238

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

The Fibonacci retracement is plotted for the major trend. The 100 and
200 day simple MAs are included. I will draw relevant trend lines and remembered lines.
When the downtrend ended in early June 2010 and the countertrend
started, the setup from Figure 10.1 helped guide the countertrend move
higher. The 100 day MA was an upside target. The market stalled at that
MA line (solid line in Figure 10.1), trading above it and then below it before
breaking to the upside to the high.
A Fibonacci retracement was drawn at the start of the countertrend
higher that went from the high at 1.5144 to the low at 1.1876. The 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement targeted what seemed like an impossible 38.2
percent retracement of 1.3124 (at least at the start of the countertrend).
However, the market made its way to the level and beyond. A high was
reached at 1.3333 on August 2, and the price started to move to the downside. The countertrend higher was over—for the time being, at least.
Reversing the View With the significant and impressive 1,457-pip rally
over, it was time to reverse the bias and view. In this view I needed to
reverse the Fibonacci retracement from the high to low in Figure 10.1, and
instead have it go from the low to high (see Figure 10.2). I needed to target
Fibonacci levels in the opposite direction so I could better map the move
and targets on the downside.

FIGURE 10.2 The Current Trend for the EURUSD Is More Bullish

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c10

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

Preparing for the Trade

19:45

Printer: Yet to come

239

In Figure 10.2, I zoom in and focus on the EURUSD daily chart from
a current perspective. This chart starts by showing the countertrend move
higher from the June low to the August high and the subsequent correction
of that move. The Fibonacci retracement overlay is reversed and goes from
the 1.1876 low to the 1.3333 high. The Fibonacci retracement lines come in
at the following levels:

r 1.2776 for the 38.2 percent
r 1.2604 for the 50 percent
r 1.2432 for the 61.8 percent.
From the high, the price moves lower, stalls at the 38.2 percent retracement at 1.2776 and the 100 day MA line just above that level (see start
of boxed area in Figure 10.2). The price finds support and tries to trade
back higher but fails. The move to the low stalls near the 50 percent target
level at 1.2604. Support is found against the key midpoint. Over the next
13 days, the price trades in a narrow range. It moves from the low at the
50 percent retracement level back toward the range high at the 1.2915 to
1.2931 area (this is the boxed area in Figure 10.2). From the high, sellers
reenter against the level and push the price back down. The price stalls
once again at the all important 100 day MA line. The market is mired in a
clearly defined range and is waiting at the 100 day MA until it decides its
next move.
A Tale of Two Trends: One Down, One Up When looking at the two
daily charts, we have a tale of two trends. In Figure 10.1 the trend seems to
be to the downside. The EURUSD price fell from a high of 1.5144 to a low
of 1.1876. The correction higher (or countertrend higher) took the price
up to 1.3333 above the 100 day MA, above the 38.2 percent retracement
at 1.3124, but stayed below the 50 percent and the 200 day MA. The move
higher, although quite substantial at 1,457 pips, looks like a correction from
a distance. The current move back to the downside at the 1.2600 area could
be the start of the reestablishment of the trend down.
In Figure 10.2, the macro picture is different. The trend moves to the
upside in this chart, and the subsequent correction takes the price down
through the 38.2 percent correction and the 100 day MA, but pauses at the
50 percent retracement at the 1.2604 level (the low was 1.2586, but that low
