
Fibonacci and Harmonic Trading
The measurement strategies within the Harmonic Trading approach employ the somewhat
controversial use of Fibonacci ratios. The recent popularity of the mystique of ancient codes
has led to an unfortunate distortion of the true value that these methods inherently possess.
In fact, it is almost hilarious that there are now numerous financial websites and publications
claiming to possess the “Fibonacci Secrets,” the Gann version of the Harmonic Trader, the quick
Harmonic Trader, or the proper Fibonacci node levels that attempt to mimic the Harmonic
Trading methodology. I say almost hilarious because most of it is not. The blatant borrowing of
these techniques without proper citation and credit has become the standard in this industry,

6

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

I am sorry to say. In fact, most of the Fibonacci-related material on trading the markets is misleading and frequently cite only the well-chosen examples to demonstrate their techniques.
It is important to emphasize that Harmonic Trading is clearly different from other
Fibonacci-related methods. Although others have utilized Fibonacci ratios to quantify various
price patterns to identify potential trading opportunities, their application has been vague and
not precise enough for actual trading situations. This was an initial frustration of mine when I
first worked with these patterns, and it was a motivating factor to be as specific as possible in
my analysis. Such specification led to the classification of harmonic patterns and even the
defining of an entire analytical system that I coined as Harmonic Trading.
Essentially, I have been trading harmonic patterns longer than anyone. Period. End of
story. How can I say this? Because there was not anything as specialized as the harmonic
patterns until The Harmonic Trader was released. Furthermore, the other ideas presented on
HarmonicTrader.com and other websites, such as StockCharts.com, eSignal, and others,
furthered the basic concepts established in The Harmonic Trader. These unprecedented
strategies have evolved into an entire methodology that I have termed Harmonic Trading.
Harmonic Trading is a sophisticated and comprehensive approach that utilizes specific and
consecutive Fibonacci alignments unlike any other methodology. I am not trying to claim to
invent the Fibonacci wheel. In addition, it is essential to me that all relevant original work be
cited properly and thoroughly. From W. D. Gann to H. M. Gartley, I have credited all pertinent
sources. However, Harmonic Trading utilizes many techniques and specific measurements that
have not been presented previously in this manner. Furthermore, the strict approach of the
interpretation of market price action from the perspective of harmonic price patterns is not the
same as other Fibonacci-related Technical Analysis.
Although not exclusive in its analysis of price movements, these methods offer precise and
accurate trading strategies that utilize unprecedented technical measures. From the 0.886
rertracement to the Bat and the Crab patterns, this approach is the most specialized and
effective Fibonacci trading strategy. The Harmonic Trading methodology is a distinct
perspective, and I assure you that “You will never look at the financial markets the same
way again.”

Chapter 1

Harmonic Trading

What Is Harmonic Trading?
Harmonic Trading is a methodology that utilizes the recognition of specific structures that
possess distinct and consecutive Fibonacci ratio alignments that quantify and validate harmonic
patterns. These patterns calculate the Fibonacci aspects of these price structures to identify
highly probable reversal points in the financial markets. This methodology assumes that
harmonic patterns or cycles, like many patterns and cycles in life, continually repeat. The key
is to identify these patterns and to enter or to exit a position based upon a high degree of
probability that the same historic price action will occur.
Harmonic Trading is based upon the principles that govern natural and universal growth
cycles. In many of life’s natural growth processes, Fibonacci numeric relationships govern
the cyclical traits of development. This “natural progression” has been debated for centuries
and has provided evidence that there is some order to life’s processes. When applied to the
financial markets, this relative analysis of Fibonacci measurements can define the extent of
price action with respect to natural cyclical growth limits of trading behavior.
Trading behavior is defined by the extent of buying and selling and influenced by the fear
or greed possessed by the market participants. Generally, price action moves in cycles that
exhibit stages of growth and decline. From this perspective, the collective entity of all buyers
and sellers in a particular market follow the same universal principles as other natural
phenomena exhibiting cyclical growth behavior.
In an attempt to learn the origins of this analysis, many get lost in the need to understand
why these relationships exist. The basic understanding required to grasp this theory should
not move beyond the simple acceptance that natural growth phenomena can be quantified by
relative Fibonacci ratio measurements. Applied to the financial markets, Fibonacci ratios can
quantify specific situations where repeating growth cycles of buying and selling exist. It is the
understanding of these types of growth cycle structures (patterns) that provides pertinent
technical information regarding price action that no other approach offers.
The evidence of harmonic patterns in the financial markets can be found in price charts. A
chart is nothing more than the collective record of buying and selling over time. Patterns that
7

8

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

form over a particular period of time reflect a signal or technical “signpost” that can indicate
the state of potential future price action. Furthermore, these situations have been historically
proven to repeat and can identify significant potential trading opportunities with favorable
risk-to-reward considerations.
After learning the basic requirements for each structure, it will take some time to develop the
experience necessary to differentiate which price structures are valid trading opportunities.
Although price structures can vary with respect to their Fibonacci alignments, Harmonic Trading
techniques identify common elements of each situation that identify opportunities and maximize
trading decisions.

Order within the Chaos
Many have argued that the financial markets are a random entity. According to the Random
Walk Theory, popularized in the book The Random Character of Stock Market Prices by Paul
H. Cootner (ed., MIT press, 1964), price action is “serially independent.” This means that price
history is not a reliable indicator of future price action. Although this theory does possess
validity, since anything can happen in the financial markets, history has proven that within
this randomness there is a degree of repetition.
Many events in the markets have repeated historically through the years. Significant
corrections have occurred in October, which are usually preceded by a late summer peak. In
addition, many common events such as defined levels of support and resistance or trend lines
define repeating market action on a daily basis. Harmonic Trading techniques capitalize on
such repeating market events by identifying specific price patterns within the randomness of the
markets. Correctly identifying these situations is the key to profiting from these opportunities.
The identification of historically repetitive price patterns is the primary means that
these techniques utilize to interpret the market’s signals. It is in this effective price pattern
identification ability that Harmonic Trading possesses its greatest advantages. The precision
and accuracy of the specific pattern alignments define a consistent and effective approach
that can be easily applied. Furthermore, each distinct pattern acts as a model for the basis
of all trading decisions. Once a potential pattern is identified, the trading opportunity can be
managed according to a defined set of rules that are particular for each situation. Although
each pattern possesses different elements, Harmonic Trading identifies specific repetitive
situations within the chaos of the financial markets.

Three Stages of Harmonic Trading
Harmonic Trading utilizes an enormous array of effective Fibonacci alignment combinations to
define patterns. However, Harmonic Trading does not stop at the identification of valid patterns.
Although it is the important first step in defining potential trading opportunities, specific rules

Chapter 1 Harmonic Trading

9

and guidelines are required to maximize the management of a position. There is more to
profiting from the patterns than just proper identification. The other aspects of trade execution
and position management are equally as important to maximize profit potential and to reduce
risk exposure:
1. Trade Identification. Regardless of what type of trading system is utilized, the initial
step is identifying a potential opportunity. Harmonic Trading techniques utilize historically
proven and repetitive price patterns that capitalize on overbought and oversold signals
generated by the market’s technical price action. A good portion of this material is
dedicated to identifying and differentiating harmonic price patterns as quantified by
Fibonacci ratio alignments. Understanding the differences among the various harmonic
patterns is essential to capitalize on specific trading opportunities.
2. Trade Execution. After accurately identifying a potential trade opportunity, the actual
trade must be determined. Several considerations must be assessed within a specific
time period defined by the potential opportunity. The validity of the pattern must be
determined, and the final action of executing of the trade or not must be considered.
3. Trade Management. After the execution action is decided, there are a variety of
general considerations involved within the trading process. If the trade was executed,
the position must be managed with specific rules to maximize the profit while minimizing
the risk.
These three stages are important to consider as the general process of trading harmonic
patterns. As I said earlier, any system utilized to trade the markets must identify a potential
opportunity, execute the trade, and manage the position until it is closed.
If these concepts are new to you, I recommend that the identification of patterns be
thoroughly understood before executing trades. The essence of Harmonic Trading is the ability
to differentiate price structures based upon specific consecutive Fibonacci ratio alignments.
Therefore, a thorough comprehension of the specific pattern price point alignments is an
essential first step to successfully trade these situations. The other skills of effective trade
execution and acute trade management are equally as important and represent the necessary
elements to consistently profit from the Harmonic Trading approach.
Harmonic Trading utilizes the best strategies of Fibonacci and pattern recognition techniques
to identify, execute, and manage trade opportunities. These techniques are extremely precise
and comprise a system that requires specific conditions to be met before any trade is executed.
The Harmonic Trading approach offers information regarding the potential state of future price
action like no other technical methods. The unique measurements and price point alignment
requirements are some of the unprecedented methods that differentiate this approach from
other technical perspectives.
If you are new to Harmonic Trading, these techniques will open your eyes to many effective
strategies that can indicate the potential future price action. If you have experience with these
strategies, the material in this book will enhance your understanding of specific situations and
offer many pattern-specific techniques that will improve your trading performance.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 2

Fibonacci Numbers

Origin of the Fibonacci Sequence
Fibonacci numbers are based upon the Fibonacci sequence discovered by Leonardo de
Fibonacci de Pisa (b. 1170–d. 1240). His most famous work, the Liber Abaci (Book of the
Abacus), was one of the earliest Latin accounts of the Hindu-Arabic number system. In this
work, he developed the Fibonacci number sequence, which is historically the earliest recursive
series known to date. The series was devised as the solution to a problem about rabbits.
The mathematical problem:
If a newborn pair of rabbits requires one month to mature and at the end of the second month
and every month thereafter reproduces itself, how many pairs will one have at the end of “n”
months?
The answer is: un
This answer is based upon the equation: un +1 = un + un -1

Although this equation might seem complex, it is actually quite simple. The sequence of the
Fibonacci numbers is as follows:
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89,144, 233, 377…

∞ (infinity)

Beginning with zero and adding one is the first calculation in the numeric series. The calculation takes the sum of the two numbers and adds it to the second number in the addition. The
sequence requires a minimum of eight calculations.
(0+1=1)…(1+1=2)…(1+2=3)…(2+3=5)…(3+5=8)…
(5+8=13)…8+13=21)…13+21=34)…(21+34=55)…(34+55=89)

After the eighth sequence of calculations, there are constant mathematical ratio relationships that can be derived from the series. Starting with the sum of the eighth calculation (34) as

11

12

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

the numerator and using the sum of the ninth equation (55) as the denominator, the result
yields 0.618.
34/55 = 0.618181 ~ 0.618

Repeating the process, the next division of the ninth calculation (21+34=55) and the tenth
calculation (34+55=89) equals 0.617978 or 0.618.
55/89 = 0.617978 ~ 0.618

In the inverse calculation of these numbers, the same rules apply. After the eighth calculation, use this sum (34), but in this case as the denominator, and the sum of the ninth equation
(55) as the numerator. This inverse calculation yields 1.618.
55/34 = 1.676471 ~ 1.618

Repeating the process, the next division of the tenth calculation (34+55=89) over the ninth
calculation (21+34=55) equals 1.618182 or 1.618.
89/55 = 1.618182 ~ 1.618

These mathematical relationships remain constant throughout the entire Fibonacci series to
infinity.
In the realm of Mathematics, the 1.618 is known as the golden ratio or Phi. The inverse
(1/1.618) of Phi is 0.618, sometimes referred to as “little Phi.” The 1.618 ratio is also commonly
referred as the golden number or the golden mean. The number is denoted by the Greek letter
Phi (ϕ). The inverse of the 1.618 (phi) sometimes is referred to as the golden ratio or golden
proportion (0.618), and it is recognized by a small “p.”

The Golden Section
A simple line can illustrate the relationships of the golden ratio or golden mean in the golden
section. Begin with drawing a line and then divide it into segments where the ratio of one part
to the entire line is the same as the ratio of the smaller part to the larger. The example of the
golden section is illustrated in the following table:
Whole Line A = 1 inch ( __________ )
Section B = 0.618 inches

(

Section C = 0.382 inches
A

–

B

= C

______ )
(

+

___ )
B = A

|-------------------|---------------|----------------|------------|
1

-

0.618 = 0.382 + 0.618 = 1

Chapter 2 Fibonacci Numbers

13

These line segments can be divided in various combinations to manifest phi (0.618) ratios.
•

Ratio of A to B = 1/0.618 = 1.618

•

Ratio of A to C = 1/0.382 = 2.618 (1+1.618)

•

Ratio of B to A = 0.618/1 = 0.618

•

Ratio of B to C = 0.618/0.382 = 1.618

•

Ratio of C to A = 0.618/1 = 0.618

•

Ratio of C to B = 0.382/0.618 = 0.618

The golden section is closely related to the golden ratio since the ratios have a relationship
to one another that is equal to phi (0.618) or the inverse, Phi (1.618).

Ancient Examples
The 0.618 and the 1.618 constants from the series are found in the Great Pyramids. In
addition, architects and artists have utilized the geometric proportions of the golden ratio in
everything from the Parthenon of Athens to the works of Leonardo Da Vinci.

Examples in the Universe
In his development of the numeric sequence, Fibonacci was attempting to define the
growth pattern of generations of rabbits as the example to explain particular mathematical
relationships. Whether it’s rabbits, elephants, or pigeons, the point to be understood is the
mathematical sequence of growth patterns possesses Phi-related proportions that are exhibited
throughout a variety of universal examples in nature.
It is important to note that both the ratios (1.618, 0.618) and the numbers in the sequence
itself (…8,13, 21, 34, 55) are manifested in these examples. For example, the actual Fibonacci
sequence of numbers can be found in the growth patterns of plants, whereas the golden number (1.618) can be found in the proportional growth of seashells. The human body possesses a
variety of relative phi (0.618) ratio measurements, and even examples of planetary phenomena
adhere to these golden proportions.

Fibonacci Phyllotaxis
Fibonacci Phyllotaxis is the discipline of studying and classifying the number of visible spirals,
called parastichies, of flowers and seed growth patterns within plants. Most commonly, various

14

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

plants grow seeds or leaves in patterns of successive elements exactly related to the Fibonacci
sequence. A survey of plants of 650 species and 12,500 specimens displaying spiral or multiple
phyllotaxis estimated that about 92% of them have Fibonacci Phyllotaxis. (R. V. Jean,
Phyllotaxis: A Systemic Study in Plant Morphogenesis [Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1994]).
On many plants, the number of petals is a Fibonacci number. For example, buttercups have
5 petals, lilies have 3 petals, some delphiniums have 8, and daisies can be found with 34, 55,
or even 89 petals. Fibonacci numbers can also be seen in the arrangement of seeds on flower
heads. Sunflower seed heads, which grow in a defined outward series, typically possess either
34, 55, or 89 spirals. Cactus spines and pinecones show the same spirals as other seed head
and leaf arrangements, but they are much more clearly visible.

Planetary Phenomenon
Not only do these constant numeric relationships occur in the Fibonacci series, there are
also universal examples that exhibit this phenomenon. For example, Venus takes 225 days
to complete a revolution around the sun. As we all know, the Earth requires 365 days to
complete one revolution. If you divide 225 by 365, the result is approximately 0.618 of a year
(225/365 = 0.616 ~ 0.618) and the inverse (365/225 = 1.622 ~ 1.618) results in 1.618 of a year.

Fibonacci Rectangles and Shell Spirals
Another illustration that exemplifies the Fibonacci numeric sequence starts with one small
square of 1 inch on each side (see Figure 2.1). After drawing the first box, a second box of
1 inch in size is added in the progression of the Fibonacci sequence (0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5).

Figure 2.1

On top of both of these, continue to draw 1-inch boxes, thereby completing a square the
size of 2 (1+1=2). Again, repeat this process in the sequential order of the Fibonacci series, as
a new square can be drawn that touches both a unit square and the latest square of side 2.
This results in having sides 3 units long and another touching both the 2-square and the
3-square that now has sides of 5 units (see Figure 2.2).

Chapter 2 Fibonacci Numbers

15

Figure 2.2

In this sequential order, each square can be added with new squares having a side that is
as long as the sum of the latest two squares’ sides. Essentially, Fibonacci Rectangles are structures composed of squares with sides each a number from the Fibonacci sequence. From this
succession of rectangles, a spiral is drawn in the squares, resulting in a quarter of a circle in
each square. It is important to note that the spiral is not a perfect symmetrical formation since it
is made up of a fragment of a circle. However, it is a good approximation of the kind of spiral
formations that are manifested in nature and illustrates the relationships of phi quite clearly.
Utilizing the Fibonacci Rectangle progression, spirals can be drawn within these constraints
that resemble the exact mathematical proportions of the shape of snail shells and seashells
(see Figure 2.3). The spiral-in-the-squares begins with a line from the center of the spiral,
increasing by a factor of the golden number in each square. So, each point on the spiral is
1.618 times as far from the center after a quarter-turn (per rectangle side).

Figure 2.3

Figure 2.4 shows a cross-section of a Nautilus seashell. The spiral curve of the shell and the
internal chambers provide buoyancy in the water that the animal continues to grow throughout
its development. Each chamber possesses defined relationships similar to the Fibonacci
Rectangle example. In the same manner that the spiral was measured in the Fibonacci
Rectangle, a particular line drawn from the center of the Nautilus out in any direction, locating
two places where the shell crosses, will possess golden proportions.

Figure 2.4

The outer crossing point will be 1.618 times as far from the center, and the inverse
resulting in 0.618, of course. This is one example in a variety of shells that manifest these phi
relationships in nature.

16

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Human Body
As the Nautilus shell example demonstrates, peculiar mathematical relationships are exhibited
in many of nature’s growth cycles. The human body demonstrates many of the same golden
proportion relationships, as well. Each tooth is related to each other based on type. For
example, the width of the central incisor is in the golden proportion to the width of the lateral
incisor. The lateral incisor is in the same golden proportion to the canine, and the canine is in
the golden proportion to the first premolar.
It is commonly known that the human hand possesses many golden proportions.
Specifically, the individual bones in the index finger are related to each other by Phi. Starting
with the tip of the finger to the base of the wrist, each section is larger than the preceding by
approximately 1.618.
The human body manifests both the golden proportions and the numeric properties of the
Fibonacci sequence itself. DNA molecules exhibit the elements of the golden section. Each
molecule measures 34 angstroms long by 21 angstroms wide for each full cycle of its double
helix spiral. The numbers, 21 and 34, are the seventh and eighth results of the Fibonacci
sequence, respectively, and possess golden proportions.
From the unique mathematical properties of the Fibonacci series to the plethora of examples
of this phenomenon repeating throughout nature, the most important concept to grasp is that
there is some unexplainable universal order to many of life’s cyclical processes. The realm of
this discussion could fill an entire book. The mysteries of these golden relationships have been
studied and debated for thousands of years. I believe it is important to understand the essence
of this natural phenomenon, as such order in the universe has implications far beyond the
financial markets. But, this discussion can be left for the theologian and the atheist to debate.
For trading purposes, these relationships, when applied to the financial markets, can
effectively analyze similar cyclical growth patterns in price action quite effectively. However,
it is important to not get caught up in the “why-type” questions that undermine the application
of these methods. Rather, it is important to respect this phenomenon and master the discipline
that such a perspective offers. As W. D. Gann proclaimed:
“I have always looked for causes and when once I determine a
cause I can always be sure of the effect or future event which I
predict. IT IS NOT MY AIM TO EXPLAIN THE CAUSE OF CYCLES.”
(The Tunnel Thru the Air [Pomeroy, WA: Lambert-Gann Publishing,
1927], 78)
