
Two moving averages and a bearish pattern giving a short signal
You can see a great example of how it’s possible to combine two moving averages with bearish-trending candlestick patterns in Figure 15-6, which is a
chart of American Express (AXP), a company best known for its credit card
business. This chart is dominated by a bearish trend, revealed by a 10-day
moving average that stays mostly below the 20-day moving average.
Two different candlestick patterns show up on the chart in Figure 15-6. The
first pattern is a straightforward bearish neck lines pattern that pops up
while trading is going on well below both moving averages. A signal like that
is enough to justify an entry point in most similar situations.
The second pattern is a bearish-thrusting line pattern, and it appears while
the downtrend is still in place. Note that part of the first day of the pattern
trades over the moving averages, and a few of the days before the pattern
show trading over the moving averages as well. But the trend remains bearish, and the 10-day moving average stays below the 20-day moving average.
That means the downtrend is still intact, and you want to hang on to your
short position for the immediate future.

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 311

Chapter 15: Combining Technical Indicators and Bearish-Trending Patterns

Figure 15-6:
A chart of
AXP where
two moving
averages
and a
couple of
bearishtrending
candlestick
patterns
reveal an
entry point.

Using moving averages and bearishtrending candlestick patterns to pick
short exits and select stop levels
Moving averages can be a huge help when you combine them with bearishtrending candlestick patterns to pick short trade entry points, but you can
also use that dynamic duo to help you determine stop levels and exit points.
I wrap up this chapter with a couple of examples that show you how to do
just that.

A single moving average and bearish pattern
for a short trade and trade exit signal
Figure 15-7 features a chart of the stock for the media conglomerate Time
Warner (TWX). This chart has a single ten-day moving average, and the bearish trend is in place when the stock price is lower than that moving average.
The stock is trading under the ten-day moving average when a bearish-thrusting line pattern appears. If you watch this chart and wait to initiate a short
position, that’s the wisest place to do it. At that point the price has been
under the moving average for only a couple of days, but it appears that a
downtrend has been in place for some time. The price works lower, but
enough volatility exists to cause the stock to trade over and under the tenday moving average fairly frequently.

311

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 312

312 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators
Figure 15-7:
A ten-day
moving
average and
a bearishthrusting
line pattern
on a chart
of TWX
reveal a
short trade
exit point.

This frequent volatility ends up really frustrating a short seller on this trade.
Even though the trend continues lower for some time, a short seller with a
stop that kicks in when the price moves or closes over the ten-day moving
average — both logical stops — would be stopped out of position fairly
quickly. But the downtrend continues, and more profits can be made. This
whipsawing (quick moving around) of the price action makes a good argument for using two moving averages, and you can see an example of that
strategy in the next section.
In cases where there’s such volatility, it may be best to leave trading in this
stock to the more seasoned traders or possibly just trade fewer shares of
this stock than you normally would until you become more familiar with this
type of action.

Two moving averages along with a bearish pattern
for a short sale and exit trade
Figure 15-8 is a chart of Citigroup Inc., (C), and it includes both a 10- and
20-day moving average. For the majority of the time covered on this chart,
the 10-day moving average is under the 20-day moving average, indicating
that a downtrend is in place.
A bearish-thrusting line pattern shows up on this chart during the prevailing
downtrend, providing a potential entry point for a short trade. It turns out to
be an attractive entry point, because the 10-day moving average doesn’t
cross over the 20-day moving average for several potentially profit-producing
days.

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 313

Chapter 15: Combining Technical Indicators and Bearish-Trending Patterns

Figure 15-8:
A chart of C
where 10and 20-day
moving
averages
combine
with a
bearishthrusting
pattern to
reveal a
short trade
exit.

Picking stop levels and exit points can be difficult when you’re working with
more than one moving average on a short trade, so consider taking an easy
route and setting a stop level that gets you out of a short on a close after the
moving averages have crossed.
It’s also worth noting in Figure 15-8 that the price trades above the 10-day
moving average several times, and even over the 20-day moving average on a
few occasions. This occurs even though the downtrend stays in place and the
10-day stays below the 20-day. Using these two moving averages together
keeps you in the trade longer, making for a much more profitable trade.

313

22_178089 ch15.qxp

2/27/08

9:41 PM

Page 314

314 Part IV: Combining Patterns and Indicators

23_178089 pp05.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 315

Part V

The Part of Tens

23_178089 pp05.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

I

Page 316

In this part . . .

f you’re looking for some easy-to-digest general information about candlestick charting, look no further
than Part V. This part is the Part of Tens, where you find
two helpful chapters on the myths of charting, trading,
and candlesticks, and then ten things to remember about
technical analysis.

24_178089 ch16.qxp

2/27/08

9:45 PM

Page 317

Chapter 16

Ten Myths about Charting, Trading,
and Candlesticks
In This Chapter
 Getting the facts on trading and candlestick misconceptions
 Discovering some trading tips

T

hroughout this book I reveal how charting techniques — especially
candlestick charts — are a path to making money in the markets. But
my views on the subject aren’t unanimous among those interested in the
markets. Many folks are critical of technical analysis in general. Also, some
say there’s no benefit in keeping an eye out for candlestick patterns. (I
know, unthinkable!) Many of you who’ve attended business school have
heard the arguments from professors (not professional investors or traders)
that the markets are efficient and nothing can be done long term to outperform this efficiency. But rest assured that the reverse is true. I’ve worked
with some very smart people who’ve done just what these professors say
can’t be done, and they’ve done it well.
In this chapter, I dispel ten common myths and misconceptions about trading
and candlestick charts to set your mind at ease and help keep you confident
in your trading pursuits.

There’s No Difference between
Candlesticks and Bar Charts
If you’ve already read some of the material in this book, hopefully, you roll
your eyes when you see this myth. Candlestick charts are far superior to
ordinary bar charts, for a whole host of reasons:

24_178089 ch16.qxp

2/27/08

9:45 PM

Page 318

318 Part V: The Part of Tens
 Candlestick charts are aesthetically appealing.
 They also feature patterns that can be easily discerned and used as the
basis for profitable trading decisions.
 Although the exact same price action shows up on bar charts, the dull
presentation makes it difficult for you to pick up on the intricacies of the
price movement.
 There aren’t any exotic names for bar chart patterns. After you’re used
to marubozus and dojis and haramis, how can you go back?

Market Efficiency Makes It Impossible
to Beat the Market over the Long Run
They drilled this into my head in college and did it again in graduate school.
Why, oh why was I trying to get a degree in finance to get into the investment
field if it was impossible for me to make any money at it? Why were all these
classes full of people wanting to move on to careers picking stocks, making
investments, or trading securities? Because some people do make good
money as investors and traders. And because everyone believes that
America is the land of opportunity, and with hard work, you can achieve
some level of success.
Market efficiency is the belief that all investors have access to the same information and are making informed investing decisions. Some say that because
these decisions are well informed and rational, current market prices reflect
the proper value of a stock or commodity. But that simply isn’t true. Traders
make impulse purchases, and prices are always moving. Prices do get out of
line, and it’s possible to profit from the results.

Only a Full-time Professional Can
Make Money in the Markets
Plenty of professionals make money as traders or full-time investors. If this
game is truly made up of winners taking money from losers, how can a parttime amateur with a small account and limited time for analysis be expected
to profit? It’s easy: focus.

24_178089 ch16.qxp

2/27/08

9:45 PM

Page 319

Chapter 16: Ten Myths about Charting, Trading, and Candlesticks
One of the most successful traders I know is a person in the state of Arkansas
who does nothing but focus on trading stocks in a specific retail stock. I
won’t say which one, but it’s very, very large. He knows the company inside
and out, and trades nothing but options and stock on this particular big box
store, where you can get anything and everything. He’s been doing this for
years and doing well at it. As a side note, he doesn’t work for the company —
he just happens to live where it’s based, and he’s watched it emerge as one of
the largest companies in the world.
If you work in a particular industry, focus on the stocks in that industry. You
already have a leg up on the competition because you have a fundamental
knowledge of the industry through experience, which is something that many
traders will never gain. For instance, if you work for a regional bank, find a
handful of similar banks to focus on, or if you work for a construction company, focus on the companies that supply to builders. By narrowing your
focus, you may just find a small niche where you can profit while professionals are spreading themselves too thin looking at multiple stocks and
industries.

Technical Analysis Is Nothing More
Than Reading Tea Leaves
This one gets me every time, probably because I just love it when charting is
compared to psychic or supernatural activities. It’s ludicrous! There’s quite a
bit of upper level math that goes into various methods of charting and trading. Also, when back testing is conducted on technical trading methods, the
statistical measures used are similar to those used to check for errors in
other hard sciences.
Not convinced of the seriousness of technical analysis? Tell that to the members of the Market Technicians Association (MTA). The MTA is a professional
society with a professional designation called a Chartered Market Technician
(CMT) that requires hours of study and the successful completion of three
levels of tests to obtain. There are loads of extremely smart people that make
a living using technical analysis who belong to this organization, and they all
argue vehemently against the idea that technical analysis isn’t a hard science.
And you’d be hard pressed to find a tarot card or crystal ball owner anywhere in the group. For more information on the organization and the designation, you can visit its Web site at www.mta.org.

319

24_178089 ch16.qxp

2/27/08

9:45 PM

Page 320

320 Part V: The Part of Tens
Charting Is for Short-Term Traders Only
Charts are wonderful for short-term trading. They depict the emotion behind
what the market is doing and allow more rational traders to pick points to
buy and sell. I can’t imagine trading over the short term without them.
However, long-term charts are also very useful, despite what you may hear
from naysayers.
Those of you with full-time jobs outside of trading probably don’t have the
time to trade full time. If you still want to get involved with trading, one solution would be to trade by using longer holding periods. You simply need to
work with longer time periods on your charts (use weekly instead of daily
charts, for instance) and just plan on holding your trades for a bit longer.
One of the more successful technical traders is William O’Neil, the publisher
of Investor’s Business Daily. O’Neil has a longer term charting methodology
that he highlights in his newspaper and through his charting service. If
you’re interested in longer term trading, seek more info on his strategies at
www.investors.com.

You Must Be Rich to Start Trading
Don’t get me wrong: No one should be speculating with money he or she
can’t afford to lose. If you’re interested in day trading stocks, you must open
an account with at least $25,000, which is more than most people can lose
without suffering major repercussions. You shouldn’t take out a second mortgage or bet the kids’ college fund on a trading strategy, regardless of how
confident you are in your abilities. Trading is stressful enough without worrying about the potentially devastating impacts of losing money if you don’t
have the appropriate means.
That said, you can also open a small account with a discount broker by using
just a few thousand dollars, and trade lower priced stocks or futures contracts. In order to trade futures with a small account, you should concentrate
on futures contracts that aren’t terribly volatile or use some sort of strategy
that employs stops to limit losses. You can get started with a small account,
but you should be prepared to either expect limited returns or use very tight
stops.

24_178089 ch16.qxp

2/27/08

9:45 PM

Page 321

Chapter 16: Ten Myths about Charting, Trading, and Candlesticks

Trading Is an Easy Way
to Get Rich Quick
Trading isn’t easy. I can’t emphasize that enough. Imagine working on something for a while, and then instead of reaping monetary rewards for your hard
work, you end up losing money. If trading was easy, we’d all do it for an hour
a day and live a life of luxury. Becoming consistently profitable requires quite
a bit of hard work.
It took me a few years of working on systems (and losing some money) before
I became consistently profitable trading for myself. My beautiful wife will
attest to the amount of work I have and continue to put into my personal
trading endeavor, which is almost like a second full-time job. However, I’ve
noticed a direct correlation between how much time I devote to trading
preparations and how well I’m doing. Hard work does pay off in trading, but
don’t expect to strike it rich with a half-hearted or lackadaisical effort.

Candlestick Charts Require More Data
and Are More Difficult to Create
Okay, if you’re drawing your charts by hand then yes, candlesticks are
tougher to create. But with very few exceptions, candlestick charts are
widely available and can be created by using the same information that’s
used to make bar charts. For more info on all the electronic resources you
can tap into to view and build candlestick charts, flip back to Chapter 4.

The Trading Game Is Stacked
against the Small Trader
This myth may have been true years ago, when almost all trading went
through a trading pit or floor specialist. Now that the Internet has transformed trading into a mostly electronic medium, there aren’t professionals
standing between you and the execution of a trade. Technology has leveled
the playing field.

321

24_178089 ch16.qxp

2/27/08

9:45 PM

Page 322

322 Part V: The Part of Tens
Also, professionals used to pay much lower commissions than individual
traders, but this too is in the past. There are several discount brokers that
charge individuals the same low rates that institutions and large traders pay
to trade. Small traders now have many versatile tools at their disposal and
can more than fend for themselves in most markets.

Selling Short Is for Professional
Traders Only
Selling short can be a difficult and nerve-racking business, especially when
working with stocks. There may be extra fees involved, and if your broker is
unable to borrow a particular stock, you may not even be able to put on the
desired short position. And keep in mind that the overall long-term trend of
the stock market is for prices to move higher, so you’re always trying to buck
the long-term trend when selling a stock short. Finally, in theory, the potential
loss on a short is unlimited, while buying a stock limits your losses to the
sum of your initial investment.
Despite all the downsides associated with shorting, I can honestly say that
it’s silly to assert that selling short is for professionals only. Not many individuals consider shorting, so there’s ample opportunity to make money at it.
If you’re interested in trying your hand at shorting, consider selling futures
contracts short as an initial effort. The barriers for shorting futures contracts
aren’t quite as high as those involved with shorting stocks. Plus there’s never
a futures contract that needs to be borrowed — you just short and wait for a
price drop to buy back.

25_178089 ch17.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 323

Chapter 17

Ten Tips to Remember about
Technical Analysis
In This Chapter
 Getting some sound advice on technical analysis
 Finding the right balance in your data
 Remembering to always back up your data

A

debate continues to rage about the validity and usefulness of technical
analysis in security trading. I’m a firm believer that, when used correctly, technical analysis is an outstanding trading and investing tool. There
are also other methods of investing and trading, but for my purposes, technical analysis combined with candlestick charting has worked quite well. As
you begin or continue your trading efforts, you almost certainly encounter
differing opinions on technical analysis, and I use this chapter to set out ten
points on the topic that you should remember as you cut through all the discussions and get down to the business of trading.

Charts Can Give False Signals
I am the first to admit that sometimes — in some cases up to 50 percent of
the time — signals can be wrong. If all signals were reliable, then you could
just see A and do B time after time, and you (and all your trading peers)
would rake in the profits.
But the reality is that charts do give false signals, and it’s up to you to use
proper money management to limit the losses that can occur when good signals go bad. Always use wise stops when you put on a trade, and remember
that when a signal fails, you must get out and move on.

25_178089 ch17.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 324

324 Part V: The Part of Tens
People Will Give You a Hard Time
Some people regard charting and trading as nothing more than glorified gambling or guessing at the future. Let them talk. Just smile and bite your tongue,
and think about the profit you just earned after closing out a winning position. Remember, people tend to make fun of things they don’t understand.
Plenty of successful traders make a comfortable living using technical analysis as a primary trading tool. One of them even owns a professional baseball
team. Who’s gonna try to ridicule you when you’re buying a sports franchise?
Okay, your trading goals may not be that lofty, but you see my point.

There’s No Definite Right or
Wrong Opinion of a Chart
Because charting combines many factors and approaches, two traders or
analysts can view a chart and have two completely different opinions about
whether the chart is bullish or bearish. The reason for the differing points of
view may be as simple as the time frame that each trader has in mind for a
trade, or it can be something as unusual as one of the traders holding a bias
about a particular stock or market depicted on a chart. Regardless of the
reasons, both opinions have some measure of validity. Also, keep in mind it
takes a buyer and seller to make a market, so when you make a trade, the
other side of that trade has a differing opinion than you.
Try to remember that wrong opinions don’t exist, just those that don’t pan
out in a specific scenario. You want people to at least be open-minded about
your use of charts for trading and investing, right? So, you should offer
others the same level of respect and consideration. After all, differing
opinions are a crucial component of an active market!

A Single Chart Doesn’t Tell a Whole Story
Multiple factors affect the prices of securities, from the health of the overall
economy to industry-specific concerns to individual company events. And a
multitude of individuals trade specific stocks daily, all with a variety of goals
and time frames.

25_178089 ch17.qxp

2/27/08

9:39 PM

Page 325

Chapter 17: Ten Tips to Remember about Technical Analysis
One solitary chart can’t provide insight into what all the various players and
influences are hoping to accomplish as they buy and trade a security over a
period of time. Keep this in mind as you develop your trading strategy, and
be sure to look at charts with time frames that don’t necessarily match up
exactly with the time line you use for your trades.
For example, you may be looking for a trade that lasts two or three days — a
pretty short time frame. It certainly doesn’t hurt to look at charts with a
longer time frame as you search for a good environment for your trade. It
may be a little confidence booster if you believe some traders with a longer
time horizon are going to be on the same side as you! It’s well worth the small
amount of extra time and effort you spend to retrieve and study the additional chart.

Charting Is Part Science, Part Art
Although higher math is crucial for technical analysis, there’s also what I like
to refer to as the art component. Some people seem to have a knack for looking at charts and getting an instant (and profitable) feel for how the future
trading action will develop with a stock or market. I think these few talented
individuals just have a sixth sense, much like traditional artists have natural
talents. These abilities are rare, but I’ve seen them in action. Unfortunately, it
wasn’t when I was looking in the mirror.
That said, I have been able to take the natural talents I do have for analyzing
charts and enhance them with study and practice. You can do the same! Keep
reading up on your patterns and maintain a watchful eye on your charts, and
you can develop the ability to analyze and trade quickly and efficiently, too.
