earnings in just over 10 years (72/7.1 = 10.1 years).

116

The Intelligent Investor

course, since growth stocks have long sold at high prices in relation
to current earnings and at much higher multiples of their average
profits over a past period. This has introduced a speculative element of considerable weight in the growth-stock picture and has
made successful operations in this field a far from simple matter.
The leading growth issue has long been International Business
Machines, and it has brought phenomenal rewards to those who
bought it years ago and held on to it tenaciously. But we have
already pointed out* that this “best of common stocks” actually
lost 50% of its market price in a six-months’ decline during 1961–62
and nearly the same percentage in 1969–70. Other growth stocks
have been even more vulnerable to adverse developments; in some
cases not only has the price fallen back but the earnings as well,
thus causing a double discomfiture to those who owned them. A
good second example for our purpose is Texas Instruments, which
in six years rose from 5 to 256, without paying a dividend, while its
earnings increased from 40 cents to $3.91 per share. (Note that the
price advanced five times as fast as the profits; this is characteristic
of popular common stocks.) But two years later the earnings had
dropped off by nearly 50% and the price by four-fifths, to 49.†
The reader will understand from these instances why we regard
growth stocks as a whole as too uncertain and risky a vehicle for
the defensive investor. Of course, wonders can be accomplished
with the right individual selections, bought at the right levels, and
later sold after a huge rise and before the probable decline. But the
average investor can no more expect to accomplish this than to find
money growing on trees. In contrast we think that the group of

* Graham makes this point on p. 73.
† To show that Graham’s observations are perennially true, we can substitute Microsoft for IBM and Cisco for Texas Instruments. Thirty years apart,
the results are uncannily similar: Microsoft’s stock dropped 55.7% from
2000 through 2002, while Cisco’s stock—which had risen roughly 50-fold
over the previous six years—lost 76% of its value from 2000 through 2002.
As with Texas Instruments, the drop in Cisco’s stock price was sharper than
the fall in its earnings, which dropped just 39.2% (comparing the three-year
average for 1997–1999 against 2000–2002). As always, the hotter they
are, the harder they fall.

The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks

117

large companies that are relatively unpopular, and therefore
obtainable at reasonable earnings multipliers,* offers a sound if
unspectacular area of choice by the general public. We shall illustrate this idea in our chapter on portfolio selection.

Portfolio Changes
It is now standard practice to submit all security lists for periodic inspection in order to see whether their quality can be
improved. This, of course, is a major part of the service provided
for clients by investment counselors. Nearly all brokerage houses
are ready to make corresponding suggestions, without special fee,
in return for the commission business involved. Some brokerage
houses maintain investment services on a fee basis.
Presumably our defensive investor should obtain—at least once
a year—the same kind of advice regarding changes in his portfolio
as he sought when his funds were first committed. Since he will
have little expertness of his own on which to rely, it is essential that
he entrust himself only to firms of the highest reputation; otherwise he may easily fall into incompetent or unscrupulous hands. It
is important, in any case, that at every such consultation he make
clear to his adviser that he wishes to adhere closely to the four
rules of common-stock selection given earlier in this chapter. Incidentally, if his list has been competently selected in the first
instance, there should be no need for frequent or numerous
changes.†

* “Earnings multiplier” is a synonym for P/E or price/earnings ratios, which
measure how much investors are willing to pay for a stock compared to the
profitability of the underlying business. (See footnote † on p. 70 in Chapter 3.)
† Investors can now set up their own automated system to monitor the
quality of their holdings by using interactive “portfolio trackers” at such websites as www.quicken.com, moneycentral.msn.com, finance.yahoo.com, and
www.morningstar.com. Graham would, however, warn against relying exclusively on such a system; you must use your own judgment to supplement
the software.

118

The Intelligent Investor

Dollar-Cost Averaging
The New York Stock Exchange has put considerable effort into
popularizing its “monthly purchase plan,” under which an
investor devotes the same dollar amount each month to buying
one or more common stocks. This is an application of a special type
of “formula investment” known as dollar-cost averaging. During
the predominantly rising-market experience since 1949 the results
from such a procedure were certain to be highly satisfactory, especially since they prevented the practitioner from concentrating his
buying at the wrong times.
In Lucile Tomlinson’s comprehensive study of formula investment plans,1 the author presented a calculation of the results of
dollar-cost averaging in the group of stocks making up the Dow
Jones industrial index. Tests were made covering 23 ten-year purchase periods, the first ending in 1929, the last in 1952. Every test
showed a profit either at the close of the purchase period or within
five years thereafter. The average indicated profit at the end of the
23 buying periods was 21.5%, exclusive of dividends received.
Needless to say, in some instances there was a substantial temporary depreciation at market value. Miss Tomlinson ends her discussion of this ultrasimple investment formula with the striking
sentence: “No one has yet discovered any other formula for investing which can be used with so much confidence of ultimate success, regardless of what may happen to security prices, as Dollar
Cost Averaging.”
It may be objected that dollar-cost averaging, while sound in
principle, is rather unrealistic in practice, because few people are so
situated that they can have available for common-stock investment
the same amount of money each year for, say, 20 years. It seems to
me that this apparent objection has lost much of its force in recent
years. Common stocks are becoming generally accepted as a necessary component of a sound savings-investment program. Thus,
systematic and uniform purchases of common stocks may present
no more psychological and financial difficulties than similar continuous payments for United States savings bonds and for life
insurance—to which they should be complementary. The monthly
amount may be small, but the results after 20 or more years can be
impressive and important to the saver.

The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks

119

The Investor’s Personal Situation
At the beginning of this chapter we referred briefly to the position of the individual portfolio owner. Let us return to this matter,
in the light of our subsequent discussion of general policy. To what
extent should the type of securities selected by the investor vary
with his circumstances? As concrete examples representing widely
different conditions, we shall take: (1) a widow left $200,000 with
which to support herself and her children; (2) a successful doctor in
mid-career, with savings of $100,000 and yearly accretions of
$10,000; and (3) a young man earning $200 per week and saving
$1,000 a year.*
For the widow, the problem of living on her income is a very difficult one. On the other hand the need for conservatism in her
investments is paramount. A division of her fund about equally
between United States bonds and first-grade common stocks is a
compromise between these objectives and corresponds to our general prescription for the defensive investor. (The stock component
may be placed as high as 75% if the investor is psychologically prepared for this decision, and if she can be almost certain she is not
buying at too high a level. Assuredly this is not the case in early
1972.)
We do not preclude the possibility that the widow may qualify
as an enterprising investor, in which case her objectives and methods will be quite different. The one thing the widow must not do is
to take speculative chances in order to “make some extra income.”
By this we mean trying for profits or high income without the necessary equipment to warrant full confidence in overall success. It
would be far better for her to draw $2,000 per year out of her principal, in order to make both ends meet, than to risk half of it in
poorly grounded, and therefore speculative, ventures.
The prosperous doctor has none of the widow’s pressures and
compulsions, yet we believe that his choices are pretty much the
same. Is he willing to take a serious interest in the business of
investment? If he lacks the impulse or the flair, he will do best to

* To update Graham’s figures, take each dollar amount in this section and
multiply it by five.

120

The Intelligent Investor

accept the easy role of the defensive investor. The division of his
portfolio should then be no different from that of the “typical”
widow, and there would be the same area of personal choice in fixing the size of the stock component. The annual savings should be
invested in about the same proportions as the total fund.
The average doctor may be more likely than the average widow
to elect to become an enterprising investor, and he is perhaps more
likely to succeed in the undertaking. He has one important handicap, however—the fact that he has less time available to give to his
investment education and to the administration of his funds. In
fact, medical men have been notoriously unsuccessful in their security dealings. The reason for this is that they usually have an ample
confidence in their own intelligence and a strong desire to make a
good return on their money, without the realization that to do so
successfully requires both considerable attention to the matter and
something of a professional approach to security values.
Finally, the young man who saves $1,000 a year—and expects to
do better gradually—finds himself with the same choices, though
for still different reasons. Some of his savings should go automatically into Series E bonds. The balance is so modest that it seems
hardly worthwhile for him to undergo a tough educational and
temperamental discipline in order to qualify as an aggressive
investor. Thus a simple resort to our standard program for the
defensive investor would be at once the easiest and the most logical policy.
Let us not ignore human nature at this point. Finance has a fascination for many bright young people with limited means. They
would like to be both intelligent and enterprising in the placement
of their savings, even though investment income is much less
important to them than their salaries. This attitude is all to the
good. There is a great advantage for the young capitalist to begin
his financial education and experience early. If he is going to operate as an aggressive investor he is certain to make some mistakes
and to take some losses. Youth can stand these disappointments
and profit by them. We urge the beginner in security buying not to
waste his efforts and his money in trying to beat the market. Let
him study security values and initially test out his judgment on
price versus value with the smallest possible sums.
Thus we return to the statement, made at the outset, that the

The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks

121

kind of securities to be purchased and the rate of return to be
sought depend not on the investor’s financial resources but on his
financial equipment in terms of knowledge, experience, and temperament.

Note on the Concept of “Risk”
It is conventional to speak of good bonds as less risky than good
preferred stocks and of the latter as less risky than good common
stocks. From this was derived the popular prejudice against common stocks because they are not “safe,” which was demonstrated
in the Federal Reserve Board’s survey of 1948. We should like to
point out that the words “risk” and “safety” are applied to securities in two different senses, with a resultant confusion in thought.
A bond is clearly proved unsafe when it defaults its interest or
principal payments. Similarly, if a preferred stock or even a common stock is bought with the expectation that a given rate of dividend will be continued, then a reduction or passing of the
dividend means that it has proved unsafe. It is also true that an
investment contains a risk if there is a fair possibility that the
holder may have to sell at a time when the price is well below cost.
Nevertheless, the idea of risk is often extended to apply to a possible decline in the price of a security, even though the decline may
be of a cyclical and temporary nature and even though the holder
is unlikely to be forced to sell at such times. These chances are present in all securities, other than United States savings bonds, and to
a greater extent in the general run of common stocks than in senior
issues as a class. But we believe that what is here involved is not a
true risk in the useful sense of the term. The man who holds a
mortgage on a building might have to take a substantial loss if he
were forced to sell it at an unfavorable time. That element is not
taken into account in judging the safety or risk of ordinary realestate mortgages, the only criterion being the certainty of punctual
payments. In the same way the risk attached to an ordinary commercial business is measured by the chance of its losing money, not
by what would happen if the owner were forced to sell.
In Chapter 8 we shall set forth our conviction that the bona fide
investor does not lose money merely because the market price of
his holdings declines; hence the fact that a decline may occur does

122

The Intelligent Investor

not mean that he is running a true risk of loss. If a group of wellselected common-stock investments shows a satisfactory overall
return, as measured through a fair number of years, then this
group investment has proved to be “safe.” During that period its
market value is bound to fluctuate, and as likely as not it will sell
for a while under the buyer’s cost. If that fact makes the investment
“risky,” it would then have to be called both risky and safe at the
same time. This confusion may be avoided if we apply the concept
of risk solely to a loss of value which either is realized through
actual sale, or is caused by a significant deterioration in the
company’s position—or, more frequently perhaps, is the result of
the payment of an excessive price in relation to the intrinsic worth
of the security.2
Many common stocks do involve risks of such deterioration. But
it is our thesis that a properly executed group investment in common stocks does not carry any substantial risk of this sort and that
therefore it should not be termed “risky” merely because of the element of price fluctuation. But such risk is present if there is danger
that the price may prove to have been clearly too high by intrinsicvalue standards—even if any subsequent severe market decline
may be recouped many years later.

Note on the Category of “Large, Prominent,
and Conservatively Financed Corporations”
The quoted phrase in our caption was used earlier in the chapter
to describe the kind of common stocks to which defensive
investors should limit their purchases—provided also that they
had paid continuous dividends for a considerable number of years.
A criterion based on adjectives is always ambiguous. Where is the
dividing line for size, for prominence, and for conservatism of
financial structure? On the last point we can suggest a specific standard that, though arbitrary, is in line with accepted thinking. An
industrial company’s finances are not conservative unless the common stock (at book value) represents at least half of the total capitalization, including all bank debt.3 For a railroad or public utility
the figure should be at least 30%.
The words “large” and “prominent” carry the notion of substantial size combined with a leading position in the industry. Such

The Defensive Investor and Common Stocks

123

companies are often referred to as “primary”; all other common
stocks are then called “secondary,” except that growth stocks are
ordinarily placed in a separate class by those who buy them as
such. To supply an element of concreteness here, let us suggest that
to be “large” in present-day terms a company should have $50 million of assets or do $50 million of business.* Again to be “prominent” a company should rank among the first quarter or first third
in size within its industry group.
It would be foolish, however, to insist upon such arbitrary criteria. They are offered merely as guides to those who may ask for
guidance. But any rule which the investor may set for himself and
which does no violence to the common-sense meanings of “large”
and “prominent” should be acceptable. By the very nature of the
case there must be a large group of companies that some will and
others will not include among those suitable for defensive investment. There is no harm in such diversity of opinion and action. In
fact, it has a salutary effect upon stock-market conditions, because
it permits a gradual differentiation or transition between the categories of primary and secondary stock issues.

* In today’s markets, to be considered large, a company should have a total
stock value (or “market capitalization”) of at least $10 billion. According to
the online stock screener at http://screen.yahoo.com/stocks.html, that gave
you roughly 300 stocks to choose from as of early 2003.

COMMENTARY ON CHAPTER 5

Human felicity is produc’d not so much by great Pieces of good
Fortune that seldom happen, as by little Advantages that occur
every day.
—Benjamin Franklin

THE BEST DEFENSE IS A GOOD OFFENSE
After the stock-market bloodbath of the past few years, why would any
defensive investor put a dime into stocks?
First, remember Graham’s insistence that how defensive you should
be depends less on your tolerance for risk than on your willingness to
put time and energy into your portfolio. And if you go about it the right
way, investing in stocks is just as easy as parking your money in bonds
and cash. (As we’ll see in Chapter 9, you can buy a stock-market index
fund with no more effort than it takes to get dressed in the morning.)
Amidst the bear market that began in 2000, it’s understandable if
you feel burned—and if, in turn, that feeling makes you determined
never to buy another stock again. As an old Turkish proverb says,
“After you burn your mouth on hot milk, you blow on your yogurt.”
Because the crash of 2000–2002 was so terrible, many investors
now view stocks as scaldingly risky; but, paradoxically, the very act of
crashing has taken much of the risk out of the stock market. It was hot
milk before, but it is room-temperature yogurt now.
Viewed logically, the decision of whether to own stocks today has
nothing to do with how much money you might have lost by owning
them a few years ago. When stocks are priced reasonably enough to
give you future growth, then you should own them, regardless of the
losses they may have cost you in the recent past. That’s all the more
true when bond yields are low, reducing the future returns on incomeproducing investments.
124

Commentary on Chapter 5

125

As we have seen in Chapter 3, stocks are (as of early 2003) only
mildly overpriced by historical standards. Meanwhile, at recent prices,
bonds offer such low yields that an investor who buys them for their
supposed safety is like a smoker who thinks he can protect himself
against lung cancer by smoking low-tar cigarettes. No matter how
defensive an investor you are—in Graham’s sense of low maintenance,
or in the contemporary sense of low risk—today’s values mean that you
must keep at least some of your money in stocks.
Fortunately, it’s never been easier for a defensive investor to buy
stocks. And a permanent autopilot portfolio, which effortlessly puts a
little bit of your money to work every month in predetermined investments, can defend you against the need to dedicate a large part of
your life to stock picking.
S H O U L D YO U “ B U Y W H AT YO U K N O W ” ?
But first, let’s look at something the defensive investor must always
defend against: the belief that you can pick stocks without doing any
homework. In the 1980s and early 1990s, one of the most popular
investing slogans was “buy what you know.” Peter Lynch—who from
1977 through 1990 piloted Fidelity Magellan to the best track record
ever compiled by a mutual fund—was the most charismatic preacher of
this gospel. Lynch argued that amateur investors have an advantage
that professional investors have forgotten how to use: “the power of
common knowledge.” If you discover a great new restaurant, car,
toothpaste, or jeans—or if you notice that the parking lot at a nearby
business is always full or that people are still working at a company’s
headquarters long after Jay Leno goes off the air—then you have a personal insight into a stock that a professional analyst or portfolio manager might never pick up on. As Lynch put it, “During a lifetime of
buying cars or cameras, you develop a sense of what’s good and
what’s bad, what sells and what doesn’t . . . and the most important
part is, you know it before Wall Street knows it.” 1
Lynch’s rule—“You can outperform the experts if you use your edge
by investing in companies or industries you already understand”—isn’t

1

Peter Lynch with John Rothchild, One Up on Wall Street (Penguin, 1989),
p. 23.

126

Commentary on Chapter 5

totally implausible, and thousands of investors have profited from it
over the years. But Lynch’s rule can work only if you follow its corollary
as well: “Finding the promising company is only the first step. The next
step is doing the research.” To his credit, Lynch insists that no one
should ever invest in a company, no matter how great its products or
how crowded its parking lot, without studying its financial statements
and estimating its business value.
Unfortunately, most stock buyers have ignored that part.
Barbra Streisand, the day-trading diva, personified the way people
abuse Lynch’s teachings. In 1999 she burbled, “We go to Starbucks
every day, so I buy Starbucks stock.” But the Funny Girl forgot that no
matter how much you love those tall skinny lattes, you still have to analyze Starbucks’s financial statements and make sure the stock isn’t
even more overpriced than the coffee. Countless stock buyers made
the same mistake by loading up on shares of Amazon.com because
they loved the website or buying e*Trade stock because it was their
own online broker.
“Experts” gave the idea credence too. In an interview televised on
CNN in late 1999, portfolio manager Kevin Landis of the Firsthand
Funds was asked plaintively, “How do you do it? Why can’t I do it,
Kevin?” (From 1995 through the end of 1999, the Firsthand Technology Value fund produced an astounding 58.2% average annualized
gain.) “Well, you can do it,” Landis chirped. “All you really need to do is
focus on the things that you know, and stay close to an industry, and
talk to people who work in it every day.” 2
The most painful perversion of Lynch’s rule occurred in corporate
retirement plans. If you’re supposed to “buy what you know,” then
what could possibly be a better investment for your 401(k) than your
own company’s stock? After all, you work there; don’t you know more
about the company than an outsider ever could? Sadly, the employees
