
Foolish Assumptions
In writing this book, I made some assumptions about you, the reader.
✓ You’re someone who needs to know a lot about day trading in a short
period of time.
✓ You may be considering a career change, looking for a productive parttime retirement activity, or bored and looking for a challenge. Maybe
you just want to know if day trading is a good way to supplement your

Introduction
current investment program. Whatever your reason for considering day
trading, you want to know how to decide whether it’s the right option
for you.
✓ If you already know that day trading is right for you, you want to
know how to get started, from opening an account to setting up your
computer monitors. (And yep, that’s plural.)
✓ You have extra money to trade (whether it’s yours or not) and you want
to try day trading techniques to goose up your portfolio returns.
✓ You have some understanding of the basics of investing — that you
know what mutual funds and brokerage accounts are, for example. If you
don’t feel comfortable with that much, you may want to read the latest
editions of Investing For Dummies (by Eric Tyson, published by Wiley) or
Mutual Funds For Dummies (also by Tyson; Wiley) and then come back
here. I can wait.

Icons Used in This Book
As you read this book, you’ll see icons scattered around the margins of the
text. Each icon points out a certain type of information, most of which you
should know or may find interesting about day trading. They go as follows:
This icon notes something you should keep in mind about day trading. It may
refer to something I covered earlier in the book, or it may highlight something
you need to remember for future investing decisions.
Tip information tells you how to invest a little better, a little smarter, and a
little more efficiently. The information can help you make better day trades or
ask better questions of people who want to supply you with research, training,
and trading systems.
I’ve included nothing in this book that can cause death or bodily harm, as far
as I can figure out, but plenty of things in the world of day trading can cause
you to lose big money or, worse, your sanity. These points help you avoid big
problems.
I put the nonessential (but often helpful) academic stuff here. By reading
material marked by this icon, you get the detailed information behind the
investment theories or, sometimes, some interesting trivia or background
information.

3

4

Day Trading For Dummies, 3rd Edition

Beyond the Book
In addition to the book content, you can find a free online Cheat Sheet that
includes information on accounts, definitions, indicators, and performance
calculation. Go to www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/daytrading to access
this handy reference material, and then print it out and keep it by your side
as you get started.
You can also access additional free articles that cover information I simply
couldn’t fit into the book. You’ll find information on a day in the life of a
trade. I also offer advice about chat rooms and Internet forums and a list of
ten alternatives to day trading. You can find them at www.dummies.com/
extras/daytrading.

Where to Go from Here
Well, open up the book and get going! If you have a particular area of interest,
use the index and table of contents to go to the topic you want. If you’re not
sure, you can either turn the page and start at the beginning or flip through
and see whether a topic catches your eye.
Need more guidance than that? Then allow me to give you some ideas. You
may want to start with Chapter 1 if you know nothing about day trading. If
you need to get set up to start trading, look at Chapters 11 and 12. If you
want to know about some of the potential problems in day trading, turn to
Chapters 4, 14, 15, and 16. If you are thinking about day trading as a career,
Chapter 2 describes what day traders do all day. For ideas about developing
strategies, whether you’re going to hold for a few minutes or several years,
go to Part II.
Bottom line: Anywhere you go, you’ll find interesting and useful information.

Part I

Getting Started with
Day Trading

For Dummies can help you get started with lots of subjects. Visit www.dummies.com
to learn more and do more with For Dummies.

In this part…
✓ Get comfortable with the basic idea of day trading: the process of making a large number of short-term trades during a
single day.
✓ Consider whether you have the steady temperament to handle
day trading in treacherous markets. It is a business. Even parttime day traders need to approach the markets with the same
seriousness as a business owner.
✓ Find out the basics of markets, trades, and strategies to help
you get started — if day trading is right for you.
✓ Discover how to plan your trades so you can trade your plan
and increase your chances for success.

Chapter 1

So You Want to Be a Day Trader
In This Chapter
▶ Figuring out just what day traders do
▶ Setting up a trading business
▶ Concentrating on a few assets, a few dollars at a time
▶ Knowing what being a successful trader takes
▶ Dispelling a few day-trading myths

M

ake money from the comfort of your home! Be your own boss! Beat
the market with your own smarts! Build real wealth! Tempting, isn’t
it? Day trading can be a great way to make money all on your own. It’s also a
great way to lose a ton of money all on your own. Do you have the fortitude
to face the market every morning?
Day trading is a crazy business. Traders work in front of their computer
screens, reacting to blips, each of which represents real dollars. They make
quick decisions because their ability to make money depends on successfully
executing a large number of trades that generate small profits. They close out
their positions in the stocks, options, and futures contracts they own at the
end of the day, which limits some of the risks — nothing can happen overnight
to disturb an existing profit position — but those limits on risk can limit profits.
After all, a lot can happen in a year, increasing the likelihood that your trade
idea will work out, but in a day? You have to be patient and work fast. Some
days offer nothing good to buy. Other days, every trade seems to lose money.
The individual human-being day trader is up against a tough opponent: highfrequency algorithms programmed and operated by brokerage firms and
hedge funds that have no emotion and can make trades in less time than it
takes to blink your eye. If you’re not prepared for that competition, you will
be crushed.

In this chapter, I cover what day traders do, share the advantages and
­disadvantages of day trading, list the personality traits of successful day

8

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
­traders, and give you information on your likelihood of success. You may find
that day trading is a great career option that takes advantage of your street
smarts and clear thinking — or that the risk outweighs the potential benefits.
Either is okay: The more you know before you make the decision to trade, the
greater your chance of being successful. If you decide that day trading isn’t
right for you, you can apply strategies and techniques that day traders use to
improve the performance of your investment portfolio.

It’s All in a Day’s Work: Defining
Day Trading
The definition of day trading is that day traders hold their securities for only
one day. They close out their positions at the end of every day and then start
all over again the next day. By contrast, swing traders hold securities for days
and sometimes even months; investors sometimes hold for years. The shortterm nature of day trading reduces some risks, because nothing can happen
overnight to cause big losses. Meanwhile, many other types of investors go to
bed thinking their position is in great shape only to wake up the next morning
to find that the company has announced terrible earnings or that its CEO is
being indicted on fraud charges.
But there’s a flip side (there’s always a flip side, isn’t there?): The day trader’s
choice of securities and positions has to work out in a day, or it’s gone.
Tomorrow doesn’t exist for any specific position. Meanwhile, the swing
trader or the investor has the luxury of time, because it sometimes takes a
while for a position to work out the way your research shows it should. In
the long run, markets are efficient, and prices reflect all information about a
security. Unfortunately, a few days of short runs may need to occur for this
efficiency to kick in.
Day traders are speculators working in zero-sum markets one day at a time.
That makes the dynamics different from other types of financial activities you
may have been involved in. When you take up day trading, the rules that may
have helped you pick good stocks or find great mutual funds over the years no
longer apply. Day trading is a different game with different rules.

Speculating, not hedging
Professional traders fall into two categories: speculators and hedgers.
Speculators look to make a profit from price changes. Hedgers look to protect
against a price change. They make their buy and sell choices as insurance,

Chapter 1: So You Want to Be a Day Trader
not as a way to make a profit, so they choose positions that offset their
exposure in another market.
As examples of hedging, consider a food-processing company and the farmer
who raises or grows the ingredients the company needs. The company may
look to hedge against the risks of price increases of key ingredients — like
corn, cooking oil, or meat — by buying futures contracts on those ingredients. That way, if prices do go up, the company’s profits on the contracts
help fund the higher prices it has to pay for those ingredients. If the prices
stay the same or go down, the company loses only the price of the contract,
which may be a fair tradeoff to the company. The farmer raising corn, soybeans, or cattle, on the other hand, benefits if prices go up and suffers if they
go down. To protect against a price decline, the farmer would sell futures on
those commodities. His futures position would make money if the price went
down, offsetting the decline on his products. And if the prices went up, he’d
lose money on the contracts, but that loss would be offset by his gain on his
harvest.
The commodity markets were intended to help agricultural producers manage
risk and find buyers for their products. The stock and bond markets were
intended to create an incentive for investors to finance companies. Speculation
emerged in all of these markets almost immediately, but it was not their
­primary purpose.
Day traders are all speculators. They look to make money from the market as
they see it now. They manage their risks by carefully allocating their money,
using stop and limit orders (which close out positions as soon as predetermined price levels are reached), and closing out at the end of the night. Day
traders don’t manage risk with offsetting positions the way a hedger does.
They use other techniques to limit losses, like careful money management
and stop and limit orders (which you can read about in Chapter 2).
Markets have both hedgers and speculators in them. Knowing that different
participants have different profit and loss expectations can help you navigate
the turmoil of each day’s trading. And that’s important, because to make
money in a zero-sum market, you only make money if someone else loses.

Understanding zero-sum markets
A zero-sum game has exactly as many winners as losers. And options and
futures markets, which are popular with day traders, are zero-sum markets.
If the person who holds an option makes a profit, then the person who wrote
(which is option-speak for sold) that option loses the same amount. There’s
no net gain or net loss in the market as a whole.

9

10

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Now some of those people buying and selling in zero-sum markets are
hedgers who are content to take small losses in order to prevent big ones.
Speculators may have the profit advantage in certain market conditions,
but they can’t count on having that advantage all the time.
So who wins and who loses in a zero-sum market? Some days, whether you
win or lose all depends on luck, but over the long run, the winners are the
people who are the most disciplined: They have a trading plan, set limits and
stick to them, and can trade based on the data on the screen rather than on
emotions like hope, fear, and greed.
Unlike the options and futures markets, the stock market is not a zero-sum
game. As long as the economy grows, company profits grow, which in turn
lead to growing stock prices. The stock market really has more winners than
losers over the long run. That doesn’t mean that any given day will have
more winners than losers, however. In the short run, the stock market should
be treated like a zero-sum market.
If you understand how profits are divided in the markets that you choose to
trade, you have a better awareness of the risks that you face as well as the
risks that the other participants are taking. People do make money in zerosum markets, but you don’t want those winners to be making a profit off you.
Some traders make money — lots of money — doing what they like. Trading
is all about risk and reward. The traders who are rewarded risked the 80
­percent washout rate. Knowing that, do you want to take the plunge? If so,
read on. And if not, read on anyway, because you may get some ideas that
can help you manage your other investments.

Being disciplined: Closing out each night
Day traders start each day fresh and finish each day with a clean slate. This
daily regimen reduces some of the risk, and it forces discipline. You can’t
keep your losers longer than a day, and you have to take your profits at the
end of the day before those winning positions turn into losers.
That discipline is important for day traders. When you day trade, you face
a market that does not know and does not care who you are, what you’re
doing, or what your personal or financial goals are. There’s no kindly boss
who may cut you a little slack today, no friendly coworker to help you
through a jam, no great client dropping you a little hint about her spending
plans for the next fiscal year. Unless you have rules in place to guide your
trading decisions, you’ll fall prey to hope, fear, doubt, and greed — the Four
Horsemen of trading ruin.

Chapter 1: So You Want to Be a Day Trader
So how do you start? First you develop a business plan and a trading plan that
reflect your goals and your personality. Then you set your working days and
hours, and you accept that you’ll close out every night. Both of these steps
are covered in Chapter 2. As you think about the securities that you’ll trade
(Chapter 3) and how you may trade them (Part II), you’ll also want to test
your trading system (Chapter 16) to see how it may work in actual trading.
In other words, you prepare and have a plan. That’s a basic strategy for any
endeavor, whether you’re running a marathon, building a new garage, or
taking up day trading.

Committing to Trading As a Business
For many people, the attraction of day trading is that traders can very much
control their own hours. Many markets, like foreign exchange, trade around
the clock. With mobile trading apps, day trading seems like a way to make
money while the baby is napping, during your lunch hour, or on just a few
mornings a week in between golf games and woodworking.
That myth that day trading is an easy activity that you can do on the side actually does makes some traders very rich. Who are these traders? The professional traders who approach day trading as a business rather than a pastime.
They make money when traders who are not fully committed lose their money.
But day trading is a business, and the best traders approach it as such. They
have business plans for what they will trade, how they’ll invest in their business, and how they’ll protect their trading profits. Therefore, much of this book
is about this business of trading: how to create a business plan (Chapter 2),
how to set up your office (Chapter 12), tax considerations (Chapter 15), and
performance evaluation (Chapter 16). If you catch a late-night infomercial about
trading, the story will be about the ease and the excitement. But if you want
that excitement to last, you have to make the commitment to doing trading as a
business to which you dedicate your time and your energy.

Trading part-time: An okay idea
if done right
Can you make money trading part-time? You can, and some people do.
Successful part-time day traders approach trading as a part-time job, not as
a little game to play when they have nothing else going on. A part-time trader
may commit to trading three days a week or to closing out at noon instead of

11

12

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
at the close of the market. A successful part-time trader still has a business
plan, still sets limits, and still acts like any professional trader would, just for
a smaller part of the day.
Part-time trading works best when you can set and maintain fixed business
hours. Working on a fixed schedule helps your brain know when to go to
work and concentrate on the market, because the habit is ingrained. The successful part-timer operates as a professional with fixed hours. Think of it this
way: My son is a patient in a group pediatric practice that has some part-time
doctors. These part-time doctors keep set hours and behave like the other
doctors in the practice; the only difference is that they work fewer hours
each week. They commit their attention to medicine when they are on the
job, and patients only know about their part-time hours when it comes time
to make an appointment. These doctors don’t pop into the office and start
giving shots during their lunch break from their “real” job, sneaking around
so that their real boss doesn’t find out.
If you want to be a part-time day trader, approach it the same way that a parttime doctor, part-time lawyer, or part-time accountant would approach work.
Find hours that fit your schedule and commit to trading during them. Have a
dedicated office space with high-speed Internet access and a computer that
you use just for trading. If you have children at home, you may need to have
child care during your trading hours. And if you have another job, set your
trading hours away from your work time. Trading via cellphone during your
morning commute is a really good way to lose a lot of money (not to mention
your life if you try it while driving).

Trading as a hobby: A bad idea
Because of the excitement of day trading and the supposed ease of doing it,
you may think that day trading makes a great hobby. On a boring Saturday
afternoon, you could just spend a few hours trading in the forex market
(foreign exchange) to make more money than if you spent those few hours
playing video games! Right?
Uh, no.
Trading without a plan and without committing the time and energy to do it
right is a route to losses. Professional traders are betting that plenty of suckers are out there, trading in just such a random way because that creates the
losers that allow them to take profits in a zero-sum market.
The biggest mistake amateur traders make? Making a lot of money the first time
trading and then assuming that all such successes will come as easily. That first
success was almost definitely due to luck, and that luck can turn against a trader
on a dime. If you make money your first time out, take a step back and see

Chapter 1: So You Want to Be a Day Trader
whether you can figure out why. Then test your strategy, using Chapter 16 as a
guide, to see whether your strategy is a good one that you can use often.
Yes, I have two warnings in this section, and for good reason: Successful day
traders commit to their business. Even then, most day traders fail in their
first year. Brokerage firms, training services, and other traders have a vested
interest in making trading seem like an easy activity that you can work into
your life. But it’s a job — a job that some people love, but a job nonetheless.
If you really love the excitement of the markets, you can find ways to invest on
a hobbyist’s schedule: You can spend your time doing fundamental research
to find long-term investments (see Chapter 17 for information on that); you
can look into alternative investments to help diversify your portfolio (head to
Chapter 3); and you can trade with play money, either in demo accounts or in
trading contests, to try trading without committing real money.

Defining the Principles of
Successful Day Trading
Although you can day trade almost every asset with wild abandon, doing so
probably isn’t a good idea. Some traders spend their entire careers working
with just one or two types of securities. This section covers the basics of
success: working with just a few assets in one market, managing positions
carefully, and concentrating on the work at hand.

Working with a small number of assets
Most day traders pick one or two markets and concentrate on those to the
exclusion of all others. That way they can learn how the markets trade, how
news affects prices, and how the other participants react to new information.
Also, concentrating on just one or two markets helps a trader maintain focus.
And what do day traders trade? Chapter 3 has information on all of the different markets and how they work, but here’s a quick summary, in no particular
order, of the most popular assets with day traders right now:
✓ Financial futures: Futures contracts allow traders to profit from price
changes in such market indexes as the S&P 500 or the Dow Jones
Industrial Average. They give traders exposure to the prices at a much
lower cost than buying all the stocks in the index individually. Of course,
they tend to be more volatile than the indexes they track because they
are based on expectations.

13

14

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
✓ Forex: Forex, short for foreign exchange, involves trading in currencies
all over the world to profit from changes in exchange rates. Forex is the
largest and most liquid market there is, and it’s open for trading all day,
every day. Traders like the huge number of opportunities. Because most
price changes are small, they have to use leverage (borrowed money)
to make a profit. The borrowings have to be repaid no matter what
­happens to the trade, which adds to the risk of forex.
✓ Common stock and exchange-traded funds: The entire business of day
trading began in the stock market, and the stock market continues to
be popular with day traders. They look for news on company performance and investor perception that affect stock prices, and they look to
make money from those price changes. A similar asset is the exchangetraded fund, which trades like a stock but is based on a market index or
­strategy. The big drawback? Stock and ETF traders can get killed at tax
time if they aren’t careful. See Chapter 15 for more information.
