 Given this embarrassment of riches—from Disney to GEICO to super-cats—it is small surprise that the public’s expectations for Berkshire were becoming inflated. By early 1996, its share price was swelling toward $40,000. Buffett was worried that the shares were becoming bait for speculators, and he was highly agitated by the plans of a couple of promoters to take advantage of Berkshire’s unusual share price by peddling low-priced “clones.” (The promoters intended to create investment trusts that would purchase shares of Berkshire and then sell low-priced units to the public.) Obsessed, as usual, with controlling every aspect of Berkshire, Buffett decided to beat these promoters to the punch with a baby Berkshire of his own. 
 In a sort of do-it-yourself stock split, Buffett devised a new issue of Berkshire—Class B common stock—worth 1 / 30 of the old shares and expected to trade at 1 / 30 the price. Shareholders could hang on to the ordinary common, now known as Class A, or (at any time) convert—one A share for thirty B shares. (Buffett would keep the high-priced variety.) Of course, in value terms they were identical: the same pizza cut in thirty slices. 
 But given that small investors attracted to his celebrity might be especially tempted to hop aboard the “cheaper” B stock, Buffett did what virtually no chief executive has ever done—he warned that the price of his stock (then $36,000) was more than he would pay for it. Berkshire’s intrinsic value had continued to grow at an impressive rate, but its stock, in recent years, had overperformed it, Buffett warned in his latest annual report. “Inevitably, there will be periods of underperformance as well.” In short, investors who pay too much for Berkshire—or any stock—implicitly are betting on its high performance to continue, perhaps for many years into the future. 
 Discussion of such an extended time period makes Buffett’s shareholders uncomfortable. It reminds them of the one “super-cat” they fear the most. As one shareholder and longtime friend admitted bluntly, “All of us have a vested interest in Warren’s good health.” 14 
 Among the stockholders, the size of the “Buffett premium”—that is, the amount above fair value that Buffett’s presence adds to the stock—is a subject of endless debate. It is feared that his death could be followed by panic selling, though, as Buffett would be quick to point out, his death would not affect the value of Berkshire’s Coca-Cola stock or of any of its other assets. Save for rare occasions, such as his recent annual letter, Buffett does not comment on what he thinks Berkshire is worth. His policy is to disclose what he will about the company and let trading follow its course. 
 But the obsession with Buffett’s longevity is one that Buffett, though for different reasons, feels more keenly than anyone. He repeats at every turn the quip that he plans to run Berkshire for at least a few years after his death, via séances. (No saying goodbye to Berkshire, even then.) 
 When Doris, his elder sister, researched the Buffett family tree, Warren said the only thing he wanted to know about his ancestors was how long they had lived. 15 Another time, he remarked to a friend that although scientists had not found a correlation between age and wealth, he didn’t think they had ever studied age and super wealth. 16 Still again, when a shareholder asked what his goal was, now that he had become the richest man in the country, Buffett spit out, “To become the oldest one.” 17 Even in his private life, he married a woman with a singular interest in helping people cope with death. 
 It is scarcely implausible that Buffett’s fear of death has contributed to his drive to accumulate. Agnostic and hyperrational, he has few other opiates. His one passion has been to collect—not money, precisely, but tangible evidence of himself. He clings to his friends, his house, his old foods and stock lines, and his stocks themselves. Notably, he says he does not enjoy running businesses; he enjoys owning them. 18 In the view of his friend Barbara Morrow, the formative trauma of his life was when he was yanked out of Omaha to go to school in Washington—a forced separation. He has been accumulating assets, but hardly ever selling or disengaging from them, ever since. As he commented in a recent letter, “We like to buy. Selling, however, is a different story.” 19 In a sense, his whole career has been an act of holding on—of refusing to say goodbye. 
 One sees him in Omaha, on a spring Sunday morning, the day before Berkshire’s annual meeting. An ersatz trolley car, not too different from the one Buffett rode as a boy, is making the rounds of Omaha’s hotels, picking up his guests. Buffett is at the front of the trolley. He heartily greets his visitors—the widow of a longtime friend from Wharton, a fellow student of Ben Graham’s, the CEO of a company Buffett owns—who step from various stages of his life as from the pages in an album. Buffett, who is dressed casually and is in a jovial mood, guides the trolley to his country club, where he is throwing a brunch for more than one hundred of his closest disciple-friend-admirers. 
 In the afternoon, the festivities, now open to all shareholders, continue at Borsheim’s. Tables of caviar, raspberry-and-kiwi tarts, cheesecake, and horseradished roast beef are set beside the jewelry and fine china. A string quartet entertains, and tuxedo-clad porters ease among the crowd ferrying velvet-cased diamonds and trays of champagne. 
 Buffett has been in a back room, playing bridge with some pals. As the party picks up steam, he quietly saunters in and stakes out a position against a rack of diamond earrings. Shareholders screw up their courage and wander over in groups of twos and threes. Buffett gets a charge out of it, not from the aspect of spectacle, exactly, but from the feeling that all of these people are included in his personal show. 
 Most of the faces at Borsheim’s are familiar to Buffett. He mentions that he knows a relative of 90 percent of Berkshire’s 7,500 shareholders on sight. He greet