
Source: www.eSignal.com

Figure 11-9:
Spinning tops
are similar to
doji both in
shape and in
that they
suggest
uncertainty
and a potential
reversal of the
prior
directional
move.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Engulfing lines

Engulfing lines are two-candlestick patterns that can be either bullish or bearish, depending on
whether they come after a downmove or an upmove:
Bullish engulfing line: The first candle is dark, followed by a large light candle, the body
of which completely engulfs the body of the dark candle, seen in Figure 11-8. The smaller
the body of the first candle (think spinning top — see the preceding section), the more
significant the reversal signals.
Bearish engulfing line: The first candle is light, followed by a long dark-colored candle
that engulfs the body of the first candle, as shown in Figure 11-10 as part of another
candle pattern.

Engulfing lines also rank among my favorite candlestick patterns and are a sufficient basis
to establish a position in the opposite direction of the preceding price move. If the high/low
of the candle preceding the engulfing candle is exceeded, the pattern is negated and you need
to exit.
Tweezers tops and tweezers bottoms
Tweezers formations are two-candlestick patterns that get their name because they resemble the
pincer end of a pair of tweezers. Tweezers tops and bottoms (shown in Figure 11-10) correspond
to double tops and bottoms in traditional chart analysis, and they mean the same thing — a reversal
after failing to make new highs or lows. Tweezers tops and bottoms are characterized by long tails
on the bottom after a move down, similar to a hammer, and long tails above after a move higher,
like shooting stars. The extremes of the tails should ideally be equal, but if the tails are sufficiently
long, I’d take notice.

Hopefully you noticed that many of the candlestick patterns I discuss have two things in
common — long tails and small bodies. As part of your technical analysis routine (see
Chapter 12), I strongly suggest reviewing daily candle charts after each day’s close (5 p.m.
ET), and on the weekends for weekly candles, to see if any patterns are evident. They can be
powerful signals about where prices are heading in the next trading day or week.

Fibonacci retracements
A retracement is a price movement in the opposite direction of the preceding price move. For
instance, if EUR/USD rises by 150 pips over the course of two days and declines by 75 pips on
the third day, prices are said to have retraced half the move higher, or made a 50 percent
retracement of the move up. (Fifty percent is not technically a Fibonacci retracement, but I include
it here because many traders watch it, too, because of its clean, halfway demarcation.)

Figure 1110: A
tweezers top
and bottom
formation
signals that an
upmove is set
to reverse and
that a decline
may be
ending. Note
the doji in the
days prior to
the tweezers
top suggesting
that upside
sentiment was
already
uncertain.

Source: www.eSignal.com

Fibonacci retracements come from the ratios between the numbers in the Fibonacci sequence, a
nearly magical numerical series that appears in the natural world and mathematics with regularity.
The most important Fibonacci retracement percentages are 38.2 percent and 61.8 percent, with
76.4 percent as a secondary, but still important, level.
Most charting systems contain an automatic Fibonacci retracement drawing tool. All you need to
do is click the starting point of a directional price move (the low for an upmove; the high for a
downmove) and drag the cursor to the finishing point of the movement. The charting system will
then display lines that correspond to 38.2 percent, 50 percent, 61.8 percent, 76.4 percent, and 100
percent.
Currency traders routinely calculate Fibonacci retracement levels to determine support and
resistance levels, and Fibonacci retracement levels are strong examples of self-fulfilling
prophecies in technical analysis. Figure 11-11 provides a good illustration of how Fibonacci
retracement levels can act as resistance in a correction higher following a price decline. You can
see the 38.2 percent retracement level put up a pretty good fight for a while, but after it broke
above, prices blew right past the 50 percent point and quickly moved to the 61.8 percent level,
even exceeding it briefly before a pullback. That pullback was nicely contained by the 38.2
percent level. Prices went on to surpass the 61.8 percent level and then tested 76.4 percent, which
also held for a time and sent prices back to the 61.8 percent point. From there they rallied higher
and finally broke the 76.4 percent level, setting up potential for a 100 percent retracement of the
prior decline.

Figure 1111: You can
identify future
support and
resistance
levels by
drawing
Fibonacci
retracements
of prior
directional
price moves
on your
charting
system.

Source: www.eSignal.com

The Science of Technical Analysis
Relax. Nothing is especially scientific or particularly complicated about technical analysis. Many
in the market use the term science to describe the mechanics of various technical tools, but in my
opinion technical analysis is far more art than science.
Each tool in technical analysis has a number of concrete elements that I need to outline before you
can start interpreting what they mean. Unless you’re developing your own systematic trading
model, you don’t need to get too caught up in the math or the calculations behind various
indicators. Far more important is understanding what the indicators are measuring and what their
signals mean and don’t mean.

Momentum oscillators and studies
Momentum refers to the speed at which prices are moving, either up or down. Momentum is an
important technical measurement of the strength of the buying or selling interest behind a
movement in prices. The higher the momentum in a downmove, for example, the greater the selling
interest is thought to be. The slower the momentum, the weaker the selling interest.
Currency traders use momentum indicators to gauge whether a price movement will be sustained,

potentially developing into a trend, or whether a directional move has run its course and is now
more likely to reverse direction. If momentum is positive and rising, it means prices are
advancing, suggesting that active buying is taking place. If momentum begins to slow, it means
prices are advancing more slowly, suggesting that buying interest is beginning to weaken. If buying
interest is drying up, selling interest may increase.
Momentum takes on added significance in currencies because there’s no viable way of assessing
trading volume on a real-time basis. In stock and futures markets, volume data is an important
indicator of the significance of a price move. For example, a sharp price movement on high
volume is considered legitimate and likely to be sustained, while a similarly sharp move on low
volume is discounted and viewed as more likely to reverse.
Momentum indicators fall into a group of technical studies known as oscillators, because the
mathematical representations of momentum are plotted on a scale that sees momentum rise and
fall, or oscillate, depending on the relative speed of the price movements. A variety of different
momentum oscillators exist, each calculated by various formulas, but they’re all based on the
relationship of the current price to preceding prices over a defined period of time.
Momentum oscillators are typically displayed in a small window at the bottom of charting
systems, with the price chart displayed above, so you can readily compare the price action with its
underlying momentum.

Overbought and oversold
Momentum oscillators have extreme levels at the upper and lower ends of the oscillator’s scale,
where the upper level is referred to as overbought and the lower level is referred to oversold. No
hard definitions of overbought and oversold exist, because they’re relative terms describing how
fast prices have changed relative to prior price changes. The best way to think of overbought and
oversold is that prices have gone up or down too fast relative to prior periods.
Many momentum indicators suggest trading rules based on the indicator reaching overbought or
oversold levels. For example, if a momentum study enters overbought or oversold territory, and
subsequently turns down or up and moves out of the overbought or oversold zone, it may be
considered a sell or buy signal.

Just because a momentum indicator has reached an overbought or oversold level does not
mean that prices have to reverse direction. After all, the essence of a trend is a sustained
directional price movement, which could see momentum remain in overbought or oversold
territory for a long period of time as prices continue to advance or decline in the trend.
Breaking news or data may be behind the price move, lending a fundamental urgency to price
adjustments that defy momentum analysis. Momentum is only an indicator. The key is to wait
for confirmation from prices that the prior direction or trend has, in fact, changed.

Divergences between price and momentum
Another useful way to interpret momentum indicators is by comparing them to corresponding price
changes. In most cases, momentum studies and price changes should move in the same direction. If
prices are rising, for example, you would expect to see momentum indicators rising as well. By
the same token, if momentum begins to stall and eventually turn down, you would expect to see
prices turn lower, too. But relatively frequently, especially in shorter, intraday time frames (15
minutes, 1 hour, or 4 hours), prices diverge from momentum (meaning, prices may continue to rise
even though momentum has started to move lower).
When prices move in the opposite direction of momentum, it’s called a divergence. Divergences
are relatively easy to spot — new price highs are not matched by new highs in the momentum
indicator, or new price lows are not matched by new lows in the momentum study. When a new
price high or low is made, and momentum fails to make a similar new high or low, the price action
is not confirmed by the momentum, suggesting that the price move is false and will not be
sustained. The expectation, then, is that the price will change direction and eventually follow the
momentum.
When prices make new highs, and momentum is falling or not making new highs, it’s called a
bearish divergence (meaning, prices are expected to shift lower — move bearishly — in line with
the underlying momentum). When prices are making new lows, but momentum is rising or not
making new lows, it’s called a bullish divergence (meaning, prices are expected to turn higher —
bullish — in line with momentum). (In Chapter 12, I show an example of a bearish divergence.)

Divergences are great alerts that something may be out of kilter between prices and the
underlying strength or momentum of the price move. Whenever you spot a divergence
between price and momentum, you should start looking more closely at what’s happening to
prices. Are stop-loss levels being run in thin liquidity conditions? Or has some important
news just come out that has sent prices moving sharply, and momentum will eventually catch
up?

In a trending environment, prices may continue to move in the direction of the trend (that’s
what a trend is), but at a slower pace, causing momentum to diverge. To know for certain,
you need to wait for confirmation from prices before you enter a trade based on a divergence.

Using momentum in ranges and trends
Momentum indicators work best in range environments, where price movements are relatively
constrained and no trend is evident or has moved into consolidation. As buying drives prices
toward the upper end of a range, for example, selling interest comes in, slowing the price advance
and turning momentum lower. As the buyers turn around, the selling interest increases and

momentum begins to accelerate lower, confirming the change in direction. At the bottom of the
range, the same thing happens, but in the opposite direction.

Momentum studies frequently give off incorrect signals during breakouts and trending
markets. This is especially the case when using shorter time frames, such as hourly and
shorter periods. The key to understanding why this happens is to recognize that momentum
studies are backward-looking indicators. All they can do is quantify the change in current
prices relative to what has come before. They have little predictive capacity, which is why
you always need to wait for confirmation from prices before trading based on a momentum
signal.

Some of the most extreme price moves typically occur when momentum readings are in
overbought or oversold territory. Divergences in shorter time frames also appear frequently,
especially during breakouts, where rapid price moves are not reflected quickly enough in
momentum studies. By the time the momentum indicator has caught up with the price breakout,
prices may already have peaked or bottomed, again causing momentum to signal a
divergence. Just because momentum is overbought or oversold doesn’t mean prices can’t
continue to move higher or lower.
Here are the main momentum oscillators used by currency traders:
Relative Strength Index (RSI): A single-line oscillator plotted on a scale from 0 to 100,
based on closing prices over a user-defined period. Common RSI periods are 9, 14, and
21. RSI compares the strength of up periods to the weakness of down periods — hence,
the label relative strength. RSI readings over 75 are considered overbought; readings
below 25 are considered oversold. RSI signals are given when the indicator leaves
overbought or oversold territory and on divergences with price.
Stochastic: A two-line oscillator plotted on a scale of 0 to 100. The two lines are known
as %K (fast stochastic) and %D (slow stochastic). Stochastics are also based on closing
prices of prior periods. The basic theory behind stochastics is that the strength of a
directional move can be measured by how near the close is to the extreme of a period. In
an uptrend, a close near the highs for the period signifies strong momentum; a close in the
middle or below signals that momentum is weakening. In a downtrend, the close of a
period should be nearer to the lows for momentum to strengthen. As momentum shifts, the
%K line will cross over the slower-moving %D line. Crossovers in overbought or
oversold territory are considered sell or buy signals. Overbought is above 80, and
oversold is below 20.
Moving Average Convergence/Divergence (MACD): Not really a momentum
oscillator, but a complex series of moving averages. (It functions similarly to momentum
studies, so I include it here.) MACD fluctuates on either side of a zero line and has no

fixed scale, so overbought or oversold are judged relative to prior extremes. MACD also
consists of two lines: the MACD line (based on two moving averages) and the signal line
(a moving average of the MACD line). Trading signals are generated if the MACD line
crosses up over the signal line while below the zero line (buy) or crosses down below the
signal line while above the zero line (sell). MACD tends to generate signals more slowly
than RSI or stochastics due to the longer periods typically used and the slower nature of
moving averages. The result is that it takes longer for MACD to cross over, generally
preventing fewer false signals.

Trend-identifying indicators
One of the market’s favorite sayings is “The trend is your friend.” The idea is that if you trade in
the direction of the prevailing trend, you’re more likely to experience success than if you trade
against the trend. Now, how can you argue with logic like that?
The hard part for us mortals is to determine whether there’s a trend in the first place. The question
becomes more complex when you look at multiple time frames, because trends can exist in any
time frame. On a daily time frame, the market may be largely range bound. But in a shorter time
frame, such as hourly or 30 minutes, there may be a trending movement that presents an opportunity
for short-term traders.

Determining whether a trend is in place is also important when it comes to deciding
whether to follow the signals given by momentum indicators. Momentum studies are great in
relatively range-bound markets, but they tend to give off bad signals during trends and
breakouts. The key is to determine whether a trend is in place.
In the following sections, I look at a few technical studies you can use to identify whether a trend
is in place and how strong it may be.

Directional Movement Indicator system
The Directional Movement Indicator (DMI) system is a set of quantitative tools designed to
determine whether a market is trending. The DMI is based on the idea that when a market is
trending, each period’s price extremes should exceed the prior price extremes in the direction of
the trend. For example, in an uptrend, each successive high should be higher than the prior
period’s high. In a downtrend, the opposite is the case: Each new low should be lower than the
prior period’s low. That’s the essence of a trend.
The DMI system is composed of the ADX line (the average directional movement index) and the
DI+ and DI– lines (which refer to the directional indicators for up periods [+] and down periods
[–]). The ADX is used to determine whether a market is trending (regardless if it’s up or down),
with a reading over 25 indicating a trending market and a reading below indicating no trend. The

ADX is also a measure of the strength of a trend — the higher the ADX, the stronger the trend.
Using the ADX, traders can determine whether a trend is operative and decide whether to use a
trend-following system or to rely on momentum oscillator signals.
As its name would suggest, the DMI system is best employed using both components. The DI+ and
DI– lines are used as trade-entry signals. A buy signal is generated when the DI+ line crosses up
through the DI– line; a sell signal is generated when the DI– line crosses up through the DI+ line.
Wilder suggests using the extreme-point rule to govern the DI+/DI– crossover signal. The rule
states that when the DI+/DI– lines cross, you should note the extreme point for that period in the
direction of the crossover (the high if DI+ crosses up over DI–; the low if DI– crosses up over
DI+). If that extreme point is exceeded in the next period, the DI+/DI– crossover is considered a
valid trade signal. If the extreme point is not surpassed, the signal is not confirmed.

The ADX can also be used as an early indicator of the end or pause in a trend. When the
ADX begins to move lower from its highest level, the trend is either pausing or ending,
signaling that it’s time to exit the current position and wait for a fresh signal from the DI+/DI–
crossover.

Moving averages
One of the more basic and widely used indicators in technical analysis, moving averages can
verify existing trends, identify emerging trends, and generate trading signals. Moving averages are
simply an average of prior prices over a user-defined time period displayed as a line overlaid on
a price chart. There are two main types of moving averages:
Simple moving average gives equal weight to each historical price point over the
specified period.
Exponential moving average gives greater weight to more recent price data, with the aim
of capturing directional price changes more quickly than the simple moving average.
In terms of defining a trend, when prices are above the moving average, an uptrend is in place;
when prices are below the moving average, a downtrend is in place.
Traders like to experiment with different periods for moving averages, but a few are more
commonly used in the market than others, and they’re worth keeping an eye on. The main moving
average periods to focus on are 21, 55, 100, and 200. Shorter-term traders may consider looking
at the 9- and 14-period moving averages.

Another way moving averages are used is by combining two or more moving averages and
using the crossovers of the moving averages as buy or sell signals based on the direction of
the crossover. For example, using a 9- and 21-period moving average, you would buy when

the faster-moving 9-period average crosses up over the slower-moving 21-period average,
and vice versa for a crossover to the downside.

Trading with clouds — Ichimoku charts
Ichimoku Kinko Hyo, or “one-glance equilibrium,” charts are another technical analysis approach
imported from Japan that is gaining widespread popularity in forex (and other financial) markets.
Often referred to as cloud charts because of the central feature of the system (the cloud, or kumo
in Japanese), Ichimoku is basically a trend-following system. But Ichimoku lines can also define
significant support and resistance levels not identified by more traditional technical approaches.
The key components of Ichimoku charts are five lines shown in Figure 11-12:
Tenkan line. The faster moving average based on the average of the high and low of the
prior nine days.
Kijun line. The slower moving average based on the average of the high and low from the
prior 26 days.
Senkou span A (leading span A). The average of the Tenkan and Kijun lines from the
prior 26 days, projected 26 days into the future.
Senkou span B (leading span B). The average of the high and low of the prior 52 days
projected 26 days into the future. The cloud is the space between the two leading spans.
Chikou span (lagging span). Today’s closing price reflected 26 days into the past.
Figure 1112: Ichimoku
charts provide
a quick way
to identify
trend direction
and also offer
support and
resistance
levels not
found
elsewhere.

Source: FOREX.com

A few points to note here: Ichimoku is a daily-based chart approach (weekly views can also be
used) making it a tool for longer-term traders. Most importantly, intra-day breaks of Ichimoku
lines are relatively common, but it’s only the daily close that matters, reinforcing it as a
medium/longer-term trading tool.
Ichimoku trading signals are based on the position of the current price relative to the lines as well
as crossovers of the lines themselves. In the simplest form, the trend is up when prices are above
the cloud and down when prices are below. Buying and selling signals also come from crossovers
of the Tenkan and Kijun lines, but the strength of the signal depends on the position of price
relative to the cloud. A crossover of the Tenkan below the Kijun line (bearish crossover) with
price above the cloud is a weak sell signal. If price is inside the cloud, it’s a medium strength sell
signal. If prices are below the cloud, it’s a strong sell signal. The same applies in bullish
crossovers, but in reverse. The Chikou span is also used to gauge the validity of the trade signals,
based on where current prices are relative to prior periods. The idea is that if an uptrend is in
place, for example, current price should be above those of prior periods, as seen by the lagging
span.
