
 The most important characteristic of high relative volume stocks is that these stocks trade independent of what their sector and the overall market are doing. When the market is weak, it means that the majority of stocks are selling off. It does not matter if it is Apple, Facebook, Amazon or Exxon. When the market is strong, the prices of the majority of stocks will be going higher. Similarly, when you hear someone say the market is “bear” or “collapsing”, they don’t mean a specific stock. They mean that the whole stock market is losing its value - all stocks together. The same is true for specific sectors. For example, when the pharmaceutical sector is weak, it means all of the pharmaceutical companies are losing their values together. 

 How do you recognize the behavior of the market? Index funds such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or the S&P 500 (SPY) are usually good indicators of what the overall market is doing. If the Dow Jones or the SPY are red, it means that the overall market is weak. If the Dow Jones or the SPY are strong, then the overall market will be going higher. 

 The behavior of stocks that have high relative volume is independent of the overall market; they are Stocks in Play. Every day, only a handful of stocks are being traded independently of their sector and the overall market. Day traders trade only those stocks. I sometimes call those stocks “ Alpha ”. In the animal kingdom, alpha is a predator at the top of a food chain upon which no other creatures prey. In day trading, Alpha stocks are the ones that are independent of both the overall market and their sector. The market and high frequency trading cannot control them. We call these Stocks in Play. 

 Therefore, the next rule is about Stocks in Play: 

 Rule 7: Retail traders trade only Stocks in Play, high relative volume stocks that have fundamental catalysts and are being traded regardless of the overall market. 

 We know we need high relative volume, but how much volume is enough. I don’t trade stocks with an average daily volume of less than 500,000 shares. You need certain liquidity in the stock to be able to get in and out of the stock without difficulty. For example, if you buy JPMorgan Chase (ticker: JPM) at $30 and you set an exit price for $29.85, can you actually get out near $29.85? Or, because volume is so low, do you have to sell at $29.50 to exit? If you are trading JPM and you conclude you should exit at $29.85, but really you cannot exit until $29.50, then this is not a good trading stock intraday. Stocks in Play have sufficient liquidity so that you can exit without unexpected slippage. 

 What makes a stock a Stock in Play? Usually it is the release of fundamental news about the stock either the day before or during the same trading day. Important news or events for companies can have significant impacts on their value in the market and therefore act as fundamental catalysts for their price action. 

 As mentioned in Chapter 2, some examples of the fundamental catalysts for stocks that make them suitable for day trading include: 

 Earnings reports 
 Earnings warnings/pre-announcements 
 Earnings surprises 
 FDA approvals/disapprovals 
 Mergers/acquisitions 
 Alliances/partnerships/major product releases 
 Major contract wins/losses 
 Restructurings/layoffs/management changes 
 Stock splits/buybacks/debt offerings 

 I check the news on all stocks up or down more than 2% pre-market and shortlist my Gappers watchlist (which I will explain further along in this book). Stocks in Play the day before are often still in play for a few days after. 

 In Chapter 7, I explain specific day trading strategies such as Momentum, Reversal, VWAP, and Moving Average. For the moment, your main question needs to be, how do I find the stock for each strategy? I categorize stocks for retail trading into three classes. Based on my experiences, this categorization provides some clarity on how to find stocks and on how to adopt a strategy for them.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Float and Market Cap 

 Before explaining the three categories, let me explain the definition of “ float ” and “ market capitalization ” or “ market cap ”. Float means the number of shares available for trading. Apple Inc., for example, as of July 2016, had 5.3 billion shares in the market that are available for buying and selling. Apple is considered a “ mega cap ” stock. These stocks usually don’t move much during the day because they require significant volume and money to be traded, so Apple shares might on average change by only one or two dollars each day. They are not very volatile and therefore day traders don’t like trading them. Day traders look for volatility. 

 On the other hand, there are some stocks that have very low float. For example, Cesca Therapeutics Inc. (ticker: KOOL) has only a 1.2-million-share float. This means that the supply of shares of KOOL is low and therefore a large demand can very quickly move the price of the stock. Low float stocks can be volatile and move very fast. Most of the low float stocks are under $10 because they are early stage companies which for the most part are not profitable. They hope to grow, and by growing further, they issue more shares and raise more money from the public market and slowly become mega cap stocks. These low float stocks are also called “ small cap ” or “ micro-cap ” stocks. Day traders love low float stocks. Now let’s return to those three categories. 

 The first category consists of low float stocks that are priced under $10. These stocks are extremely volatile, moving 10%, 20%, 100% or even 1,000% each day. Yes, there have been those kinds of moves! You must be careful with this category. Just as you can turn your $1,000 into $10,000 in a single trade, your $1,000 can just as easily turn into $10. Low float stocks under $10 are often highly manipulated and difficult to trade, and therefore only very experienced and highly equipped retail traders should trade these stocks. I personally rarely trade in them. If someone claims to have turned $1,000 into $10,000 in a month, and if it’s true, they must have traded this type of low float stock. No beginner or even intermediate trader can trade with such accuracy and efficiency. If novice traders tried trading low float stocks that are under $10, they would more likely turn their $1,000 into nothing in a matter of days. 

 When it comes to low float stocks, the Bull Flag Momentum Strateg y— which I detail in Chapter 7— works best. The other strategies in this book are not suitable for low float sub-$10 stocks. 

 You generally cannot sell short low float stocks that cost less than $10. For short selling, you need to borrow shares from your broker, and it’s rare that a broker will lend you such volatile stocks. Even if your broker is willing to lend them to you, I strongly advise that you do not attempt to short sell them. They can easily surge and you will end up wiping out your account. You definitely can become a full-time profitable day trader without short selling risky stocks, so leave that to the Wall Street professionals. 

 Trading low float stocks is very difficult for the new trader. It is difficult to read the direction of their next move and therefore they are very difficult to manage your risk while trading them. I discourage new traders from trading low float stocks. When the new trader is wrong, the loss is such that it wipes out many gains. 

 The second category is medium float stocks in the range of $10-$100. These stocks have medium floats of around 5 million to 500 million shares. Many of my strategies explained in this book work well on these stocks, especially the VWAP and Support or Resistance Strategies. Medium float stocks that are more expensive than $100 are not popular among retail day traders and I myself avoid them. You usually cannot buy many shares of them because of their high price. Therefore, it is basically useless to day trade them. Leave them for the institutional traders. 

 The third category of stocks for trading is m ega cap stocks like Apple, Alibaba, Yahoo, Microsoft and Home Depot. These are well established companies that usually have over $500 million in public shares available for trading. These stocks are traded in millions of shares every day. As you may guess, these stocks move only when large institutional traders, investment banks, and hedge funds are buying or selling large positions. Retail traders like us, who typically trade 100 to 1,000 shares, usually cannot move the price of these stocks. Retail traders should avoid these stocks unless there is a good fundamental catalyst for them. From the strategies set forth in Chapter 7, Reversals and Moving Average Strategies usually work well on these stocks. Do not forget though, unless there is a fundamental catalyst, these stocks are being heavily traded by computers and high frequency traders and are not suitable for retail day trading. 

 The table below summarizes these categories: 

 Float 

 Price Range 

 My Favorite Strategy (Chapter 7) 

 Low float (less than 5 million) 

 Under $10 

 Only Momentum (Long) 

 Medium float 
 (5-500 million) 

 $10-$100 

 All, mostly VWAP and Support or Resistance 

 Large float (+500 million) 

 Any 
 (usually +$20) 

 All, mostly Moving Average and Reversal 

 Stocks in Play can be found in two ways: 

 Pre-market morning watchlist 
 Real time intraday scans 

 Let me explain how each day I find my Stocks in Play for trading.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Pre-Market Gappers 

 Experienced traders are sensitive to being in the right stocks at the right time. As I mentioned, traders are just as good as the stocks they trade. I and the traders in my community use a scanner every morning that I program to find Stocks in Play based on the following criteria: 

 Stocks that in the pre-market gapped up or down at least 2% 
 Stocks that have traded at least 50,000 shares in the pre-market 
 Stocks that have an average daily volume of over 500,000 shares 
 Stocks that have Average True Range of at least 50 cents (how large of a range a stock has on average every day) 
 There is a fundamental catalyst for the stock 
 As a rule, I do not trade stocks with an enormous short interest higher than 30% (the short interest is the quantity of stock shares that investors or traders have sold short but not yet covered or closed out) 

 Why these criteria? 

 When there are some fundamental catalysts, there will be unusual pre-market activity and a Stock in Play will have gapped up or down before the market opens with a significant number of shares being traded (such as 50,000 shares). 

 I look for highly traded stocks, so that buying and selling 1,000 shares won’t be a problem. That is why I am looking at stocks with an average daily volume of over 500,000 shares. I also am looking for stocks that usually move in a good range for trading. That is why I look at Average True Range (ATR). ATR means how large of a range a stock has on average every day. If ATR is $1, then you can expect the stock to move around $1 daily. That is a good number. If you have 1,000 shares, you may profit $1,000 from the trade. But if ATR is only 10 cents, then that trading range is not attractive for me. 

 Let’s look at Figure 4.2, which is an example of how my watchlist will form. On August 19, 2016 at 9 a.m. New York time, my scanner showed these stocks: 

 Figure 4.2 - My Gappers watchlist on August 19, 2016 at 9 a.m. EST. 

 As you can see, I have highlighted the Gap (%) and Float columns on my watchlist. From over 4,000 stocks, I now have only eight candidates. I will go over each of them before the market opens at 9:30 a.m. I will check the news on each of them to learn why they gapped up or down. Is there a fundamental catalyst for that stock? Has there been any news coverage or extreme events for that company? 

 From those eight, I usually select two or three stocks to watch closely. You cannot watch eight stocks, and regardless, there are usually no more than two or three good candidates. I watch the best two or three candidates closely on my screen, looking for potential setups. I plan my trades before the market opens (I provide some thoughts on how to create if-then statements in Chapter 9) and then I wait for the market bell. I then trade my plan. 

 I mentioned above that, as a rule, I do not trade stocks with an enormous short interest, nor with a daily volume likely to be less than 500,000 shares intraday. A high short interest indicates traders or investors think a stock’s price is likely to fall. But the challenge with high short interest is that these stocks are more prone to a short squeeze by bullish investors and traders. A short squeeze occurs when short sellers panic and are scrambling to return their borrowed shares, forcing prices to increase quickly and dangerously. You do not want to be stuck short in a short squeeze. 

 I am sometimes unable to identify a stock that fits these criteria for being in play on the Gappers scanner. In those cases, I watch my intraday real time scanner to find Stocks in Play for momentum or reversal or other types of trades. My first choice though will always be a Stock in Play that I find on my pre-market Gappers watchlist.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Real Time Intraday Scans 

 For some strategies, you cannot find stocks in the pre-market. The Momentum, Top Reversal and Bottom Reversal Strategies explained in Chapter 7 are the types of strategies applicable for when a setup suitable for trading happens during trading hours. It is hard to find these stocks during a pre-market scan watchlist. For these strategies, I have specific scanners that look for these stocks and I will explain these scanners in detail in the next section. 

 Real Time Volume Radar 

 During the day, there may be some new Stocks in Play in the market that I did not catch in my morning watchlist. Figure 4.3 below is a screenshot of a scanner on my Trade Ideas software (see Chapter 5) that is set to find real time stocks for me that: 

 Figure 4.3 - My intraday Volume Radar scanner looking for real time Stocks in Play. 

     Have gapped up or down at least $1 
 Have ATR of more than 50 cents 
 Have average relative volume of at least 1.5 (the stock is trading at 1.5 times its normal volume) 
 Have average daily trading volume of at least 500,000 shares 

 Those are my requirements for a stock to be in play. Having ATR of more than 50 cents is important because you want the stock to move enough during the day so you can make a profit out of its volatility. There is no point in trading a stock that is moving only 5 cents on average in a day. 

 I will also take a look at the sector of stocks. If I have a few stocks in one sector, there is a good chance that these stocks are not in play. They have high relative volume because their sector is under heavy trading by institutional traders. It is important to know that stocks usually trade with their sector. For example, when oil stocks are selling off, almost all of the oil companies sell off. Therefore, it is important to recognize Stocks in Play from the herd. Remember, you are only as good as the stock you trade, so if you are the best trader in the world, but in a wrong stock, you will lose money. 

 Real Time Bull Flag Momentum Scanner 

 For the Momentum Strategy, as I earlier explained, you need to find low float stocks that are moving. You cannot find these stocks unless you are using a good scanner. For a scanner, I use Trade Ideas software. Please check my website for the Trade Ideas link and a discount code exclusive for my trading community. 

 Figure 4.4 - My intraday real time Bull Flag Momentum scanner. 

 In Figure 4.4 above, you can see how I am scanning real time for my Momentum Strategy. During the day, the scanner is finding stocks that have high relative volume, low float, and high activity. I then check them in my trading platform and decide, based on my Momentum Strategy set out in Chapter 7, if I want to trade them. 

 Real Time Reversal Scanners 

 Top and Bottom Reversal Strategies are two other strategies that you cannot find stocks for in the pre-market. You must have an intraday real time scanner. Figure 4.5 below is an image of a Top and Bottom Reversal scan: 

 Figure 4.5 - My intraday real time Reversal scanner. 

 As you can see, I am scanning the market real time to find stocks that are selling off or surging up so I can trade my Reversal Strategies. You can read more about these strategies in Chapter 7. 

 I won’t go into the details here about how to make these scans, but I will explain in Chapter 7 under each strategy the specifics of what to look for in stocks in each category. If you develop new strategies for yourself, you can also define new scanners for yourself. These scanners are highly adjustable and you can change the parameters as you like. These are the parameters that work for me, but as you gain experience and learn more about other strategies and your trading style, you may very well decide to define new scanners for yourself. 

 Many new traders don’t initially need a scanner. If you join a community of day traders such as mine, you will be able to see my scanner in real time. These scanners are costly, around $100 per month, so at the beginning of your career transition to day trading, you will probably want to keep your expenses down as much as possible.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Planning the Trade Based on Scanners 

 Once I find my Stocks in Play, I start to look for the individual setups in them. I constantly monitor their charts and try to plan a trade based on the strategies detailed in Chapter 7. I usually select three Stocks in Play and watch them separately on my three monitors. When I see a potential strategy, I plan my trade. This is a fast decision making process. Sometimes you have to plan a trade in a few minutes and at other times in just a few seconds. This is why you need months of training in simulator accounts to well understand the decision making process. 

 I focus considerably on quality versus quantity. There are millions of traders out there and there are no doubt millions of strategies out there as well. I had to find the strategy that worked best for me, my personality and my account size. I’ve found a strategy that works really well for traders in our community as well as for my own personal trading. This strategy involves taking only the best setups and waiting on the sidelines until I see something worth trading. 

 Day trading can be a boring profession – most of the time you are just sitting and watching your list. In fact, if day trading is not boring for you, then you are probably overtrading. 

 If you require a reminder of the importance of patience in trading, here it is. There are plenty of traders out there who are making the error of overtrading. Overtrading can mean trading 20, 30, 40, or even 60 times a day. You’ll be commissioning your broker to do each and every one of those trades, so you are going to lose both money and commissions. Many brokers charge $4.95 for each trade, so for 40 trades, you will end up paying $200 per day to your broker. That is a lot. If you overtrade, your broker will become richer, and you will become, well, broker! Remember, your goal is to trade well, not to trade often. 

 Another problem with overtrading is risk. While you're in a trade you are exposed to risk, and that’s a place you don’t want to be in unless you have proven that there is a setup in the strategy worth trading. 

 Here is my next golden rule: 

 Rule 8: Experienced traders are like guerrilla soldiers. They jump out at just the right time, take their profit, and get out. 

 The stock market is controlled by machines and highly sophisticated algorithms and, as a result, there is considerable high frequency trading. High frequency trading creates significant noise in the price action and is specifically designed to shake out retail traders like you and me. You must be smart. Don’t expose yourself to them. Profitable traders usually make only two or three trades each day. They then cash out and enjoy the rest of their day.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 Chapter 5: Tools and Platforms 
 Like starting any other business and profession, to start day trading you require a few important tools. You need a broker and an order execution platform. These are tools you will definitely need for yourself. 

 As I explained in Chapter 4, you will also need a stock scanner to find your watchlist and look for potential real time setups. You may not need a scanner though if you are part of a trading community. People who are part of our community can see my screen in real time and use my scanners.

How to Day Trade for a Living

 What Broker to Use? 

 For day trading, you need a good direct broker. In fact, you don’t just need a good broker; you need an awesome broker. Your broker is your vehicle to trade. If you have a bad broker, you lose money, even if you are trading properly and accurately, because your broker eventually has to fill your order on time and at a good price. There are many brokers out there with various software and price structures. Many of them are great but expensive, some are terrible but cheap, and many of them are either terrible or expensive or both. For the sake of keeping this book short, I will not start reviewing all of them, but I do have additional information on my website about brokers and which ones to choose. Please visit my website and access that information. I will share here though what broker I am using and why. 

 Interactive Brokers 

 For several good reasons, I am currently using Interactive Brokers (also known as IB, www.interactivebrokers.com ). 

 First, I live in Vancouver, Canada, and IB allows me to have my tax-free and registered retirement accounts for day trading. Many brokers do not allow you to have tax-free or retirement accounts (such as TFSA, RRSP in Canada or 401(k) in the U.S.) for day trading. 
