
126

Chapter 5

(03/30/90

(BMY) Bristol Myers Squibb

Monthly Bar Chart

‘|
ll!

ounding or Saucer Bottom

; }
|

aT

yl!

(

cI 2

atari

Figure 5.8 This chart shows what a saucer (or rounding) bottom looks
like. They're very slow and gradual, but usually mark major turns. This bot-

tom lasted four years.


Major Reversal Patterns 127

02/04/97 (MU) Micron Technology Inc 12/31/97

tha Hy .

I

Volume
Heavy Volume

yall. dull. i hut sll

‘SET ater Pred valig Tieden © Ormape Rasa, be 100

Figure 5.9 Example of a v reversal pattern. These sudden reversals take
place with little or no warning. A sudden price drop on heavy volume is usu-
ally the only telltale sign. Unfortunately, these sudden turns are hard to spot
in advance.


128 Chapter 5

CONCLUSION

We've discussed the five most commonly used major reversal pat-
terns—the head and shoulders, double and triple tops and bot-
toms, the saucer, and the V, or spike. Of those, the most common
are the head and shoulders, and double tops and bottoms. These
patterns usually signal important trend reversals in Progress and
are classified as major reversal patterns. There is another class of
patterns, however, which are shorter term in nature and usually
Suggest trend consolidations rather than Teversals. They are aptly
called continuation patterns. Let’s look at this other type of pattern
in Chapter 6.


Continuation Patterns

INTRODUCTION

The chart patterns covered in this chapter are called continuation
patterns. These patterns usually indicate that the sideways price
action on the chart is nothing more than a pause in the prevail-
ing trend, and that the next move will be in the same direction as
the trend that preceded the formation. This distinguishes this
group of patterns from those in the previous chapter, which usu-
ally indicate that a major trend reversal is in progress.

Another difference between reversal and continuation
patterns is their time duration. Reversal patterns usually take
much longer to build and represent major trend changes.
Continuation patterns, on the other hand, are usually shorter
term in duration and are more accurately classified as near term
or intermediate patterns.

Notice the constant use of the term “usually.” The treat-
ment of all chart patterns deals of necessity with general tenden-
cies as opposed to rigid rules. There are always exceptions. Even
the grouping of price patterns into different categories sometimes

129


130 Chapter 6

becomes tenuous. Triangles are usually continuation patterns, but
sometimes act as reversal patterns. Although triangles are usually
considered intermediate patterns, they may occasionally appear
on long term charts and take on major trend significance. A vari-
ation of the triangle—the inverted variety—usually signals a
major market top. Even the head and shoulders pattern, the best
known of the major reversal patterns, will on occasion be seen as
a consolidation pattern.

Even with allowances for a certain amount of ambiguity
and the occasional exception, chart patterns do generally fall
into the above two categories and, if properly interpreted, can
help the chartist determine what the market will probably do
most of the time

TRIANGLES

Let’s begin our treatment of continuation patterns with the tri-
angle. There are three types of triangles—symmetrical, ascend-
ing, and descending. (Some chartists include a fourth type of tri-
angle known as an expanding triangle, or broadening formation.
This is treated as a separate pattern later.) Each type of triangle
has a slightly different shape and has different forecasting
implications.

Figures 6.la-c show examples of what each triangle
looks like. The symmetrical triangle (see Figure 6.1a) shows
two converging trendlines, the upper line descending and the
lower line ascending. The vertical line at the left, measuring
the height of the pattern, is called the base. The point of inter-
section at the right, where the two lines meet, is called the
apex. For obvious reasons, the symmetrical triangle is also
called a coil.

The ascending triangle has a rising lower line with a flat
or horizontal upper line (see Figure 6.1b). The descending tri-
angle (Figure 6.1c), by contrast, has the upper line declining
with a flat or horizontal bottom line. Let’s see how each one is
interpreted.


Continuation Patterns 131

Apex

Figure 6.la_ Example of a bullish symmetrical triangle. Notice the two
converging trendlines. A close outside either trendline completes the pattern.

The vertical line at the left is the base. The point at the right where the two
lines meet is the apex.

N

Figure 6.1b Example of an ascending triangle. Notice the flat upper line
and the rising lower line. This is generally a bullish pattern.


132 Chapter 6
Figure 6.1¢ Example of a descending triangle. Notice the flat bottom line
and the declining upper line. This is usually a bearish pattem.

THE SYMMETRICAL TRIANGLE

The symmetrical triangle (or the coil) is usually a continuation
pattern. It represents a pause in the existing trend after which
the original trend is resumed. In the example in Figure 6.la, the
prior trend was up, so that the percentages favor resolution of
the triangular consolidation on the upside. If the trend had
been down, then the symmetrical triangle would have bearish
implications.

The minimum requirement for a triangle is four reversal
points. Remember that it always takes two points to draw a
trendline. Therefore, in order to draw two converging trendlines,
each line must be touched at least twice. In Figure 6.la, the tri-
angle actually begins at point 1, which is where the consolida-
tion in the uptrend begins. Prices pull back to point 2 and then
rally to point 3. Point 3, however, is lower than point 1. The
upper trendline can only be drawn once prices have declined
from point 3.

Notice that point 4 is higher than point 2. Only when
prices have rallied from point 4 can the lower upslanting line be
drawn. It is at this point that the analyst begins to suspect the he
or she is dealing with the symmetrical triangle. Now there are four
reversal points (1, 2, 3, and 4) and two converging trendlines.

While the minimum requirement is four reversal points,
many triangles have six reversal points as shown in Figure 6.1a.


Continuation Patterns 133

This means that there are actually three peaks and three troughs
that combine to form five waves within the triangle before the
uptrend resumes. (When we get to the Elliott Wave Theory, we’ll
have more to say about the five wave tendency within triangles.)

Time Limit for Triangle Resolution

There is a time limit for the resolution of the pattern, and that is
the point where the two lines meet—at the apex. As a general rule,
prices should break out in the direction of the prior trend some-
where between two-thirds to three-quarters of the horizontal
width of the triangle. That is, the distance from the vertical base
on the left of the pattern to the apex at the far right. Because the
two lines must meet at some point, that time distance can be mea-
sured once the two converging lines are drawn. An upside break-
out is signaled by a penetration of the upper trendline. If prices
remain within the triangle beyond the three-quarters point, the
triangle begins to lose its potency, and usually means that prices
will continue to drift out to the apex and beyond

The triangle, therefore, provides an interesting combina-
tion of price and time. The converging trendlines give the price
boundaries of the pattern, and indicate at what point the pattern
has been completed and the trend resumed by the penetration of
the upper trendline (in the case of an uptrend). But these trend-
lines also provide a time target by measuring the width of the pat-
tern. If the width, for example, were 20 weeks long, then the break-
out should take place sometime between the 13th and the 15th
week. (See Figure 6.1d.)

The actual trend signal is given by a closing penetration of
one of the trendlines. Sometimes a return move will occur back to
the penetrated trendline after the breakout. In an uptrend, that
line has become a support line. In a downtrend, the lower line
becomes a resistance line once it’s broken. The apex also acts as an
important support or resistance level after the breakout occurs.
Various penetration criteria can be applied to the breakout, simi-
lar to those covered in the previous two chapters. A minimum
penetration criterion would be a closing price outside the trend-
line and not just an intraday penetration.


134 Chapter 6

05/29/97 (DELL) Dell Computer Corp 02/24/98

Daily Bar Chart {

126

100

vl
i )

ath ;
ye ‘yi

en oT Thug ‘Sep ‘oct Nov. ‘Dee ve Fev

A Bullish Symmetrical Triangle

Figure 6.1d Dell formed a bullish symmetrical triangle during the fourth
quarter of 1997. Measured from left to right, the triangle width is 18 weeks.
Prices broke out on the 13th week (see circle), just beyond the two-thirds point.

Importance of Volume

Volume should diminish as the price swings narrow within the
triangle. This tendency for volume to contract is true of all con-
solidation patterns. But the volume should pick up noticeably at
the penetration of the trendline that completes the pattern. The
return move should be on light volume with heavier activity
again as the trend resumes.

Two other points should be mentioned about volume. As
is the case with reversal patterns, volume is more important on
the upside than on the downside. An increase in volume is essen-
tial to the resumption of an uptrend in all consolidation patterns.

The second point about volume is that, even though
trading activity diminishes during formation of the pattern, a
close inspection of the volume usually gives a clue as to whether


Continuation Patterns 135

the heavier volume is occurring during the upmoves or down-
moves. In an uptrend, for example, there should be a slight ten-
dency for volume to be heavier during the bounces and lighter
on the price dips.

Measuring Technique

Triangles have measuring techniques. In the case of the sym-
metrical triangle, there are a couple of techniques generally
used. The simplest technique is to measure the height of the ver-
tical line at the widest part of the triangle (the base) and mea-
sure that distance from the breakout point. Figure 6.2 shows the
distance projected from the breakout point, which is the tech-
nique I prefer.

The second method is to draw a trendline from the top
of the base (at point A) parallel to the lower trendline. This
upper channel line then becomes the upside target in an
uptrend. It is possible to arrive at a rough time target for prices
to meet the upper channel line. Prices will sometimes hit the
channel line at the same time the two converging lines meet at
the apex.

Figure 6.2 There
are two ways to take
a measurement from
a symmetrical trian-
gle. One is to mea-
sure the height of the
base (AB); project
that vertical distance
from the breakout
point at C. Another
method is to draw a
parallel line upward
from the top of the
baseline (A) parallel
to the lower line in
the triangle.



136 Chapter 6

THE ASCENDING TRIANGLE

The ascending and descending triangles are variations of the sym-
metrical, but have different forecasting implications. Figures 6.3a
and b show examples of an ascending triangle. Notice that the
upper trendline is flat, while the lower line is rising. This pattern
indicates that buyers are more aggressive than sellers. It is consid-
ered a bullish pattern and is usually resolved with a breakout to
the upside.

Both the ascending and descending triangles differ from
the symmetrical in a very important sense. No matter where in
the trend structure the ascending or descending triangles appear,
they have very definite forecasting implications. The ascending
triangle is bullish and the descending triangle is bearish. The sym-
metrical triangle, by contrast, is inherently a neutral pattern. This
does not mean, however, that the symmetrical triangle does not
have forecasting value. On the contrary, because the symmetrical

Figure 6.3a An ascending triangle. The pattern is completed on a deci-
sive close above the upper line. This breakout should see a sharp increase in
volume. That upper resistance line should act as support on subsequent dips
after the breakout. The minimum price objective is obtained by measuring
the height of the triangle (AB) and projecting that distance upward from the
breakout point at C.


Continuation Patterns 137

07/02/97 ("DWT X) Dow Transportation 02/18/98

Daily Bar Chart

i par
Ww i! H i !

yf '
i i i My i }
alah woe

‘ha ‘Ses oa Wev Dec Ve Feb
“GRE TT eam Pied vilrg VradeBuaan © Omege Rissenrch irc. 1207

Ascending Triangle

Figure 6.3b The Dow Transports formed a bullish ascending triangle near
the end of 1997. Notice the flat upper line at 3400 and the rising lower line.
This is normally a bullish pattern no matter where it appears on the chart.

triangle is a continuation pattern, the analyst must simply look to
see the direction of the previous trend and then make the assump-
tion that the previous trend will continue.

Let’s get back to the ascending triangle. As already stated,
more often than not, the ascending triangle is bullish. The bullish
breakout is signaled by a decisive closing above the flat upper
trendline. As in the case of all valid upside breakouts, volume
should see a noticeable increase on the breakout. A return move
back to the support line (the flat upper line) is not unusual and
should take place on light volume.

Measuring Technique

The measuring technique for the ascending triangle is relatively
simple. Simply measure the height of the pattern at its widest


138 Chapter 6

point and project that vertical distance from the breakout point.
This is just another example of using the volatility of a price pat-
tern to determine a minimum price objective.

The Ascending Triangle as a Bottom

While the ascending triangle most often appears in an uptrend
and is considered a continuation pattern, it sometimes appears as
a bottoming pattern. It is not unusual toward the end of a down-
trend to see an ascending triangle develop. However, even in this
situation, the interpretation of the pattern is bullish. The break-
ing of the upper line signals completion of the base and is con-
sidered a bullish signal. Both the ascending and descending trian-
gles are sometimes also referred to as right angle triangles.

THE DESCENDING TRIANGLE

The descending triangle is just a mirror image of the ascending, and
is generally considered a bearish pattern. Notice in Figures 6.4a
and b the descending upper line and the flat lower line. This pat-
tern indicates that sellers are more aggressive than buyers, and is
usually resolved on the downside. The downside signal is regis-
tered by a decisive close under the lower trendline, usually on
increased volume. A return move sometimes occurs which should
encounter resistance at the lower trendline.

The measuring technique is exactly the same as the
ascending triangle in the sense that the analyst must measure the
height of the pattern at the base to the left and then project that
distance down from the breakdown point.

The Descending Triangle as a Top

While the descending triangle is a continuation pattern and usu-
ally is found within downtrends, it is not unusual on occasion for
the descending triangle to be found at market tops. This type of
pattern is not that difficult to recognize when it does appear in the
top setting. In that case, a close below the flat lower line would sig-
nal a major trend reversal to the downside.


Continuation Patterns

139

wo

3

Figure 6.4a A
descending trian-
gle. The bearish
pattern is complet-
ed with a decisive
close under the
lower flat line. The
measuring tech-
nique is the height
of the triangle (AB)

tl

]
I | Nin hia

projected down
from the breakout
at point C.
06/17/97 (DD) Du Pont E I De Nemour 10/29/97
Daily Bar Chart | |
oy
}8s.

Descending Triangle

ni

Mt /

ul

Ln

Figure 6.4b A bearish descending triangle formed in Du Pont during
the autumn of 1997. The upper line is descending while the lower line is
flat. The break of the lower line in early October resolved the pattern to the

downside.


140 Chapter 6

The Volume Pattern

The volume pattern in both the ascending and descending trian-
gles is very similar in that the volume diminishes as the pattern
works itself out and then increases on the breakout. As in the case
of the symmetrical triangle, during the formation the chartist can
detect subtle shifts in the volume pattern coinciding with the
swings in the price action. This means that in the ascending pat-
tern, the volume tends to be slightly heavier on bounces and
lighter on dips. In the descending formation, volume should be
heavier on the downside and lighter during the bounces.

The Time Factor in Triangles

One final factor to be considered on the subject of triangles is that
of the time dimension. The triangle is considered an intermediate
pattern, meaning that it usually takes longer than a month to
form, but generally less than three months. A triangle that lasts
less than a month is probably a different pattern, such as a pen-
nant, which will be covered shortly. As mentioned earlier, trian-
gles sometimes appear on long term price charts, but their basic
meaning is always the same.

THE BROADENING FORMATION

This next price pattern is an unusual variation of the triangle and
is relatively rare. It is actually an inverted triangle or a triangle
turned backwards. All of the triangular patterns examined so far
show converging trendlines. The broadening formation, as the
name implies, is just the opposite. As the pattern in Figure 6.5
shows, the trendlines actually diverge in the broadening forma-
tion, creating a picture that looks like an expanding triangle. It is
also called a megaphone top.

The volume pattern also differs in this formation. In the
other triangular patterns, volume tends to diminish as the price
swings grow narrower. Just the opposite happens in the broaden-
ing formation. The volume tends to expand along with the wider price
swings. This situation represents a market that is out of control


Continuation Patterns 141

Figure 6.5 A broadening top. This type of expanding triangle usually
occurs at major tops. It shows three successively higher peaks and two declin-
ing troughs. The violation of the second trough completes the pattern. This is
an unusually difficult pattern to trade and fortunately is relatively rare.

and unusually emotional. Because this pattern also represents an
unusual amount of public participation, it most often occurs at
major market tops. The expanding pattern, therefore, is usually a
bearish formation. It generally appears near the end of a major bull
market.

FLAGS AND PENNANTS

The flag and pennant formations are quite common. They are usu-
ally treated together because they are very similar in appearance,
tend to show up at about the same place in an existing trend, and
have the same volume and measuring criteria.

The flag and pennant represent brief pauses in a dynamic
market move. In fact, one of the requirements for both the flag


142 Chapter 6

and the pennant is that they be preceded by a sharp and almost
straight line move. They represent situations where a steep
advance or decline has gotten ahead of itself, and where the mar-
ket pauses briefly to “catch its breath” before running off again in
the same direction.

Flags and pennants are among the most reliable of contin-
uation patterns and only rarely produce a trend reversal. Figures
6.6a-b show what these two patterns look like. To begin with,
notice the steep price advance preceding the formations on heavy
volume. Notice also the dramatic drop off in activity as the con-
solidation patterns form and then the sudden burst of activity on
the upside breakout.

Construction of Flags and Pennants

The construction of the two patterns differs slightly. The flag
tesembles a parallelogram or rectangle marked by two parallel
trendlines that tend to slope against the prevailing trend. In a
downtrend, the flag would have a slight upward slope.

Figure 6.6a Example
of a bullish flag. The flag
usually occurs after a
sharp move and represents
@ brief pause in the trend.
The flag should slope
against the trend. Volume
should dry up during the
formation and build again
on the breakout. The flag
| I| | | | | | | | | | usually occurs near the
midpoint of the move.



Continuation Patterns 143

Figure 6.6b A bullish
pennant. Resembles a
small symmetrical trian-
gle, but usually lasts no
/ longer than three weeks.
Volume should be light
during its formation. The
move after the pennant is
completed should dupli-
| | | | | | | | | | cate the size of the move

preceding it.

The pennant is identified by two converging trendlines
and is more horizontal. It very closely resembles a small symmet-
rical triangle. An important requirement is that volume should
dry up noticeably while each of the patterns is forming.

Both patterns are relatively short term and should be com-
pleted within one to three weeks. Pennants and flags in down-
trends tend to take even less time to develop, and often last no
longer than one or two weeks. Both patterns are completed on the
penetration of the upper trendline in an uptrend. The breaking of
the lower trendline would signal resumption of downtrends. The
breaking of those trendlines should take place on heavier volume.
As usual, upside volume is more critically important than down-
side volume. (See Figures 6.7a-b.)

Measuring Implications

The measuring implications are similar for both patterns. Flags
and pennants are said to “fly at half-mast” from a flagpole. The
flagpole is the prior sharp advance or decline. The term “half-
mast” suggests that these minor continuation patterns tend to


144 Chapter 6

13/31/97 (IP) International Paper C 07/18/97

Daily Bar Chart | | | I

| p55

pa7na

| Naty Bullish Flag

11(!! ls
hail! we

Pm
(| °

Cape hay un Tut

wT Onaga

Figure 6.7a A bullish flag in International Paper. The flag looks like a
down-sloping parallelogram. Notice that the flag occurred right at the
halfway point of the uptrend.

appear at about the halfway point of the move. In general, the
move after the trend has resumed will duplicate the flagpole or
the move just prior to the formation of the pattern.

To be more precise, measure the distance of the preceding
move from the original breakout point. That is to say, the point at
which the original trend signal was given, either by the penetra-
tion of a support or resistance level or an important trendline.
That vertical distance of the preceding move is then measured
from the breakout point of the flag or pennant—that is, the point
at which the upper line is broken in an uptrend or the lower line
in a downtrend.
