
Bulletproof Systems • 221

ual traders. It may require $200,000 to diversify a long-term trendfollowing system adequately. Trading four or ﬁve different systems
may require as much as $1 million or more. This factor alone may
cause many people to decide to place their money with a good professional trader who runs a commodity pool or hedge fund rather
than trade for their own accounts privately.

Facing Reality
A robust trading program is built on the premise that you cannot
predict the speciﬁc market conditions you will encounter in your
actual trading. Robust trading accounts for this by building systems
that are robust because they are adaptable or simple and are not
speciﬁcally dependent on market conditions. A mature robust trading program trades many different systems in many different markets and is much more likely to perform consistently in the future
than is a program that trades a small number of systems that have
been highly tailored to a small number of markets.

This page intentionally left blank

fourteen
MASTERING YOUR
DEMONS
The market does not care how you feel. It will not prop up your ego or
console you when you are down. Therefore, trading is not for everyone.
If you are unwilling to face the truth about the markets and the truth
about your own limitations, fears, and failures, you will not succeed.

hope that some of you may be as inspired by the Turtle story as
I was when I ﬁrst read about the great speculator Jesse Livermore
in Edwin Lefèvre’s Reminiscences of a Stock Operator in 1982. The
fact that Richard Dennis was able to teach a group of traders in two
weeks and then have them go on to earn more than $100 million
for him over the next four years has become one of trading’s most
compelling stories. The success of the Turtle experiment has
proven that Richard had a set of teachable principles that if followed consistently would result in proﬁtable trading.
The funny thing is that most of the principles that Richard
Dennis taught us were not new. Some were basic principles that
had been espoused by other famous traders since before Richard
was born. Yet the very simplicity of the principles we were taught

I

• 223 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

224 • Way of the Turtle

in some respects was a hindrance for those of us who tried to follow them in those initial months.
People have a tendency to believe that complicated ideas are better than simple ones. Many ﬁnd it hard to comprehend that
Richard Dennis could have made several hundred million dollars
by using a handful of simple rules. It is natural to think that he must
have had some secret. Many of the Turtles fought that demon during our ﬁrst few months of trading. Some of us thought that trading successfully couldn’t possibly be that simple; that there must
be something else to it. This type of thinking obstructed some of
the Turtles’ trading so much that they never were able to follow the
straightforward rules Richard had outlined.
My theory is that this belief and the need for complication come
from insecurity and the resulting need to ﬁnd some reason to feel special in some way. Having secret knowledge makes us feel special; possessing simple truths does not. Therefore, our egos drive us to believe
that we possess some kind of special knowledge to prove to ourselves
that we are somehow superior to others. Our egos don’t want us to
limit ourselves to commonly known truths. The ego wants secrets.

Live By the Ego, Die By the Ego
This is the major reason why beginning traders are drawn to discretionary trading. Discretionary trading feeds the ego; it is trading
that relies on one’s judgment, in contrast with systematic trading,
where trading decisions are made by using rules that specify exactly
when and how much to buy and sell. So when you use your judgment to trade and you win, the ego wins. You can then brag to your
friends how you are the master of the markets.

Mastering Your Demons • 225

I see this particular behavior constantly on online trading
forums—especially the broad-based ones that attract new traders.
You regularly see posts from individuals bragging about how they
bought just before a run-up, or they have found the Holy Grail and
have a 90 percent accurate system, or they have been trading for
three months and have made 200 percent. They invariably have
done this by trading with too much leverage, so they might have
turned $5,000 into $15,000; however, they run a very high risk of
losing that $15,000 because they are trading too aggressively. A few
months later, you may see the same traders post that they have
blown up their account and lost everything. These individuals were
trading to feed their egos, and as the saying goes, live by the ego,
die by the ego.
There are many successful discretionary traders, but there are
far more unsuccessful ones. The biggest reason for this is that the
ego is not your friend as a trader. The ego wants to be right, it
wants to predict, and it wants to know secrets. The ego makes it
much more difﬁcult to trade well by avoiding the cognitive biases
that hinder proﬁts.
An example from the Turtle days will bring this point home.

The Great Ping-Pong Battle
Some people may ﬁnd this hard to believe since trading seems like a
very exciting job to outsiders, but most of the time when we were
trading we did absolutely nothing. We were bored. The markets were
quiet most of the time. In short, the Turtles had a lot of free time on
their hands.

226 • Way of the Turtle

Fortunately, we had a Ping-Pong table, and so Ping-Pong was
our game. Almost all of us played it at least once a day. We played
so much that one day we had a note posted to our door from someone in the large insurance ofﬁce adjacent to ours threatening our
deaths because they did not like the fact that we got to play games
all day while they had to do work (presumably they did not like
their work).
I had never played the game seriously before, but I soon developed reasonable skills and started beating some of the better players after a few months. I adopted the Chinese-style pen hold grip,
which allowed me to switch between forehand and backhand more
easily—that was better for my aggressive spin-ﬁlled style.
But there was one Turtle who was much better than any of the
rest of us, one we all knew we could not beat. He had been playing
for a long time, and we all watched in awe when he played. He generally had no problems beating us 21 to 10 or by an even larger
margin, and we knew he was just toying with us. He beat us without
breaking a sweat.
After a few months of play, one of the Turtles suggested that we
have a tournament. In a group full of competitive traders, this was
serious stuff. We all felt that the tournament probably would really
be about who was second best since there was no doubt who was
the best player; however, we wanted to see who would be champ.
When the tournament began, the weaker players were weeded out
one by one until we were down to the strongest eight players. With
the exception of the best player, we were all pretty close in skills.
I decided to change my style for the tournament. Instead of
going for kill shots whenever I had a chance the way I normally did,

Mastering Your Demons • 227

I played conservatively. I even changed my grip from the pen hold to
the more accurate traditional style (the way one holds a tennis
racket) and my paddle from the spongy ones that give lots of spins
to the sandpaper ones that are better for defense since they are less
responsive to the spin of the opponent. I knew that the best player
had superior spin technique and would not have any problem handling my comparatively feeble spins so if I were to do well against
him I was better off with a paddle that weakened his advantage of
superior spin technique.
My strategy paid off as I slowly beat my next two opponents in
close and exciting matches. That meant that we were now down to
two players and I would be playing in the championship round
against a much superior player, the one we all expected to win the
tournament. I would have to play my best game and he would have
to break for me to win, and we all knew it. All the Turtles were present for this ﬁnal match, which pitted youth and energy against experience and skill.
As we started to play, I noticed something: My opponent really
wanted to win the match; he was taking it very seriously. It was
obvious that it was very important for him to win. He had much to
lose since he was already considered the superior player, already
counted as the best. In contrast, I had nothing to lose. I already had
won the tournament as the rest of us saw it. No one expected me to
win or even thought that I could win.
He won the ﬁrst few points pretty easily, in fact, so easily that I
began to worry that I might get shut out, skunked. But as I adapted
to his superior speed and shot placement and played extremely
defensively, I started to wear him out. He was playing more aggres-

228 • Way of the Turtle

sively than he normally would have because he wanted to ﬁnish me
off quickly. I was playing more conservatively because I knew it was
my only chance. I started to get longer volleys before he won the
point, and then I ﬁnally started to win points—not many at ﬁrst but
just enough to keep me in the game. As I began to win more and
more points, my opponent’s play suffered. He started to become
angry with himself for letting an inferior player gain any sort of
advantage.
Slowly the advantage tipped in my favor, and I started coming
back in the second game of the match. I clawed my way back to
even and then went on to win that game. So at the end of the ﬁrst
two games we were tied one to one, but the momentum was in my
favor with one game to play.
The ﬁnal game was a battle. We fought back and forth with the
game tied and with each of us being one point from victory on several occasions. Finally, I hit the last shot and he missed. In the end,
the pressure of the tournament, of proving that he was the better
player, got to him and he cracked. He was assuredly the best player.
I knew it and he knew it, but in the end that didn’t matter, and he
lost because he couldn’t handle the pressure. The win meant too
much to him, and that affected his play.
My superior opponent was also not successful in the Turtle program. I believe this was the case for the same reason that he lost
the Ping-Pong tournament. His ego was too tied up in his own trading for him to be able to see that the reasons for his poor performance were inside him. Not coincidentally, the Ping-Pong expert was
the same Turtle who believed that Rich had given me secrets that he
had not been given. It was too hard for him to see that the reason I

Mastering Your Demons • 229

was making money when he was losing was that I was trading better than he was because I was focusing on the rules and blotting out
any ego issues. He blamed it on not having been given the secrets.
He did not want to face the truth.

Humble Pie,The Best Food for Traders
If you want to be a great trader, you must conquer your ego and
develop humility. Humility allows you to accept the future as something that is unknowable. Humility will keep you from trying to
make predictions. Humility will keep you from taking it personally
when a trade goes against you and you exit with a loss. Humility will
let you embrace trading that is based on simple concepts because
you won’t have a need to know secrets so that you can feel special.

Don’t Be an Ass
Although I had an easier time than most, perhaps all, of the Turtles, I don’t want to give the impression that I am some sort of egoless automaton who was immune to the cognitive biases and a
master of my own psychology. I was not. Here’s a case in point.
Sometime during our second year we were in a big move, and I
once again was loaded with the maximum four units we were
allowed as part of the rules. I asked a few of the other Turtles how
many units they were in, and several of them did not have the full
four-unit position. That meant that they were not making as much
money as they should have been. Thus, my asking them about their
positions was a bit like rubbing their noses in it.
Later that day, like almost every day, I left to catch a commuter
train since I lived in the western suburb of Riverside, Illinois. Sev-

230 • Way of the Turtle

eral of the other Turtles commuted by train as well, and we all
would leave at about the same time. I remember opening the door
and entering the hallway to hear one of the guys who had left a bit
earlier say to the other something like, “Did you hear him today?
What an ass.”
The thing is they were right. I had been an ass: the worst kind
of ass, the clueless dolt who had been one without realizing it. I
had not stopped to consider how my actions were affecting the others. Upon the briefest reﬂection, it was obvious that I had been
cruel to brag about having something that they did not. I am sure
that it was all the more bitter to have those careless remarks come
from a young punk barely out of high school.
I have thought about that day many times over the last 20-plus
years since I overhead that bit of conversation. It was the day that
I vowed to try to never be an ass again, to spend a little more time
thinking about how what I do and say could affect others before I
acted. I also try to be a bit more tolerant of the clueless asses I
encounter on occasion, mindful of the fact that I too am one from
time to time.

Finding Consistency
The most important lessons in life are simple yet difﬁcult to execute. In trading, consistency is the key. A systematic trading
approach, a thorough understanding of the limitations of that
approach, and the tools used to build trading systems can help you
be more successful and constant. You must be consistent to trade
well. You must be able to execute your plan or the plan has no
meaning.

Mastering Your Demons • 231

If I had to pick the single X factor most responsible for our success as Turtles, it would be the fact that we were taught by a legendary trader. This knowledge gave us a faith in the methods that
Richard taught us, making it much easier for us to follow his rules
consistently and persistently. Unless you can ﬁnd another famous
trader to teach you and give you the same conﬁdence, you will have
to ﬁnd that faith on your own. You will have to develop conﬁdence
in your methods as well as in your ability to make money over time
using those methods.
The best way I know to develop faith in systematic approaches
to trading is to explore some systems on your own using trading simulation software. The software will let you look at the past in the
same way that actual trading does. You will ﬁnd the process of
researching various trading systems and checking your assumptions
against actual market data to be a humbling one. If you start actual
trading, you may ﬁnd it to be much harder than you might have
thought. Putting real money on the line is not the same as practicing or paper trading.
If you are considering a career in trading, you must keep one
important fact in mind, and that is that I am very unusual. By
some freak of biology or upbringing, it was not difﬁcult for me to
be consistent in my trading. My psychological makeup made it
easy for me to repel cognitive biases. So, although I have seen the
effects of psychological breakdown and weakness in traders, I am
not the best counselor for anyone who needs help overcoming his
particular issues because it is not something that I had to rise
above myself.
Another thing to consider is that I am not an expert in trading
psychology. For these reasons, although I have been able to observe

232 • Way of the Turtle

ﬁrsthand the importance of psychological strength, I cannot offer
speciﬁc advice on how to build it beyond what is contained in this
book. Fortunately, there are others who have made a study of such
psychology and are able to offer speciﬁc advice to those who may
have a more difﬁcult time trading than I did. Many have found the
writings of Van Tharp, Brett Steenbarger, Ari Kiev, and Mark
Douglas helpful in their own efforts to master their trading demons.
I encourage you to consider those sources.
Finally, my experience primarily has been as a trend follower. I
have explored and traded other styles, including day trading and
swing trading, and so I know that the principles outlined in this
book apply to those types of trading as well. Do not take my focus
on trend following to imply that this is the best way to trade. In fact,
trend following is probably not for most people. Each style requires
a particular psychological makeup that you may or may not possess. Matching your personality with its strengths and weaknesses
against a particular trading style is very important, and several of
the authors mentioned above can speak more authoritatively on
this subject.

Lessons from the Turtles
1. Trade with an edge: Find a trading strategy that will produce
positive returns over the long run because it has a positive
expectation.
2. Manage risk: Control risk so that you can continue to trade or
you may not be around to see the beneﬁts of a positive expectation system.

Mastering Your Demons • 233

3. Be consistent: Execute your plan consistently to achieve the
positive expectation of your system.
4. Keep it simple: Simple systems hold up better over time than do
more complex ones.

Remember that a plan means nothing if it is not acted on. If you
really want to be a successful trader, commit yourself to the ﬁrst
step. I did, and I’ve never regretted it.

This page intentionally left blank

epilogue
WHEN ALL IS
SAID AND DONE
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—
I took the one less traveled by,
And that has made all the difference.
—Robert Frost

spent a great deal of time over the last few months focusing on
the ﬁrst part of this book because I wanted it be an apt introduction to the epilogue. It was this last chapter that I was most
enthusiastic about completing.
Once you have lived the life of a trader—lived as a Turtle—the
trader’s philosophy permeates the rest of your experience. As you
work through and see your way around cognitive biases and make
adjustments for them in your thinking as it relates to the markets,
you start to do the same thing in other areas of your life. One of
the ways in which good traders differ from those who are less successful is that they are not afraid to be different, to do something
unlike what everyone else is doing, to take their own path.

I

• 235 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

236 • Way of the Turtle

Take Your Own Path
I was 19 years old when I decided to become a trader. I was conﬁdent of my potential success and told some of my closest friends
that I would be a millionaire by age 21. I was not bragging as much
as sharing my hope for being successful in trading. It was new to
me, and it fascinated me. I made a commitment to trading even
though that meant dropping out of college. My father, who did not
have a college degree and felt that had held him back in his career,
was not pleased. But I have always been an individualist, unafraid
to voice my opinions, unafraid to disagree with authority, and so I
did not really care what everyone else thought; I knew it was the
right decision for me. My independence and outspokenness have
gotten me into trouble at times; I’m sure this has worried my
mother on numerous occasions, but it has served me well.
It is hard to imagine what life would have been like if I had not
decided to drop everything else to become a trader. I certainly
would not have responded to Richard Dennis’s ad in the paper.
Now I see life as a trader approaches his craft: Nothing ventured,
nothing gained. Risk is your friend. Don’t be afraid of it. Understand it. Control it. Dance with it. Traders take chances with good
expectation but expect to lose regularly. They are not hesitant to
act because they’re afraid that they might be wrong, a quality that
emerges in the kind of life they lead. They follow their own path
and don’t worry that sometimes they will fail in certain attempts
because they know that is part of life; they understand that failure
is a necessary prerequisite to success and learning.
I always have enjoyed extreme challenges and attempted to do
things that most people consider foolish, impractical, or impossible. I see possibilities where many people see obstacles and am

When All Is Said and Done • 237

compelled to pursue those opportunities. I have failed in this many
times, but I also have succeeded with each experience and learned
something new.
If people asked me what my goal was, I would answer: “To make
the world a better place, of course.” I think the power lies in all of
us to make the world better in some concrete way, however small.
That is a worthy objective. I would be far richer and more “successful” if I had stuck to trading and never ventured into anything
new. Some of the other Turtles did that and have been wildly successful running hedge funds with hundreds of millions or even billions of dollars under management. Similarly, if I had stuck with a
particular niche in the software industry, I might be more successful, at least as others measure success.
True to my nature, I don’t care about others’ opinions of my success. They are not going to be the ones at my deathbed wondering
whether I made a difference, whether I lived well and fully. I am.

The Track to Nowhere
Most of my oldest friends think I am going through some sort of
prolonged midlife crisis. I probably seem irresponsible and unconventional to them. If having a midlife crisis means examining your
life and deciding that you don’t want to live by a set of success criteria created by society and the media, I am guilty as charged. I
highly recommend having one if you haven’t done so already. The
alternative is much less interesting.
I constantly meet people who have lost themselves in an empty
pursuit of what they ought to do. In an effort to please their parents
and teachers, to get a good job, to make a lot of money, and so on,

238 • Way of the Turtle

they followed a path set out by others rather than one they chose
for themselves. For some, this started in grammar school; for others, it happened as late as college or perhaps shortly after they
started their ﬁrst real jobs and began to take on responsibilities.
Invariably, the path took them far from their dreams and what they
had hoped they would become. They lost sight of the fact that they
had a choice: They could decide at any time to do something
else—decide perhaps to step off the path and explore the world and
themselves a bit.
In many companies there is a word for this path. It is called a
career track, or track for short. That is a good analogy because a
train engineer cannot decide what route to take; those decisions
are made by the people who set out the track and those who control the switches along the way. I have been thinking about this phenomenon quite a bit lately, and it occurs to me that the reason most
people don’t follow their dreams is that they are afraid of failing in
their endeavors. They believe it is better to follow a predetermined
path that they know they can achieve rather than one of their own
making where they will be tested.
I don’t believe that anyone consciously makes this decision; it
happens by default or through lack of action. People do not say to
themselves: “I’d really like a boring job working for a company I
hate.” It just happens.
They step onto the track without realizing it. Then, once they
are on it, it takes a conscious effort to leave it. Otherwise they will
end up wherever it leads, which is probably not where they wanted
to go. Since they did not step consciously onto the track, they may
not even realize where they are until they ﬁnd themselves very far
away from their dreams.
