
46

c02.indd 46

1/13/09 9:56:22 AM

Chapter Summary

time.When implemented, this creates a situation where any exchange
rate movement will not affect the profit/loss picture, since one side
of the hedge profits as the other side loses by an equal amount.
After this discussion on basic foreign exchange trading mechanics, the next logical step is to explore the features and functionalities of a currency trading platform. This can be accomplished at no
cost simply by signing up for a free demo practice account with any
reputable online forex broker. The best part about this is that a forex
trader can test-drive a trading platform in an extremely thorough
manner, secure in the knowledge that all losses in a practice account
are not only free-of-charge, but also highly educational.

47

c02.indd 47

1/13/09 9:56:22 AM

c02.indd 48

1/13/09 9:56:22 AM

CHAPTER 3

Technical Analysis—
Tools for Trading
Foreign Exchange

After reading this chapter, you will be
able to:
●

Apply the primary tools used by technical traders to
analyze the foreign exchange markets.

●

Understand the purposes and mechanics of the most
important functional elements of currency charts.

●

Delve into the most practical aspects of technical analysis, including pattern recognition, drawing trendlines,
and identifying support and resistance.

49

c03.indd 49

1/13/09 9:59:02 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

I ntroduction to Technical Analysis —
Interpreting Price Action
Technical analysis is the most popular discipline, or school of financial analysis, for trading the foreign exchange markets. Simply put,
technical analysis is often defined as the systematic study of price
action, which is ultimately derived from the effects of mass market
behavior.
While fundamental analysis may concern itself with the myriad reasons why price moves, technical analysis is single-mindedly
focused on how price moves, and the ways in which that might affect
future price movement. Technical analysis consists of a broad methodology through which traders can make all of their most important
trading decisions. This includes entries, exits, stop-loss placement,
profit target placement, trade-sizing, risk management, and more.
The primary toolbox used by foreign exchange technical analysts in analyzing and interpreting price action is the versatile currency chart. As we shall soon see, there are several styles of these
toolboxes, including bar charts, candlestick charts, and point & figure charts.
Furthermore, within each of these toolboxes is quite a diverse set
of tools. These tools can range anywhere from a simple trendline to
an elaborate chart pattern to a mathematically derived oscillator to a
complex algorithmic trading system. For the purposes of this book,
however, we will stick to the essentials.
When a beginner is first introduced to using technical analysis for analyzing and trading the foreign exchange markets, there
are invariably several buzzwords and phrases that are heard most

50

c03.indd 50

1/13/09 9:59:02 AM

I n t r o d u c t i o n t o Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

frequently. These include such common terms as trend, support/
resistance, moving averages, head-and-shoulders pattern, Fibonacci,
Elliott Wave, and so on. All of these terms, and much more, will be
addressed further on in this chapter.
In the actual practice of technical analysis, however, generally it
is better to keep all of these countless chart elements to a manageable minimum in order to avoid the very common beginner’s epidemic of “paralysis by analysis.” This is where traders clutter their
charts with so many lines and indicators that they become utterly
unable to conduct any useful analysis or to act on any bonafide signals from their charts. In the world of technical analysis, too much
of a good thing is just as bad as the opposite extreme of not enough.
To avoid paralysis by analysis, traders should ideally master
a handful of chart elements and become an expert on how price
reacts to these elements. For example, a trader may study in-depth
how a certain currency pair reacts over time in relation to the outer
bands of the popular Bollinger Bands indicator. Or another trader
may wish to become an expert on price behavior around the key
Fibonacci retracement levels.Yet another trader may choose to work
exclusively with trendlines, trading bounces and breakouts of these
dynamic support/resistance levels. There is virtually no end to how
a technical analyst may specialize to become a master of one (or a
few), rather than an unfocused Jack of all Trades.
The primary advantages of technical analysis for the foreign
exchange trader are manifold. This includes the exceptionally precise trade entries and exits afforded by chart analysis, sensible risk
management through the use of technically derived stop levels, the
ability to backtest technical strategies using past price action, and

51

c03.indd 51

1/13/09 9:59:03 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

the unambiguous, rule-based nature of many technical trading
systems. These concepts will all be covered in this chapter and in
Chapter 5, which covers trading methods and strategies.
While technical analysis can be a powerful method for analyzing foreign exchange price movement, it can also be both timeconsuming and incredibly frustrating. This is often the case when
indicators or lines that traders rely upon to provide them with profitable trading signals give false signals, conflicting signals, or just
plain don’t work. But this should not be a valid reason to abandon
the entire discipline of technical analysis altogether. As alluded to
previously, there is no lack of foreign exchange traders who, through
untiring study and experience, have managed to build successful
trading careers from specializing in just a handful of technical methods that work well for them.
Therefore, patience and the careful study of technical tools and
methods clearly comprise the path to mastery of technical analysis.
In turn, the mastery of technical analysis may well provide the road
to consistent profitability in the foreign exchange markets.

B asics of Bars and Candlesticks
Bars and candlesticks are the primary building blocks of technical analysis charting. There are several other methods of depicting
price action visually in the foreign exchange markets, including
older techniques that enjoy significant followings like point & figure
charts (which will be touched on later in this chapter), but bars and
candlesticks have assumed their vital roles as the main workhorses of
present-day technical analysis.

52

c03.indd 52

1/13/09 9:59:03 AM

Basics of Bars and Candlesticks

Bar charts and candlestick charts share close similarities in that
they both represent the most salient data points available in price
action analysis. Within a given time period, this includes the open
price, the high price, the low price, and the close price. For example, a daily chart, where each bar or candlestick represents one full
trading day, will depict the price levels at which a given day opened
and closed, as well as the high and low that were reached during
that day. In the foreign exchange markets, incidentally, a trading day
would consist of a full 24 hours. Exhibit 3.1 shows an example of
both a bar and a candlestick.
As shown in Exhibit 3.1, a bar opens at the level of the left horizontal arm and closes at the level of the right horizontal arm. The
top of the vertical bar represents that period’s high, while the bottom represents the low.
In contrast, a candlestick places much heavier emphasis on the
open and close of a particular period by making the space between
EXHIBIT 3.1

Bar and Candlestick Diagram
Highest price during time period
Period close price (on bar right)
Bar
Period open price (on bar left)
Lowest price during time period

Candlestick

Highest price during time period
Period open or close price
Real body is white (or green) if
currency closed higher and black
(or red) if it closed lower
Period open or close price
Lowest price during time period

53

c03.indd 53

1/13/09 9:59:03 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

the open and close exceptionally prominent. This space is called the
“real body.” The vertical lines above and below are called “shadows”
or “wicks.” If the real body is white (or green), it means that it was a
bullish candle, and that price opened at the bottom of the real body
and closed at the top of the real body. If, on the other hand, the real
EXECUTIVE INSIGHT

Steve Nison
The most authoritative voice on the subject of candlesticks would
certainly be Steve Nison, CMT. But besides having introduced the
entire concept of Japanese candlesticks to the English-speaking
world, Nison has also been a renowned expert on Western-style
technical analysis for over three decades. Therefore, he brings
a unique perspective that straddles both Eastern and Western
methods of charting. Widely quoted in the major financial press
as one of the world’s foremost technical analysts, Nison authored
the definitive book on the subject of candlesticks, Japanese
Candlestick Charting Techniques, and is the founder and President
of CandleCharts.com.
Nison states:
“Warren Buffett said he would be a bum in the street with
a tin cup if the markets were always efficient. And why
aren’t the markets efficient? It’s because of human emotions such as fear, greed, and hope. And the only way to
gauge the emotional and psychological aspects of market
participants is technical analysis. Bernard Baruch, one
of most famous economists of the 20th century stated,
‘It’s not the news itself, but it is the market’s reaction to
the news that’s important.’ And for those who watch the
forex market we know that many times an ounce of emotion can be worth a pound of facts.

54

c03.indd 54

1/13/09 9:59:03 AM

Basics of Bars and Candlesticks

EXECUTIVE INSIGHT (CONTINUED)
The reason I’m spending time on the importance of
market psychology is that the candlesticks—which I refer
to as candles—is one of the best methods to get a quick
visual grasp of who’s winning in the ongoing battle of the
bulls versus the bears. While very easy to construct,
the candles provide an x-ray into the supply/demand
situation. As the Japanese proverb states, ‘Look at the
outside and know the inside.’ Think about the candle
line. A tall white real body means the bulls are in charge
during that session—whether it’s an intraday, daily,
or weekly. A long black real body hints the bears are in
force. A doji (where the open and close are the same)
clearly reflects a market in balance between the bulls and
bears. And if a doji emerges during a rally, it increases
the chances of a turn. A hammer, with its extended long
lower shadow, is visually proving the market is rejecting lower levels. So on this one session it means that
the bears are getting less confident because the market
can’t hold the lows into the close, while the bulls are getting more optimistic. In essence, the candlestick line is
drawn based on the psychological underpinning of current
market activity. And by reading the candles correctly you
are reading the market’s message.
As the author mentions in this chapter, I recommend using candles as just one of the tools in a trading
arsenal. However, after you gain the knowledge of how
to correctly and fully harness the insight of the candles
you’ll find that they will become one of your most important tools. At my live seminars, where I have taught thousands of retail and institutional traders, I often ask at the
conclusion, ‘Who would ever go back to a bar chart?’ No
one has ever raised a hand.”

55

c03.indd 55

1/13/09 9:59:04 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

body is black (or red), it means that it was a bearish candle, and that
price opened at the top of the real body and closed at the bottom of
the real body.
In both the U.S. equities and futures markets, bar charts have
traditionally been the primary mode of representing price action
for technical analysis purposes. Only in the past decade or so have
candlestick charts come into popular usage in the Western world,
largely through the efforts of Steve Nison, who introduced this
ancient charting method to America from its humble rice-trading
roots in Japan.
The main difference between bars and candlesticks lies in their
differing visual portrayals of identical price data points. Therefore,
although both charting methodologies utilize the same data, which
includes the open, high, low, and close price of a given time period,
the manner in which this information is represented differs significantly between the two.While bars may reveal all of the usual support/
resistance indications and chart patterns that Western technical analysts
normally look for, candlesticks go a step further by including all of this
relevant information plus providing a unique visual interpretation of
the struggle between bulls (buyers) and bears (sellers).
Furthermore, while there are numerous popular chart patterns
that are commonly associated with bar charts (e.g., head-and-shoulder,
double tops, triangles, flags, and pennants, among many others), candlestick charts include all of these formations, plus incorporate an
additional library of imaginatively named chart patterns like “morning star,” “hammer,” and “hanging man,” among many others. All of
these patterns for both bar and candlestick charts will be explained
later in this chapter.

56

c03.indd 56

1/13/09 9:59:04 AM

Keeping Time with Char t Timeframes

K eeping Time with Chart Timeframes
While the structures of bars and candlesticks are relatively straightforward, these stick shapes would mean very little from an analytical
perspective without the vital element of time. On both bar and candlestick charts, the vertical y-axis represents the price of one currency
in a pair against the other, while the horizontal x-axis represents time
moving forward from left to right. This is illustrated in Exhibit 3.2.
Point & figure (p&f ) charts are the notable exception to this prevailing axis structure, as they do not include the time element. But
these unique p&f charts will be touched upon in more detail later
on in this chapter.
EXHIBIT 3.2

Chart with Labeled x-axis and y-axis

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

57

c03.indd 57

1/13/09 9:59:04 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

Most charting software allows traders to choose from a wide
variety of timeframes for bar and candlestick charts. This choice
is critical for numerous reasons. Most importantly, it dictates how
much time is contained in each bar or candlestick. For example,
in a daily chart, each bar has a duration of exactly one day, or 24
hours. A five-minute candlestick, on the other hand, has a duration
of exactly five minutes. It is crucial for traders to know exactly what
timeframe is being viewed at all times, as there are differing strategies for long-term, medium-term, and short-term trading.
Another reason that the timeframe holds so much importance is
that it determines how much price action can practically be viewed
at one time. Longer-term charts like daily, weekly, and monthly
timeframes can comfortably include price action visuals going back
many years or decades. Displaying price action spanning more than
a few days for one- or five-minute charts, on the other hand, would
quickly become unwieldy.
Yet another reason timeframes are so critical lies in the very
nature of technical analysis itself. It is certainly true that chart patterns are generally fractal, which means that these patterns can be
found on all chart timeframes. But from a practical trading perspective, trends and patterns are usually much more reliable on longerterm charts like daily and higher, rather than shorter-term charts
like the intraday hourly and minute charts. This is partly due to the
fact that directionless volatility, or noise, that usually defies all technical analysis efforts, is much more prevalent on shorter-term charts.
Chart timeframes should therefore be chosen with a great deal
of care. Of course, many traders choose to view and analyze multiple

58

c03.indd 58

1/13/09 9:59:05 AM

Support for Resistance (and Support)

timeframes simultaneously in order to identify trend confirmations
and/or conflicts. This type of trading approach will be discussed in
Chapter 5, which covers trading methods and strategies.
Popular timeframes used by foreign exchange traders include
(in ascending order of duration): 1-minute, 5-minute, 10-minute,
15-minute, 30-minute, 1-hour, 2-hour, 3-hour, 4-hour, 12-hour, daily,
weekly, and monthly. There are also multitick timeframes, where
each bar or candlestick contains a certain number of ticks (minimum incremental movements in price), but these are not nearly as
popular as the abovementioned standard duration timeframes.

S uppor t for Resistance (and Support)
Now that basic chart structure has been established, the real “meat
and potatoes” of technical analysis can be discussed, and there is no
better place to begin than with support and resistance. Besides the
notion of trend, which will be discussed in the next section,
the twin concepts of support and resistance are at the core of technical analysis. Their explanation is rather simple, yet their significance is far-reaching.
Support and resistance are two parts of one whole. They can
also be considered polar opposites. Support is simply defined as the
recurring upward price “pressure” found at relatively lower prices,
while resistance is the recurring downward price “pressure” found at
relatively higher prices. These upward and downward pressures have
a number of hypothetical causes, many of which are purported to
relate closely with mass trader psychology.

59

c03.indd 59

1/13/09 9:59:05 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

Without delving into the theoretical underpinnings of the collective trader psyche, however, the concepts of support and resistance are often considered simply to stem from market participants’
price memory, among other factors. This idea will be explored
briefly here.
From a price memory perspective, sustainable support and resistance levels will occur because traders remember specific price levels, and will base their trading decisions on whether they consider
these levels as relatively high or relatively low. The most basic tendency is for traders to buy at price levels they consider relatively
low (support) and to sell at price levels they consider relatively high
(resistance).
When a majority of traders collectively believe that a certain
price level or region is relatively low, buying pressure will often result
and the price should generally go up, thereby creating a “bounce up
off support.” Conversely, when a majority of traders believe that a
certain price level or region is relatively high, selling pressure will
often result and the price should generally go down, thereby creating
a “bounce down off resistance.”
For an example of resistance, if the price region surrounding
1.6000 on the EUR/USD is considered collectively by traders to
be relatively high (which, as of this writing, is the case), traders
without positions in the market may wish to sell short the pair if
this level is reached, with the intention to profit by buying back
(or covering) later at a lower price. By the same token, traders with
existing long positions in the pair may also wish to sell at this level,
effectively closing their positions and taking their profits. All of
this selling activity places downward pressure at this 1.6000 level,

60

c03.indd 60

1/13/09 9:59:05 AM

Support for Resistance (and Support)

thereby creating significant resistance in the form of a “ceiling” on
price action. The expectation, then, is that when price reaches a
significant resistance level, it will turn and go back down at that
level.
If, on the other hand, the price region surrounding 95.00 on the
USD/JPY is considered collectively by traders to be relatively low,
traders without positions in the market may wish to buy the pair
if this level is reached, with the intention to profit by selling their
positions later at a higher price. And traders with existing short positions in the pair may also wish to buy back (or cover) at this level,
effectively closing their positions and taking their profits. All of this
buying activity places upward pressure at this 95.00 level, thereby
creating significant support in the form of a “floor” on price action.
The expectation, then, is that when price reaches a significant support level, it will turn and go back up at that level.
Sideways price action between both a support floor and a resistance ceiling is called a trading range, as displayed in Exhibit 3.3.
These occur quite often in the foreign exchange markets. Many
currency traders exploit breakouts or breakdowns of low volatility
trading ranges as one of their primary trade entry tactics. This will
be discussed further in Chapter 5, which covers trading methods
and strategies.
The simple fact that support and resistance levels are often
respected by price numerous times before ultimately being broken
is, in itself, a remarkable phenomenon that can contribute a great
deal to any foreign exchange trader’s strategy. Therefore, whenever
price nears historically significant support or resistance levels, traders and analysts will invariably begin paying close attention to the

61

c03.indd 61

1/13/09 9:59:05 AM

Te c h n i c a l A n a l y s i s

EXHIBIT 3.3

Trading Range Support and Resistance

Source: FX Solutions – FX AccuCharts

action, waiting for the level in question either to be respected or
broken. These traders and analysts will then act accordingly.
Another important aspect of traders’ collective price memory as
it relates to the concept of support and resistance lies in the extraordinary tendency for a support/resistance level to transform into the
opposite, once broken. For example, when price breaks out above a
previous resistance level, technical analysts and traders would then
consider that broken resistance level as a new support level. By the
same token, when price breaks down below a previous support level,
technical analysts and traders would then consider that broken support level as a new resistance level.

62

c03.indd 62

1/13/09 9:59:05 AM

Support for Resistance (and Support)

The most plausible reason for this phenomenon, from a technical analysis perspective, is that once a currency pair breaks a
support/resistance level in a convincing manner, traders begin to
believe that the pair has reached a whole new plateau of price activity. Therefore, mass trader momentum will move away from the previous price level, towards equilibrium at this new norm. The border
between the old plateau and the new one is the broken support/
resistance zone, and it will therefore be expected to act as a future
price barrier.
For example, if the GBP/USD breaks out and remains above a
highly significant resistance level that represents a multidecade high,
say at 2.1160 (as of this writing), traders will begin to believe that
the pair will continue to move within this new, higher plateau. This is
because it would be such a technically rare feat to break this lofty level
that price must be trending up with extremely strong momentum. So
when the level is finally broken, if price ever subsequently went back
down to revisit that broken resistance line around 2.1160, it would
signal a relatively low price, and therefore a good place to buy at support. And when a lot of major market participants all decide to buy at
support, it can be manifested in price action as a bounce up off support. This phenomenon can be seen in Exhibit 3.4.
Of course, as with every aspect of technical analysis (or any other
analysis, for that matter), this tendency does not always work out
as expected. But the phenomenon is realized frequently enough in
the foreign exchange markets to warrant serious consideration. The
expectation that support becomes resistance, and resistance becomes
support, is one of the central themes of the support/resistance concept, as well as of technical analysis as a whole.
