
strategies.
^ Cohen says, "I'm always learning, which keeps it exciting and new.
I'm not doing the same thing that I was doing ten years ago. I have
evolved, and will continue to evolve."

6. It Requires Time to Become a Successful Trader
Experience is a minimum requirement for success in trading, just as it is
in any other profession, and experience can be acquired only in real time.
As Cook says, "You can't expect to become a doctor or an attorney
overnight, and trading is no different."

7. Keep a Record of Your Market Observations
Although the process of gaining experience can't be rushed, it can be
made much more efficient by writing down market observations instead

WIZARD LESSONS

of depending on memory. Keeping a daily diary in which he recorded the
recurrent patterns he noticed in the market was instrumental to Cook's
transition from failure to great success. All of the many trading strategies
he uses grew out of these notes. Masters jots down observations on the
backs of his business cards. A compilation of these notes provided the
basis for his trading model.

8. Develop a Trading Philosophy
Develop a specific trading philosophy—an integration of market concepts and trading methods—that is based on your market experience and
is consistent with your personality (item 3). Developing a trading philosophy is a dynamic process—as you gather more experience and'knowledge, the existing philosophy should be revised accordingly.

9. What Is Your Edge?
Unless you can answer this question clearly and decisively, you are not
ready to trade. Every trader in this book has a specific edge. Here are a
few examples:
>• Masters has developed a catalyst-based model that identifies high
probability trades.
>• Lauer employs a specific six-step selection process that identifies
stocks with extremely favorable return/risk prospects.
>• Cook has identified price patterns that correctly predict the shortterm direction of the market approximately 85 percent of the
time.
»• Cohen combines the information flow provided by the select group of
traders and analysts he has assembled with his innate timing skills as
a trader.
> A tremendous investment in research and very low transactions costs
have made it possible for Shaw's firm to identify and profit from small
market inefficiencies.
>• By combining carefully structured financing deals with hedging
techniques, Fletcher and Guazzoni implement transactions that
have a very high probability of being profitable in virtually any scenario.

i/lZARD L E S S O N S
(^

Watson's extensive c o m m u n i c a t i o n - b a s e d research allows h i m to

was absolutely no doubt in my mind. I had never failed to succeed at

identify overlooked stocks that are likely to advance sharply well
before those opportunities become well recognized on Wall
Street.

anything that I put my mind to, and this was no different."

10. The Confidence Chicken-and-Egg Question
One of the most strikingly evident traits among a l l the Market Wizards is
their high level of confidence. This leads to the question: Are they confident because they have done so well, or is t h e i r success a consequence of
their confidence? Of course, it would hardly be surprising that anyone
who has done as extraordinarily well as the traders in this book would be
confident. But the more interviews f do with Market Wizard types, the
more convinced I become that confidence is an inherent t r a i t shared by
these traders, and is as much a contributing factor to their success as a
consequence of it. To cite only a few of the many possible examples:
^ When Watson was asked what gave him the confidence to pursue a
career in money management when he had no prior success p i c k i n g
stocks, he replied, "Once I decide 1 am going to do something, I
become determined to succeed, regardless of the obstacles. If 1 didn't
have that attitude, I never would have made it.'
^ Masters, who launched his fund when he was an unemployed stockbroker with virtually no track record gave this response to a similar
question. "I realized that if somebody could make money trading, so
could I. Also, the fact that I had competed successfully at the highest
levels of swimming gave me confidence that I could excel in this business as well."
K Lauer was almost apologetic about his confidence when he decided
to switch careers from analyst to money manager: "I hesitate to say
this because 1 don't, want to sound arrogant—one of the things that
gave me confidence in going out on my own was that the fund managers were my clients when 1 was an analyst, and 1 thought they
would not be particularly difficult to compete against."
*• Lescarbeau's confidence seemed to border on the irrational. When
asked why he didn't delay a split with his partner, who was the money
manager of the team, until he had developed his own approach,
Lescarbeau replied, "I knew I would come up with something. There

An honest self-appraisal in respect to confidence may be one of the
best predictors of a trader's prospects for success in the markets. At the
very least, those who consider changing careers to become traders or
risking a sizable portion of their assets in the market should ask themselves whether they have absolute confidence in their ultimate success.
Any hesitation in the answer should be viewed as a cautionary flag.

11. Hard Work
The irony is that so many people are drawn to the markets because it
seems like an easy way to make a lot of money, yet those who excel tend
to be extraordinarily hard workers—almost to a fault. Consider just some
of the examples in this book:
>• As if running a huge trading company were not enough, Shaw has
also founded a number of successful technology companies, provided
venture capital funding and support to two computational chemistry
software firms, and chaired a presidential advisory committee. Even
when he is on a rare vacation, he acknowledges, "I need a few hours
of work each day just to keep myself sane."
^ Lescarbeau continues to spend long hours doing computer research
even though his systems, which require very little time to run, are
performing spectacularly well. He continues to work as if these systems were about to become ineffective tomorrow. He never misses a
market day, to the point of hobbling across his house in pain on the
day of his knee surgery so that he could check on the markets.
*• Minervini works six-day workweeks, fourteen-hour trading days, and
claims not to have missed a market day in ten years, even when he
had pneumonia.
> Cook continues to do regular farmwork in addition to spending fifty
to sixty hours a week at trading. Moreover, for years after the disastrous trade that brought him to the brink of bankruptcy, Cook worked
the equivalent of two full-time jobs.
> Bender not only spends a full day trading in the U.S. markets, but
then is up half the night trading the Japanese stock market.

WIZARD LESSONS

WIZARD LESSONS

12. Obsessiveness

15. Risk Control

There is often a fine line between hard work and obsession, a line that is
frequently crossed by the Market Wizards. Certainly some of the examples just cited contain elements of obsession. It may well be that a tendency toward obsessiveness in respect to the markets, and often other
endeavors as well, is simply a trait associated with success.

Minervini believes that one of the common mistakes made by novices is
that they "spend too much time trying to discover great entry strategies
and not enough time on money management." "Containing your losses,"
he says, "is 90 percent of the battle, regardless of the strategy." Cohen
explains the importance of limiting losses as follows: "Most traders make
money only in the 50 to 55 percent range. My best trader makes money
only 63 percent of the time. That means you're going to be wrong a lot.
If that's the case, you better make sure your losses are as small as they
can be."
Risk-control methods used by the traders interviewed included the
following:
Stop-loss points. Both Minervini and Cook predetermine where
they will get out of a trade that goes against them. This approach allows
them to limit the potential loss on any position to a well-defined risk
level (barring a huge overnight price move). Both Minervini and Cook
indicated that the stop point for any trade depends on the expected
gain—that is, trades with greater profit potential will use wider stops
(accept more risk).
Reducing the position. Cook has a sheet taped to his computer
reading: GET SMALLER. "The first thing I do when I'm losing," he says, "is
to stop the bleeding." Cohen expresses the virtually identical sentiment:
"If you think you're wrong, or if the market is moving against you and you
don't know why, take in half. You can always put it on again. If you do
that twice, you've taken in three-quarters of your position. Then what's
left is no longer a big deal."
Selecting low-risk positions. Some traders rely on very restrictive
stock selection conditions to control risk as an alternative to stop-loss liquidation or position reduction (detailed in item 17).
Limiting the initial position size. Cohen cautions, "A common
mistake traders make . . . is that they take on too big of a position relative
to their portfolio. Then when the stock moves against them, the pain
becomes too great to handle, and they end up panicking or freezing." On
a similar note, Fletcher quotes his mentor, Elliot Wolk, "Never make a
bet you can't afford to lose."

15. The Market Wizards Tend to Be Innovators, Not Followers
To list a few examples:

> WTien Fletcher started his first job, he was given a desk and told to
"figure it out." He never stopped. Fletcher has made a career of thinking up and implementing innovative market strategies.
*• Bender not only developed his own style of trading options but also
created an approach that sought to profit by betting against conventional option models.
*• Shaw's entire life has been defined by innovation: the software company he launched as a graduate student; his pioneering work in
designing the architecture of supercomputers; the various companies
he founded; and his central role in developing the unique complex
mathematical trading model used by D. E. Shaw.
>• By compiling detailed daily diaries of his market observations for over
a decade, Cook was able to develop a slew of original, high-reliability
trading strategies.
^ Minervini uncovered his own menagerie of chart patterns rather than
using the patterns popularized in market books.
*• By jotting down all his market observations, Masters was able to
design his own catalyst-based trading model.
> Although he was secretive about the details, based on their incredible
performance alone, it is quite clear that Lescarbeau's systems are
unique.

14. To Be a Winner You Have to Be Willing to Take a Loss
In Watson's words, "You can't be afraid to take a loss. The people who

are successful in this business are the people who are willing to lose
money."

WIZARD LESSONS

Diversification. The more diversified the holdings, the lower the
risk. Diversification by itself, however, is not a sufficient risk-control
measure, because of the significant correlation of most stocks to the
broader market and hence to one another. Also, as discussed in item 53,
too much diversification can have significant drawbacks.

WIZARD LESSONS

I don't lose money. I'm not talking about making money yet." Another

advantage of buying stocks that are trading at depressed levels is that the
stocks in this group that do turn around will often have tremendous
upside potential.

18. Value Alone Is Not Enough

Short selling. Although the common perception is that short selling
is risky, it can actually be an effective tool for reducing portfolio risk (see
item 59).
Hedged Strategies. Some traders (Fletcher, Guazzoni, Shaw, and
Bender) use methodologies in which positions are hedged from the
onset. For these traders, risk control is a matter of restricting leverage,
since even a low-risk strategy can become a high-risk trade if the leverage
is excessive. (See, for example, discussion of LTCM in the Shaw interview.)

them viewed it as a sufficient condition. There always had to be other
compelling reasons for the trade, because a stock could be low priced
and stay that way for years. Even if you don't lose much in buying a
value stock that just sits there, it could represent a serious investment
blunder by tying up capital that can be used much more effectively elsewhere.

16. You Can't Be Afraid of Risk

19. The Importance of Catalysts

Risk control should not be confused with fear of risk. A willingness to
accept risk is probably an essential personality trait for a trader. As Watson states, "You have to be willing to accept a certain level of risk, or else
you will never pull the trigger." When asked what he looks for when he
hires new traders, Cohen replies, "I'm looking for people who are not
afraid to take risks."

