
ecclesiastical ban. Frederic was disgusted with his new subjects; but, as the Templars and
Hospitallers remained true to him, he marched to Jerusalem to be crowned. All the
churches were shut against him, and he could not even find a priest to officiate at his
coronation. He had despised the Papal authority too long to quail at it now, when it was
so unjustifiably exerted, and, as there was nobody to crown him, he very wisely crowned
himself. He took the royal diadem from the altar with his own hands, and boldly and
proudly placed it on his brow. No shouts of an applauding populace made the welkin
ring, no hymns of praise and triumph resounded from the ministers of religion; but a
thousand swords started from their scabbards, to testify that their owners would defend
the new monarch to the death.
It was hardly to be expected that he would renounce for any long period the dominion of
his native land for the uneasy crown and barren soil of Palestine. He had seen quite
enough of his new subjects before he was six months among them, and more important
interests called him home. John of Brienne, openly leagued with Pope Gregory against
him, was actually employed in ravaging his territories at the head of a papal army. This
intelligence decided his return. As a preliminary step, he made those who had contemned
his authority feel, to their sorrow, that he was their master. He then set sail, loaded with
the curses of Palestine. And thus ended the seventh Crusade, which, in spite of every
obstacle and disadvantage, had been productive of more real service to the Holy Land
than any that had gone before; a result solely attributable to the bravery of Frederic and
the generosity of the Sultan Camhel.
Soon after the Emperor's departure a new claimant started for the throne of Jerusalem, in
the person of Alice, Queen of Cyprus, and half-sister of the Mary who, by her marriage,
had transferred her right to John of Brienne. The grand military orders, however, clung to
Frederic, and Alice was obliged to withdraw.
So peaceful a termination to the Crusade did not give unmixed pleasure in Europe. The
chivalry of France and England were unable to rest, and long before the conclusion of the
truce, were collecting their armies for an eighth expedition. In Palestine, also, the
contentment was far from universal. Many petty Mahomedan states in the immediate
vicinity were not parties to the truce, and harassed the frontier towns incessantly. The
Templars, ever turbulent, waged bitter war with the Sultan of Aleppo, and in the end were
almost exterminated. So great was the slaughter among them that Europe resounded with
the sad story of their fate, and many a noble knight took arms to prevent the total
destruction of an order associated with so many high and inspiring remembrances.
Camhel, seeing the preparations that were making, thought that his generosity had been
sufficiently shown, and the very day the truce was at an end assumed the offensive, and
marching forward to Jerusalem took possession of it, after routing the scanty forces of the
Christians. Before this intelligence reached Europe a large body of crusaders was on the
march, headed by the King of Navarre, the Duke of Burgundy, the Count de Bretagne,
and other leaders. On their arrival, they learned that Jerusalem had been taken, but that
the Sultan was dead, and his kingdom torn by rival claimants to the supreme power. The
dissensions of their foes ought to have made them united, but, as in all previous Crusades,
each feudal chief was master of his own host, and acted upon his own responsibility, and

without reference to any general plan. The consequence was that nothing could be done.
A temporary advantage was gained by one leader, who had no means of improving it,
while another was defeated, without means of retrieving himself. Thus the war lingered
till the battle of Gaza, when the King of Navarre was defeated with great loss, and
compelled to save himself from total destruction by entering into a hard and oppressive
treaty with the Emir of Karac.
At this crisis aid arrived from England, commanded by Richard Earl of Cornwall, the
namesake of Coeur de Lion, and inheritor of his valour. His army was strong, and full of
hope. They had confidence in themselves and in their leader, and looked like men
accustomed to victory. Their coming changed the aspect of affairs. The new Sultan of
Egypt was at war with the Sultan of Damascus, and had not forces to oppose two enemies
so powerful. He therefore sent messengers to meet the English Earl, offering an exchange
of prisoners and the complete cession of the Holy Land. Richard, who had not come to
fight for the mere sake of fighting, agreed at once to terms so advantageous, and became
the deliverer of Palestine without striking a blow. The Sultan of Egypt then turned his
whole force against his Moslem enemies, and the Earl of Cornwall returned to Europe.
Thus ended the eighth Crusade, the most beneficial of all. Christendom had no further
pretence for sending her fierce levies to the East. To all appearance, the holy wars were at
an end: the Christians had entire possession of Jerusalem, Tripoli, Antioch, Edessa, Acre,
Jaffa, and, in fact, of nearly all Judea; and, could they have been at peace among
themselves, they might have overcome, without great difficulty, the jealousy and hostility
of their neighhours. A circumstance, as unforeseen as it was disastrous, blasted this fair
prospect, and reillumed, for the last time, the fervour and fury of the Crusades.
Gengis Khan and his successors had swept over Asia like a tropical storm, overturning in
their progress the landmarks of ages. Kingdom after kingdom was cast down as they
issued, innumerable, from the far recesses of the North and East, and, among others, the
empire of Korasmin was overrun by these all-conquering hordes. The Korasmins, a
fierce, uncivilized race, thus driven from their homes, spread themselves, in their turn,
over the south of Asia with fire and sword, in search of a resting place. In their impetuous
course they directed themselves towards Egypt, whose Sultan, unable to withstand the
swarm that had cast their longing eyes on the fertile valleys of the Nile, endeavoured to
turn them from their course. For this purpose, he sent emissaries to Barbaquan, their
leader, inviting them to settle in Palestine; and the offer being accepted by the wild horde,
they entered the country before the Christians received the slightest intimation of their
coming. It was as sudden as it was overwhelming. Onwards, like the simoom, they came,
burning and slaying, and were at the walls of Jerusalem before the inhabitants had time to
look round them. They spared neither life nor property; they slew women and children,
and priests at the altar, and profaned even the graves of those who had slept for ages.
They tore down every vestige of the Christian faith, and committed horrors unparalleled
in the history of warfare. About seven thousand of the inhabitants of Jerusalem sought
safety in retreat; but before they were out of sight, the banner of the Cross was hoisted
upon the walls by the savage foe to decoy them back. The artifice was but too successful.
The poor fugitives imagined that help had arrived from another direction, and turned back

to regain their homes. Nearly the whole of them were massacred, and the streets of
Jerusalem ran with blood.
The Templars, Hospitallers, and Teutonic knights forgot their long and bitter animosities,
and joined hand in hand to rout out this desolating foe. They intrenched themselves in
Jaffa with all the chivalry of Palestine that yet remained, and endeavoured to engage the
Sultans of Emissa and Damascus to assist them against the common enemy. The aid
obtained from the Moslems amounted at first to only four thousand men, but with these
reinforcements Walter of Brienne, the Lord of Jaffa, resolved to give battle to the
Korasrains. The conflict was as deadly as despair on the one side, and unmitigated
ferocity on the other, could make it. It lasted with varying fortune for two days, when the
Sultan of Emissa fled to his fortifications, and Walter of Brienne fell into the enemy's
hands. The brave knight was suspended by the arms to a cross in sight of the walls of
Jaffa, and the Korasminian leader declared that he should remain in that position until the
city surrendered. Walter raised his feeble voice, not to advise surrender, but to command
his soldiers to hold out to the last. But his gallantry was unavailing. So great had been the
slaughter, that out of the grand array of knights, there now remained but sixteen
Hospitallers, thirty-three Templars, and three Teutonic cavaliers. These with the sad
remnant of the army fled to Acre, and the Korasmins were masters of Palestine.
The Sultans of Syria preferred the Christians to this fierce horde for their neighbours.
Even the Sultan of Egypt began to regret the aid he had given to such barbarous foes, and
united with those of Emissa and Damascus to root them from the land. The Korasmins
amounted to but twenty thousand men, and were unable to resist the determined hostility
which encompassed them on every side. The Sultans defeated them in several
engagements, and the peasantry rose up in masses to take vengeance upon them.
Gradually their numbers were diminished. No mercy was shown them in defeat.
Barbaquan, their leader, was slain, and after five years of desperate struggles they were
finally extirpated, and Palestine became once more the territory of the Mussulmans.
A short time previous to this devastating irruption, Louis IX. fell sick in Paris, and
dreamed in the delirium of his fever that he saw the Christian and Moslem hosts fighting
before Jerusalem, and the Christians defeated with great slaughter. The dream made a
great impression on his superstitious mind, and he made a solemn vow that if ever he
recovered his health, he would take a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. When the news of the
misfortunes of Palestine, and the awful massacres at Jerusalem and Jaffa, arrived in
Europe, St. Louis remembered him of his dream. More persuaded than ever, that it was
an intimation direct from Heaven, he prepared to take the Cross at the head of his armies,
and march to the deliverance of the Holy Sepulchre. From that moment he doffed the
royal mantle of purple and ermine, and dressed in the sober serge becoming a pilgrim. All
his thoughts were directed to the fulfilment of his design, and although his kingdom
could but ill spare him, he made every preparation to leave it. Pope Innocent IV.
applauded his zeal and afforded him every assistance. He wrote to Henry III. of England
to forward the cause in his dominions, and called upon the clergy and laity all over
Europe to contribute towards it. William Longsword, the celebrated Earl of Salisbury,
took the Cross at the head of a great number of valiant knights and soldiers. But the

fanaticism of the people was not to be awakened either in France or England. Great
armies were raised, but the masses no longer sympathized. Taxation had been the great
cooler of zeal. It was no longer a disgrace even to a knight if he refused to take the Cross.
Rutebeuf, a French minstrel, who flourished about this time (1250), composed a dialogue
between a crusader and a non-crusader, which the reader will find translated in "Way's
Fabliaux." The crusader uses every argument to persuade the non-crusader to take up
arms, and forsake every thing, in the holy cause; but it is evident from the greater force of
the arguments used by the noncrusader, that he was the favourite of the minstrel. To a
most urgent solicitation of his friend, the crusader, he replies,
"I read thee right, thou boldest good To this same land I straight should hie, And win it
back with mickle blood, Nor gaine one foot of soil thereby. While here dejected and
forlorn, My wife and babes are left to mourn; My goodly mansion rudely marred, All
trusted to my dogs to guard. But I, fair comrade, well I wot An ancient saw, of pregnant
wit, Doth bid us keep what we have got, And troth I mean to follow it."
This being the general feeling, it is not to be wondered at that Louis IX. was occupied
fully three years in organizing his forces, and in making the necessary preparations for
his departure. When all was ready he set sail for Cyprus, accompanied by his Queen, his
two brothers, the Counts d'Anjou and d'Artois, and a long train of the noblest chivalry of
France. His third brother, the Count de Poitiers, remained behind to collect another corps
of crusaders, and followed him in a few months afterwards. The army united at Cyprus,
and amounted to fifty thousand men, exclusive of the English crusaders under William
Longsword. Again, a pestilential disease made its appearance, to which many hundreds
fell victims. It was in consequence found necessary to remain in Cyprus until the spring.
Louis then embarked for Egypt with his whole host; but a violent tempest separated his
fleet, and he arrived before Damietta with only a few thousand men. They were, however,
impetuous and full of hope; and although the Sultan Melick Shah was drawn up on the
shore with a force infinitely superior, it was resolved to attempt a landing without waiting
the arrival of the rest of the army. Louis himself in wild impatience sprang from his boat,
and waded on shore; while his army, inspired by his enthusiastic bravery, followed,
shouting the old war-cry of the first crusaders, Dieu le veut! Dieu le veut! A panic seized
the Turks. A body of their cavalry attempted to bear down upon the crusaders, but the
knights fixed their large shields deep in the sands of the shore. and rested their lances
upon them, so that they projected above, and formed a barrier so imposing, that the
Turks, afraid to breast it, turned round and fairly took to flight. At the moment of this
panic, a false report was spread in the Saracen host, that the Sultan had been slain. The
confusion immediately became general -- the deroute was complete: Damietta itself was
abandoned, and the same night the victorious crusaders fixed their headquarters in that
city. The soldiers who had been separated from their chief by the tempest, arrived shortly
afterwards; and Louis was in a position to justify the hope, not only of the conquest of
Palestine, but of Egypt itself.
But too much confidence proved the bane of his army. They thought, as they had
accomplished so much, that nothing more remained to be done, and gave themselves up
to ease and luxury. When, by the command of Louis, they marched towards Cairo, they

were no longer the same men; success, instead of inspiring, had unnerved them;
debauchery had brought on disease, and disease was aggravated by the heat of a climate
to which none of them were accustomed. Their progress towards Massoura, on the road
to Cairo, was checked by the Thanisian canal, on the banks of which the Saracens were
drawn up to dispute the passage. Louis gave orders that a bridge should be thrown across;
and the operations commenced under cover of two cat-castles, or high moveable towers.
The Saracens soon destroyed them by throwing quantities of Greek fire, the artillery of
that day, upon them, and Louis was forced to think of some other means of effecting his
design. A peasant agreed, for a considerable bribe, to point out a ford where the army
might wade across, and the Count d'Artois was despatched with fourteen hundred men to
attempt it, while Louis remained to face the Saracens with the main body of the army.
The Count d'Artois got safely over, and defeated the detachment that had been sent to
oppose his landing. Flushed with the victory, the brave Count forgot the inferiority of his
numbers, and pursued the panic-stricken enemy into Massoura. He was now completely
cut off from the aid of his brother-crusaders, which the Moslems perceiving, took
courage and returned upon him, with a force swollen by the garrison of Massoura, and by
reinforcements from the surrounding districts. The battle now became hand to hand. The
Christians fought with the energy of desperate men, but the continually increasing
numbers of the foe surrounded them completely, and cut off all hope, either of victory or
escape. The Count d'Artois was among the foremost of the slain, and when Louis arrived
to the rescue, the brave advance-guard was nearly cut to pieces. Of the fourteen hundred
but three hundred remained. The fury of the battle was now increased threefold. The
French King and his troops performed prodigies of valour, and the Saracens, under the
command of the Emir Ceccidun, fought as if they were determined to exterminate, in one
last decisive effort, the new European swarm that had settled upon their coast. At the fall
of the evening dews the Christians were masters of the field of Massoura, and flattered
themselves that they were the victors. Self-love would not suffer them to confess that the
Saracens had withdrawn, and not retreated; but their leaders were too wofully convinced
that that fatal field had completed the disorganization of the Christian army, and that all
hopes of future conquest were at an end.
Impressed with this truth, the crusaders sued for peace. The Sultan insisted upon the
immediate evacuation of Damietta, and that Louis himself should be delivered as hostage
for the fulfilment of the condition. His army at once refused, and the negotiations were
broken off. It was now resolved to attempt a retreat; but the agile Saracens, now in the
front and now in the rear, rendered it a matter of extreme difficulty, and cut off the
stragglers in great numbers. Hundreds of them were drowned in the Nile; and sickness
and famine worked sad ravage upon those who escaped all other casualties. Louis himself
was so weakened by disease, fatigue, and discouragement that he was hardly able to sit
upon his horse. In the confusion of the flight he was separated from his attendants, and
left a total stranger upon the sands of Egypt, sick, weary, and almost friendless. One
knight, Geffry de Sergines, alone attended him, and led him to a miserable hut in a small
village, where for several days he lay in the hourly expectation of death. He was at last
discovered and taken prisoner by the Saracens, who treated him with all the honour due
to his rank and all the pity due to his misfortunes. Under their care his health rapidly
improved, and the next consideration was that of his ransom.

The Saracens demanded, besides money, the cession of Acre, Tripoli, and other cities of
Palestine. Louis unhesitatingly refused, and conducted himself with so much pride and
courage that the Sultan declared he was the proudest infidel he had ever beheld. After a
good deal of haggling, the Sultan agreed to waive these conditions, and a treaty was
finally concluded. The city of Damietta was restored; a truce of ten years agreed upon,
and ten thousand golden bezants paid for the release of Louis and the liberation of all the
captives. Louis then withdrew to Jaffa, and spent two years in putting that city, and
Cesarea, with the other possessions of the Christians in Palestine, into a proper state of
defence. He then returned to his own country, with great reputation as a saint, but very
little as a soldier.
Matthew Paris informs us that, in the year 1250, while Louis was in Egypt, "thousands of
the English were resolved to go to the holy war, had not the King strictly guarded his
ports and kept his people from running out of doors." When the news arrived of the
reverses and captivity of the French King, their ardour cooled; and the Crusade was sung
of only, but not spoken of.
In France, a very different feeling was the result. The news of the King's capture spread
consternation through the country. A fanatic monk of Citeaux suddenly appeared in the
villages, preaching to the people, and announcing that the Holy Virgin, accompanied by a
whole army of saints and martyrs, had appeared to him, and commanded him to stir up
the shepherds and farm labourers to the defence of the Cross. To them only was his
discourse addressed, and his eloquence was such that thousands flocked around him,
ready to follow wherever he should lead. The pastures and the corn-fields were deserted,
and the shepherds, or pastoureaux, as they were termed, became at last so numerous as to
amount to upwards of fifty thousand, -- Millot says one hundred thousand men. [Elemens
de l'Histoire de France.] The Queen Blanche, who governed as Regent during the absence
of the King, encouraged at first the armies of the pastoureaux; but they soon gave way to
such vile excesses that the peaceably disposed were driven to resistance. Robbery,
murder, and violation marked their path; and all good men, assisted by the government,
united in putting them down. They were finally dispersed, but not before three thousand
of them had been massacred. Many authors say that the slaughter was still greater.
The ten years' truce concluded in 1264, and St. Louis was urged by two powerful motives
to undertake a second expedition for the relief of Palestine. These were fanaticism on the
one hand, and a desire of retrieving his military fame on the other, which had suffered
more than his parasites liked to remind him of. The Pope, of course, encouraged his
design, and once more the chivalry of Europe began to bestir themselves. In 1268,
Edward, the heir of the English monarchy, announced his determination to join the
Crusade; and the Pope (Clement IV.) wrote to the prelates and clergy to aid the cause by
their persuasions and their revenues. In England, they agreed to contribute a tenth of their
possessions; and by a parliamentary order, a twentieth was taken from the corn and
moveables of all the laity at Michaelmas.

In spite of the remonstrances of the few clearheaded statesmen who surrounded him,
urging the ruin that might in consequence fall upon his then prosperous kingdom, Louis
made every preparation for his departure. The warlike nobility were nothing loth, and in
the spring of 1270, the King set sail with an army of sixty thousand men. He was driven
by stress of weather into Sardinia, and while there, a change in his plans took place.
Instead of proceeding to Acre, as he originally intended, he shaped his course for Tunis,
on the African coast. The King of Tunis had some time previously expressed himself
favourably disposed towards the Christians and their religion, and Louis, it appears, had
hopes of converting him, and securing his aid against the Sultan of Egypt. "What honour
would be mine," he used to say, "if I could become godfather to this Mussulman King."
Filled with this idea he landed in Africa, near the site of the city of Carthage, but found
that he had reckoned without his host. The King of Tunis had no thoughts of renouncing
his religion, nor intention of aiding the Crusaders in any way. On the contrary, he
opposed their landing with all the forces that could be collected on so sudden an
emergency. The French, however, made good their first position, and defeated the
Moslems with considerable loss. They also gained some advantage over the
reinforcements that were sent to oppose them; but an infectious flux appeared in the
army, and put a stop to all future victories. The soldiers died at the rate of a hundred in a
day. The enemy, at the same time, made as great havoc as the plague. St. Louis himself
was one of the first attacked by the disease. His constitution had been weakened by
fatigues, and even before he left France he was unable to bear the full weight of his
armour. It was soon evident to his sorrowing soldiers that their beloved monarch could
not long survive. He lingered for some days, and died in Carthage, in the fifty-sixth year
of his age, deeply regretted by his army and his subjects, and leaving behind him one of
the most singular reputations in history. He is the model-king of ecclesiastical writers, in
whose eyes his very defects became virtues, because they were manifested in furtherance
of their cause. More unprejudiced historians, while they condemn his fanaticism, admit
that he was endowed with many high and rare qualities; that he was in no one point
behind his age, and, in many, in advance of it.
His brother, Charles of Anjou, in consequence of a revolution in Sicily, had become King
of that country. Before he heard of the death of Louis, he had sailed from Messina with
large reinforcements. On his landing near Carthage, he advanced at the head of his army,
amid the martial music of drums and trumpets. He was soon informed how inopportune
was his rejoicing, and shed tears before his whole army, such as no warrior would have
been ashamed to shed. A peace was speedily agreed upon with the King of Tunis, and the
armies of France and Sicily returned to their homes.
So little favour had the Crusade found in England, that even the exertions of the heir to
the throne had only collected a small force of fifteen hundred men. With these few Prince
Edward sailed from Dover to Bourdeaux, in the expectation that he would find the French
King in that city. St. Louis, however, had left a few weeks previously; upon which
Edward followed him to Sardinia, and afterwards to Tunis. Before his arrival in Africa,
St. Louis was no more, and peace had been concluded between France and Tunis. He
determined, however, not to relinquish the Crusade. Returning to Sicily, he passed the
winter in that country, and endeavoured to augment his little army. In the spring he set
