
277


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

more disciplined than the next guy, to survive and prosper in the
game. The most common reason that most traders fail is because
they refuse to properly respect and contain risk. One stubborn
bad trade is all it takes to wipe out years of gains. Tyrone’s in-
sight is that by simply never putting oneself in that position, the
trader already stands a better chance of success than the rest of
the crowd. Just to underscore this point, he talks about his expe-
rience with Chinese traders, which presumably given the strong
cultural emphasis on hard work are far more disciplined than their
American counterparts. Yet, in the end, he states that the Chinese
are just as susceptible to the exact same flaws in risk control as their
American counterparts. Human nature is universal and discipline
is the common thread that unites all great traders across the world.

Constantly Learn and Adapt

Finally, as we mentioned in the chapter introduction, what makes
Tyrone such a successful trader is his ability to constantly learn
and adapt. As you follow the course of his career, you see that
he learned how to scalp the open after the glory days of buy’em-
and-hold -’em bull market of the 1990s disappeared. Then, when
decimalization made mincemeat of most momentum traders, he
learned how to use a variety of filters to look for better setups.
Finally, as a trader who simply traded price action and technical
indicators for most of his career, Tyrone then learned to effectively
trade the news by exploiting his old momentum trading skills. The
key takeaway point from Tyrone’s experience is that there is no “one
way” to trading success. The path to profitability requires constant
willingness to try new setups. Just like the markets, trading is not
a static discipline, and Tyrone’s career is a testament to the need
for flexibility and adaptability.

278


CHAPTER 10

SURFING FOR
PROFITS

ASHKAN BOLOUR

With an unusual combination of strong quantitative skills and a
deep background in psychology, Ashkan Bolour provides unique
insights into the art and science of trading. One of the earliest en-
trants into the retail Forex market, Ashkan has achieved tremen-
dous success matching wits against some of the most sophisticated
players in the biggest financial market in the world. An avid surfer,
Ashkan compares trading to the ocean—calm one day, turbulent
the next—and counsels traders to take it all in stride. Although he
uses a variety of complex quantitative algorithms, Ashkan never
loses sight of the mental aspect of the business and often practices
meditation to enhance his focus and place him in syne with the
overall market. We chatted with Ashkan from his California home
as trading in the U.S. session was coming to an end.

279


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q - How did you start in trading? What was your first market?

A : Basically I started in equities. My background was in math-
ematics. So it was easy for me—to understand the quantitative
nature of the markets. I would just get daily graphs and go through
the numbers and look at the market in a quantitative way.

Q.: What was your profession when you started to get involved
in the stock market? Were you an engineer by trade?

A : No, actually, when I started trading I was still in high school.
My mom opened an account with my money and threw in a little of
her own. Then I started to trade. I was always good at mathematics;
I was basically just good at making money.

Q.: You started making money right away?

A : Yes, in a sense, I used William O’Neal’s strategy of picking
stocks. I would pick a company where I would buy 300 to 400
shares. I would stick with them for several months and that just
seemed to work. I would find a company with expanding earnings
and go from there. They were small-cap stocks. You know $5, $6,
$7 stock, always under 10. Then they'd go up to like $14 or $15
over several months. That type of trading just went on for several
years. Basically that’s how I got started, but my background is not
engineering, I studied psychology and in psychology I was enrolled
in an experimental quantitative program that had a lot of statistics.
We did a lot of analysis with multiple-regression equations, time-
series analysis, factor analysis, and things like that. So I just applied
that to the stock market. I obviously studied charting and technical
analysis. I really got in-depth, trying to understand all aspects of
the market and I actually went and worked for an investment bank
that took a couple of companies public. Then I went to work for
another firm, in Beverly Hills that had high-net worth clients that
day traded big blocks.

280


SURFING FOR PROFITS

: When you were in Beverly Hills and were working for this
firm that had high-net-worth individuals, were you doing block
trading for them or were you a sales trader?

A : No, actually I came in there just as a broker. I had 7 and 63
license, and I basically came with a couple of clients that traded big
blocks. We would do all kinds of research together and find stocks.
We'd try to find out good ideas on a daily basis. I started learning
how to trade options. There was another guy that traded options.
He had expertise in that area, so just being around different traders
at that time, I picked up a lot of different things.

: What year was that when you were brokering this kind of
stuff? Was it in the late ’90s?

A: Yeah, it was in the late ‘90s. I think I got my license in around
’95. I was younger then, so I kind of hopped around to try and
figure out just what it was I really wanted to do, and being with
the investment bank I knew that I really didn’t want to do that.
Also I liked trading, but I knew I didn’t want to be scalping a
couple thousand shares for a quarter or half a point. So I went
and worked for some firms and then eventually a friend of mine
wanted me to come down to his office to look at something called
foreign exchange. That was seven years ago, and so I kind of just
fell into that. I looked at the markets and with my technical analysis
background, my eyes and my mind just matched with the market.

: At that time foreign exchange trading was just starting to
become available to the retail clients. The Internet made it possible
for these retail brokers to go out and offer FX to the public.

A: Yes. It’s funny you say that because back then the first place I
traded at they didn’t even take trades over the Internet. They had
a little window in the office where we placed our order ticket and
then the lady would stamp it. It would be attached to an account

281


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

at HSBC, and you would ask for a quote on a pair. The lady in
the “cage” would call a hotline and ask for a quote and you'd say,
okay buy x amount at that price. Now you can just log onto the
internet and trade instantly, but I am actually glad I got in at the
beginning. It’s nice to see the FX market grow and flourish over
the past several years.

Q.: one of the things that differentiates the FX market from
every other electronic market out there is that it’s a spread-based
market. It doesn’t have commission, but on the flipside you are not
allowed to buy on the bid or sell at the offer. You have to pay the
bid offer spread. At that time the bid offer spreads must have been
considerably larger than they are now right?

A : Yes. I’m pretty sure, from what I remember when they'd give
us the quote, it was ten pips. So you had to be patient and be a
good trader, look at it from a longer perspective because if you
took the offer, for example, you had to make 15 pips just to be
up 5 pips wide. So, yeah, it was like that back then and I’ve seen
those spreads steadily come down and at some places its now just
two or three pips wide on majors. It is just so much more liquid
now.

Qe As a matter of fact there was a recent article in Financial
Times saying that next year the foreign exchange market is going
to do 3.6 trillion per day.

A : Wow.

Q.:-The growth of it is just massive. And they are actually attribut-
ing quite a lot of it to the advent of retail traders coming into the
market, which was absolutely nonexistent at that time. If you were
trading at a 10-point spread, your typical holding period must have

282


SURFING FOR PROFITS

been longer. It sounds like it was more position type of trading,
right?

A : Yes, it definitely was. You had to trade the daily charts and
you'd come in maybe towards the top of a daily bar. You were not
trading the one minute bars for example. So we would just trade
on the longer-term timeframes. It was a lot more difficult. I think
right now my trading activity is a hundred times greater. Back then
I would place maybe two to three trades a week and now I do that
intraday.

Q.: Back in those days you probably tried to shoot for 50 to maybe
75 points per trade. Now you're able to trade for 15 to 20 points?

A : Exactly. Basically you know you could scalp the market more.
If the market back then was moving in a 20-point range, back and
forth, back then you wouldn't be able to get out of the position,
but now that the spreads are tighter in that 20-point range you can
get 10 pips out of that trade.

There is money to be taken off the table every day in foreign
exchange just because of the volatility in the markets. I think the
foreign exchange markets really lends itself to that. It’s a great
place to be for volatility, for liquidity. So I think it’s a good market.

Q.: Do you have several strategies? Let’s say x amount of your
capital—how much percentage-wise do you allocate to intraday
trading and how much of your positions are longer-term daily,
perhaps, even sometimes weekly type of trades?

A : Yeah, I would say usually I'll take a position every day based
on a certain standard amount of money that I’m willing to risk.
So that’s 20 times a month basically, Monday through Friday, and
then through that month if I see a trend, if I’ve identified what
looks to be a several-day trade, then I am willing to ride that. I'll
take one position of that same amount and then, if it’s going in
my direction. I'll add to that position. So, basically, I like to keep
things standard in that manner.

283


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.wil you initiate a trade, let’s say based upon your short-term
bias? But then if that trade becomes profitable, will you simply
hold on to part of that trade and then even add to it and turn it into
a longer-term trade?

A : No, I wouldn’t change it into to a long-term trade. If I was
trading a short-term trend and I felt that it was over, I would take
all my profits. Hopefully, I’m also in that trend with a long position.
I’m riding that long position in a sense already. A good trader never
changes the timeframe that they initiated their trade in, only bad
traders do this when their trades are going against them. They
will usually change a short timeframe to a long one when in a bad
position.

: So on occasion you will have essentially two of the same
position? One position will have a short-term target and the other
one may have a longer-term perspective—is that correct?

A: Yeah, I'll do that, definitely.

Q:s0 they may be at the same price essentially, or relatively
close, but it’s literally two separate positions in the same direction?

A : Right, exactly.

QO. 1et's go back to your start in the business. You were brokering.
You were trading. You were getting exposed a little to options. Did
you trade options actively, or was that more on the side while you
were brokering?

A : We did trade options actively, and I learned to trade in my
own account. Basically I had some clients who were very active. So
it evolved from me brokering with them and then again having a
mathematical mind and wanting to try new things. Having higher

284


SURFING FOR PROFITS

leverage with options, I traded it for those reasons to familiarize
myself with the different product that I’ve never traded.

Q.: Were you trading options essentially as proxies for stocks?
In other words were you basically trading delta or were trading
volatility as well? [Authors’ note: delta in options is typically defined
as the amount of percent an option will move in relation to $1 move
in the underlying. For example, at-the-money call options usually
have a delta of .5, meaning they will increase by 50 cents if the
stock rises by $1.] Were you doing any kind of complex option
strategies or primarily just using them as directional tools?

A : No, it was basically in one direction. Sometimes we tried to
acquire some stocks and we would sell puts to get into them. Ifthey
didn’t get them, that was fine because they would make money off
selling the put. When you got them, they become stock. So those
were kind of unique things I saw that seemed to work. [Authors’
note: Ashkan refers to an option strategy called put selling. The
seller of the put collects the premium if the stock remains at the
same price or rises. However, if the stock falls sharply, he is ob-
ligated to purchase it at the agreed upon strike price, which can
sometimes be far higher than the actual market price. ]

Q-that strategy works great in a bull market—until it doesn’t.

A : Exactly. That was when the market was really running in the
one direction. So it worked in any form, but I personally never
really got into it. I never really made money the way I did trading
stocks. So, even though I like options, it never really caught on
with me.

Q- ts interesting because the progression was from stocks to
options to foreign exchange, and one of the things that we see is
that there is an enormous amount of similarity between options
and foreign exchange if you just simply trade them on a directional

285


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

basis. Foreign exchange in many ways contains the same type of
properties as options—highly directional, highly leveraged. Is that
what appealed to you?

A : Yeah. I mean it was that and it was also the fundamental
reasons of what a currency stands for when you look at a currency
pair—which led to my understanding of the currency markets
better than the options markets. Foreign exchange is definitely
similar to options in terms of leverage and the way it was very
technical. All those things made me want to trade it. I’m glad that I
went from equities to options to foreign exchange because I think
it was a natural progression. It seemed to work well for me.

Q.: What specifically about the FX market made you realize that
it was different?

A : Well, say the pound/dollar or euro/yen or whatever you're
looking at—there’s always going to be both sides to the price. You
compare that to equity, and equity has underlying value. You can
always buy it for a certain concrete amount. You would take the
number of shares and the stock price and you would know what
the company was worth. Currency is more of a conceptual idea of
prices, and currencies never, in a sense, go to zero. Sure, it can
devalue in a huge manner or the price can appreciate greatly. But
the fact that value was conceptual appealed to me. Plus the fact that
currencies trade so technically and trend well all really appealed
to me.

Q.: You were saying that the FX market is a bounded market,
meaning that it doesn’t go to zero and it doesn’t go to a million
like the stock market could. Can you give us an idea how FX lends
itself to technical analysis?

A : Well, basically I think if you have a certain fundamental
understanding of the markets and you understand what direc-
tion the market is moving in, then you choose an area based on

286


SURFING FOR PROFITS

technical analysis to get into the markets. There are many differ-
ent techniques—from candlesticks to moving averages—but if you
stick with one technique that you've identified and use it over and
over with proper risk management, I think you can definitely make
money in this market.

Q.-tes quite interesting because what you're saying though is
that you really create a directional bias based upon fundamental
analysis, and then you enter the market based upon technical anal-
ysis. So you get an idea of where you think the trade is going to go
and then you use technical analysis to time your entry?

A : Yeah, I think that’s accurate.

Q.: What are the key factors in FX that you feel drive direction-
ality?

A : If you look at a certain country, there are certain funda-
mentals—facts that support the strength of that country. For ex-
ample, is the economy booming? Are they in a recession? Is job
growth strong? What are interest rates like? Things like that. So
essentially you need to know those factors to get a pulse of the
country and compare that to the pulse of another country.

I try to make sure I understand everything regarding each
country of the pair that I’m looking at. If you have all the informa-
tion, you should be able to make a decision. If that decision looks
good and matches with positive technical areas in the market, then
you can make a trade.

: In FX there are basically two types of trades, there is the
prodollar and the antidollar trade, where you're trading the U.S.
dollar against an array of world currencies: the euro, the yen, the
pound, the Australian dollar, and the other commodity currencies.
Then there are the cross-trades, where you're trading countries
outside of the U.S. against each other. Do you concentrate on one

287


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

or the other? Do you do both? Do you have a preference for either
one?

A : No, I usually kind of just stick with the U.S. dollar ver-
sus the majors and the Australian and Canadian dollars. There is
enough volatility and enough information to be analyzed with those
currencies.

: And then what catches your eye? There are about seven
primary dollar pairs on any given day. What makes you decide
which side of the trade you want to be on and which pair you want
to choose?

A : Coming into the day, I already have an idea based on the last
few days of the week what’s kind of happening. Then I see what
news has come out, since that’s what drives the market. I look at
all the economic releases, all the numbers that have been released
to see if the market has to adjust itself. If the market had a certain
consensus and it was wrong, then everyone is basically wrong and
then the market moves. And so you have to come in, assess all that
information, add that to the equation of what has happened over
the last several days, and then formulate a decision and see if it’s
viable to make a trade.

Q.: cenerally there are two type of traders. There are the traders
who are continuation traders and there are traders who are reversal
traders. Looking at the model you’ve described, well let’s just say
for argument sake right now, we have generally dollar-positive
information, right?

A : Correct.

: So continuation traders would pretty much always try to
get long the dollar given the fundamental background that we
currently find ourselves in. Reversal traders will clearly look for

288


SURFING FOR PROFITS

points of exhaustion where the information flow is going to start to
turn and go the other way. How would you classify yourself?

A : Basically I am a continuation trader. When the trends are
going in that direction, I don’t see any point in trying to find the
turn. It will tell you when it’s reversed.

: How would you know that it had reversed? What kind of
technical telltale signs would tell that the trend has stopped?

A : It’s got to come to some area where it’s reversed before. That’s
number one. Then, even though it may reverse, it always takes at
least a day or so for that happen. If you look at any chart pattern
where the market’s reversed, you'll see a daily reversal. Reversal
only happens once, but the continuation’s happening all the time
until the moment the reversal is hit.

: Given that kind of layout, since you obviously look at previ-
ous support and resistance levels, how would you approach a trade
where—and again let’s use the dollar—we have a slew of positive
data, a good fundamental background, the U.S. dollar strength-
ening over the last several days, but approaching critical prior
resistance levels. At that level, even though the fundamental news
continues to be supportive, do you become more cautious because
of the technical barriers in front of you or do you simply stay in
there until proven otherwise?

A : Yeah, definitely I do become more cautious. I’m just a trader.
At the end of the day I just try to make money for myself. If
it gets to a critical technical area and I’ve made enough money,
maybe I'll stay out of the market for a while or lower my leverage.
I say to myself, I’m not sure here, I’m going to wait. I’ve already
made money coming into this. So let me just assess my personal
situation or my relevant situation around me and see what’s going
on. I may do something like that, which has nothing to do with
trading, but has to do with being and living as a trader. Let’s say
it’s Christmas time or Thanksgiving or something like that. You're

289


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

planning a trip, for the last five weeks you've made money, and
it’s around this resistance level. So you just close the trade, get
on an airplane, and take a week or two off. That’s the great thing
about being a trader. You can do things like that. So that’s how I'll
manage it.

Q : How about your short-term trades? Are they triggered off of
news events or are they triggered off of technical considerations?
What we mean by that is, you clearly monitor the news. You prob-
ably have a news feed. Ifnews comes out that’s dollar favorable, do
you simply jump on the bandwagon right away and try to see if you
could get a continuation move for 10 to 15 points off of that? Or do
you simply have your own technical triggers—when your moving
averages cross or whatever algorithm you're using—concur with
your bias and then you take the trade?

A : Yes, I'll trade off these numbers. For example, I'll look for
some type of news that adds to dollar strength. I may not trade if
the news is negative for the dollar for example. On the other hand,
if 1 come into the day and all the numbers have come out at 8:30 in
the morning, and there’s nothing else the rest of the day, you have
to adjust your game. Then I just look for technical areas where the
market kind of bounced back and forth. Then I'll try and go into
the direction of where I think the market’s going and I'll just be
patient.

Q.- interesting, So, in an environment where all news is already
been presented and the market retreats into more of technical
trading environment, you will then refocus your energies on tech-
nicals and look for opportune points of entry that are in sync with
your overall fundamental bias. In other words, if market bounces
but then starts to weaken again in a direction of your long-term
bias, that’s when you will use technical algorithms and you'll come
into the market, right?
