FOREX trading is conducted through individual contracts. The standard
contract size (also called a lot) is usually 100,000 units. This means that for
every standard contract you acquire, you are controlling 100,000 units of the
base currency. For this contract size, each pip (the smallest price increment)
is worth $10. Many companies offer mini accounts in which you can trade
units of 10,000, where the pip value is $1 or even smaller.
In comparison with other markets, trading the FOREX market allows
very low margin requirements because of leverage. In FOREX, you don’t
need to obligatorily buy a currency first in order to sell it later. It is possible to open positions for buying and selling any currency without actually
having it at hand: For a standard account size, usually Internet brokers
establish a minimum deposit such as $2000 for trading in the FOREX market and grant a leverage of 1:100. That is, opening the position at $100,000,
a trader invests $1000 and receives $99,000 as a credit.
For those wishing to get started at a smaller investment size, many brokers offer a mini account. The FOREX mini account offers smaller contract
sizes controlling $10,000 units. The usual account minimum to start a mini
account is about $250.
With a mini account, you only need $50 as a margin deposit requirement per every $10,000 lot traded. The leverage is usually 200:1 (10,000 ⫼
50 ⫽ 200), and in some cases it can rise to 400 or 500:1 (you then would
need even less margin to operate). Thus, with $250, you could trade a maximum of 5 minilots; with $500, a maximum of 10; with $1000, a maximum
of 20; etc.
This leverage is 50 times greater than for stocks (stock day trading provides a 4:1 intraday leverage for traders who have $25,000 or more in an
account by U.S. law). Using a high degree of leverage is not always appropriate because it can be very risky, but it provides the trader with a higher
degree of flexibility for the execution of different trading strategies.
Even further, now some brokers are offering a micro account. I personally would not recommend these because the leverage is really high, but a

CHAPTER 1

WHAT YOU MUST KNOW TO GET STARTED

5

micro account may be a good way to get your feet wet, so to speak, by trading real money before moving on to a more standard size account. Micro
accounts require as little as $25 to open and be able to control $1000 units.
The pip values, on average, are about $0.10 (10 cents).
You can always go to www.JamesDicks.com to see what brokers I use.
The FOREX is able to maintain its objectivity and avoid being controlled or manipulated by one or few of its participants because the volume
transacted is so high that if any of them would want to do so, by changing
prices at will, they would have to operate with tens of billions of dollars.
This is the reason why the FOREX can’t be influenced by any single participant, and even though there are situations where a huge transaction can
seem to take control of the market for a few moments, the balance is established again almost immediately because of the great liquidity involved.
This also allows traders to get a profit by opening and closing positions
within a few seconds.
The FOREX market is always moving. You can chose to maintain a
position for a very short time or for longer periods, even years; it will
depend only on your own trading strategies.
In the FOREX, it is possible to perform speculative activities without
the need for a real money supply. This is referred to as marginal trading.
The amount required as a guarantee for the transaction is low, thus providing an opportunity to open positions with a small account in U.S. dollars
(some local brokers also accept some of the main currencies, such as
the euro, pound sterling, Japanese yen, etc.) and buy or sell a lot of other
different currencies.
Transactions can be conducted very quickly and yield a profit while the
exchange rates go up or down. Marginal trading implies operating with
borrowed capital, where you need only a small percentage of the total sum
of the transaction.
For example, you have analyzed the situation in the market and have
come to the conclusion that the euro will go up against the dollar. You open
1 lot for buying the euro (EUR) with a margin of 1 percent (1:100 leverage)
at the price of 1.2750 dollars per euro (the margin needed will be $1275)
and wait for the exchange rate to go up. Sometime later, you see that your
analysis was right. You close the position at 1.2827 and earn 77 pips ($770).
Most currencies have a daily range of fluctuation of about 100 to 150
pips on average, some even more. This gives FOREX traders the opportunity to make money on these changes.
There are several tools that allow the trader to be able to understand
and make decisions on the market, grouped basically under fundamental or

6

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

technical analysis. There is a constant exchange of political and economic
information going on, and it is important to be informed on this because
this will have an impact on the overall behavior of the market and will show
market reaction as price changes. This is called fundamental analysis, an
overview on all this information and how it affects a particular country and
currency value. Fundamental analysis takes account of rumors, political
events, and the local and international economy, such as, for example, the
rates of inflation and unemployment, taxes, and interest rates. The political
stability of a particular country and unexpected events also have great
influence on the fluctuations of that country’s currency.
Sometimes, especially in the case of economic forecasts, this information can become a self-fulfilling prophecy in that a certain outcome is
expected, so the market reacts before the fact, thus starting a movement in
prices that can be seen as an early move, and if the forecast is confirmed,
the prices suddenly can start going in the opposite direction from the real
move because the predicted result has already occurred, and traders are
now closing their positions. This can lead to market reactions that seem
completely opposite to what the economic releases are implying for the
currency, although there are also many details that could be modifying the
outcome because all the currencies are moving in unison, and their
respective interaction will affect all the others. Thus the fundamental
details sometimes can be too big to grasp completely. Only the big banks
and financial institutions, which employ professional economic analysts,
can have access to a more precise and wide array of information with
timely accuracy.
Technical analysis affirms, on the contrary, that all this information is
already priced in and that the resulting reactions are visible on charts. It is
based essentially on prices, time, and volume: What are the lowest and
highest prices that a currency has reached in how much time or during what
period, and how many transactions were performed?
Technical analysis also assumes the repetitiveness of the market, which
it most probably will perform again in the future as it has already performed in the past. It analyzes past quotes and predicts the prices to come
based on statistical and mathematical calculations.
Both technical and fundamental analyses complement each other.
A professional trader should consider both sides at any moment because
some of the elements of each type of analysis will be present in the other.
For example, a fundamental trader will have to consider resistance and
supports, and a technical trader must be aware of the news that will have
an impact on price changes.

CHAPTER 1

WHAT YOU MUST KNOW TO GET STARTED

7

FOREX VERSUS STOCKS
What are the differences between trading in the FOREX and operating in
the stock market?
The FOREX market is always open. Like some supermarkets that are
open 24 hours, the FOREX is a “supermarket” of currencies,
open 24 hours a day, 5 days a week. The FOREX opens in most of
the brokers on Sunday at 3 to 5 p.m. Eastern Time (ET) and stays
open until Friday at 4 p.m. EST (it must be borne in mind that the
opening and closing—Sunday and Friday—may vary from broker
to broker). In this way, traders have the ability to operate either in
the American, Asian, or European markets, which gives them the
advantage of being able to react to certain events or news that is
bound to emerge and also gives them the opportunity to decide
their schedules.
No commission is charged. Most brokers do not charge additional
fees or commissions to buy or sell currencies, whether online or
by telephone. This is so because of the use of a fixed spread that
is consistent and transparent. The cost of a buy/sell in the FOREX
market is much lower than in any other market (e.g., stock,
futures, etc.). A side note to this is that because of the competition
for narrower spreads and faster executions, some brokers are
providing very tight spreads and extremely fast execution with
little latency. In order for them to do this, however, they are now
starting to charge commissions. The commissions vary, and with
a little due diligence, you will be able to find just the right broker.
Orders are executed instantly. In normal market conditions, the
execution of orders at a given price is done instantly. The trader
places the order at the quoted price, which is being updated in
real time. There is no difference between the price shown by the
broker and the price at which the purchase order is executed.
There are special conditions, though, in which market volatility is
such that orders can be delayed or requoted, but under normal
conditions, there are no such delays.
There are no restrictions on short selling. Unlike the stock market,
the FOREX has no restrictions to open sell positions (short). In the
FOREX, there is a chance to buy or sell regardless of whether the
market is bullish or bearish. Owing to the fact that in the FOREX
there is always someone buying a currency and selling another at

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

8

the same time, there is no structural bias in the market. A trader
can operate both upward and downward in the market.
What, then, is the relationship between the stock market and the
FOREX? The stock market serves as a key indicator for the FOREX market. Technology has facilitated the possibility of investing in markets other
than the local market/country, no matter their geographic location. Therefore, it has forged a relationship between the stock market and the currency
of the country like this: If the stock market is going upward, it increases the
investment in dollars, but in a market that is on the downside, investors tend
to sell shares of companies in that country, attempting to recover capital
and investing in another country.
Here’s a table showing the main advantages of the FOREX versus stocks:
Advantage

FOREX

Stocks

24-Hour market
No commissions
Instant execution
Short selling

Yes
Yes*
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No

*Some exceptions.

There are no intermediaries. Stock markets that tend to be centralized
have advantages for the operator. But a problem with this is the
need for an intermediary between the stock market and the trader.
However, FOREX intermediaries do not exist, and thus the trader
may buy or sell in the FOREX market without physical
intermediaries that can buy or sell a particular pair at the time that
they wish or think is appropriate. In the absence of an
intermediary, the trader gets higher profits at lower costs.
The market is not controlled for buys or sells. The stock market is
more susceptible to speculation based primarily on rumors of
buying or selling by other companies. I can see this when a big
company buys another relatively smaller company, and the value
of the company’s shares increase. But the stock market is also
likely to go down when you think that a company has been making
profits and that investors tend to take profits by selling the shares.
The analysts and firms are less influenced. The stock market is more
influenced by rumors of one company being bought by another.
This is why sometimes the firms or analysts can recommend a

CHAPTER 1

WHAT YOU MUST KNOW TO GET STARTED

9

purchase of a particular share when in fact such share will fall
based on rumors of a takeover of one company by another.
In the FOREX market, analysts just base their studies on the market
and are not influenced by rumors of purchase. This is a market
that generates billions of dollars a day for banks and certainly is
necessary for the success of global markets.
Four currencies against thousands of shares. In the FOREX market,
there are six major pairs, whereas in the stock market, there are
thousands of companies. So analyzing four key pairs is much
easier than analyzing thousands of companies. In the FOREX,
obviously there are more than a hundred pairs, but those that are
the most subject to transactions include only six major pairs.

FOREX VERSUS FUTURES
Is there a significant difference between trading futures and FOREX?
The FOREX operates at a higher volume, thus offering better
liquidity. As I have said, the FOREX is the market with more
volume, which already operates daily with highs peaking close to
US $6 trillion in turn over a day and an average near US $3
trillion a day in turn over. This market can absorb the volume of
that daily operation. The futures market, on the other hand,
operates with approximately US $30 billion a day. This is nothing
compared with US$3 trillion. This is why the futures market has
limited liquidity, whereas the FOREX market always has
complete liquidity, which tells us that sales or purchases can be
settled at any time or stop losses can jump without affecting the
market in volatile conditions. It must be said that the FOREX is
more than 45 times bigger than all the combined futures markets.
The FOREX is a 24-hour market. This is precisely the major
disadvantage of the futures market. The FOREX is a 24-hour
nonstop market, but the futures market is open only for 7 hours.
Therefore, FOREX traders have the ability to react to news that
arises elsewhere, whereas futures traders have to wait for the
opening of the daily meeting.
No commissions are involved. In the FOREX, the broker earns money
from the spreads that the broker provides. The intermediary is
eliminated, and the transactions are being done online through the
platform provided by the broker or by telephone. Logically, the

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

10

broker assumes the spread, which is the difference between the
bid and ask prices. In the futures market, on the other hand, a
certain commission has to be paid to the broker. Some brokers in
the FOREX are starting to charge commissions so that they can
provide the tightest spreads possible. It really is a preference, but
the bottom line is that the broker will make money somehow.
After all, that is why they are in the business.
The price is known, and the execution is instantaneous. In a FOREX
transaction, the price that the trader sees at the moment is the
price that he or she will get; orders are executed instantaneously
under normal market conditions. On the other hand, in the futures
market, the order is not executed immediately. Sometimes the
price does not reflect the current market price, but the price of
the final purchase price will not necessarily be the one at which
the trader is buying.
There is a guarantee of limited risk. In the FOREX, traders can limit
their risk of losses. The risk is minimized by the platform, which
automatically generates a margin call if the margin required
exceeds the available capital in your account. Futures losses are
always a possibility; a position can be closed with losses, and
therefore, you may have a deficit in your account and incur a debt.
Keep in mind that there is always a potential to lose money trading.
All the futures commission merchants (FCMs) will provide you
with disclaimers, which they are required by law to provide. I have
been trading in the FOREX for many years, and I have never had or
seen a negative account in the spot FOREX owing to a margin call.
The main advantages of the FOREX versus futures include the following:
Advantage

FOREX

Futures

24-Hour market
No commissions
Instant execution
Leverage to 400:1
Known price
Limited risk

Yes
Yes*
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
No
No

*Some exceptions.

C

H

2

A

P

T

E

R

MAJOR CURRENCIES
AND PAIRS
THE U.S. DOLLAR
The U.S. dollar (USD) is the base or quote currency with the following
FOREX major currency pairs: USD/JPY, USD/CAD, USD/CHF, EUR/USD,
GBP/USD, AUD/USD, and NZD/USD. Additionally, the USD is the base
currency and is paired with the following currencies: NOK, SEK, SGD,
DKK, CNY, MXN, BRL, ZAR, and other exotic currencies depending on
each broker’s availability.
The USD (also abbreviated $) is the official currency used in the
United States of America. It is considered the standard currency unit that is
used in commodity markets across the globe (especially gold and crude oil
markets). It also is currently the most employed reserve currency in the
world. This allows the country to hold trade deficits with other countries
without experiencing depreciation.
The volatility of the currency is usually low to medium. The economy
of the United States has the strongest influence on the rest of the world,
especially in the computer technology, medical, aerospace, and military
fields. It is principally market-oriented; thus corporations and private businesses lead in decision making.

11

12

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

THE EURO
The euro (or EUR) is the base or quote currency with the following FOREX
major and crossed-rate currency pairs: EUR/USD, EUR/JPY, EUR/GBP,
EUR/CHF, EUR/AUD, EUR/CAD, and EUR/NZD. Additionally, the EUR
is the base currency and is paired with the following currencies: NOK, SEK,
SGD, DKK, CNY, MXN, BRL, ZAR, and other exotic currencies depending on each broker’s availability.
The euro is the currency that is actually used in most member countries
of the European Union. It was created in 1999 and implemented in 2002
and represents the result of the most important monetary reform on the
entire continent. It was designed with the intent of rendering free trade easier between the members of the Euro zone, aiming at the same time for a
political integration. The EUR/USD currency pair is nicknamed “fiber,”
and this is said to come from the fact that the Euro zone comprises the
greatest optical fiber network in the world. Its market volatility used to be
low, but it has been seen to increase to medium in the recent months.
The European Central Bank (ECB) and the other central banks of every
member country manage the currency through the European System of
Central Banks (ESCB). The ECB is the only authority that has the power to
set monetary policy, whereas the issuing and distribution of notes and coins
are done by the other members of the ESCB. All the decisions and procedures among the members of the European Union are based on agreements
between its member countries. Adoption of the euro has allowed the Euro
zone to become the largest economy in the world. This actually makes it a
stronger currency than the U.S. dollar.

THE AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR
The Australian dollar (AUD) is the base or quote currency with the following FOREX major and crossed-rate currency pairs: AUD/USD, AUD/JPY,
AUD/CHF, AUD/NZD, EUR/AUD, GBP/AUD, and AUD/CAD. It is also
the base currency in some exotic pairs.
The AUD is the official currency of the Commonwealth of Australia. It
is also familiarly called the “Aussie,” which nickname also extends to the
AUD/USD currency pair. It is the sixth most traded currency in the FOREX
market and accounts for about 5 percent of worldwide foreign exchange
transactions. Its popularity stems from the almost inexistent intervention
of Australia’s government in the FOREX market, with the add benefit of

CHAPTER 2

MAJOR CURRENCIES AND PAIRS

13

Australia’s political and economic stability. The volatility it shows in the
markets is low.
Australia’s economy is based on domestic industrial production
(particularly of machinery and transportation equipment) and export of
raw materials (mostly from its huge mining activity) and products from
its agricultural sector.

THE CANADIAN DOLLAR
The Canadian dollar (CAD) is the base or quote currency with the following FOREX major and crossed-rate currency pairs: USD/CAD, CAD/JPY,
CAD/CHF, AUD/CAD, EUR/CAD, GBP/CAD, and NZD/CAD.
The CAD is the official currency of Canada. Coin and bill denominations are similar to those of the U.S. dollar. It is familiarly called the “loonie”
because of the image of a loon that appears on one of the faces of the coins,
and traders also use this nickname to designate the USD/CAD currency pair.
The volatility of the Canadian dollar in the FOREX market is low, although
it is heavily related to fluctuations in oil prices.
The economy of Canada is quite similar to that of the United States,
being market- and production-oriented, having evolved from a mostly rural
economy (before World War II), and now being principally urban and
industrial, with the increase in manufacturing, mining, and service sectors.
Its principal trading partner is the United States.

THE BRITISH POUND
The British pound sterling (GBP) is the base or quote currency with the
following FOREX major and crossed-rate currency pairs: GBP/USD,
GBP/JPY, EUR/GBP, GBP/CHF, GBP/AUD, GBP/CAD, and GBP/NZD.
Additionally, the GBP is the base currency paired with the following currencies: NOK, SEK, SGD, DKK, CNY, MXN, BRL, ZAR, and other exotic
currencies depending on each broker’s availability.
The GBP is the official currency used in the United Kingdom (Great
Britain). It is one of the world’s most widely traded currencies, along with
the U.S. dollar, the Japanese yen, the euro, and the Swiss franc. Additionally, it is the currency unit with the highest value among the “majors.” The
GBP/USD currency pair is familiarly called the “cable” in traders’ slang
because the rates originally were transmitted via a trans-Atlantic telegraph
cable. The market volatility of this currency is low to medium.

14

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

The economy of the United Kingdom is one of the largest in the world,
with a strong agriculture and mining industry. The services sector represents the main percentage of the gross domestic product, and tourism has
been developing strongly in recent years.

THE SWISS FRANC
The Swiss franc (CHF) is the base or quote currency with the following
FOREX major and crossed-rate currency pairs: USD/CHF, CHF/JPY,
GBP/CHF, EUR/CHF, CAD/CHF, AUD/CHF, and NZD/CHF.
The CHF is the official currency of Switzerland and Liechtenstein. The
currency is used by the Central Bank of Switzerland. The letters CHF stand
for “Confederatio Helvetica Franc.” The USD/CHF currency pair is familiarly referred to as the “Swissie” among FOREX traders. The volatility of
the Swiss franc in the FOREX market is usually low to moderate.
The CHF is a fairly stable currency, especially in its relationship to
the euro, with which it maintains a strong correlation. This causes the
EUR/USD and USD/CHF currency pairs to be the highest negatively correlated pairs, with a factor of more than 90 percent. Thanks to Switzerland’s
strong political and economic stability, the currency is used mostly as a
reserve currency by financial institutions and wealthy private individuals
throughout the world.
