
Download at www.wowebook.com

This page intentionally left blank

Download at www.wowebook.com

C H A P T E R

2

THE BASIC PRINCIPLE OF TECHNICAL
ANALYSIS—THE TREND

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter, you should be able to

• Define the term trend
• Explain why determining the trend is important to the technical analyst
• Distinguish between primary, secondary, short-term, and intraday trends
• Discuss some of the basic beliefs upon which technical analysis is built
The art of technical analysis—for it is an art—is to identify trend changes at an early
stage and to maintain an investment position until the weight of the evidence indicates that the trend has reversed. (Pring, 2002)
Technical analysis is based on one major assumption—trend. Markets trend. Traders and
investors hope to buy a security at the beginning of an uptrend at a low price, ride the trend, and
sell the security when the trend ends at a high price. Although this strategy sounds very simple,
implementing it is exceedingly complex.
For example, what length trend are we discussing? The trend in stock prices since the
Great Depression? The trend in gold prices since 1980? The trend in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average (DJIA) in the past year? Or, the trend in Merck stock during the past week? Trends exist
in all lengths, from long-term trends that occur over decades to short-term trends that occur from
minute to minute.
Trends of different lengths tend to have the same characteristics. In other words, a trend in
annual data will behave the same as a trend in five-minute data. Investors must choose which
trend is most important for them based on their investment objectives, their personal preferences,
and the amount of time they can devote to watching market prices. One investor might be more
concerned about the business cycle trend that occurs over several years. Another investor might

9

Download at www.wowebook.com

10

Part 1 Introduction

be more concerned about the trend over the next six months, while a third investor might be most
concerned about the intraday trend. Although individual investors and traders have investment
time horizons that vary greatly, they can use the same basic methods of analyzing trends because
of the commonalities that exist among trends of different lengths.
Trends are obvious in hindsight, but ideally, we would like to spot a new trend right at its
beginning, buy, then spot its end, and sell. However, this ideal never happens, except by luck.
The technical analyst always runs the risk of spotting the beginning of a trend too late and missing potential profit. The analyst who does not spot the ending of the trend holds the security past
the price peak and fails to capture all of the profits that were possible. On the other hand, if the
analyst thinks the trend has ended before it really has and sells the security prematurely, the analyst has then lost potential profits. Therefore, the technical analyst spends a lot of time and brainpower attempting to spot as early as possible when a trend is beginning and ending. This is the
reason for studying charts, moving averages, oscillators, support and resistance, and all the other
techniques we explore in this book.
The fact that market prices trend has been known for thousands of years. Specific records
are available from the eighteenth century in Japan. Academics have disputed that markets tend to
trend because if it were true, it would spoil their theoretical models. Recent academic work has
shown that the old financial models have many problems when applied to the behavior of real
markets. In Chapter 4, “The Technical Analysis Controversy,” we discuss some of the new academic findings about how market prices behave and some of the evidence against the old finance
theories. Academics and others traditionally have scorned technical analysis as if it were a cult;
as it turns out, however, the almost religious belief in the Efficient Markets Hypothesis has
become a cult itself, with adherents unwilling to accept the enormous amount of evidence
against it. In fact, technical analysis is very old, developed through practical experience with the
trading markets, and has resulted in some sizable fortunes for those following it.

HOW DOES THE TECHNICAL ANALYST MAKE MONEY?
Several requirements are needed to convert pure technical analysis into money. The first and
most important, of course, is to determine when a trend is beginning or ending. The money is
made by “jumping” on the trend as early as possible. Theoretically, this sounds simple, but profiting consistently is not so easy.
The indicators and measurements that technical analysts use to determine the trend are not
crystal balls that perfectly predict the future. Under certain market conditions, these tools might
not work. Also, a trend can suddenly change direction without warning. Thus, it is imperative
that the technical investor be aware of risks and protect against such occurrences causing losses.
From a strategic standpoint, then, the technical investor must decide two things: First, the
investor or trader must choose when to enter a position, and second, he or she must choose when
to exit a position. Choosing when to exit a position is composed of two decisions. The investor
must choose when to exit the position to capture a profit when price moves in the expected direction. The investor must also choose when to exit the position at a loss when price moves in the
opposite direction from what was expected. The wise investor is aware of the risk that the trend

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 2 The Basic Principle of Technical Analysis—The Trend

11

might differ from what he or she expected. Making the decision of what price level to sell and cut
losses before even entering into a position is a way in which the investor protects against large
losses.
One of the great advantages in technical analysis, because it studies prices, is that a price
point can be established at which the investor knows that something is wrong either with the
analysis or the financial asset’s price behavior. Risk of loss can therefore be determined and
quantified right at the beginning of the investment. This ability is not available to other methods
of investment. Finally, because actual risk can be determined, money management principles can
be applied that will lessen the chance of loss and the risk of what is called “ruin.”
In sum, the basic ways to make money using technical methods are
• “The trend is your friend”—Play the trend.
• Don’t lose—Control capital risk of loss.
• Manage your money—Avoid ruin.
Technical analysis is used to determine the trend, when it is changing, when it has changed, when
to enter a position, when to exit a position, and when the analysis is wrong and the position must
be closed. It’s as simple as that.

WHAT IS A TREND?
What exactly is this trend that the investor wants to ride to make money? A rising trend, or
uptrend, occurs when prices reach higher peaks and higher troughs. An uptrend looks something
like Chart A in Figure 2.1. A declining trend, or downtrend, is the opposite—when prices reach
lower troughs and lower peaks. Chart B in Figure 2.1 shows this downward trend in price. A
sideways or flat trend occurs when prices trade in a range without significant underlying
upward or downward movement. Chart C in Figure 2.1 is an example of a sideways trend; prices
move up and down but on average remain at the same level.
Figure 2.1 shows a theoretical example of an uptrend, downtrend, and sideways trend. But,
defining a trend in the price of real-world securities is not quite that simple. Price movement
does not follow a continuous, uninterrupted line. Small countertrend movements within a trend
can make the true trend difficult to identify at times. Also, remember that there are trends of differing lengths. Shorter-term trends are parts of longer-term trends.
From a technical analyst’s perspective, a trend is a directional movement of prices that
remains in effect long enough to be identified and still be playable. Anything less makes technical analysis useless. If a trend is not identified until it is over, we cannot make money from it. If
it is unrecognizable until too late, we cannot make money from it. In retrospect, looking at a
graph of prices, for example, many trends can be identified of varying length and magnitude, but
such observations are observations of history only. A trend must be recognized early and be long
enough for the technician to profit.

Download at www.wowebook.com

12

Part I Introduction

Higher
Peaks

Lower
Peaks

Lower
Troughs
Higher
Troughs

Chart B—Downtrend

Chart A—Uptrend

Horizontal Peaks

Horizontal Troughs

Chart C—Sideways Trend

FIGURE 2.1 The trend

HOW ARE TRENDS IDENTIFIED?
There are a number of ways to identify trends. One way to determine a trend in a data set is to run
a linear least-squares regression. This statistical process will provide information about the trend
in security prices. Unfortunately, this particular statistical technique is not of much use to the
technical analyst for trend analysis. The regression method is dependent on a sizable amount of
past price data for accurate results. By the time enough historical price data is accumulated, the

Download at www.wowebook.com

13

Chapter 2 The Basic Principle of Technical Analysis—The Trend

trend is likely beginning to change direction. Despite the tendency for trends to be persistent
enough to profit from, they never last forever.

BOX 2.1 LINEAR LEAST-SQUARES REGRESSION
Most spreadsheet software includes a formula for calculating a linear regression line.
It uses two sets of related variables and calculates the “best fit” between the data and
an imaginary straight (linear) line drawn through the data. In standard price analysis,
the two variable data sets are time and price—day d1 and price X1, day d2 and price
X2, and so forth. By fitting a line that best describes the data series, we can determine a number of things. First, we can measure the amount by which the actual data
varies from the line and, thus, the reliability of the line. Second, we can measure the
slope of the line to determine the rate of change in prices over time, and third, we can
determine when the line began. The line represents the trend in prices over the period
of time studied. It has many useful properties that we will look at later, but for now,
all we need to know is that the line defines the trend over the period studied. Appendix A, “Basic Statistics,” provides more detailed information about least squares
regression.

Many analysts use moving averages to smooth out the shorter and smaller trends within the
trend of interest and identify the longer trends. Chapter 13, “Breakouts, Stops, and Retracements,” discusses the use of moving averages.
Another method of identifying trends is to look at a graph of prices for extreme points,
tops, and bottoms, separated by reasonable time periods, and to draw lines between these
extreme points (see Figure 2.2). These lines are called trend lines. This traditional method is an
outgrowth of the time before computer graphic software when trend lines were hand drawn. It
still works, however. Using this method to define trends, you must define reversal points. Chapter 12, “Trends—The Basics,” covers several methods of determining reversal points, but most
such points are obvious on a graph of prices. By drawing lines between them, top to top and bottom to bottom, we get a “feeling” of price direction and limits. We also get a “feeling” of slope,
or the rate of change in prices. Trend lines can define limits to price action, which, if broken, can
warn that the trend might be changing.

Download at www.wowebook.com

14

Part I Introduction

17.00

16.00

15.00

14.00

13.00

12.00

11.00

10.00

CNET–CNET Networks

16,000,000
14,000,000

Volume

12,000,000
10,000,000
8,000,000
6,000,000
4,000,000

June

July

Aug.

Sept.

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

2006

Feb.

Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 2.2

Hand-drawn trend lines from top to top and bottom to bottom

TRENDS DEVELOP FROM SUPPLY AND DEMAND
As in all markets, whether used cars, grapefruit, real estate, or industrial products, the economic
principle of interaction between supply and demand determines prices in trading markets. Each
buyer (demand) bids for a certain quantity at a certain price, and each seller (supply) offers or
“asks” for a certain quantity at a certain price. When the buyer and seller agree and transact, they
establish a price for that instant in time. The reasons for buying and selling can be complex—
perhaps the seller needs the money, perhaps the seller has learned of unfavorable information,
perhaps the buyer heard a rumor in the golf club locker room—whatever the reason, the price is
established when all of this information is collected, digested, and acted upon through the bid
and offer.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 2 The Basic Principle of Technical Analysis—The Trend

15

Price, therefore, is the end result of all those inexact factors, and it is the result of the supply and demand at that instant in time. When prices change, the change is due to a change in
demand and/or supply. The seller might be more anxious; the buyer might have more money to
invest—whatever the reason, the price will change and reflect this change in supply or demand.
The technical analyst, therefore, watches price and price change and does not particularly worry
about the reasons, largely because they are indeterminable.
Remember that many players for many reasons determine supply and demand. In the trading markets, supply and demand may come from long-term investors accumulating or distributing a large position or from a small, short-term trader trying to scalp a few points. The number of
players and the number of different reasons for their participation in supply and demand is close
to infinite. Thus, the technical analyst believes it is futile to analyze the components of supply
and demand except through the prices it creates. Where economic information, company information, and other information affecting prices is often vague, late, or misplaced, prices are readily available, are extremely accurate, have historic records, and are specific. What better basis is
there for study than this important variable? Furthermore, when one invests or trades, the price is
what determines profit or loss, not corporate earnings nor Federal Reserve policy. The bottom
line, to the technical analyst, is that price is what determines success and, fortunately, for whatever reasons, prices tend to trend.

WHAT TRENDS ARE THERE?
The number of trend lengths is unlimited. Investors and traders need to determine which length
they are most interested in, but the methods of determining when a trend begins and ends are the
same regardless of length. This ability for trends to act similarly over different periods is called
the “fractal” nature of trends. Fractal patterns or trends exist in nature along shorelines, in
snowflakes, and elsewhere. For example, a snowflake is always six-sided, having six branches, if
you will. Each branch has a particular, unique pattern made of smaller branches. Using a microscope to look closely at the snowflake, we see that the smaller branches off each larger branch
have the same form as the larger branch. This same shape carries to even smaller and smaller
branches, each of which has the same pattern as the next larger. This is the fractal nature of
snowflakes. The branches, regardless of size, maintain the same pattern. Figure 2.3 shows a computer-generated fractal with each subangle an exact replica of the next larger angle.
The trading markets are similar in that any period we look at—long, medium, or very
short—produces trends with the same characteristics and patterns as each other. Thus, for analysis purposes, the length of the trend is irrelevant because the technical principles are applicable
to all of them. The trend length of interest is determined solely by the time horizon of the investor
or trader.
This is not to say that different trend lengths should be ignored. Because shorter trends
make up longer trends, any analysis of a trend of interest must include analysis of the longer and
shorter trends around it. For example, the trader interested in ten-week trends should also analyze trends longer than ten weeks because a longer trend will affect the shorter trend. Likewise, a
trend shorter than ten weeks should be analyzed because it will often give early signals of a

Download at www.wowebook.com

16

Part I Introduction

change in direction in the larger, ten-week trend. Thus, whatever trend the trader or investor
selects as the trend of interest, the trends of the next longer and next shorter periods should also
be analyzed.

Notice that each subangle is an exact
replica of its larger angle, progressing
from the overall design to the smallest
example within it.
Courtesy of Dr. J.C. Sprott (http://sprott.physics.wisc.edu/fractals.htm)

FIGURE 2.3 Example of computer-generated fractal

For identification purposes, technical analysts have divided trends into several broad, arbitrary categories. These are the primary trend (measured in months or years), the secondary or
intermediate trend (measured in weeks or months), the short-term trend (measured in days), and
the intraday trend (measured in minutes or hours). Except for the intraday trend, Charles H.
Dow, founder of the Dow Jones Company and the Wall Street Journal, first advanced this division in the nineteenth century. Charles Dow also was one of the first to identify technical means
of determining when the primary trend had reversed direction. Because of his major contributions to the field, Dow is known as the “Father” of technical analysis. We will look more closely
at Dow’s contributions in Chapter 3, “History of Technical Analysis,” as we study the history of
technical analysis, and in Chapter 6, “Dow Theory.”

Download at www.wowebook.com

17

Chapter 2 The Basic Principle of Technical Analysis—The Trend

WHAT OTHER ASSUMPTIONS DO TECHNICAL ANALYSTS MAKE?
That markets trend is the basic principle underlying the theory of technical analysis. Of course, it
is the price of the securities that are being monitored that form the trend. Supporting this notion
of trending prices, technical analysts have made several other assumptions that we cover briefly.
First, technical analysts assume that price is determined by the interaction of supply and
demand. As basic economic theory teaches, when demand increases, price goes up, and when
demand decreases, price goes down. One of the factors that determine supply and demand is
buyer and seller expectations. (You do not buy a stock unless you expect it to rise in price.)
Expectations result from human decisions, and decisions are based on information (perceived,
accurate, or otherwise), emotions (greed, fear, and hope), and cognitive limitations such as
behavioral biases, emotions and feelings that originate from the chemistry and electrical connections within our brains. A new field of study called “neurofinance,” an interdisciplinary study of
the application of neuroscience to investment activity, is finding remarkable connections
between how our brain functions and how we invest.
Second, technical analysts assume that price discounts everything. Price discounts all
information, related to the security or otherwise, as well the interpretation of expectations
derived from that information. This concept was first articulated by Charles H. Dow, later reemphasized by William Peter Hamilton in his Wall Street Journal editorials, and succinctly
described by Robert Rhea (1932), a prominent Dow Theorist, when writing about stock market
averages:
The Averages discount everything: The fluctuations of the daily closing prices of the
Dow-Jones rail and industrial averages afford a composition index of all the hopes,
disappointments, and knowledge of everyone who knows anything of financial matters, and for that reason the effects of coming events (excluding acts of God) are
always properly anticipated in their movement. The averages quickly appraise such
calamities as fires and earthquakes.
This sounds a little like Eugene Fama’s (1970) famous statement related to the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis (EMH) that “prices fully reflect all available information.” However, Fama was referring more to information on the specific security and was presuming that all interpretation of that
information was immediately and rationally interpreted. Although technical assumptions include
the price discount assumption of EMH adherents, they go far beyond that simplicity. They
include not only information, both about the security and about all other outside factors that
might influence that security price, but also the interpretation of that information, which might or
might not be rational or directly related, and the expectations derived from that information.
Interpretation, according to technical analysis, is subject to “irrational exuberance” and will
“drive men to excess” as well as to a “corresponding depression” (Hamilton, 1922).

Download at www.wowebook.com

18

Part I Introduction

BOX 2.2 PROFESSOR ANDREW LO’S ADAPTIVE MARKETS HYPOTHESIS
In an attempt to reconcile the existing but different finance ideas of efficient markets
and behavioral finance, Dr. Lo has proposed the “Adaptive Markets Hypothesis”
(2005). Lo proposes a framework based upon the principles of evolution, competition, adaptation, and natural selection in which markets and players change over
time. The risk-reward relationship is not constant, but changes with market conditions. Thus, investors do not seek to optimize their returns because to do so is too
costly. Decisions instead are made based on experience and “best guesses,” leaving
them subject to interpretative and behavioral bias—namely emotions. As long as the
markets are stable, these methods provide satisfactory results. When the economic
environment changes, however, and the methods fail, the investors then have to adapt
to survive. The size and strength of the different interacting player groups can cause
this environmental change. An example is when the bondholders, during the 1998
Russian government debt default, sought liquidity and upset the investors in previously stable interest rate spreads, leaving them with failing and illiquid positions.
Those who could rapidly adapt survived. Those who could not, failed. In sum,
investment strategies change and evolve; innovation is the secret of survival; and survival is the goal rather than maximizing the utility of risk versus return.
