
Chapter 6

Understanding and Applying Market News
and Information
In This Chapter
Getting up to speed on market developments
Finding the news, information, and data
Making sense of it all with themes
Anticipating data and market reactions
As Roseanne Roseannadanna used to say, “It just goes to show you. It’s always something. If it’s
not one thing, it’s another.” Okay, maybe I’m dating myself with a reference to the classic
Saturday Night Live “Weekend Update” commentator, played by Gilda Radner way back in the
1970s, but her tagline fits the forex market nicely.
Any number of real-world forces are at work in the forex market at a given moment — economic
data, interest rate decisions, and geopolitical events, to name just a few. And they all get filtered
through the market’s collective consciousness and translated into price movements.
As currency traders, we’re focused on trying to make money based on those price movements, but
we’re not alone. A whole raft of participants is active in the currency market, and they’re all
analyzing the same news and data, and drawing differing conclusions. To add yet another
dimension, they’re making trades based on those conclusions, which is what ultimately moves
currency prices.
Which brings me back to the observation: If it’s not one thing, it’s another. The “other” in this case
boils down to how markets process information — and there’s a lot of it. I’ve spent over 20 years
in the Forex market as a trader, analyst, and strategist, and just when I think I’ve seen it all,
something new and unexpected comes along. So you’re not alone when it comes to having to sift
through the mountain of information and make trading decisions.
Your aim is to avoid paralysis by analysis and to absorb and understand as much as you can about
what’s driving the market, all with the goal of making successful currency trades. My aim is to
give you a better understanding of the types of information that move the market and a solid
foundation to interpret and apply that information.

Sourcing Market Information
The jumping-off point for the discussion of market information has to be getting the market
information in the first place. Institutional traders have teams of economists, analysts, and
strategists providing them with up-to-the-minute observations and interpretations. Does this give
them an advantage? Not necessarily. In the big picture, most of the information they’re getting is
available to individual traders, but you have to make the effort to find it, read it, and understand it.

The art of boarding a moving train
Anyone who’s ever tried to jump on a moving train knows you have to start running alongside it
before you reach out and try to grab hold. If you’re standing flat-footed and you try to grab on,
you’re likely to get your arm ripped off. The forex market is no different, and any trader who tries
to jump in without first getting up to speed is asking for trouble.
Getting up to speed in the forex market means learning what current themes are driving the market.
To do that, you’re going to need to know where to find market information and how to interpret it.

But getting up to speed takes time, so don’t be in a rush to start trading based on a few days
or hours of research. I recommend spending a month following the various currency pairs and
familiarizing yourself with what’s going on before you consider yourself up to speed. Using a
practice account at an online forex broker is a great way to get up to speed. Over the course
of a month, you’ll be exposed to a full cycle of economic data indicators and most market
events, like central bank meetings, which will give you a firsthand sense of how the market
behaves and adjusts to new information.

Part of the excitement of currency trading is that there’s always something going on — a
train is leaving the station every few minutes. So don’t worry about missing the next train,
because there’s always another one right behind it.

Taking the pulse of the market
As online currency trading has grown in popularity in recent years, there’s been a proliferation of
currency-specific websites targeted at individual traders. We can’t possibly begin to review them
all here, but you’d do well to start out with FXstreet.com (www.fxstreet.com), a comprehensive
site featuring diverse sources of market analysis, many from big-name institutional contributors,
all for free.

When you’re looking at forex research from various information sources, be mindful of who
is providing the analysis. If you don’t know the identities or backgrounds of the analysts, you
may be reading the work of someone with just a few months or a year of market experience
— not exactly the most sophisticated insight. When in doubt, focus on the reports made
available by major financial institutions.
Most online currency trading platforms also offer various types of market research and analysis,
so when you’re deciding which broker you should open your account with, look at the quality (not
to be confused with quantity) of its research offerings.

News sources
I tend to focus on the mainstream financial press, which provides continuous coverage of the major
financial markets. Their websites provide frequent intraday updates that cover data releases and
announcements, usually with some institutional commentary as well, so you can better understand
how and why the market is reacting. In alphabetical order, my favorites are
Bloomberg (www.bloomberg.com)
MarketWatch.com (www.marketwatch.com)
Reuters (www.reuters.com)

When you’re reading a market news report, always use a critical eye. Keep in mind that
what’s being reported has already happened, and the market has digested the information and
adjusted prices accordingly.
When interpreting news and information always ask yourself:
What is the source of the information? You need to differentiate fact from opinion or
rumor.
How old is the information? You need to gauge the timeliness of the information and the
extent to which the market has already acted on it.

Real-time market news sources
The forex market moves on news quickly, and the institutional players generally have multiple live
feeds from the major accredited newswires, such as Dow Jones, Bloomberg, and Reuters.
Individuals can get real-time news, especially data releases, from the financial TV networks, such
as Bloomberg TV, CNBC, and Fox Business News.

At FOREX.com, we provide a real-time market commentary (known as Forex Insider)
directly on our trading platform. The updates are provided by our research team and senior
traders based on our years of experience trading in the interbank forex market. Forex Insider
offers instant analysis of data releases and other news events, as well as short-term tactical
trading considerations such as institutional buying and selling flows, currency option interest,
and technical support and resistance levels. I think it’s a great resource for individual traders
and about as close as you can get to the institutional market.
Social networks like Facebook and Twitter are also being used by online forex brokerages to
distribute news and research. Also, check to see which brokerages offer access to their trading
platforms from mobile devices and messaging services or apps for iPhone/iPad and Android.
They’re a great way to keep up on the market when you’re not in front of your computer.

Economic data and event calendars
The forex market revolves around economic data and events, and you’re going to need to find a
reliable market calendar to see what’s coming down the road next. The best market calendars
contain all the major upcoming economic releases, showing the time of the report, what the market
is forecasting, and the prior report indicated.

Perhaps even more important than data reports are economic events like central bank ratesetting meetings, the release of the minutes of those meetings, speeches by central bankers,
and important meetings such as monthly gatherings of Eurozone finance ministers. Comments
from these events frequently move the market in the short term, and if you’re not aware of
them, you risk getting blindsided.
Later in this chapter, I look at how markets anticipate data and events, and how this anticipation
can affect currency prices. But you can’t anticipate if you don’t know what’s scheduled.

Currency forecasts
Most of the financial media are keen on institutional forecasts of where currency rates are headed,
and you’ll likely encounter a lot of one-month, quarterly, and year-ahead currency-rate forecasts in
your market research. However, treat these as an indication of overall market sentiment and
outlook instead of as a concrete trading recommendation. Most forecasts are heavily skewed to
current circumstances and are a much better guide to what the market is thinking at the moment than
to where rates will actually be in a month or a year.

Rumors: Where there’s smoke, there’s fire

As if there weren’t enough legitimate news and information to contend with in the 24-hour-a-day
forex market, rumors have the nasty habit of popping up at unpredictable times. All financial
markets love rumors. Here is a pair of the forex market’s favorites:
Whisper numbers: These are rumors of economic data anywhere from a few minutes to a
few hours before the scheduled release time. They tend to roil short-term positions opened
in anticipation of a report, and they also influence the market’s subsequent reaction to the
report. For example, a whisper number suggesting a much-worse-than-expected U.S. data
report, which was originally forecast to be weak anyway, may see the USD come under
more intense pressure prior to the release time. When the real number comes out, and it’s
weak but in line with forecasts, and not as weak as the whisper number, the USD may
actually rebound because the worst fears were not realized.
Large market orders: These are rumors that frequently do hold water, but like everything
else, not always. They’re typically associated with central banks or large institutional
players buying or selling, and they usually mention a price level. Pay attention to the price
level as a potential source of support or resistance. If the price level is broken, the order
either wasn’t real or has been filled. Either way, the price level has given way, potentially
triggering a further directional move.

The trouble with rumors is that you have no easy way to determine whether they’re true, and
even if you can, you have no way of being certain of the price reaction, which is ultimately
the key to dealing with rumors. Rumors have the uncanny habit of coming out after relatively
extensive directional moves or attempts to break through important technical levels, attempts
that subsequently fail and see prices reverse direction.
The key is to be aware that an intraday move or test of a technical level is under way and to have a
relatively tight exit strategy if the market turns tail. If there is a rumor behind a sudden reversal,
you’ll usually find out only after the fact anyway, but a tight exit plan will save you from getting
left behind in the reversal.

Putting Market Information into Perspective:
Focusing on Themes
At any given moment in the forex market, several themes dominate the market’s attention. Market
themes are the essence of the real-world forces currently holding sway in the market. Themes are
what market commentators and analysts are talking about when they explain what’s happening in
the market. But most important, themes are the filters through which new information and data are
absorbed by the market.

Market themes come in all shapes and sizes, and have differing impacts on the market over time.
Some are long-term themes that can color the market’s direction for months and years, such as the
persistent U.S. trade deficit. Others may hold sway for only a few hours, days, or weeks, such as
unexpectedly hawkish comments from a central banker.
Market themes come in two main forms that coexist in parallel universes but that also frequently
overlap. The two types of themes that I like to focus on are fundamental themes and technical
themes.

Driving fundamental themes
Each currency has its own set of fundamental circumstances in which it’s being evaluated by the
market. The basic fundamental environment is ever-present, but it’s also subject to change over
time, just as economic conditions will change in the course of business cycles. Fundamental
themes will also shift in relative importance to one another, with certain themes being pushed to
the side for a period when news or events focuses the market’s attention on other, more pressing
themes.
As you read the following sections, keep in mind that each theme applies to each and every
currency but in varying degrees at any given moment. I include some examples of what’s likely to
happen to a currency based on what incoming information means for each theme; I go into more
detail on how the market processes fresh data at the end of this chapter.

Rising or falling interest rates
Interest rates are usually the single most important determinant of a currency’s value. (I go
into greater detail on the significance of monetary policy and interest rates in Chapter 5.) But
it’s not just about where interest rate levels are now, though that’s still important (higher
interest rate currencies tend to do better against lower-yielding currencies). What matters
most is their overall direction (whether they’re going up or down), their future level (how
high or low they’re likely to go), and the timing of any changes (how fast rates are likely to
change).
Markets are constantly speculating about the direction of interest rates, even though interest rate
changes are relatively infrequent. Speculation over the direction and timing of interest rate changes
is one of the primary drivers of a currency’s value on a daily basis as well as over longer time
frames.
The information inputs that drive the interest rate outlook are centered on economic growth data
and inflation reports, which I cover in detail in Chapter 7. The stronger the growth picture is, or
the higher inflation pressures are, the more likely interest rates are to move higher, normally
improving a currency’s outlook. The weaker the growth outlook or the lower the inflation

readings, the more likely interest rates are to remain steady or move lower, typically hurting a
currency in the process.

Bond markets also have a lot to say about the direction of interest rates and are the best
real-time barometer of the market’s interest rate expectations. Central banks can really only
influence short-term interest rates, which are driven by the central bank’s target interest rate.
But longer-term bond yields, with the ten-year maturity as the benchmark, reflect the market’s
long-term view of an economy’s outlook and the direction of likely future interest rate moves.
Falling bond yields (lower interest rates) point to a weaker economic outlook and the
probability of lower interest rates ahead, typically denting that currency, while higher bond
yields point to economic optimism and likely higher rates, usually supporting that currency.

The effect of interest rate themes is most powerful when the interest rates of two currencies
are seen to be diverging — when one currency’s interest rate is expected to move higher and
the other lower. Keep an eye on the three-month yield spreads — the difference between
yields of two government bonds — for relative changes that can favor one currency over
another. Rates don’t necessarily have to diverge to affect currencies. One currency’s yields
may simply move higher faster than another, and the widening spread between the two will
reveal this.

When you’re looking at economic data or monetary policy rhetoric, always assess the
incoming information first in terms of what it means for the interest rates of the nation’s
currency — the interest rate theme. A currency that is expected to see lower rates in the near
future, for example, is likely to stop declining and may even rebound if an economic growth
report or an inflation reading comes in higher than expected. The market will pause to
consider whether its outlook for lower rates is correct. By the same token, a currency facing
the prospect of lower interest rates ahead, when hit with weaker economic data or lower
inflation readings, is likely to weaken further. I say “weaken further” because it was probably
already under pressure and moving lower before the latest batch of data hit the market.

Looking for growth
Economic growth prospects are the linchpin to a host of currency value determinants, from the
interest rate outlook to the attractiveness of a nation’s investment climate (stocks and bonds). Not
surprisingly, the stronger the outlook for growth, the better a particular currency is likely to
perform relative to currencies of countries with weaker growth outlooks. Strong economic growth
increases the likelihood of higher interest rates down the road, as central bank officials typically
seek to restrain too rapid growth to head off inflationary pressures. Weaker growth data increases
the prospect of potentially lower interest rates, as well as dampening the outlook for the
investment environment.

Many growth data reports reflect only a particular sector of a nation’s larger economy, such
as the manufacturing sector or the housing market. Depending on how significant that sector is
to the larger national economy, those reports will tend to be interpreted as correspondingly
more or less significant. Industrial production data in Japan, for example, is more significant
to the Japanese outlook than it is to the U.S. outlook because of the more prominent role
manufacturing plays in Japan.

There’s no set recipe for how growth data will impact a currency’s value, but when the
interest rate outlook is generally neutral, as in no solid conviction on the direction of two
countries’ rates, the growth theme becomes more important.

Fighting inflation
Inflation is the bogeyman that all central bankers have nightmares about. Even when inflation is
low, they still worry about it — it’s just part of the job. When inflation is running too high for their
comfort, fuhgeddaboutit. As a currency trader attuned to monetary policy developments, you need
to monitor inflation readings as well. (I look at the key inflation reports in greater detail in Chapter
7.)

The inflation theme is far more nuanced than the growth theme in what it implies for a
currency’s value. Depending on the bigger picture, it can produce starkly different outcomes
for a currency. In general, if growth is good, and inflation is too high, it’s a currency plus. If
growth is low or weakening, and inflation is too high, it’s a currency negative. Come again?
Both scenarios point to steady-to-higher interest rates, which should typically be a currency
plus, right? The rub is that the low-/slow-growth scenario coupled with high/higher interest
rates increases the risks of an economy dropping into recession, which would ultimately
result in interest rate cuts farther down the road. In this sense, currencies are a bit fickle in
that they like higher interest rates some of the time, but not all of the time.
The same phenomenon can happen when a central bank holds rates too high for too long, usually
based on fighting inflation, and the market begins to speculate that an economic downturn is ahead.
The response is actually not that bizarre if you consider that the forex market is, first and foremost,
always anticipating future interest rates.

When factoring inflation data into the interest rate theme, be aware of how the overall
growth theme is holding up. If growth is good, and inflation is high because of economic
strength, higher inflation readings will be currency supportive. If growth is slowing, and
inflation is still too high, the currency impact will be decidedly less positive and very likely
downright negative.

Seeking stability
The Great Financial Crisis of 2008–2009 (GFC) exposed financial stability as another
overarching theme. In the initial phases of the crisis, the financial sector (banks and insurers) was
shaken to its core and required massive government intervention to prevent a system-wide failure.
The subsequent economic downturn later exposed excessive government debt levels and budget
deficits as a threat to sovereign debt and economic growth. The road to recovery in the developed
economies remains a tough haul, and government debt levels and the risk of a sovereign default
may continue as a theme for years to come.

Whether it’s high debt levels in Europe or quantitative easing in the United States, financial
stability and perceptions of creditworthiness can exert a significant impact on national
currencies, usually for the worse. Keep an eye on government bond yields as an indication of
market fears. Higher yields may mean investors are selling a country’s bonds over fears of a
default and not because of positive growth expectations. If so, the currency of the at-risk
country is going to suffer alongside its bonds. (See Chapter 5 for more on this topic.)

Gauging the strength of structural themes
Beyond interest rates, growth, inflation and, stability, several other prominent themes regularly
assert themselves, mostly in the structural sphere (the big-picture elements of how an economy is
performing).
Structural themes can be fleeting — they can be in full force one day or for several weeks or
months and then drop from the radar screen altogether. These themes are also usually secondary to
those I outline in the preceding sections (interest rates, growth, inflation, and stability), but
structural themes can still exert significant influence on a currency on their own. Most important,
they can amplify the impact of the primary themes, like throwing gas on a fire. Following are
frequently recurring structural themes:
Employment: Employment is the key to an economy’s long-run performance and a
primary driver of interest rates. As long as employment is rising, the longer-term
economic outlook is supported. But if job growth begins to falter, as reflected in incoming
labor market reports, economic prospects will tend to be marked down. Sharp increases
in unemployment are among the fastest triggers to interest rate cuts by central bankers,
going back to the primary interest rate theme.
Deficits: Both fiscal and trade deficits are typically currency negatives. During times of
low/slow growth, the impact of deficits can be magnified, as the very credibility of a
currency can be questioned, as was recently the case with the euro. During times of
steady/high growth, deficits may have less impact but are still a negative hanging over the
