E
L
T
BOO
T
I
L
E
K
H
T
of

COMMON SENSE

INVESTING
The Only Way to Guarantee Your
Fair Share of Stock Market Returns

JOHN C. BOGLE
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

TLE BOO
T
I
L
E
K
TH

of
COMMON SENSE

INVESTING

Little Book Big Profits Series
In the Little Book Big Profits series, the brightest icons in the financial world write on topics that range from tried-and-true investment
strategies we’ve come to appreciate to tomorrow’s new trends.
Books in the Little Book Big Profits series include:
The Little Book That Beats the Market, where Joel Greenblatt,
founder and managing partner at Gotham Capital, reveals a
“magic formula” that is easy to use and makes buying good companies at bargain prices automatic, giving you the opportunity to
beat the market and professional managers by a wide margin.
The Little Book of Value Investing, where Christopher Browne,
managing director of Tweedy, Browne Company, LLC, the oldest
value investing firm on Wall Street, simply and succinctly explains
how value investing, one of the most effective investment strategies
ever created, works, and shows you how it can be applied globally.
The Little Book of Common Sense Investing, where Vanguard
Group founder John C. Bogle shares his own time-tested philosophies, lessons, and personal anecdotes to explain why outperforming the market is an investor illusion, and how the simplest of
investment strategies—indexing—can deliver the greatest return to
the greatest number of investors.

E
L
T
BOO
T
I
L
E
K
H
T
of

COMMON SENSE

INVESTING
The Only Way to Guarantee Your
Fair Share of Stock Market Returns

JOHN C. BOGLE
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2007 by John C. Bogle. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
Wiley Bicentennial Logo: Richard J. Pacifico
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978)
646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site
at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Bogle, John C.
The little book of common sense investing : the only way to guarantee
your fair share of stock market returns / John C. Bogle.
p. cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-470-10210-7 (cloth)
ISBN-10: 0-470-10210-1 (cloth)
1. Index mutual funds. I. Title.
HG4530.B635 2007
332.63'27—dc22
2006037552
Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Paul A. Samuelson, professor of economics
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Nobel Laureate, investment sage.
In 1948 when I was a student at Princeton
University, his classic textbook introduced me
to economics. In 1974, his writings reignited my
interest in market indexing as an investment strategy.
In 1976, his Newsweek column applauded my creation of the world’s first index mutual fund. In
1993, he wrote the foreword to my first book, and
in 1999 he provided a powerful endorsement for my
second. Now in his ninety-second year, he remains
my mentor, my inspiration, my shining light.

Contents

Introduction

xi

Chapter One
A Parable

1

Chapter Two
Rational Exuberance

9

Chapter Three
Cast Your Lot with Business

23

Chapter Four
How Most Investors Turn a Winner’s Game
into a Loser’s Game

35

[VIII]

C O N T E N TS

Chapter Five
The Grand Illusion

49

Chapter Six
Taxes Are Costs, Too

60

Chapter Seven
When the Good Times No Longer Roll

68

Chapter Eight
Selecting Long-Term Winners

78

Chapter Nine
Yesterday’s Winners, Tomorrow’s Losers

89

Chapter Ten
Seeking Advice to Select Funds?

100

Chapter Eleven
Focus on the Lowest-Cost Funds

113

Chapter Twelve
Profit from the Majesty of Simplicity

122

C O N T E N TS

[IX]

Chapter Thirteen
Bond Funds and Money Market Funds

138

Chapter Fourteen
Index Funds That Promise to Beat
the Market

152

Chapter Fifteen
The Exchange Traded Fund

164

Chapter Sixteen
What Would Benjamin Graham Have
Thought about Indexing?

176

Chapter Seventeen
“The Relentless Rules of Humble Arithmetic” 187

Chapter Eighteen
What Should I Do Now?

200

Acknowledgments

215

Introduction


Don’t Allow a Winner’s Game
to Become a Loser’s Game.

SUCCESSFUL INVESTING IS ALL about common sense.
As the Oracle has said, it is simple, but it is not easy.
Simple arithmetic suggests, and history confirms, that the
winning strategy is to own all of the nation’s publicly held
businesses at very low cost. By doing so you are guaranteed to capture almost the entire return that they generate in the form of dividends and earnings growth.
The best way to implement this strategy is indeed simple: Buying a fund that holds this market portfolio, and holding it forever. Such a fund is called an index fund. The index
fund is simply a basket (portfolio) that holds many, many
eggs (stocks) designed to mimic the overall performance of

[XII]

INTRODUCTION

any financial market or market sector.* Classic index funds,
by definition, basically represent the entire stock market basket, not just a few scattered eggs. Such funds eliminate the
risk of individual stocks, the risk of market sectors, and
the risk of manager selection, with only stock market risk remaining (which is quite large enough, thank you). Index
funds make up for their short-term lack of excitement by
their truly exciting long-term productivity.

Index funds eliminate the risks of
individual stocks, market sectors, and manager
selection. Only stock market risk remains.

This is much more than a book about index funds. It is a
book that is determined to change the very way that you
think about investing. For when you understand how our
financial markets actually work, you will see that the
index fund is indeed the only investment that guarantees
you will capture your fair share of the returns that business earns. Thanks to the miracle of compounding, the
* Keep in mind that an index may also be constructed around bonds and the
bond market, or even “road less traveled” asset classes such as commodities
or real estate. Today, if you wish, you could literally hold all your wealth in
a diversified set of index funds representing asset classes within the United
States or the global economy.

INTRODUCTION

[XIII]

accumulations of wealth over the years generated by those
returns have been little short of fantastic.
I’m speaking here about the classic index fund, one
that is broadly diversified, holding all (or almost all) of its
share of the $15 trillion capitalization of the U.S. stock
market, operating with minimal expenses and without advisory fees, with tiny portfolio turnover, and with high tax
efficiency. The index fund simply owns corporate America, buying an interest in each stock in the stock market
in proportion to its market capitalization and then holding
it forever.
Please don’t underestimate the power of compounding
the generous returns earned by our businesses. Over the
past century, our corporations have earned a return on their
capital of 9.5 percent per year. Compounded at that rate
over a decade, each $1 initially invested grows to $2.48;
over two decades, $6.14; over three decades, $15.22; over
four decades, $37.72, and over five decades, $93.48.* The
magic of compounding is little short of a miracle. Simply
put, thanks to the growth, productivity, resourcefulness,
and innovation of our corporations, capitalism creates
* These accumulations are measured in nominal dollars, with no adjustment
for the long-term decline in their buying power, averaging about 3 percent
a year since the twentieth century began. If we use real (inflation-adjusted)
dollars, the return drops from 9.5 percent to 6.5 percent. As a result, the
accumulations of an initial investment of $1 would be $1.88, $3.52, $6.61,
$12.42, and $23.31 for the respective periods.

[XIV]

INTRODUCTION

wealth, a positive-sum game for its owners. Investing in equities is a winner’s game.
The returns earned by business are ultimately translated into the returns earned by the stock market. I have
no way of knowing what share of these returns you have
earned in the past. But academic studies suggest that if
you are a typical investor in individual stocks, your returns have probably lagged the market by about 2.5 percentage points per year. Applying that figure to the
annual return of 12 percent earned over the past 25
years by the Standard & Poor’s 500 Stock Index, your
annual return has been less than 10 percent. Result:
your slice of the market pie, as it were, has been less
than 80 percent. In addition, as explained in Chapter 5,
if you are a typical investor in mutual funds, you’ve
done even worse.
If you don’t believe that is what most investors experience, please think for a moment, about the relentless
rules of humble arithmetic. These iron rules define the
game. As investors, all of us as a group earn the stock
market’s return. As a group—I hope you’re sitting down
for this astonishing revelation—we are average. Each
extra return that one of us earns means that another of
our fellow investors suffers a return shortfall of precisely
the same dimension. Before the deduction of the costs of
investing, beating the stock market is a zero-sum game.

INTRODUCTION

[XV]

But the costs of playing the investment game both
reduce the gains of the winners and increases the
losses of the losers. So who wins? You know who wins.
The man in the middle (actually, the men and women
in the middle, the brokers, the investment bankers, the
money managers, the marketers, the lawyers, the accountants, the operations departments of our financial
system) is the only sure winner in the game of investing. Our financial croupiers always win. In the casino,
the house always wins. In horse racing, the track always wins. In the powerball lottery, the state always
wins. Investing is no different. After the deduction of
the costs of investing, beating the stock market is a
loser’s game.
Yes, after the costs of financial intermediation—all
those brokerage commissions, portfolio transaction
costs, and fund operating expenses; all those investment
management fees; all those advertising dollars and all
those marketing schemes; and all those legal costs and
custodial fees that we pay, day after day and year after
year—beating the market is inevitably a game for losers.
No matter how many books are published and promoted
purporting to show how easy it is to win, investors fall
short. Indeed, when we add the costs of these self-help
investment books into the equation, it becomes even
more of a loser’s game.

[XVI]

INTRODUCTION


Don’t allow a winner’s game
to become a loser’s game.

The wonderful magic of compounding returns that is
reflected in the long-term productivity of American business, then, is translated into equally wonderful returns in
the stock market. But those returns are overwhelmed by
the powerful tyranny of compounding the costs of investing. For those who choose to play the game, the odds in
favor of the successful achievement of superior returns
are terrible. Simply playing the game consigns the average investor to a woeful shortfall to the returns generated
by the stock market over the long term.
Most investors in stocks think that they can avoid
the pitfalls of investing by due diligence and knowledge,
trading stocks with alacrity to stay one step ahead of the
game. But while the investors who trade the least have a
fighting chance of capturing the market’s return, those
who trade the most are doomed to failure. An academic
study showed that the most active one-fifth of all stock
traders turned their portfolios over at the rate of more
than 21 percent per month. While they earned the market return of 17.9 percent per year during the period
1990 to 1996, they incurred trading costs of about 6.5
percent, leaving them with an annual return of but 11.4

INTRODUCTION

[XVII]

percent, only two-thirds of the return in that strong
market upsurge.

Fund investors are confident that they can easily
select superior fund managers. They are wrong.

Mutual fund investors, too, have inflated ideas of
their own omniscience. They pick funds based on the recent performance superiority of fund managers, or even
their long-term superiority, and hire advisers to help them
do the same thing. But, the advisers do it with even less
success (see Chapters 8, 9, and 10). Oblivious of the toll
taken by costs, fund investors willingly pay heavy sales
loads and incur excessive fund fees and expenses, and are
unknowingly subjected to the substantial but hidden
transaction costs incurred by funds as a result of their hyperactive portfolio turnover. Fund investors are confident
that they can easily select superior fund managers. They
are wrong.
Contrarily, for those who invest and then drop out of
the game and never pay a single unnecessary cost, the odds
in favor of success are awesome. Why? Simply because they
own businesses, and businesses as a group earn substantial
returns on their capital and pay out dividends to their owners. Yes, many individual companies fail. Firms with flawed
ideas and rigid strategies and weak managements ultimately

[XVIII]

INTRODUCTION

fall victim to the creative destruction that is the hallmark of
competitive capitalism, only to be succeeded by others.*
But in the aggregate, businesses grow with the long-term
growth of our vibrant economy.
This book will tell you why you should stop contributing to the croupiers of the financial markets, who rake in
something like $400 billion each year from you and your
fellow investors. It will also tell you how easy it is to do
just that: simply buy the entire stock market. Then, once
you have bought your stocks, get out of the casino and
stay out. Just hold the market portfolio forever. And
that’s what the index fund does.
This investment philosophy is not only simple and elegant. The arithmetic on which it is based is irrefutable. But
it is not easy to follow its discipline. So long as we investors
accept the status quo of today’s crazy-quilt financial market
system; so long as we enjoy the excitement (however costly)
of buying and selling stocks; so long as we fail to realize that
there is a better way, such a philosophy will seem counterintuitive. But I ask you to carefully consider the impassioned
message of this little book. When you do, you, too, will
want to join the revolution and invest in a new, more economical, more efficient, even more honest way, a more productive way that will put your own interest first.
* “Creative destruction” is the formulation of Joseph E. Schumpeter in
Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 1942.

INTRODUCTION

[XIX]

It may seem farfetched for me to hope that any single
little book could ignite the spark of a revolution in investing. New ideas that fly in the face of the conventional wisdom of the day are always greeted with doubt, scorn, and
even fear. Indeed, 230 years ago the same challenge was
faced by Thomas Paine, whose 1776 tract Common
Sense helped spark the American Revolution. Here is
what Tom Paine wrote:
Perhaps the sentiments contained in the following
pages are not yet sufficiently fashionable to procure
them general favor; a long habit of not thinking a thing
wrong, gives it a superficial appearance of being right,
and raises at first a formidable outcry in defense of custom. But the tumult soon subsides. Time makes more
converts than reason.
In the following pages, I offer nothing more than
simple facts, plain arguments, and common sense; and
have no other preliminaries to settle with the reader,
than that he will divest himself of prejudice and prepossession, and suffer his reason and his feelings to determine for themselves; that he will put on, or rather that
he will not put off, the true character of a man, and
generously enlarge his views beyond the present day.

As we now know, Thomas Paine’s powerful and articulate arguments carried the day. The American Revolution led to our Constitution, which to this day defines the
responsibility of our government, our citizens, and the
fabric of our society. Inspired by his words, I titled my

[XX]

INTRODUCTION

1999 book Common Sense on Mutual Funds, and asked
investors to divest themselves of prejudice and to generously enlarge their views beyond the present day. In this
new book, I reiterate that proposition.

If I “could only explain things to enough people,
carefully enough, thoroughly enough,
thoughtfully enough—why, eventually everyone
would see, and then everything would be fixed.”

In Common Sense on Mutual Funds, I also applied to
my idealistic self these words of the late journalist
Michael Kelly: “The driving dream (of the idealist) is that
if he could only explain things to enough people, carefully
enough, thoroughly enough, thoughtfully enough—why,
eventually everyone would see, and then everything would
be fixed.” This book is my attempt to explain the financial
system to as many of you who will listen carefully enough,
thoroughly enough, and thoughtfully enough so that you
will see, and it will be fixed. Or at least that your own participation in it will be fixed.
Some may suggest that, as the creator both of Vanguard in 1974 and of the world’s first index mutual fund
in 1975, I have a vested interest in persuading you of my
views. Of course I do! But not because it enriches me to
do so. It doesn’t earn me a penny. Rather, I want to per-

INTRODUCTION

[XXI]

suade you because the very elements that formed Vanguard’s foundation all those years ago—all those values
and structures and strategies—will enrich you.
In the early years of indexing, my voice was a lonely
one. But there were a few other thoughtful and respected believers whose ideas inspired me to carry on
my mission. Today, many of the wisest and most successful investors endorse the index fund concept, and
among academics, the acceptance is close to universal.
But don’t take my word for it. Listen to these independent experts with no axe to grind except for the truth
about investing. You’ll hear from some of them at the
end of each chapter.
Listen, for example, to this endorsement by Paul A.
Samuelson, Nobel Laureate and professor of economics
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to whom this
book is dedicated: “Bogle’s reasoned precepts can enable
a few million of us savers to become in twenty years the
envy of our suburban neighbors—while at the same time
we have slept well in these eventful times.”
Put another way, in the words of the Shaker hymn,
“Tis the gift to be simple, tis the gift to be free, tis the
gift to come down where we ought to be.” Adapting this
message to investing by simply owning an index fund, you
will be free of almost all of the excessive costs of our financial system, and will receive, when it comes time to

[XXII]

INTRODUCTION

draw on the savings you have accumulated, the gift of
coming down just where you ought to be.
The financial system, alas, won’t be fixed for a long
time. But the glacial nature of that change doesn’t prevent you from looking after your self-interest. You don’t
need to participate in its expensive foolishness. If you
choose to play the winner’s game of owning businesses
and refrain from playing the loser’s game of trying to beat
the market, you can begin the task simply by using your
own common sense, understanding the system, and investing in accordance with the only principles that will
eliminate substantially all of its excessive costs. Then, at
last, whatever returns our businesses may be generous
enough to deliver in the years ahead, reflected as they will
be in our stock and bond markets, you will be guaranteed
to earn your fair share. When you understand these realities, you’ll see that it’s all about common sense.
JOHN C. BOGLE
Valley Forge, Pennsylvania
January 5, 2007

INTRODUCTION

Don’t Take My Word for It
Charles T. Munger, Warren Buffett’s partner at
Berkshire Hathaway, puts it this way: “The general
systems of money management [today] require people to pretend to do something they can’t do and
like something they don’t. [It’s] a funny business because on a net basis, the whole investment management business together gives no value added to all
buyers combined. That’s the way it has to work. Mutual funds charge two percent per year and then brokers switch people between funds, costing another
three to four percentage points. The poor guy in the
general public is getting a terrible product from the
professionals. I think it’s disgusting. It’s much better to be part of a system that delivers value to the
people who buy the product.”
William Bernstein, investment adviser (and
neurologist), and author of The Four Pillars of Investing, says: “It’s bad enough that you have to take
market risk. Only a fool takes on the additional
risk of doing yet more damage by failing to diversify properly with his or her nest egg. Avoid the
problem—buy a well-run index fund and own the
whole market.”
Here’s how the Economist of London puts it:
“The truth is that, for the most part, fund managers
have offered extremely poor value for money. Their
(continued)
