 You don’t have to invest like an institution. If you invest like an institution, you’re doomed to perform like one, which in many cases isn’t very well. Nor do you have to force yourself to think like an amateur if you already are one. If you’re a surfer, a trucker, a high school dropout, or an eccentric retiree, then you’ve got an edge already. That’s where the tenbaggers come from, beyond the boundaries of accepted Wall Street cogitation. 
 When you invest, there’s no Flint around to criticize your quarterly results or your semiannual results, or to grill you as to why you bought Agency Rent-A-Car instead of IBM. Well, maybe there’s a spouse and perhaps a stockbroker with whom you are forced to converse, but a stockbroker will be quite sympathetic to your odd choices and certainly isn’t going to fire you for picking Seven Oaks—as long as you’re paying the commissions. And hasn’t the spouse (the Person Who Doesn’t Understand the Serious Business of Money) already proven a faith in your investment schemes by allowing you to continue to make mistakes? 
 (In the unlikely event that your mate is dismayed at your stock selections, you could always hide the monthly statements that arrive in the mail. I’m not endorsing this practice, only pointing out that it’s one more option available to the small investor that’s out of the question for the manager of an equity fund.) 
 You don’t have to spend a quarter of your waking hours explaining to a colleague why you are buying what you are buying. There’s no rule prohibiting you from buying a stock that begins with r, a stock that costs less than $6, or a stock in a company that’s connected to the Teamsters. There’s nobody to gripe, “I never heard of Wal-Mart” or “Dunkin’ Donuts sounds silly—John D. Rockefeller wouldn’t have invested in donuts.” There’s nobody to chide you for buying back a stock at $19 that you earlier sold at $11—which may be a perfectly sensible move. Professionals could never buy back a stock at $19 that they sold at $11. They’d have their Quotrons confiscated for doing that. 
 You’re not forced to own 1,400 different stocks, nor is anyone going to tell you to sprinkle your money on 100 issues. You’re free to own one stock, four stocks, or ten stocks. If no company seems attractive on the fundamentals, you can avoid stocks altogether and wait for a better opportunity. Equity fund managers do not have that luxury, either. We can’t sell everything, and when we try, it’s always all at once, and then there’s nobody buying at decent prices. 
 Most important, you can find terrific opportunities in the neighborhood or at the workplace, months or even years before the news has reached the analysts and the fund managers they advise. 
 Then again, maybe you shouldn’t have anything to do with the stock market, ever. That’s an issue worth discussing in some detail, because the stock market demands conviction as surely as it victimizes the unconvinced.

One Up on Wall Street 

 3 
 Is This Gambling, or What? 

 “Gentlemen prefer bonds.” 
 —Andrew Mellon 

 After major upsets such as the Hiccup of Last October, some investors have taken refuge in bonds. This issue of stocks versus bonds is worth resolving right up front, and in a calm and dignified manner, or else it will come up again at the most frantic moments, when the stock market is dropping and people rush to the banks to sign up for CDs. Lately, just such a rush has occurred. 
 Investing in bonds, money-markets, or CDs are all different forms of investing in debt—for which one is paid interest. There’s nothing wrong with getting paid interest, especially if it is compounded. Consider the Indians of Manhattan, who in 1626 sold all their real estate to a group of immigrants for $24 in trinkets and beads. For 362 years the Indians have been the subjects of cruel jokes because of it—but it turns out they may have made a better deal than the buyers who got the island. 
 At 8 percent interest on $24 (note: let’s suspend our disbelief and assume they converted the trinkets to cash) compounded over all those years, the Indians would have built up a net worth just short of $30 trillion, while the latest tax records from the Borough of Manhattan show the real estate to be worth only $28.1 billion. Give Manhattan the benefit of the doubt: that $28.1 billion is the assessed value, and for all anybody knows it may be worth twice that on the open market. So Manhattan’s worth $56.2 billion. Either way, the Indians could be ahead by $29 trillion and change. 
 Granted it’s unlikely that the Indians could have gotten 8 percent interest, even at the kneecracker rates of the day, if in fact there were kneecracker rates in 1626. The pioneer borrowers were used to paying much less, but assuming the Indians could have wangled a 6 percent deal, they would have made $34.7 billion by now, and without having to maintain any property or mow Central Park. What a difference a couple of percentage points can make, compounded over three centuries. 
 However you figure it, there’s something to be said for the supposed dupes in this transaction. Investing in debt isn’t bad. 
 Bonds have been especially attractive in the last twenty years. Not in the fifty years before that, but definitely in the last twenty. Historically, interest rates never strayed far from 4 percent, but in the last decade we’ve seen long-term rates rise to 16 percent then fall to 8 percent, creating remarkable opportunities. People who bought U.S. Treasury bonds with 20-year maturities in 1980 have seen the face value of their bonds nearly double, and meanwhile they’ve still been collecting the 16 percent interest on their original investment. If you were smart enough to have bought 20-year T-bonds then, you’ve beaten the stock market by a sizable margin, even in this latest bull phase. Moreover, you’ve done it without having to read a single research report or having to pay a single tribute to a stockbroker. 
 (Long-term T-bonds are the best way to play interest rates because they aren’t “callable”—or at least not until five years prior to maturity. As many disgruntled bond investors have discovered, many corporate and municipal bonds are callable much sooner, which means the debtors buy them back the minute it’s advantageous to do so. Bondholders have no more choice in the matter than property owners who face a condemnation. As soon as interest rates begin to fall, causing bond investors to realize they’ve struck a shrewd bargain, the deal is canceled and they get their money back in the mail. On the other hand, if interest rates go in a direction that works against the bondholders, the bondholders are stuck with the bonds. 
 Since there’s very little in the corporate bond business that isn’t callable, you’re advised to buy Treasuries if you hope to profit from a fall in interest rates.) 
 LIBERATING THE PASSBOOKS 
 Traditionally bonds were sold in large denominations—too large for the small investor, who could only invest in debt via the savings account, or the boring U.S. savings bonds. Then the bond funds were invented, and regular people could invest in debt right along with tycoons. After that, the money-market fund liberated millions of former passbook savers from the captivity of banks, once and for all. There ought to be a monument to Bruce Bent and Harry Browne, who dreamed up the money-market account and dared to lead the great exodus out of the Scroogian thrifts. They started it with the Reserve Fund in 1971. 
 My own boss, Ned Johnson, took the idea a thought further and added the check-writing feature. Prior to that, the money-market was most useful as a place where small corporations could park their weekly payroll funds. The check-writing feature gave the money-market fund universal appeal as a savings account and a checking account. 
 It’s one thing to prefer stocks to a stodgy savings account that yields 5 percent forever, and quite another to prefer them to a money-market that offers the best short-term rates, and where the yields rise right away if the prevailing interest rates go higher. 
 If your money has stayed in a money-market fund since 1978, you certainly have no reason to feel embarrassed about it. You’ve missed a couple of major stock market declines. The worst you’ve ever collected is 6 percent interest, and you’ve never lost a penny of your principal. The year that short-term interest rates rose to 17 percent (1981) and the stock market dropped 5 percent, you made a 22 percent relative gain by staying in cash. 
 During the stock market’s incredible surge from Dow 1775 on September 29, 1986, to Dow 2722 on August 25, 1987, let’s say you never bought a single stock, and you felt dumber and dumber for having missed this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. After a while you wouldn’t even tell your friends you had all your money in a money-market—admitting to shoplifting would have been less mortifying. 
 But the morning after the crash, with the Dow beaten back to 1738, you felt vindicated. You avoided the whole trauma of October 19. With stock prices so drastically reduced, the money-market actually had outperformed the stock market over the entire year—6.12 percent for the money-market to 5.25 percent for the S&P 500. 
 THE STOCKS REBUT 
 But two months later the stock market had rebounded, and once again stocks were outperforming both money-market funds and long-term bonds. Over the long haul they always do. Historically, investing in stocks is undeniably more profitable than investing in debt. In fact, since 1927, common stocks have recorded gains of 9.8 percent a year on average, as compared to 5 percent for corporate bonds, 4.4 percent for government bonds, and 3.4 percent for Treasury bills. 
 The long-term inflation rate, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, is 3 percent a year, which gives common stocks a real return of 6.8 percent a year. The real return on Treasury bills, known as the most conservative and sensible of all places to put money, has been nil. That’s right. Zippo. 
 The advantage of a 9.8 percent return from stocks over a 5 percent return from bonds may sound piddling to some, but consider this financial fable. If at the end of 1927 a modern Rip Van Winkle had gone to sleep for 60 years on $20,000 worth of corporate bonds, paying 5 percent compounded, he would have awakened with $373,584—enough for him to afford a nice condo, a Volvo, and a haircut; whereas if he’d invested in stocks, which returned 9.8 percent a year, he’d have $5,459,720. (Since Rip was asleep, neither the Crash of ’29 nor the ripple of ’87 would have scared him out of the market.) 
 In 1927, if you had put $1,000 in each of the four investments listed below, and the money had compounded tax-free, then 60 years later you’d have had these amounts: 

 In spite of crashes, depressions, wars, recessions, ten different presidential administrations, and numerous changes in skirt lengths, stocks in general have paid off fifteen times as well as corporate bonds, and well over thirty times better than Treasury bills! 
 There’s a logical explanation for this. In stocks you’ve got the company’s growth on your side. You’re a partner in a prosperous and expanding business. In bonds, you’re nothing more than the nearest source of spare change. When you lend money to somebody, the best you can hope for is to get it back, plus interest. 
 Think of the people who’ve owned McDonald’s bonds over the years. The relationship between them and McDonald’s begins and ends with the payoff of the debt, and that’s not the exciting part of McDonald’s. Sure, the original bondholders have gotten their money back, the same as they would have with a bank CD, but the original stockholders have gotten rich. They own the company. You’ll never get a tenbagger in a bond—unless you’re a debt sleuth who specializes in bonds in default. 
 WHAT ABOUT THE RISKS? 
 “Ah, yes,” you say to yourself, especially after the latest drop in stock prices, “but what about the risks? Aren’t stocks riskier than bonds?” Of course stocks are risky. Nowhere is it written that a stock owes us anything, as it’s been proven to me on hundreds of sorry occasions. 
 Even blue-chip stocks held long term, supposedly the safest of all propositions, can be risky. RCA was a famous prudent investment, and suitable for widows and orphans, yet it was bought out by GE in 1986 for $66.50 a share, about the same price that it traded in 1967, and only 74 percent above its 1929 high of $38.25 (adjusted for splits). Less than one percent worth of annual appreciation is all you got in 57 years of sticking with a solid, world-famous, and successful company. Bethlehem Steel continues to sell far below its high of $60 a share reached in 1958. 
 Glance at a list of the original Dow Jones industrials from 1896. Who’s ever heard of American Cotton Oil, Distilling and Cattle Feeding, Laclede Gas, U.S. Leather Preferred? These once-famous stocks must have vanished long ago. 
 Then from the 1916 list we see Baldwin Locomotive, gone by 1924; the 1925 list includes such household names as Paramount Famous Lasky and Remington Typewriter; in 1927, Remington Typewriter disappears and United Drug takes its place. In 1928, when the Dow Jones was expanded from 20 to 30 companies, the new arrivals included Nash Motors, Postum, Wright Aeronautical, and Victor Talking Machine. The latter two companies were removed by 1929—Victor Talking Machine because it had merged into RCA. (You’ve seen the results of sticking with that one.) In 1950, we find Corn Products Refining on the list, but by 1959 it, too, is taken off and replaced by Swift and Co. 
 The point is that fortunes change, there’s no assurance that major companies won’t become minor, and there’s no such thing as a can’t-miss blue chip. 
 Buy the right stocks at the wrong price at the wrong time and you’ll suffer great losses. Look what happened in the 1972–74 market break, when conservative issues such as Bristol-Myers fell from $9 to $4, Teledyne from $11 to $3, and McDonald’s from $15 to $4. These aren’t exactly fly-by-night companies. Buy the wrong stocks at the right time and you’ll suffer more of the same. During certain periods it seems to take forever for the theoretical 9.8 percent annual gain from stocks to show up in practice. The Dow Jones industrials reached an all-time high of 995.15 in 1966 and bounced along below that point until 1972. In turn, the high of 1972–73 wasn’t exceeded until 1982. 
 But with the possible exception of the very short-term bonds and bond funds, bonds can be risky, too. Here, rising interest rates will force you to accept one of two unpleasant choices: suffer with the low yield until the bonds mature, or sell the bonds at a substantial discount to face value. If you are truly risk-averse, then the money-market fund or the bank is the place for you. Otherwise, there are risks wherever you turn. 
 Municipal bonds are thought to be as secure as cash in a strongbox, but on the rare occasion of a default, don’t tell the losers that bonds are safe. (The best-known default is that of the Washington Public Power Supply System, and their infamous “Whoops” bonds.) Yes, I know bonds pay off in 99.9 percent of the cases, but there are other ways to lose money on bonds besides a default. Try holding on to a 30-year bond with a 6 percent coupon during a period of raging inflation, and see what happens to the value of the bond. 
 A lot of people have invested in funds that buy Government National Mortgage Association bonds (Ginnie Maes) without realizing how volatile the bond market has become. They are reassured by the ads—“100 percent government-guaranteed”—and they’re right, the interest will be paid. But that doesn’t protect the value of their shares in the bond fund when interest rates rise and the bond market collapses. Open the business page and look at what happens to such funds on a day that interest rates rise half a percent and you’ll see what I mean. These days, bond funds fluctuate just as wildly as stock funds. The same volatility in interest rates that enables clever investors to make big profits from bonds also makes holding bonds more of a gamble. 
 STOCKS AND STUD POKER 
 Frankly, there is no way to separate investing from gambling into those neat categories that are meant to reassure us. There’s simply no Chinese wall, bundling board, or any other absolute division between safe and rash places to store money. It was in the late 1920s that common stocks finally reached the status of “prudent investments,” whereas previously they were dismissed as barroom wagers—and this was precisely the moment at which the overvalued market made buying stocks more wager than investment. 
 For two decades after the Crash, stocks were regarded as gambling by a majority of the population, and this impression wasn’t fully revised until the late 1960s when stocks once again were embraced as investments, but in an overvalued market that made most stocks very risky. Historically, stocks are embraced as investments or dismissed as gambles in routine and circular fashion, and usually at the wrong times. Stocks are most likely to be accepted as prudent at the moment they’re not. 
 For years, stocks in large companies were considered “investments” and stocks in small companies “speculations,” but lately small stocks have become investments and the speculating is done in futures and options. We’re forever redrawing this line. 
 I’m always amused when people describe their investments as “conservative speculations” or else claim that they are “prudently speculating.” Usually that means they hope they’re investing but they’re worried that they’re gambling. The phrase “we’re seeing one another” serves the same function for couples who can’t decide if they’re serious. 
 Once the unsettling fact of the risk in money is accepted, we can begin to separate gambling from investing not by the type of activity (buying bonds, buying stocks, betting on the horses, etc.) but by the skill, dedication, and enterprise of the participant. To a veteran handicapper with the discipline to stick to a system, betting on horses offers a relatively secure long-term return, which to him has been as reliable as owning a mutual fund, or shares in General Electric. Meanwhile, to the rash and impetuous stockpicker who chases hot tips and rushes in and out of his equities, an “investment” in stocks is no more reliable than throwing away paychecks on the horse with the prettiest mane, or the jockey with the purple silks. 
 (In fact, to the rash and impetuous stock player, my advice is: Forget Wall Street and take your mad money to Hialeah, Monte Carlo, Saratoga, Nassau, Santa Anita, or Baden-Baden. At least in those pleasant surroundings, when you lose, you’ll be able to say you had a great time doing it. If you lose on stocks, there’s no consolation in watching your broker pace around the office. 
 Also, when you lose mad money at the horses you simply throw your worthless tickets on the floor and you’re done with it, but in stocks, options, and so forth you have to relive the painful episodes with the tax accountant every spring. It may take days of extra work to figure all this out.) 
 To me, an investment is simply a gamble in which you’ve managed to tilt the odds in your favor. It doesn’t matter whether it’s Atlantic City or the S&P 500 or the bond market. In fact, the stock market most reminds me of a stud poker game. 
 Betting on seven-card stud can provide a very consistent long-term return to people who know how to manage their cards. Four of the cards are dealt faceup, and you can not only see all of your hand but most of your opponents’ hands. After the third or fourth card is dealt, it’s pretty obvious who is likely to win and who is likely to lose, or else it’s obvious there is no likely winner. It’s the same on Wall Street. There’s a lot of information in the open hands, if you know where to look for it. 
 By asking some basic questions about companies, you can learn which are likely to grow and prosper, which are unlikely to grow and prosper, and which are entirely mysterious. You can never be certain what will happen, but each new occurrence—a jump in earnings, the sale of an unprofitable subsidiary, the expansion into new markets—is like turning up another card. As long as the cards suggest favorable odds of success, you stay in the hand. 
 Anyone who plays regularly in a monthly stud poker game soon realizes that the same “lucky stiffs” always come out ahead. These are the players who undertake to maximize their return on investment by carefully calculating and recalculating their chances as the hand unfolds. Consistent winners raise their bet as their position strengthens, and they exit the game when the odds are against them, while consistent losers hang on to the bitter end of every expensive pot, hoping for miracles and enjoying the thrill of defeat. In stud poker and on Wall Street, miracles happen just often enough to keep the losers losing. 
 Consistent winners also resign themselves to the fact that they’ll occasionally be dealt three aces and bet the limit, only to lose to a hidden royal flush. They accept their fate and go on to the next hand, confident that their basic method will reward them over time. People who succeed in the stock market also accept periodic losses, setbacks, and unexpected occurrences. Calamitous drops do not scare them out of the game. If they’ve done the proper homework on H & R Block and bought the stock, and suddenly the government simplifies the tax code (an unlikely prospect, granted) and Block’s business deteriorates, they accept the bad break and start looking for the next stock. They realize the stock market is not pure science, and not like chess, where the superior position always wins. If seven out of ten of my stocks perform as expected, then I’m delighted. If six out of ten of my stocks perform as expected, then I’m thankful. Six out of ten is all it takes to produce an enviable record on Wall Street. 
 Over time, the risks in the stock market can be reduced by proper play just as the risks in stud poker are reduced. With improper play (buying a stock that’s overpriced) even the purchase of Bristol-Myers or Heinz can result in huge losses and wasted opportunities, as I’ve said. It happens to people who imagine that betting with blue chips relieves them of the need to pay attention, so they lose half their money in quick fashion and may not recoup it for another eight years. In the early 1970s millions of uninformed dollars chased overpriced opportunities and soon disappeared as a result. Does that make Bristol-Myers and McDonald’s risky investments? Only because of the way people invested in them. 
 On the other hand, assuming you’d done the homework, putting your money on the risky and troubled General Public Utilities, the owners of the Three Mile Island nuclear problem, was far more “conservative” than an ill-timed investment in solid old Kellogg. 
 Not wanting to “risk” investment capital that belonged to my mother-in-law, Mrs. Charles Hoff, I once advised her to buy stock in Houston Industries, a very “safe” company. It was safe all right—the stock did nothing for more than a decade. I figured I could take more of a “gamble” with my own mother’s money, so I bought her the “riskier” Consolidated Edison. It went up sixfold. Con Ed wasn’t all that risky to those who had continued to monitor the fundamentals. The big winners come from the so-called high-risk categories, but the risks have more to do with the investors than with the categories. 
 The greatest advantage to investing in stocks, to one who accepts the uncertainties, is the extraordinary reward for being right. This is borne out in the mutual fund returns calculated by the Johnson Chart Service of Buffalo, New York. There’s a very interesting correlation here: the “riskier” the fund, the better the payoff. If you’d put $10,000 into the average bond fund in 1963, fifteen years later you’d come out with $31,338. The same $10,000 in a balanced fund (stocks and bonds) would have produced $44,343; in a growth and income fund (all stocks), $53,157; and in an aggressive growth fund (also all stocks), $76,556. 
 Clearly the stock market has been a gamble worth taking—as long as you know how to play the game. And as long as you own stocks, new cards keep turning up. Now that I think of it, investing in stocks isn’t really like playing a seven-card stud-poker hand. It’s more like playing a 70-card stud-poker hand, or if you own ten stocks, it’s like playing ten 70-card hands at once.
