on the call, he plans to exercise his put; if he does get assigned on the call, he will let
the put expire worthless. In order to make a decision, he must know whether the call
will be exercised. Unfortunately, he won't know this until the day after expiration,
when he either does or does not receive an assignment notice. But then it will be too
late because the call will have expired.

It may seem that an option which is exactly at-the-money at expiration will never
be exercised since, in theory, it has no value. In fact many at-the-money options do get
exercised. Even though such an option has no theoretical value, it does have some


Option Arbitrage 225

practical value. For example, suppose the owner of a call which is exactly at-the-money
at expiration wants to take a long position in the underlying contract. He has two
choices. He can either exercise the call or buy the underlying contract. Since most
exchanges where options are traded include the right of exercise in the original
transaction cost, it is almost always cheaper to exercise the call. Even if there is a charge
for exercise, it will be less than the cost of trading the underlying contract. Anyone
owning an at-the-money option, and choosing to take a long or short position at
expiration, will find that it is cheaper to exercise the option than buy or sell the
underlying contract.

Clearly, the trader who is short an at-the- money option at expiration has a problem.
What can he do?

One course might be to guess whether the trader will be assigned. If the market
appears to be strong on the last trading day, the trader might assume that it will continue
higher on the day following expiration. If the person who holds the call sees the situation
similarly, it is logical to assume that the call will be exercised. Hence, the trader will
choose not to exercise the put. Unfortunately, if the trader is wrong, and he does not
get assigned on the call, he will find himself with a long underlying position which he
would rather not have. Conversely, if the market appears to be weak on the last trading
day, the trader might make the assumption that he will not be assigned on the call. He
will therefore choose to exercise the put. But again, if he is wrong and does get an
assignment notice, he will find himself with an unwanted short underlying position on
the day following expiration.

The risk of a wrong guess can be further compounded by the fact that conversions
and reversals, because of their low risk, are usually done in large size. If the trader
guesses wrong, he may find himself naked long or short not one, but several hundred
underlying contracts.

There can be no certain solution to the problem of pin risk. With many, perhaps
thousands, of open contracts outstanding, some at-the-money options will be exercised
and some won't. If the trader lets the position go to expiration and relies on luck, he is
at the mercy of the fates, and that is a position which an intelligent option trader prefers
to avoid. The practical solution is to avoid carrying conversions and reversals to
expiration when there is a real possibility of expiration right at the exercise price. If the
trader has a large number of June 100 conversions or reversals, and expiration is
approaching with the underlying market close to 100, the sensible course is to reduce
the pin risk by reducing the size of the position. If the trader doesn’t reduce the size, he
may find that he is under considerable pressure to get out of a large number of risky
Positions at the last moment.

Sometimes even a careful trader will find that he has some at-the-money conver-
sions or reversals outstanding as expiration approaches. One way to eliminate the pin
risk which still exists is to liquidate the position at the prevailing market prices.
Unfortunately, this is likely to be a losing proposition since the trader will be forced to
trade each contract at an unfavorable price, either buying at the offer or selling at the
bid. Fortunately, it is often possible to trade out of such a position al! at once at a fair
Price.


226 Chapter 11

Since conversions and reversals are common strategies in all option markets, a
trader who has an at-the-money conversion and is worried about pin risk can be fairly
certain that there are also traders in the market who have at-the-money reversals and
are also worried about pin risk. If the trader with the conversion could finda trader with
a reversal and cross positions with him, both traders would eliminate the pin risk
associated with their positions. This is why, on option exchanges, one often finds traders
looking for other traders who want to trade conversions or reversals at even money.
This simply means that a trader wants to trade out of his position at a price which is fair
to everyone involved, so that everyone can avoid the problem of pin risk. Whatever
profit a trader expected to make from the conversion or reversal presumably resulted
from the initial trade, not from the closing trade.

Certain options, such as stock indices and Eurodollars, are settled at expiration in
cash rather than with the delivery of an actual underlying contract. When such an
option expires, the amount of cash which flows into or out of a trader’s account is simply
the amount by which the option is in-the-money, i.e., the difference between the
underlying price and the option’s exercise price. There is no pin risk associated with
options which settle in this manner because no underlying position results from exercise
or assignment.

Interest rate risk, execution risk, and pin risk are common to all markets, regardless
of the underlying contract. There are, however, certain risks which are unique to a
market depending on the characteristics of the underlying market.

Settlement Risk in the Futures Market

Let’s go back to our original conversion where a trader is short a June 100 call, long a
June 100 put, and long an underlying contract. Suppose the underlying contract is a
June futures contract which is trading at 102.00. If there are three months remaining
to June expiration, interest rates are 8%, and all options are subject to stock-type (cash)
settlement, the value of the June 100 synthetic market (the difference between the June
100 call and the June 100 put) is:

futures price — exercise price — carry on 2 points for 3 months =
102 — 100 - (2 x 3/12 x 8%) = 1.96

Suppose a trader is able to sell a June 100 call for 5.00, buy a June 100 put for 3.00,
and sell a June futures contract for 102.00. If interest rates do not change, and assuming
there will not be a problem with pin risk, at expiration the trader should realize a profit
of .04, since he has done the June 100 conversion at .04 better than its value.

Suppose that shortly after the trader initiates this conversion, the underlying June
futures contract falls to 98.00. The synthetic (short) side of the position will now show
a profit of four points: the short call and long put together will appreciate by four points.
But because the options are settled like stock, the profit on the synthetic side will only
be a paper profit, and will not be fully realized until expiration. On the other hand, the
trader is also long a June futures contract, and this contract, since it is subject to
futures-type settlement, will result in an immediate four point debit when the market
drops four points. To cover this four point debit, the trader will either have to borrow


Option Arbitrage 227

the money or take the money out of an existing, interest-bearing account. In either case
there will be a loss in interest, and this interest loss will not be offset by the paper profit
from the option position. If the loss in interest is great enough, it may more than offset
the profit of .04 which the trader originally expected from the position. And in the most
extreme case, where the trader does not have access to the funds required to feed the
futures position, the trader may be forced to liquidate the position. Needless to say,
forced liquidations are never profitable.

Of course, this works both ways. A rise in the price of the underlying futures
contract to 106.00 will result in a four point loss to the synthetic side: the short call and
long put together will decline by four points. But the loss on the synthetic side will only
be a paper loss, and will not be fully realized until expiration. On the other hand, the
rise in the futures contract will result in an immediate cash credit, a credit on which the
trader can earn interest. This interest will increase his potential profit beyond the
original expected profit of .04,

Most futures option traders think of conversions and reversals as being delta
neutral, but in fact this is not necessarily true. With the underlying futures contract at
102, the deltas in our example might be:

Option Position Delta Position
short June 100 call ~60
long June 100 put ~38
long June futures contact +100
total +2

The two extra deltas reflect the fact that the trader would prefer the market to rise rather
than fall, so that cash will flow into his account from the futures position. The interest
from this cash flow can represent an unexpected profit or loss, in the case of a decline
in the futures price.

Two deltas are really no risk, except when we remember that conversions and
reversals, because of their low risk, are often done in very large size. A trader who
executes 500 conversions has a risk delta equal to 500 x +2 = +1000. This is the same
as being naked long 10 futures contracts. The risk comes from the interest that can be
earned on any cash credit, or which must be paid on any cash debit, resulting from
movement in the underlying futures contract.

The amount by which the delta of a synthetic futures position will differ from 100
depends on the interest risk associated with the position. This in turn depends on two
factors: the general level of interest rates and the amount of time remaining to
expiration. The higher the interest rate and the more time remaining to expiration, the
greater the risk. The lower the interest rate and the Jess time remaining to expiration,
the less the risk. A 10% interest rate with nine months to expiration represents a much
greater risk than a 4% interest rate with one month remaining to expiration. In the
former case, the deltas of a synthetic position may add up to 94, while in the latter case
the deltas may add up to 99.

Note that there is no settlement risk when both contracts are subject to the same
settlement procedure. If all contracts are subject to stock-type settlement, no cash flow


228 Chapter 1 1

results from fluctuations in the prices of the contracts prior to expiration. If all contracts
are subject to futures-type settlement, any credit or debit resulting from changes in the
price of the underlying futures contract will be offset by an equal but opposite cash flow
from. changes in prices of the option contracts.

Dividend Risk in the Stock Market

Consider a stock trading at 10214, with three months to June expiration, interest rates
at 8%, and a dividend of 11% expected prior to expiration. The value of the June 100
synthetic (the difference between the 100 call and the June 100 put) is:

stock price — exercise price + carry on 100 to expiration — expected dividends =
10214 - 100 + (100 x 3/12 x 8%) -114=3

Suppose a trader is able to sell a June 100 call for 744, buy a June 100 put for
4//, and buy stock for 1021. If interest rates do not change, and assuming there will
not be a problem with pin risk, at expiration the trader should realize a profit of 14,
since he has done the June 100 conversion at 1% better than its value.

Since the trader owns the stock, part of his profit comes from the !'% point
dividend which he expects to receive when the stock goes ex-dividend. If the dividend
changes unexpectedly, it could affect the trader’s eventual profit. If, for example, the
company is doing poorly and decides to cut its dividend in half, to 34, the trader’s
conversion will be worth % less, and his profit of '/4 will turn into a loss of 14. Of course,
if the company is doing well and decides to increase its dividend to two points, the
conversion will be worth 14 more, and the trader’s profit will increase from 14 ta 34.
Clearly, the possibility of a change in the expected dividend represents a risk to a
conversion or reversal. Moreover, if multiple dividends are expected over the life of the
strategy, the impact of a change in the company’s dividend policy can be greatly
magnified.

BOXES

As we have seen, a conversion or reversal entails risk because these strategies combine
a synthetic position in options with a position in the underlying contract. The risk arises
because a synthetic position in options and an actual position in the underlying contract
can have different characteristics, either in terms of settlement procedure, as in the
futures option market, or in terms of the dividend payout, as in the stock option market.
How might we eliminate this risk?

One way to eliminate this risk is to eliminate the position in the underlying
contract. Consider a conversion:

short a call
long a put
long an underlying contract


Option Arbitrage 229

If we want to maintain this position, but would also like to eliminate the risk that goes
with holding an underlying position, we might replace the long underlying position with
something that acts like an underlying contract, but which isn’t an underlying contract.
For example, we might replace the long underlying position with a deeply in-the-money
call. Now our position is:

short a call
long a put
long a deeply in-the-money call

If the deeply in-the-money call has a delta of 100, and therefore acts like a long
underlying contract, the position will have the same characteristics as the conversion,

In the same way, instead of replacing the underlying position with a deeply
in-the-money call, we can sell a deeply in-the-money put:

short a call
long a put
short a deeply in-the-money put

If the deeply in-the-money put has a delta of -100, and therefore acts like an underlying
contract, the position will again have the same characteristics as the conversion.

This type of position, where the underlying instrument in a conversion or reversal
is replaced with a deeply inthe-money option, is known as a three-way. While
eliminating some risks, a three-way is not without its own problems. If a trader sells a
deeply in-the-money option to complete his three-way, he still has the risk of the market
going through the exercise price. Indeed, as the underlying market moves closer and
closer to the exercise price of the deeply in-the-money option, the option will act less
and less like a position in the underlying contract. The combination of contracts will
then act less and less like a true conversion or reversal.

What else acts like an underlying contract but isn’t an underlying contract? A
synthetic underlying position obviously fills the bill. In addition to a three-way, we might
also consider replacing an underlying position in a conversion or reversal with a
synthetic equivalent. For example, our original position might be a 100 conversion:

short a June 100 call
long a June 100 put
long an underlying contract

Suppose we also execute a reversal at 90:

long a June 90 call short a June 100 call
short a June 90 put long a June 100 put
short an underlying contract long an underlying contract

The long and short underlying contracts cancel out, leaving:

long a June 90 call short a June 100 call
short a June 90 put long a June 100 put


230 Chapter 11

We are left with a synthetic long position at the 90 exercise price, and a synthetic short
position at the 100 exercise price. Or we can think of the position as a reversal at one
exercise price, and a conversion at a different exercise price.

This position, known as a box, is similar to a conversion or reversal, except that
any risk associated with holding a position in the underlying contract has been
eliminated because the underlying position has been replaced with a synthetic underly-
ing position at a different exercise price. A trader is long (short) the box when he is
synthetically long (short) the lower exercise price and synthetically short (long) the
higher exercise price. The example position is long a June 90/100 box.

At expiration, regardless of the price of the underlying contract, a trader who has
a box will simultaneously buy the underlying contract at one exercise price and sell the
underlying contract at the other exercise price. The value of the box at expiration will
therefore be exactly the amount between exercise prices. In our example, at expiration
the 90/100 box will be worth exactly 10 points because the trader will simultaneously
buy the underlying contract at 90 and sell itat 100. If itis worth 10 points at expiration,
how much is it worth today? If the options are subject to stock-type settlement, the value
of the box today will be the value of the box at expiration less carrying costs. If our
10-point box expires in three months with interest rates at 8%, the value today is:

10 - (10 x 3/12 x 8%) = 10—.20 = 9.80

Since a box eliminates the risk associated with carrying a position in the underlying
contract, boxes are even less risky than conversions and reversals, which are themselves
low-risk strategies. When all options are European (there is no risk of early exercise),
and the options are settled in cash rather than through delivery of the underlying
contract (there is no pin risk), the purchase or sale of a box is identical to lending or
borrowing funds over the life of the options. In our example, a trader who sells a
10-point box for 9.80 has essentially borrowed funds from the buyer of the box for three
months at an interest rate of 8%. If a trader were willing to pay a higher rate to borrow
funds, he could sell the box at a lower price, for example 9.70. This corresponds to a
rate over three months of 12%. When no other method is available, a trading firm might
be able to raise needed short-term cash by selling boxes. Since the firm will probably
have to sell the boxes at a price lower than the theoretical value, this will increase the
firm’s borrowing costs. Moreover, if the options can be exercised early, or if there is a
danger of pin risk at expiration, this method of borrowing may not be without its own
risks,

We originally introduced a box as a conversion at one exercise price and a reversal
at a different exercise price. Since the long and short underlying positions cancel out,
we are left with two synthetic underlying positions. The June 90/100 box was written:

long a June 90 call short a June 100 call
short a June 90 put long a June 100 put

The left side of the box is a synthetic long at 90 and the right side is a synthetic short at
100. Instead of dividing the box into right and left sides, we can also divide it into top
and bottom sides. Notice that the top side is a bull vertical call spread (long June 90


Option Arbitrage 231

call/short June 100 call}, while the bottom side is a bear vertical put spread (long June
100 put/short June 90 put). Since a box is a combination of two vertical spreads, the
combined prices of the vertical spreads must add up to the value of the box.

For example, with three months remaining to expiration and interest rates at 8%,
the value of our June 90/100 box is 9.80. Suppose a trader knows that the June 90/100
vertical call spread is trading for six points. Without any additional information, the
trader can estimate the fair market price of for the June 90/100 vertical put spread. He
knows 90/100 box is worth 9.80, and that the value ofa call and put vertical spread
must add up to the value of the box. The price of the put spread must therefore be:

9.80 — 6 = 3.80

If the trader believes he can either buy or sell the call vertical spread at six points, and
he is asked for a market in the put spread, he will probably make his market around an
assumed value of 3.80. He might, for example, make a market of 3.50 bid/4.10 ask. If
he is able to buy the put vertical for 3.50, he can then try to buy the call vertical for
6.00. If he is successful, he will have paid a total of 9.50 for a box with a theoretical
value of 9.80. Conversely, if he is able to sell the put vertical for 4.10, he can then try
to sell the call vertical for 6.00. If he is successful, he will have sold a box with a
theoretical value of 9.80 at a price of 10.10.

JELLY ROLLS

Another method of eliminating a position in the underlying contract is to take a synthetic
position in a different expiration month, rather than at a different exercise price as with
a box. For example, suppose we have executed the following reversal:

long a June 100 call
short a June 100 put
short an underlying contract

Suppose we now execute the following conversion:

short a September 100 call
long a September 100 put
long an underlying contract

If the underlying contract for both June and September is identical, they will cancel out,
leaving us with:

long a June 100 call short a September 100 call
short a June 100 put long a September 100 put

These combined long and short synthetic positions taken at the same exercise prices but
in different expiration months is known as a jelly rol? or simply a roll. The strategy is

3. This very unscientific sounding term seems to have originated among traders on the Chicago Board
Options Exchange.


232 Chapter 11

most common in the stock option market where the underlying for both months is the
same.

What should be the value of a roll in the stock option market? In our example, the
sale of the June/September 100 roll, the trader will buy stock at 100 at June expiration
and sell the same stock at 100 at September expiration. The value of the roll is the cost
of holding the stock for the three-month period from June to September. If interest rates
are 8%, the holding costs are:

100 x 3/12 x 8% = 2.00

Therefore, the roll should have a value of two points. Expressed another way, the
difference between the June 100 synthetic (the June 100 call less the June 100 put) and
the September 100 synthetic (the September 100 call less the September 100 put}
should be exactly two points.

Now suppose that the stock pays a quarterly dividend of 4 point. Since the trader
will own the stock for the period from June to September, he will receive the 34 point
dividend. The value of the roll is now the two-point carrying cost less the 34 point
dividend, or 1%. The full value of the roll is:
