
Mistake 3: Doubling Down on a Losing Position
We’ll actually delve into this topic in detail in Chapter 7, but since
it’s one of our 10 Common Mistakes, we’ll briefly introduce it here.
Doubling down is a strategy that seeks to gamble a loss away. It’s
nothing more than a contemporary market variation of a doubleor-nothing bet. This mistake is the logical next step for the trader
who made Mistake 2 (Failing to Accept a Loss). If we pick up where
we left off from Figure 5.4, we see that the stock is now trading at
$34. Let’s assume that the trader initially purchased 1,000 shares of
the stock at $60. At this point, the trade is $26 per share out-of-themoney. In order for the trader to simply break even, the stock price
has to rise $26. We’ve seen from the chart that the stock doesn’t
appear to have any intention of gaining $26 anytime soon. So the
trader starts to think to himself, “Hmmm, this stock probably won’t
pick up $26 but it may pick up $13. After all, $13 higher is only $47,
and that’s below where it fell from the resistance line.”

c05.indd 106

11/2/07 12:19:00 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

107

Now, if the trader just sits back and holds his position, he needs
a $26 rally to break even. However, he begins to reason that the $13
rally is possible. The only way to break even from a $13 rally is to buy
another 1,000 shares at $34. You see, he spent $60,000 for the first
trade and $34,000 for the second. That’s a total of $94,000 for 2,000
shares or $47 per share. Therefore, when the stock moves back up to
$47, he breaks even. No loss, no gain.
The problem with this strategy is that nothing has changed in the
dynamic of the stock. That’s fine that the trader wants to break even
at $47, but the stock is still in a downtrend and the sellers are still
in control. The most likely outcome from this approach is that the
stock will continue moving down and the trader is now losing money
at twice the rate. Sometimes, traders will apply this strategy again, hoping against hope for a rally that will save them from self-destruction.
By the time the pain becomes too great to bear, this trader may be
holding on to 4,000 or more shares that are all losing money.
Figure 5.5 shows a stock that started over $800 per share! It’s
hard to imagine that such a strong stock could fall far. People who
bought the stock at these levels didn’t think in terms of the stock’s
losing 90 percent of its value. It’s easy to convince yourself that this
stock is a bargain at $700 because it was just recently trading at $800.
But if you haven’t seen an example like this in your own trading,
learn the lesson from others who have. Every stock has only one
support level that will never be broken—zero. Anything above that is
subject to the sellers pushing it further down.

Figure 5.5 Where Would You Double Down?

c05.indd 107

11/2/07 12:19:00 PM

108

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

Mistake 4: Lack of Training and Preparation
Think for a minute about a mutual fund. You send your money to
a fund and it is pooled with every other investor’s funds. The management team then makes the buy and sell decisions, guided by the
fund prospectus. For the privilege of having a professional management team, you pay a fund expense each year. Some funds may be as
little as ½ percent or less. Others may charge fees of 2 to 3 percent or
more. The point here is that you’re relinquishing your right to make
the trading decisions to the fund managers. Obviously, they have a
fiduciary responsibility to use their skills and judgment to maximize
the growth of your assets. If they are able to increase the value of
your assets by 10 percent, they will receive their management fee.
If they increase the value of your assets by only 2 percent, they will
receive their management fee. If they fail and the value of your assets
declines, they will receive their management fee. You see where we’re
going? Most traders and investors hold some type of mutual fund or
funds and give no thought to the fund expense. We suspect that the
reason it isn’t considered is that you never actually write a check for
the expense—it simply reduces the value of your investment. Perhaps it’s like the direct withdrawal of income taxes. It would be a lot
more painful if you received your full wages and then had to return
a portion to the government to settle your tax liability.
Now the reason you’re reading this book is quite likely because
you have decided to make your own buy and sell decisions for at
least some portion of your portfolio. An alternative reason is that
you have absolutely no interest in trading but yet you suffer from
congenital insomnia and previous remedies have fallen short. For
the former, we’re going to suggest that you implement your own
management fees. Instead of paying the fees to a team of outside
managers, create your own education account. This account should
be used to help you become a better manager of your own money.
Set aside 1 percent of the amount of money that you’re personally
managing and use that as your training and preparation account. If
you have a $100,000 portfolio and you’re actively managing $20,000,
then each year you have $200 to spend on becoming a better investor
and trader. We’re always amazed at how many people are willing
to lose many thousands of dollars due to bad trading decisions or
practices, but they refuse to invest even a minimal amount in their
education. Look at your trading history and see if you can identify

c05.indd 108

11/2/07 12:19:00 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

109

a trade or two that could have been avoided if you knew a bit more
about technical analysis. How much did you lose on those trades?
In Chapter 1 we talked about the importance of including education as a component of your trading plan. We want to emphasize
again that we subscribe to the Keep It Super Simple philosophy when
it comes to market training and education. There are many trainers
and teachers out there who will try to convince you that you have to
study deep and wide in various aspects of technical analysis before
you can unlock the secrets of the market. Just last night, we received
an e-mail with the title, “Profits Keep Pouring In!!!” The marketer
went on to describe how a particular options sage had generated
massive profits from a little-known six-legged option spread. How
easy would it be to think that the reason you’re not profiting in a particular market is that you don’t know how to create this complicated
multileg option trade?
The fact is that the ingredients necessary for trading and investing success are pretty simple. Like learning a language, though, the
best foundation is laid when you take the time to learn a piece at a
time and spend plenty of time practicing. For example, it is possible
to attend a crash course and learn charting, technical indicators,
and stock strategies all at the same time. But it becomes a bit overwhelming when you try to put it all into practice at the same time.
A better approach would be to learn how to read a candlestick chart.
Then go out and start reading many candlestick charts to see how the
patterns develop. Something will just not click, perhaps identifying
certain reversal patterns. So you take another course, read another
book, or attend another seminar and learn a bit more. Gradually,
you develop the recognition skills that will allow you to find the patterns more quickly and easily.
As in any other area of life, you should never stop learning. Trading and investing is no exception. How long does it take to be a master of the basics? The Market Guys will freely admit that we continue
to learn every day. Sometimes it’s a tip or trick that we once knew
but have forgotten to apply at the right time. Sometimes it’s more
fundamental in order to keep up with the ever-changing tide of
the markets. This is especially important with the changes that we
see every year in technology and shifts in how the markets operate.
What will the impact on your trading be when all of the markets
move to 24-hour trading? If you rely on a gap trading strategy, will
you be prepared when there are no more gaps?

c05.indd 109

11/2/07 12:19:00 PM

110

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

You need to make sure that you never lose sight of the other
participants in the market. Even though you may be trading alone in
the isolation of your home office, there are many traders out there
who are striving for every advantage in the markets. Do you really
want to enter that arena without adequate training and preparation? We can assure you that there are many traders who will be
trading the same stocks as you who have done their homework and
have properly equipped themselves.
Picture yourself getting ready to walk on to the field of play at an
NFL football game. Across the line from you is the defensive team.
The tackles have spent the entire preseason in the weight room
building up muscle mass and strength. They’ve done countless drills
on the field, maximizing their cardio fitness and endurance. They’ve
sat through hours of tapes in order to understand the strategies that
could be employed against them in any given situation. Finally,
they’ve taped their joints, donned the pads, and slipped on the helmet for action. Now it’s time for you to stroll onto the field with the
singular objective of getting the ball across the line for a goal. You’re
feeling pretty comfortable in your loafers and khaki shorts. No cumbersome pads for you; you’re well appointed in a light button-up shirt.
Your preseason was spent in air-conditioned comfort, munching on
a bag of chips. You’ve heard about some of the defense plays that
could be coming your way, but you haven’t learned how to recognize
them or counter the moves. How reasonable is it to expect that you’ll
be able to outmaneuver the defense and actually score? Why is it that
so many traders and investors enter the field of play in the markets
with the same level of training and preparation and yet still somehow
expect that they’ll be able to score? The markets will occasionally
reward the lucky, but only the well-trained and prepared investor or
trader will be in it for the long run.

Mistake 5: Trading with Scared Money
Mistake 5 often is the direct result of having made Mistake 2 (Failing to
Accept a Loss) or Mistake 4 (Lack of Training and Preparation). You
trade with scared money when you’ve had a bad trade and now you’re
gun shy. The term gun shy refers to hunting dogs who have developed a
fear of guns. Sometimes this occurs through an accident of some sort,
like getting hit with a spent shell casing. Sometimes, it’s just the loud
report that creates a fear within the dog. However it starts, the dog is

c05.indd 110

11/2/07 12:19:01 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

111

incapable of working near a hunter, often running at the mere sight
of a gun. Unless the dog was born gun shy, it takes much patience and
retraining to get the dog back to where she can point and retrieve without trembling in fear. You have to start small and easy and gradually
build the dog’s confidence.
A gun-shy trader is the same way. You took a trade that started
in your direction, and so you decided to relax your risk management discipline. Perhaps you canceled your stop order protection
and went away for a few days. After all, the trade was moving in a
profitable direction, so you felt as though you didn’t need to manage it. When you came back, the stock had dropped 40 percent on
a bad earnings announcement. For a day or so, you walk around
zombie-like, incredulous at the turn in fortune. When you regain
your senses and close the position, you’ve suffered a catastrophic
loss. If you have the funds remaining to continue trading, you
will certainly not enter the next trade with the same level of confidence that you had on the last trade. Like the shaking, gun-shy dog,
the mere hint of a drop in price will cause you to tremble and
close the position at market.
Another type of gun-shy trader is the person who doesn’t yet
understand the mechanics and strategies of trading, but starts to trade
anyway. This trader is the football player we described in Mistake 4
(Lack of Training and Preparation). Oblivious to the defensive team
staring him down, he struts onto the playing field. The whistle blows,
the play starts, and our khaki-clad trader is stomped into the turf.
Chances are very good that on the next play, he’ll be running toward
his own goal line in an attempt to avoid getting stomped twice.
Scared money results in the trader’s taking one of two courses
of action. The first course of action is that the trader will attempt
to gamble his way out of his mistakes. This is the trader who failed to
accept a loss, took a 40 percent hit on a single trade, and figured that
it’s time for him to double his money on the next trade. This trader
allows the scared money to turn him into a Wild West gambler. The
initial trade may have been a sound initial entry, purchasing 800
shares of a stock trading at $50. The scared money trade, however, is
5,000 shares of a $3 stock. The trader hopes that his stock will rally
to $10 and he’ll walk away with a handsome $35,000 profit. More
times than not, the $3 stock becomes a $1 stock as the gamble fails to
pay off. To reinforce this point, go back to Chapter 1 and review the
section on the trader-versus-gambler personality.

c05.indd 111

11/2/07 12:19:01 PM

112

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

The second course of action that may be taken by the gun-shy
trader who is trading with scared money is more common. Rather
than going for broke and trying to make up the loss in one fell
swoop, the trader will hold the trade very close to the vest in order to
avoid any more pain. In this scenario, the trader buys a stock at $50
and immediately places a sell stop order at $49.99. After losing her
penny, she looks for the next trade. She finds a stock in an uptrend
and buys it at $44. She immediately places her sell stop at $43.99.
Do you see what’s happening? This trader is terrified of taking a loss
of the magnitude that created her fear in the first place. She knows
better than to think that she can recover her losses in a single trade
but she doesn’t have the confidence to allow the market to breathe.
As such, each trade is choked with a small loss that slowly but surely
creates the very loss she was trying to avoid.
A common mistake in trader thinking is that tightening the stop
will result in reduced loss. While the loss per trade may be smaller,
the frequency of losses will increase. This offsets any advantage
that the smaller loss may yield. Remember, you should always let the
chart tell you where to place the stop, based on support or resistance. If you approach a trade with an acceptable loss amount already
in mind, you’re attempting to tell the market what you want. Unfortunately, the market doesn’t care what you want.

Mistake 6: Buying Cheap Options
While we touch on the subject of options throughout this book,
our intent isn’t for this to serve as a comprehensive options trading
guide. Nevertheless, since we present 10 Common Mistakes Made
by Traders, we didn’t want to discount the list by 10 percent and
only list 9 Common Mistakes Made by Traders. With options, you
usually get what you pay for. Cheap options generally have only time
value in their price. There isn’t any intrinsic value that’s reflected
in the premium. The salient point is this: The value of the option
lies in the speculative worth based on where the underlying stock
could move. That is, the premium price is grounded on what might
happen, not on any intrinsic value at the present time.
Interestingly, the same principle applies to many penny stocks.
We could just as easily label this mistake “Buying Cheap Stocks.” Sure,
it is possible to find value stocks where the company’s fundamental
worth is discounted through the stock price. Some measures

c05.indd 112

11/2/07 12:19:01 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

113

of the underlying worth of a company may be the dividend yield,
the price-to-book ratio, or many other varieties of accounting metrics.
However, just because a stock price is cheap doesn’t mean that the company is discounted. The stock price can be manipulated many ways.
Often, when a stock price falls too far, a company will announce a reverse
stock split. That accounting maneuver alone may cause the price to
move from $5 per share to $15 per share in a three-for-one reverse
split. It’s the same company but with a new stock price. Has anything
changed? Of course not, but now the perception of cheap and expensive is shifted.
One of the reasons that traders flock to cheap stocks and options
is the number of shares that can be purchased for a fixed amount
of buying power. If you have $50,000, you can choose between 1,000
shares of a $50 stock or 25,000 shares of a $2 stock. Traders start fantasizing about the $2 stock gaining another $2, and they tally up the
$50,000 profit. If the $50 stock moves up $2, they’re only looking at
banking a $2,000 profit. Could the $2 stock double? Yes, but it could
also drop to $1. Now that cheap little stock just swallowed $25,000
from your account.
You should take the time to burn the image of Figure 5.6 into
your mind. Notice the price scale on the vertical axis of the chart. This
stock is trading at around $3 on the left side of the chart. Without
the benefit of being able to see into the future on the right side of the
chart, it would be easy to rationalize how this should be a $10 stock.

Figure 5.6 A Cheap Stock Getting Cheaper

c05.indd 113

11/2/07 12:19:01 PM

114

The Market Guys’ Five Points for Trading Success

It’s especially easy to do that if the stock has recently dropped down
from that level. The thinking is that if it were trading at $10 or $20
just six months ago, surely it could jump back up to $8, $10, or more!
Instead, the stock continued its downward spiral until it became a $1
stock. Cheap stocks don’t always go up; sometimes they go bankrupt.

Mistake 7: Overcomplicating the Analysis
If you think Fibonacci was a pianist, you’re probably not making this
mistake. For the rest of you, we have these words of advice: “Lighten
up!” We’ll repeat our philosophy many times over throughout this
book. Keep It Super Simple. The reason we have to drill this thinking
into our minds is that at every turn we’re programmed by marketing
messages that convince us that we’ll succeed in the market if we only
take the time to learn that which we don’t currently know. It’s a little
like the guy who was asked how much money it would take to make him
happy. His response was, “A little more.” A little more knowledge is
not always a good thing if the knowledge takes you down a rabbit
hole of useless information. As we write this section, we’re looking
at the front cover advertisement in a popular trading magazine. The
software provider (who shall remain anonymous) is proclaiming that
they provide over 100 free and proprietary technical analysis studies.
For crying out loud! If you need to cherry pick from 100 proprietary studies before you can identify a trading opportunity, then we
strongly suggest that you consider switching to decaf.
In engineering, we discuss a concept known as signal-to-noise
ratio. Essentially, this is a measure of the useful information (signal)
to the useless or irrelevant information (noise). The goal is to maximize the signal while minimizing the amount and effect of the noise.
It’s ironic that engineers, who must understand this concept in
order to qualify as a professional engineer, are some of the most egregious transgressors when it comes to the markets. Traders who come
from more technical backgrounds have spent their careers learning
more advanced methodologies for solving problems. The disconnect
between an engineering or scientific endeavor and the stock markets
is that the former is generally deterministic while the latter is probabilistic. We’ll appeal to the purists who will take us to task for failing to
recognize the probabilistic nature of quantum physics. You’ll appreciate that such a discussion would certainly qualify as an extreme tangent for this book.

c05.indd 114

11/2/07 12:19:02 PM

10 Common Mistakes Made by Traders . . .

115

Nevertheless, the sciences have given us firm rules regarding the
world around us. The energy of a body in motion, kinetic energy,
is one half the body’s mass times the velocity squared. It has always
been such and will continue to be. It doesn’t even matter where
you’re located in the world. But the markets, being probabilistic,
do not always give us a falling stock price when a shooting star candle pattern occurs at the top of an uptrend. It’s important that the
trader understand this because this is the reason why you cannot
create a black box trading system. As far as we know, there isn’t
anyone sitting on the beach in the Caribbean collecting checks
from her broker while her trading system automatically executes
winning trades.
Since we recognize that maximizing the signal while minimizing the noise is important, we have to ensure that we’re not adding
to the noise by layering on scanners, tickers, screens, charts, and
lists. Success in the market is not dependent on the one technical
tool that you haven’t yet acquired. When we meet traders who have
fallen into this trap, we like to walk them through a very basic process. First, clear everything off the chart except price and volume.
The price may be in your favorite form: candlestick, line, bar, and so
on. Second, identify support and resistance role reversal levels. This
is explained in much more detail in the following chapter. Third,
add confirming indicators as appropriate for the market. In other
words, if you’re trading a trend, use a moving average. If your stock
is channeling, consider adding a Bollinger Band or other oscillating
indicator. Whatever you choose for the third step, be judicious in the
application. If you get to step three and then add your top 10 technical indicators, you’ve defeated the purpose of the exercise. Stop and
ask yourself if the chart in Figure 5.7 is really the best layout to help
you find trading opportunities.
Finally, the trader who is constantly overanalyzing a trade setup
is usually the last one to actually place the trade. We refer to this
condition as Paralysis by Analysis. By the time he’s convinced himself that he found a good trade, he’s missed the better part of the
move. We don’t think it’s a coincidence that the first four letters of
“analysis” describe this personality completely. It is true that the perfect trade will occasionally present itself. Much more often, though,
is the arrival of the imperfect trade that requires a combination of
technical analysis paired with the judgment born from many previous trades.
