
The RSI Enables Comparisons Between Securities

The nature of the RSI calculation enables the accurate comparison of dif-
ferent securities on the same chart. In Chart 11-1, there are two series, the
Dow Jones Utilities Index and the Philadelphia Gold and Silver Share
Index. The upper panel plots a 45-day ROC and the lower one a 45-day RSI.
With the ROC, it is not easily possible to compare the two because the
Utilities Index is far less volatile. On the other hand, you can see that the
divergence in volatility is far less. Because of this, it is much easier to estab-
lish universal standards for the overbought and oversold benchmarks. Using

the 14-day default, these levels are traditionally set at 30 for oversold and
70 for overbought.

Constructing Overbought/Oversold Lines

The default time span for the calculation of an RSI is 14 periods. The over-
bought and oversold lines are typically drawn at 70 and 30, respectively. In
an article entitled “How The RSI Behaves,”? Peter W. Aan argued that the
average value of an RSI top and bottom occurred close to the 72 and 32 le
els, respectively. This research would indicate that the 70 and 30 levels rec-
ommended by Wilder should be moved farther apart to better reflect the
average overbought and oversold values.

It is important to note that the magnitude of the oscillations of the RS!
is inverse to that of most other momentum series, For example, the ROC
indicator is subject to wider fluctuations the longer the time span. It works

"Futures, January 1985,

Individual Momentum Indicators I 213

Chart 11-1 RSI versus the ROC. (From www.pring.com.)

[F om = a]
40 ’ Philadelphia Gold and |
45-day ROC , M a nae” Silver Share Index :
204. meek y ve ba
ad iy ny ped on
at : a

Me

204 ; oN ye

Dow Jones Utilities i

—|
a a CE
spouses ones eee care eer el pe age ee

in an opposite way for the RSI. For the RSI, equilibrium is the halfway point,
which in this case is the 50 level. It is therefore traditional to place the over-
bought and oversold lines equidistant from this point.

