
Considering more than price
Your choice of brokers should be based on much more than who can offer
you the cheapest price. Although price definitely is a factor in your selection
of broker, it is one of many factors you need to consider. The most important
factors are the services that your broker offers and how effective and efficient
the broker is in carrying out those promised services. Look for brokers that
offer smart order routing capabilities, but steer clear of the ones that accept
payment for order flow (see the “Types of orders supported” section, earlier
in this chapter).
You may find a brokerage firm that provides all the bells and whistles at the
cheapest price, but if its systems break down at a critical trading moment
and you’re not able to implement your trades when you want to, those bells
and whistles mean nothing, and not being able to rely on them can result in
huge losses. Look for brokers that allow you to test drive a demo version of
order entry systems.

Doing a little research
If you expect to become an active and successful trader and want full access
so you can trade electronically through the exchanges, you more than likely
need to research direct-access brokers. If, however, you believe that your
volume of trades per month will be lower than 50, you may want to consider
a discount broker that offers access to ECNs. Basically, your choice of brokers
comes down to the types of services and accounts you need and which
broker offers the best mix for what you want to do and pay.

43

44

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
Your first step is to make lists of your financial objectives, the types of
trading you want to do, and the services you know you’re going to need. After
committing those factors to memory, talk with other traders you know and be
sure to find out what their experiences have been with various brokers.
You can also research and compare ratings of brokers on the Internet. Try
these Web sites:
✓ SmartMoney: This site also conducts a yearly survey that can give you
an excellent overview of broker performance. Go to www.smartmoney.
com, click on “Stocks & Options” in the left-hand menu, and then scroll
down to “Annual Broker Survey.” The survey lists rankings for basic and
premium discount brokers and full-service brokers.
✓ Barron’s: The Web site of the weekly financial magazine (www.barrons.
com) does an excellent annual evaluation of online brokers and
direct-access brokers, usually in March. A subscription is required.
✓ Active Trader magazine (www.activetradermag.com) and Stocks
and Commodities magazine (www.traders.com) also periodically
review brokers and trading platforms. Subscriptions are required.
After narrowing down your choices, check out the disciplinary histories of
the brokerage firms you’re considering. You can easily do that by calling
a toll-free hotline operated by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority
(FINRA) at 800-289-9999, or checking its Web site at www.finra.org to
find out what disciplinary actions (if any) have been taken by securities
regulators or criminal authorities. You also need to call your state regulator
to be sure the specific broker you’re thinking about working with is licensed
to do business in your state. This information can be crucial. If you work with
an unlicensed broker who goes out of business, you may not have any way of
recovering any lost funds even if an arbitrator or court rules in your favor.

Understanding how you’ll be paying
After conducting your initial research into brokerage firms and narrowing
down your choices, be sure you understand how the brokerage firms are
paid by
✓ Reviewing each firm’s fee and commission schedule. The schedules
should include the fees or charges you’re required to pay when opening
the account and what you pay to maintain and close the account.
✓ Finding out how your broker is compensated if you’re planning to work
with a human being rather than trade online. Many brokers receive
higher compensation when they sell their firm’s own products, so they
may try to steer you toward them rather than another product that
may be a better match for your trading objectives. Rarely are brokerage
products good trading vehicles.

Chapter 3: Going for Broke(r): Discovering Your Brokerage Options
One other level of protection that you need to check on is the broker’s
membership in the Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC).
Although SIPC membership won’t insure you against losses caused by market
declines, the SIPC does give you some protection if your brokerage firm faces
insolvency. You can find out more about the SIPC at www.sipc.org.

Getting to Know the Rules
After you pick your broker, you must be sure you know the trading rules.
Although federal law mandates margin requirements, sets trade settlement
rules, and bans free riding (nope, we’re not talking about horseback riding
here), brokerage firms sometimes have even more stringent rules for their
clients. We review the federal requirements here, but you need to check with
your broker to find out any additional rules your chosen firm imposes.
Rules for stock trading fall under the jurisdiction of the Federal Reserve,
which specifies its stock trading regulations in Regulation T. Rules spelled
out under Regulation T encompass margin accounts, broker-dealer accounts,
securities transactions, credit extended based on securities, and other factors
related to securities markets. We don’t review all the specifics here, but
instead we home in on three key areas that impact your trading choices —
margin requirements, trade settlement, and free riding.

Margin requirements
The Federal Reserve’s Regulation T specifies how much you can borrow
when you use a margin account to purchase new shares of stocks on margin.
This initial margin requirement permits you to borrow up to 50 percent of the
cost of the new shares. For example, if you open a new margin account with
a $10,000 cash deposit, you can buy up to $20,000 worth of stock. After your
$20,000 purchase, your account will have a cash balance of $0, an equity
balance of $10,000, and a margin balance of $10,000. At this time, all your
equity is committed to this trade, so you cannot enter any new positions
unless you deposit additional funds.
If the stock price increases, your equity balance increases. If the stock
price decreases, your equity balance decreases. In either case, your margin
balance remains the same, $10,000. The only way to reduce the outstanding
margin balance is to deposit extra cash into your account or sell the shares
of stock.
When your stock price increases, your equity balance increases and you may
use the increased equity as collateral to borrow additional money to buy
additional shares of stocks. You may borrow up to the value of the increased
equity balance. This will increase your margin balance.

45

46

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
However, if your equity balance decreases, FINRA rules (Rule 431 and Rule
2520, respectively) regulate the minimum equity position permitted in
your account. Currently, the minimum is 25 percent of the total value of all
margined securities. Some brokers may require more.
In the single-stock example earlier in this chapter, if the total value of the
stock falls below $13,332, then the equity balance in your portfolio will be
less than 25 percent of the total value. The math is simple: 25 percent of
$13,332 is $3,333. Your cash balance is still $0 and your margin balance is
still $10,000. Subtract $10,000 from $13,332 to determine your equity balance,
which is $3,332. Your equity balance is less than 25 percent of your total
account balance.
When this occurs, your broker will call and demand additional collateral to
support the outstanding margin loan. This is a margin call. You may meet
your margin call requirements by depositing more cash or you may deposit
fully paid, unmargined securities from another account. If you do not deposit
additional collateral, your broker is permitted to sell up to four times the
amount of stock required to meet your margin call, and may sell any of the
stocks in your portfolio.
If you have more than a few positions, margin calculations become complex.
It helps to think about it like this: When initiating a new position, you can
never borrow more than half of the value of the position. To maintain
sufficient collateral, your broker will insist that the value of your stocks be
more than enough to cover the loan. Therefore, if your equity balance falls
below 25 percent of the total portfolio value, your broker will ask for
additional collateral in the form of a margin call.
As a trader, you should never satisfy a margin call. Instead, you should close
the offending position(s). It is possible that an extraordinary event may cause
the value of your stocks to fall below the amount owned on your outstanding
margin loan. If this happens, your broker will close your positions, but you
must still repay the debt. Unlike a cash account, you can lose more than 100
percent of the money you deposit into a margin account.
Note: Not all stocks can be bought on margin and neither can all stocks be
used as collateral. If you want to trade on margin, be sure you understand the
margin requirements imposed by your broker. Some brokerage firms require
even stiffer requirements to maintain a margin account, especially if you trade
volatile or lightly-traded stocks.
FINRA Rule 2520 was amended in 2001 to restrict day-trading activity. Your
broker or the FINRA will consider you a pattern day trader after you buy or sell
any security on the same day in a margin account and execute four or more
such trades during a five-day business period (excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and holidays). If you’re pegged as a pattern day trader, you’re required to
maintain $25,000 in your margin account, which can seriously impact your day
trading and other trading activities.

Chapter 3: Going for Broke(r): Discovering Your Brokerage Options

Settling trades
When you place an order to buy a stock, you must settle that transaction in
three business days. This settlement cycle is known as T + 3. The brokerage
firm must receive your payment for any securities you buy no later than
three days after the trade is executed. If you’re selling a stock, it’s probably
being held in your brokerage account and will be taken out of that account
on the day of settlement. Options and government securities trade on a T + 1
settlement cycle, which means these transactions settle the next trading day.

Free riding
No, we’re not talking about hopping a train on the sly. Free riding in the
stock-trading world can get you in a bunch of trouble, so keep reading.
Basically it means that you must pay for a stock before you can sell it, and
because it takes three days to settle a stock transaction, that means, in
theory, you can actually buy a stock and then place an order to sell it before
the stock purchase actually settles.
This is a cash account problem. Although many swing and day traders
actually turn around stock purchases and sales that quickly, they typically
trade in a margin account and are able to sidestep the problem. Margin
traders use the unsettled proceeds of a trade as collateral to borrow money
until the trade is settled. Still, day traders and swing traders must have enough
cash or buying power in their accounts to cover all purchases of stock.
Formally, this rule is found in Section 220 of Regulation T, which states that in
a cash account, a brokerage firm may buy a security on your behalf — or sell a
security — if either of the following applies:
✓ You have sufficient funds in the account.
✓ The firm accepts in good faith your agreement to make a full-cash
payment for the security before you sell it.
If you do ever buy and sell a security before the settlement cycle (T + 3) is
complete — or even on the same day — and without sufficient cash in your
account, a brokerage firm can make what is called an intraday extension of
credit (a loan), but that exposes the firm to increased risks — especially the
risk that you may overextend your financial resources and may not be able to
settle your trades. Most brokerage firms require active traders who buy and
then sell securities within the settlement cycle to conduct those activities
within a margin account.
If you take a free ride and haven’t made some type of credit arrangement with
your broker, your broker is likely to freeze your account for 90 days. During
that 90-day period, the broker requires you to pay for any purchase on the

47

48

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
date that you make the trade. In other words, you lose the option of settling
your trades within three days. Some brokerage firms require you to have
enough cash in your account to complete the transaction before you make
the trade so you thus avoid even the risk of free riding.
We talk more about these rapid forms of trading (swing trading and day
trading) in Chapters 16 and 17.

Chapter 4

Putting Your Computer to Work:
Your Key Business Tool
In This Chapter
▶ Streamlining trading activities
▶ Selecting charting software, fundamental information sources, and research tools
▶ Choosing a trading platform
▶ Evaluating computer and Internet resources

B

ack in the old days, you’d call your broker to enter an order and then
wait for your broker to phone back and report the fill price. Active
traders? They’d hang out in the broker’s lobby, watching the ticker, boasting
over winning trades, commiserating over losing trades, and shooting the
breeze.
If you kept charts, you either made them yourself or had them delivered
by postal carrier in book form. They arrived at the end of each week. If you
couldn’t afford that extravagance, you’d buy monthly summaries and update
them yourself.
Every retail investor bought and sold stocks the same way. The pros had the
advantage, but it was more or less a level playing field for the rest of us.
Today, you’d be hard-pressed to find a ticker-tape machine in any brokerage
office. The Internet has changed everything. You can still buy chart books,
but now they’re delivered via the Internet, and so are stock prices, realtime intraday charts, and research reports. You can enter orders online,
have your orders filled within seconds, and receive notification showing the
order’s price almost as quickly.
Online brokers provide a vast array of research and trading tools for their
clients. Real-time streaming quotes, proprietary and third-party research,
sophisticated charts, and extensive order-entry capabilities make today’s
traders better informed and better equipped than ever before.

50

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
If you’re anything like us, you’re going to spend plenty of time with your
trading platform. It pays to spend a little time thinking about what information
you need now, how you’ll use it, and what you may need in the future. With
just a little foresight, you can set up your trading platform so that it’s
effective today and yet still be able to upgrade it without completely
disrupting your day-to-day activities.
In this chapter, we review the basic computer hardware you need to access
all there is to offer for traders, explore the software options you’ll want to
consider for managing your trading activities, and discuss various trading
platforms and data-feed alternatives. Finally, we give you a road map to the
options available on the Internet.

Making Use of Your Computer
Although tracking the market and charting stock prices by hand is an
excellent learning exercise — it gives you a feel for the market that you can’t
get by reviewing computer-generated charts — we doubt that you’d want to
travel to the local library or your broker’s office to research the stocks that
interest you. The wealth of online information that can help you improve
your trading results is simply remarkable. This section lists some of the
things you can do with your computer.

Identifying trading candidates
With your computer, you can do all of the following:
✓ Display and interpret price charts
✓ Research stocks, bonds, IPOs, options, and futures
✓ Read analyst reports and company reports to the SEC
✓ Screen stocks for technical or fundamental constraints
✓ Monitor economic reports, earnings reports, and business news
✓ Monitor market indexes, sectors, and trading statistics

Chapter 4: Putting Your Computer to Work: Your Key Business Tool

Managing your account
Managing your account can involve some or all of the following:
✓ Entering and executing trades, and monitoring open orders
✓ Controlling and tracking order routing
✓ Receiving almost instantaneous fill reports
✓ Monitoring and analyzing your portfolio and all open positions
✓ Tracking profits and losses
✓ Analyzing your trading history

Improving your trades
You can become a better trader by doing the following:
✓ Evaluating trading systems and testing trading ideas
✓ Keeping trading logs to audit your trading performance
✓ Monitoring the tax consequences of your trades
✓ Staying in touch with other traders

Finding Price Charts
Price charts show the history of a stock’s price over time. These charts
conceal useful trading information that is revealed with careful analysis.
Reading, interpreting, and understanding what you see in a price chart are
described in Chapters 8 through 11.
Fortunately, price charts are easy to find. If your broker doesn’t provide an
adequate charting package, you can find excellent charting tools on dozens of
online sites. If you have to go outside your broker’s environment, you may
have to put up with Internet banner ads. Most of the charts on free Web sites
display 20-minute delayed prices. You may have to pay $9.95 to $34.95 a
month for Internet charts that update in real time.

51

52

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
At a minimum, you need control over the time frame and the types of charts
displayed. For example, you probably want 1-minute, 5-minute, 15-minute,
and 60-minute charts to go with daily, weekly, and monthly charts. Other
features to look for include these:
✓ Trading volume. (It’s critical.)
✓ Moving averages to show average prices over time. You’ll want at least
two types, simple moving averages and exponential moving averages,
and you’ll want control over the period being averaged. Moving averages
are discussed in Chapter 11.
✓ Indicators and oscillators to help evaluate a stock’s direction and
momentum. We use the MACD (Moving Average Convergence
Divergence) indicator and the Stochastics Oscillator. Indicators and
oscillators are discussed in Chapter 11.
✓ A variety of chart styles, including bar charts and candlestick charts.
Bar charts are the most popular stock charts, and they’re the ones we
use throughout this book. We describe how to read and interpret them
in Chapter 9. Candlestick charts display the price data using a slightly
different format that is preferred by some traders. The analysis techniques
in this book work for both styles.
✓ Ability to display data in a log or semi-log format. This allows equal
percentage price changes to appear the same on the price chart, which
is helpful for comparing the price movements of two differently priced
stocks. For example, if a $10 stock rises to $20, that’s a 100 percent
price change. If a $50 stock rises to $100, that’s also a 100 percent price
increase, but it will look like a much larger price increase on a standard
price chart. Use a log or semi-log format to show similar percentage
changes so they look the same on the chart.
✓ Ability to group charts together so you can quickly scan open positions
or trade candidates.
✓ Ability to show support and resistance levels, draw trend lines, and
make annotations.
There are two kinds of online charts: real-time charts and delayed-price
charts. While the charts may be identical, the prices shown in the charts
are not. Real-time charts display current price data updated within a few
seconds of the trade. Delayed-price charts do not show the most current
trades. Instead, the prices shown on the chart are at least 15 to 20 minutes old.

Chapter 4: Putting Your Computer to Work: Your Key Business Tool
Although many excellent online charting alternatives are out there, they
typically aren’t as flexible or configurable as the ones offered in stand-alone
charting packages or integrated trading platforms. And you probably won’t
have access to trading-system development and testing software that is
required to create and test your own trading system. The advantages and
disadvantages of online charts, stand-alone charting packages, and integrated
trading platforms are discussed in the following sections. We discuss methods
for developing and testing personalized trading systems in Chapter 15.

Internet charts, delayed prices
Although real-time charts are desirable, they’re a necessity only for extremely
active short-term traders. Analyzing the market and developing your trading
plan are best done before the market in which you plan to make your trades
opens, or after it closes. Delayed-price charts are more than adequate for
these planning and analysis activities.
You can use delayed-price charts to identify support and resistance levels,
display moving averages, find emerging trends, and select possible entry and
exit points for tomorrow’s trading day.
Here are a few sources for online charts:
✓ BigCharts (www.bigcharts.com): BigCharts is part of the CBS
MarketWatch family. The site is free and offers an excellent charting
package with plenty of options, including interactive charts, industry
analysis, and stock screeners. You can define a list of favorite charts for
quick review. News and market commentary are also provided.
✓ Investor’s Business Daily (www.investors.com): Investor’s Business
Daily (IBD) publishes its proprietary ranking system online and in its
daily paper. Using the stock-picking methodology developed by publisher
William O’Neil, the site provides charts and rankings by relative strength
and earnings growth. Available by subscription.
✓ Decision Point (www.decisionpoint.com): Decision Point is another
subscription charting site, but it takes a different approach, providing
chart books, hundreds of unique charts, and market commentary based
primarily on technical analysis. If you’re looking for a quick way to scan
a large group of stocks, this site provides excellent tools. You may find
that Decision Point is a nice complement to a more traditional charting
site or charting software package.
