
Companies in the business services sector are almost as varied as the busi-
nesses they serve. After all, the group includes firms such as Fiserv (financial
institution data processing), Waste Management (waste hauling), Omnicom
(advertising), and even United Airlines (air transportation). Because the busi-
ness services sector is so varied, we divide it into three major subsectors based
on how companies set up their businesses to make money. Specifically, we look
at technology-based, people-based, and hard-asset-based subsectors. Although
not all companies within the industry fit perfectly into just one of these cate-
gories, it's a useful distinction to make when you're analyzing a potential in-
vestment in business services. Despite being such a diverse group of businesses,

a few major themes impact the majority of business services companies.

Todd Lukasik, Fritz Kaegi, and Sanjay Ayer with Pat Dorsey.


220 BUSINESS SERVICES

Outsourcing Trend

Business-to-business services have grown significantly, increasing as a percent-
age of GDP from 3.5 percent in 1990 to 5.4 percent in 2001. Fueling the growth
has been the popularity of outsourcing—the practice of offloading noncore
tasks to third parties.

Many business services providers have essentially created markets for
themselves based on this trend. Cintas, for example, has successfully con-
vinced companies that it’s better to pay Cintas to service employees’ uniforms
than to leave the responsibility to each individual employee or to handle it
themselves. Other industries developed to fill needs that would be difficult or
impossible for companies to handle internally. It is impractical, for example,
for every mom-and-pop retailer to develop its own infrastructure to facilitate
its acceptance of credit and debit card payments. Instead, companies such as
First Data and National Processing allow retailers to tap into larger systems,
the fixed costs of which can be leveraged across many clients.

Outsourcing makes sense to many business owners because it usually
saves time and money, removes the hassle of dealing with noncore tasks, and
allows management to focus on what's really important to the success of their

company.

Economic Moats in Business Services
In business services, size does indeed matter. Companies can leverage size to
boost both their top and bottom lines. By expanding the range of services of-
fered, companies can increase total revenue per customer. By handling more
volume—especially over fixed-cost networks—companies can lower unit
costs and achieve greater profitability.

‘To capitalize on this, many business services firms have attempted to ac-
quire their way to critical mass and achieve scale economies by consolidating
the operations of multiple businesses. For example, data processing firms such
as Fiserv, First Data, and ADP have all made acquisitions an important part of
their overall strategies.

Size impacts the industry through branding as well. Often, brands play a
major role in a business outsourcing purchase decision. Companies may be
hesitant to outsource payroll processing (and the related handling of em-
ployee pay and tax funds) to Fly-By-Night Upstart, Inc., but are comfortable


TECHNOLOGY-BASED BUSINESSES

entrusting the responsibility to ADP, founded in 1949 and currently the
biggest payroll processor. Even in business services, brands count, and it’s
usually the biggest companies that have the most recognizable brands.

Many industries in business services have significant barriers to entry,
making it tough for new players to enter the field. For example, a company
that wanted to process credit card transactions for banks and retailers would
have to build a processing infrastructure to support its business, including
hardware, the software development to manage the data, and a sales network
to sign customers. Such a company would have to go through considerable
trouble and expense just to try to compete against a company such as First
Data, which already handles billions of transactions each year.

Despite the relatively high barriers to entry in the electronic transaction
processing industry, there's little protection against competition from other
industry participants. For example, in 2001, Concord EFS lost Bank of Amer-
ica’s electronic funds transfer switching business to a very aggressive bid from
competitor Visa. Thus, although most business services industries have wide
moats, companies still need to differentiate themselves further to fend off po-

tentially intense competition from established industry players.

Technology-Based Businesses

Technology-based companies include data processors (ADP, First Data),
database providers (IMS Health, Equifax, Getty Images), and other com-
panies that leverage technology to deliver their services. When technology-
based companies get cheap, they can be a great opportunity for investors.
Due to the sizable and defensible competitive advantages most companies in
this subsector enjoy, they've often generated better-than-average long-term
returns. For example, the 10-year average total return for a group of data
processors was 14.2 percent through May 2003, which was above the 9.7 per-
cent average total return for the S&P 500.

Industry Structure

Technology-based businesses often offer the strongest cases for outsourcing.
For example, a bank looking to implement electronic check imaging could
spend the money to develop and maintain its own proprietary system, or it

could contract with Fiserv. Because Fiserv spreads its system’s development

221


222

BUSINESS SERVICES

and maintenance costs across many banks, the cost of Fiserv’s system to any
one bank is relatively low. And with input from all its clients feeding feature
development, it’s likely that Fiserv’s product would be superior to something
just one bank could develop on its own.

In general, technology-based businesses like Fiserv and its check imaging
system require huge initial investments to set up an infrastructure that can be
leveraged across many customers. These huge investments are a barrier to
entry for new competitors.

Although the current participants in the various technology-based indus-
tries compete vigorously against one another, their markets generally have so
much potential that price competition tends to be less intense than you
might otherwise expect. For example, in 2002, Paychex and ADP—by far the
two largest companies in payroll processing—had fewer than 900,000 U.S.
clients between them, which represented only about 12 percent of the 7.2
million employers believed to be operating in the United States. Similarly,
the use of card payments (such as credit and debit transactions) is expected to
grow from about 28 percent of all consumer expenditures in 1999 to almost
50 percent by 2010 (based on dollar volume of transactions in the United
States),! which should benefit firms such as First Data and National Process-
ing. Faced with markets like these, companies are less inclined to compete
vigorously on price, instead counting on enough growth to go around for all
companies to benefit.

Another desirable characteristic of technology-based businesses is the low
ongoing capital investment required to maintain their systems. For firms al-
ready in the industry, the huge upfront technology investments have already
taken place. And the cost of technology tends to drop over time, so upkeep
expenditures are minimal. First Data’s Western Union franchise, for example,
spends only about 5 percent of revenue each year to maintain and build its
fixed assets in the business.

Companies in this subsector often benefit from both economies of scale
and operating leverage. Economies of scale refers to a company’s ability to lever-

age its fixed cost infrastructure across more and more clients, as demonstrated

"The Nilson Report, Number 753, December 2001.


TECHNOLOGY-BASED BUSINESSES

by Cintas washing loads upon loads of uniforms in a single plant and First
Data processing billions of transactions via one network. The result of scale
economies should be operating leverage, whereby profits are able to grow faster
than sales.

The combination of operating leverage and low ongoing capital require-
ments suggests that technology-based firms should have plenty of free cash to
throw around. Telltale signs of good cash generation are dividends, share
buybacks, and an accumulation of cash on the balance sheet.

Another characteristic to look for when evaluating investments in this
subsector is predictable sales and profits. Because 5- to 10-year customer con-
tracts can be the norm for technology-based businesses, 80 percent to 90 per-
cent of a company’s revenue may be booked before the year even begins. That
makes financial results more stable and predictable.

Asa result of the high barriers to entry into technology-based businesses
and long-term customer contracts, firms in this subsector tend to have wide,
defensible moats. For this reason, when a technology-based business services
stock is cheap, it’s usually worth a good look.

Hallmarks of Success for Technology-Based Businesses
Investors interested in technology-based companies should look for busi-
nesses that:

> Throw off cash: With big market opportunities, operating leverage, and
minimal ongoing investment requirements, technology-based businesses
have no excuse for not generating loads of cash. Technology-based busi-
nesses often have free cash flow margins in the mid-teens or higher.

> Enjoy economies of scale: Because bigger is better in this industry, the mar-
ket leaders benefit from cost advantages relative to small competitors.
This usually translates into better financial performance, either by retain-
ing cost advantages or sharing them with clients and gaining even more
market share.

> Report stable financial performance: Because customers usually sign con-
tracts that last 5 to 10 years, the majority of technology-based companies’

revenue should be recurring and predictable year in and year out.

203


224 BUSINESS SERVICES

> Are exposed to fast-growing or underpenetrated markets: Given the operating
leverage of most technology-based firms, exposure to markets with lots of
growth potential should translate into impressive profit expansion.

> Offer a complete range of services: Many outsourcing buyers look to consoli-
date their purchases, so they have fewer relationships to manage. Com-
panies with a one-stop collection of services should benefit from this trend.
Furthermore, getting existing clients to sign up for more services is gener-
ally easier than signing up a new client, and cross sales can also increase
customer switching costs, binding customers ever tighter to the firm.

> Have strong sales capabilities and access to distribution channels: Business
services don't sell by themselves, so it’s no surprise that the most success-

ful companies have strong salesforces.

People-Based Businesses

The people-based subsector includes companies that rely heavily on people
to deliver their services, such as consultants and professional advisors
(Accenture, Moody’s), temporary staffing companies (Manpower, Robert
Half), and advertising agencies (Omnicom, Interpublic). Investments can
be attractive at the right price, but the model is generally less attractive than
that of our technology-based subsector.

Industry Structure

People-based businesses make their money by leveraging an investment in
their employees’ time. The classic example of this model is the consulting in-
dustry. An analyst who is paid $50 per hour by the consulting firm may actu-
ally be hired out to clients at a rate of $250 per hour. Thus, the consulting firm
makes a spread on the analyst’s billed time. That spread has to cover other
costs, such as overhead and partners’ bonuses, so it’s not pure profit for the
firm. But marking up the cost of peoples’ time is the basic way consulting
firms make money.

As a result of this business model, growth for people-based companies
comes mainly from finding and hiring more skilled workers to deploy. Train-
ing (or some might say, indoctrinating) new hires is important because it
helps to ensure a somewhat standard level of service quality. Salary expense is

essentially a big, fixed cost that must be covered for profits to be made. But


PEOPLE-BASED BUSINESSES

when the economy slows and companies become more careful with spending,
these firms’ services (such as consulting and advertising) are normally popular
places for cutbacks.

While most companies in this subsector operate in very fragmented in-
dustries, there are definite advantages to businesses with national and inter-
national scale. Manpower, for example, has an advantage relative to smaller
players when competing for the largest companies’ business because Man-
power can staff workers around the globe wherever they're needed. Scale also
fosters efficiencies in advertising and brand development that smaller com-
petitors don’t enjoy. For example, in 2001, Accenture spent about $150 mil-
lion on image development to bolster its brand after splitting away from
Arthur Andersen.

Relationships are also very important in this subsector. The very nature of
the business—with a somewhat unique product for every client—makes it
difficult to clearly differentiate one company’s offering from the next. As such,
relationships play a key role in driving business. Purchase decisions may be
made because the project buyer went to school with the consulting partner or
another division at the buyer's firm has used a particular advertising agency
for years with success.

Although some people-based businesses, such as Moody's, have wide
moats, economic moats for companies operating people-based models are usu-
ally narrow at best. Brands, longstanding relationships with customers, and ge-
ographic scope can provide some advantages relative to competitors. But
within most people-based industries, there are usually multiple competitors
with similar strengths in these areas, and they tend to compete aggressively

with one another.

Hallmarks of Success for People-Based Businesses

> Differentiation of offering: Differentiation can give companies an advan-
tage and lead to superior financial results. Robert Half has successfully
differentiated itself in the staffing business by focusing on professional
labor for smaller employers and developing different brands for the dif-
ferent markets it serves.

> Providing a necessary andlor low-cost service: When customers feel com-

pelled to purchase the service and when the cost of the service is relatively

225


226 BUSINESS SERVICES

low, customers are less likely to spend time trying to negotiate a better
price. Firms view Moody’s, for example, as an important component of
debt issuance because investors are familiar and comfortable with
Moody’s debt ratings. Furthermore, the cost of a Moody’s rating is a frac-
tion of the total value of the money raised through the debt issue.

> Organic growth: Look for internally generated growth instead of growth
generated by acquisitions because it signals healthy demand for the firm’s
service. In addition, acquisitions don’t always integrate as smoothly as

planned, subjecting the business to integration risks.

Hard-Asset-Based Businesses

Companies in the hard-asset-based subsector depend on big investments in
fixed assets to grow their businesses. Airlines, waste haulers (Waste Manage-
ment, Allied Waste, Republic Services), and expedited delivery companies
(FedEx, UPS) all fall into this subsector. In general, these companies aren't as
attractive as technology-based businesses, but investors can still find some

wide-moat stocks and good investments in this area.

Industry Structure

Growth for hard-asset-based businesses inevitably requires large incremental
outlays for fixed assets. After all, once an airline is flying full planes, the only
way to get more passengers from point A to point B is to acquire an additional
aircraft, which can cost $35 million or more.

Because the incremental fixed investment occurs before asset deployment,
companies in this sector generally finance their growth with external funding.
Debt can be used to finance almost all of the asset's cost, so lenders generally
require the asset to provide collateral against the loan. With this model, high
leverage is not necessarily a bad thing, provided that the company can make
enough money deploying the asset to cover the cost of debt financing and
earn a reasonable return for shareholders.

With this in mind, airlines are generally the least attractive investment of
all the companies in this subsector, Airlines must bear enormous fixed costs
to maintain their fleets and meet the demands of expensive labor contracts,

yet they sell a commodity service that’s difficult to differentiate. As a result,


HARD-ASSET-BASED BUSINESSES

Common Investing Pitfall: Off Balance-Sheet Financing

FedEx reported $1.8 billion in debt in fiscal 2002. Given its market cap of about

$16 billion at fiscal year end 2002, the implied leverage of 11 percent {i.e., $1.8 bil-
lion/$16 billion) seems reasonable, if not low. Further scrutiny, however, reveals large
lease obligations that would have added almost $12 billion in debt to FedEx’s balance
sheet, had FedEx chosen to purchase the assets outright instead of leasing them.
Including this off-balance sheet obligation as part of debt financing pushes FedEx’s
leverage much higher. (A good rule of thumb for getting a handle on leases is to find
a footnote to the 10-K labeled “lease commitments,” and lock fora discussion of
“future minimum lease payments” related to “operating leases.” Find the minimum
lease payment for next year, multiply it by eight, and you'll have a good rough esti-
mate of haw much debt the leases represent.)

price competition is intense, profit margins are razor-thin—and often non-
existent—and operating leverage is so high that the firms can swing from
being wildly profitable to nearly bankrupt in a short time. If you don’t think
this sounds like a recipe for good long-term investments, you're right—air-
lines have lost a collective $11 billion (excluding the impact of recent govern-
ment handouts) between deregulation in 1978 and 2002. Over the same time
period, 125 airlines had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, and 12 of
them filed for Chapter 7 liquidation.

But despite the terrible performance for airlines in general, a few carriers
have fared very well. Southwest, for one, has been profitable for 30 consecu-
tive years—an amazing achievement considering the cyclicality of its business
and the dismal operating environment for the industry in 2002. Southwest’s
superior financial performance is largely because of its main strategic advan-
tage: a low cost structure driven by its practice of flying one type of aircraft
for all of its no frills, point-to-point routes. In an industry with less-than-
desirable fundamentals, Southwest has achieved superior financial results by
deploying a different, and dominant, business strategy.

Other characteristics of hard-asset-based businesses make this segment

worth watching. The idea of limited or shrinking assets, for example, can go a

27


228

BUSINESS SERVICES

long way to providing stability in the competitive landscape for these com-
panies. Because of the NIMBY (not in my back yard) principle, it is very dif-
ficult to get approval for new landfill sites. As a result, it is highly unlikely that
new competitors will enter the landfill side of the waste management busi-
ness. That puts a company such as Waste Management, which owns 40 per-
cent of the total U.S. disposal capacity via its 300 landfills, at an advantage.
The majority of hard-asset-based companies fall into the narrow- or no-
moat buckets. With few, if any, competitive advantages for many of these
companies, investors should look for a pretty steep discount to a fair value es-

timate before buying shares.

Hallmarks of Success for Hard-Asset-Based Businesses

> Cost leadership: Because hard-asset-based companies have large fixed costs,
those that deliver their products most efficiently have a strong advantage
and can achieve superior financial performance, such as Southwest in the
airline industry. Firms don’t usually advertise their cost structures per se,
so to get an idea about how efficiently a company operates, look at its
fixed asset turnover, operating margins, and RO[C—and compare its
numbers to industry peers.

> Unique assets: When limited assets are required to fulfill the delivery of
a particular service, ownership of those assets is key. For example, Waste
Management’s numerous, well-located landfill assets represent a signifi-
cant competitive advantage and barrier to entry in the waste management
government approval to diminish its share of this business.

> Prudent financing: Remember, having a load of debt is not itself a bad
thing. Having a load of debt that cannot be easily financed by the cash
flow of the business is a recipe for disaster. When analyzing companies
with high debt, always be sure that the debt can be serviced from free

cash flow, even under a downside scenario.

Investor's Checklist: Business Services
> Understand the business model. Knowing if a company leverages tech-
nology, people, or hard assets will provide insight as to the kind of finan-

cial results the company May produce.


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

Look for scale and operating leverage. These characteristics can provide
significant barriers to entry and lead to impressive financial performance.
Look for recurring revenue. Long-term customer contracts can guarantee
certain levels of revenue for years into the future. This can provide a de-
gree of stability in financial results.

Focus on cash flow. Investors ultimately earn returns based on a com-
pany’s cash-generating ability. Avoid investments that aren't expected to
generate adequate cash flow.

Size the market opportunity. Industries with big, untapped market
opportunities provide an attractive environment for high growth. In
addition, companies chasing markets perceived to be big enough to ac-
commodate growth for all industry participants are less likely to compete
on price alone.

Examine growth expectations. Understand what kind of growth rates are
incorporated into the share price. If the rates of growth are unrealistic,
avoid the stock.
