
people is, olde gossyps tales went abroade, new tales were invented, fables were added to
fables, and lyes grew upon lyes. So that every daye newe slanders were laide upon the
King, and not one of them true. Rumors arose, blasphemyes were sprede, the enemyes
rejoyced, and treasons by the priestes were mainteyned; and what lykewise was surmised,
or other subtiltye practised, all was then lathered upon this foolish prophet, as 'thus saith
Peter Wakefield;' 'thus hath he prophecied;' ' and thus it shall come to pass;' yea, many
times, when he thought nothing lesse. And when the Ascension-day was come, which
was prophecyed of before, King John commanded his royal tent to be spread in the open
fielde, passing that day with his noble counseyle and men of honour, in the greatest
solemnitie that ever he did before; solacing himself with musickale instrumentes and
songs, most in sight among his trustie friendes. When that day was paste in all prosperitie
and myrth, his enemyes being confused, turned all into an allegorical understanding to
make the prophecie good, and sayde, "he is no longer King, for the Pope reigneth, and
not he." [King John was labouring under a sentence of excommunication at the time.]
"Then was the King by his council perswaded that this false prophet had troubled the
realme, perverted the heartes of the people, and raysed the commons against him; for his
wordes went over the sea, by the help of his prelates, and came to the French King's care,
and gave to him a great encouragement to invade the lande. He had not else done it so
sodeinely. But he was most lowly deceived, as all they are and shall be that put their trust
in such dark drowsye dreames of hipocrites. The King therefore commanded that he
should be hanged up, and his sonne also with him, lest any more false prophets should
arise of that race."
Heywood, who was a great stickler for the truth of all sorts of prophecies, gives a much
more favourable account of this Peter of Pomfret, or Pontefract, whose fate he would, in
all probability, have shared, if he had had the misfortune to have flourished in the same
age. He says, that Peter, who was not only a prophet, but a bard, predicted divers of King
John's disasters, which fell out accordingly. On being taxed for a lying prophet in having
predicted that the King would be deposed before .he entered into the fifteenth year of his
reign, he answered him boldly, that all he had said was justifiable and true; for that,
having given up his crown to the Pope, and paying him an annual tribute, the Pope
reigned, and not he. Heywood thought this explanation to be perfectly satisfactory, and
the prophet's faith for ever established.
But to return to Merlin. Of him even to this day it may be said, in the words which Burns
has applied to another notorious personage,
"Great was his power and great his fame; Far kenned and noted is his name ?
His reputation is by no means confined to the land of his birth, but extends through most
of the nations of Europe. A very curious volume of his Life, Prophecies, and Miracles,
written, it is supposed, by Robert de Bosron, was printed at Paris in 1498, which states,
that the Devil himself was his father, and that he spoke the instant he was born, and
assured his mother, a very virtuous young woman, that she should not die in child-bed
with him, as her ill-natured neighbours had predicted. The judge of the district, hearing of

so marvellous an occurrence, summoned both mother and child to appear before him; and
they went accordingly the same day. To put the wisdom of the young prophet most
effectually to the test, the judge asked him if he knew his own father? To which the infant
Merlin replied, in a clear, sonorous voice, "Yes, my father is the Devil; and I have his
power, and know all things, past, present, and to come." His worship clapped his hands in
astonishment, and took the prudent resolution of not molesting so awful a child, or its
mother either.
Early tradition attributes the building of Stonehenge to the power of Merlin. It was
believed that those mighty stones were whirled through the air, at his command, from
Ireland to Salisbury Plain, and that he arranged them in the form in which they now
stand, to commemorate for ever the unhappy fate of three hundred British chiefs, who
were massacred on that spot by the Saxons.
At Abergwylly, near Caermarthen, is still shown the cave of the prophet and the scene of
his incantations. How beautiful is the description of it given by Spenser in his "Faerie
Queene." The lines need no apology for their repetition here, and any sketch of the great
prophet of Britain would be incomplete without them :-"There the wise Merlin, whilom wont (they say), To make his wonne low underneath the
ground, In a deep delve far from the view of day, That of no living wight he mote be
found, Whenso he counselled with his sprites encompassed round.
"And if thou ever happen that same way To travel, go to see that dreadful place; It is a
hideous, hollow cave, they say, Under a rock that lies a little space >From the swift
Barry, tumbling down apace Amongst the woody hills of Dynevoure; But dare thou not, I
charge, in any case, To enter into that same baleful bower, For fear the cruel fiendes
should thee unwares devour!
"But, standing high aloft, low lay thine care, And there such ghastly noise of iron chaines,
And brazen caudrons thou shalt rombling heare, Which thousand sprites, with longenduring paines, Doe tosse, that it will stun thy feeble braines; And often times great
groans and grievous stownds, When too huge toile and labour them constraines; And
often times loud strokes and ringing sounds >From under that deep rock most horribly
rebounds.
"The cause, they say, is this. A little while Before that Merlin died, he did intend A
brazen wall in compass, to compile About Cayr Merdin, and did it commend Unto these
sprites to bring to perfect end; During which work the Lady of the Lake, Whom long he
loved, for him in haste did send, Who thereby forced his workmen to forsake, Them
bound till his return their labour not to slake.
"In the mean time, through that false ladie's traine, He was surprised, and buried under
biere, Ne ever to his work returned again; Natheless these fiendes may not their work
forbeare, So greatly his commandement they fear, But there doe toile and travaile day and
night, Until that brazen wall they up doe reare." [Faerie Queene, b. 3. c. 3. s. 6--13.]

Amongst other English prophets, a belief in whose power has not been entirely effaced
by the light of advancing knowledge, is Robert Nixon, the Cheshire idiot, a contemporary
of Mother Shipton. The popular accounts of this man say, that he was born of poor
parents, not far from Vale Royal, on the edge of the forest of Delamere. He was brought
up to the plough, but was so ignorant and stupid, that nothing could be made of him.
Everybody thought him irretrievably insane, and paid no attention to the strange,
unconnected discourses which he held. Many of his prophecies are believed to have been
lost in this manner. But they were not always destined to be wasted upon dull and
inattentive ears. An incident occurred which brought him into notice, and established his
fame as a prophet of the first calibre. He was ploughing in a field when he suddenly
stopped from his labour, and, with a wild look and strange gestures, exclaimed, "Now,
Dick! now, Harry! O, ill done, Dick! O, well done, Harry! Harry has gained the day!" His
fellow labourers in the field did not know what to make of this rhapsody; but the next day
cleared up the mystery. News was brought by a messenger, in hot haste, that at the very
instant when Nixon had thus ejaculated, Richard III had been slain at the battle of
Bosworth, and Henry VII proclaimed King of England.
It was not long before the fame of the new prophet reached the ears of the King, who
expressed a wish to see and converse with him. A messenger was accordingly despatched
to bring him to court; but long before he reached Cheshire, Nixon knew and dreaded the
honours that awaited him. Indeed it was said, that at the very instant the King expressed
the wish, Nixon was, by supernatural means, made acquainted with it, and that he ran
about the town of Over in great distress of mind, calling out, like a madman, that Henry
had sent for him, and that he must go to court, and be clammed; that is, starved to death.
These expressions excited no little wonder; but, on the third day, the messenger arrived,
and carried him to court, leaving on the minds of the good people of Cheshire an
impression that their prophet was one of the greatest ever born. On his arrival King Henry
appeared to be troubled exceedingly at the loss of a valuable diamond, and asked Nixon if
he could inform him where it was to be found. Henry had hidden the diamond himself,
with a view to test the prophet's skill. Great, therefore, was his surprise when Nixon
answered him in the words of the old proverb, "Those who hide can find." From that time
forth the King implicitly believed that he had the gift of prophecy, and ordered all his
words to be taken down.
During all the time of his residence at court he was in constant fear of being starved to
death, and repeatedly told the King that such would be his fate, if he were not allowed to
depart, and return into his own country. Henry would not suffer it, but gave strict orders
to all his officers and cooks to give him as much to eat as he wanted. He lived so well,
that for some time he seemed to be thriving like a nobleman's steward, and growing as fat
as an alderman. One day the king went out hunting, when Nixon ran to the palace gate,
and entreated on his knees that he might not be left behind to be starved. The King
laughed, and, calling an officer, told him to take especial care of the prophet during his
absence, and rode away to the forest. After his departure, the servants of the palace began
to jeer at and insult Nixon, whom they imagined to be much better treated than he
deserved. Nixon complained to the officer, who, to prevent him from being further

molested, locked him up in the King's own closet, and brought him regularly his four
meals a day. But it so happened that a messenger arrived from the King to this officer,
requiring his immediate presence at Winchester, on a matter of life and death. So great
was his haste to obey the King's command, that he mounted on the horse behind the
messenger, and rode off, without bestowing a thought upon poor Nixon. He did not return
till three days afterwards, when, remembering the prophet for the first time, he went to
the King's closet, and found him lying upon the floor, starved to death, as he had
predicted.
Among the prophecies of his which are believed to have been fulfilled, are the following,
which relate to the times of the Pretender :-"A great man shall come into England, But the son of a King Shall take from him the
victory."
" Crows shall drink the blood of many nobles, And the North shall rise against the
South." "The cock of the North shall be made to flee, And his feather be plucked for his
pride, That he shall almost curse the day that he was born,"
All these, say his admirers, are as clear as the sun at noon-day. The first denotes the
defeat of Prince Charles Edward, at the battle of Culloden, by the Duke of Cumberland;
the second, the execution of Lords Derwentwater, Balmerino, and Lovat; and the third,
the retreat of the Pretender from the shores of Britain. Among the prophecies that still
remain to be accomplished, are the following :-"Between seven, eight, and nine, In England wonders shall be seen; Between nine and
thirteen All sorrow shall be done!"
"Through our own money and our men Shall a dreadful war begin. Between the sickle
and the suck All England shall have a pluck,"
"Foreign nations shall invade England with snow on their helmets, and shall bring plague,
famine, and murder in the skirts of their garments."
"The town of Nantwich shall be swept away by a flood"
Of the two first of these no explanation has yet been attempted; but some event or other
will doubtless be twisted into such a shape as will fit them. The third, relative to the
invasion of England by a nation with snow on their helmets, is supposed by the old
women to foretell most clearly the coming war with Russia. As to the last, there are not a
few in the town mentioned who devoutly believe that such will be its fate. Happily for
their peace of mind, the prophet said nothing of the year that was to witness the awful
calamity; so that they think it as likely to be two centuries hence as now.
The popular biographers of Nixon conclude their account of him by saying, that "his
prophecies are by some persons thought fables; yet by what has come to pass, it is now

thought, and very plainly appears, that most of them have proved, or will prove, true; for
which we, on all occasions, ought not only to exert our utmost might to repel by force our
enemies, but to refrain from our abandoned and wicked course of life, and to make our
continual prayer to God for protection and safety." To this, though a non sequitur, every
one will cry Amen!
Besides the prophets, there have been the almanack makers, Lilly, Poor Robin, Partridge,
and Francis Moore, physician, in England, and Matthew Laensbergh, in France and
Belgium. But great as were their pretensions, they were modesty itself in comparison
with Merlin, Shipton, and Nixon, who fixed their minds upon higher things than the
weather, and who were not so restrained in their flights of fancy as to prophesy for only
one year at a time. After such prophets as they, the almanack makers hardly deserve to be
mentioned; no, not even the renowned Partridge, whose wonderful prognostications set
all England agog in 1708, and whose death, at a time when he was still alive and kicking,
was so pleasantly and satisfactorily proved by Isaac Bickerstaff. The anti-climax would
be too palpable, and they and their doings must be left uncommemorated.

POPULAR ADMIRATION FOR GREAT THIEVES.
Jack: Where shall we find such another set of practical philosophers who, to a man, are
above the fear of death?
Wat: Sound men and true!
Robin: Of tried courage and indefatigable industry!
Ned. Who is there here that would not die for his friend?
Harry: Who is there here that would betray him for his interest?
Mat: Show me a gang of courtiers that could say as much!
-- Dialogue of thieves in the Beggars' Opera.
Whether it be that the multitude, feeling the pangs of poverty, sympathise with the daring
and ingenious depredators who take away the rich man's superfluity, or whether it be the
interest that mankind in general feel for the records of perilous adventures, it is certain
that the populace of all countries look with admiration upon great and successful thieves.
Perhaps both these causes combine to invest their career with charms in the popular eye.
Almost every country in Europe has its traditional thief, whose exploits are recorded with
all the graces of poetry, and whose trespasses "are cited up in rhymes, And sung by
children in succeeding times." [Shakspeare's Rape of Lucretia.]
Those travellers who have made national manners and characteristics their peculiar study,
have often observed and remarked upon this feeling. The learned Abbe le Blanc, who
resided for some time in England at the commencement of the eighteenth century, says,
in his amusing letters on the English and French nations, that he continually met with
Englishmen who were not less vain in boasting of the success of their highwaymen than
of the bravery of their troops. Tales of their address, their cunning, or their generosity,
were in the mouths of everybody, and a noted thief was a kind of hero in high repute. He
adds that the mob, in all countries, being easily moved, look in general with concern upon
criminals going to the gallows; but an English mob looked upon such scenes with
'extraordinary interest: they delighted to see them go through their last trials with
resolution, and applauded those who were insensible enough to die as they had lived,
braving the justice both of God and men: such, he might have added, as the noted robber
Macpherson, of whom the old ballad says-"Sae rantingly, sae wantonly, Sae dauntingly gaed he: He played a spring, and danced it
round Beneath the gallows tree."
Among these traditional thieves the most noted in England, or perhaps in any country, is
Robin Hood, a name which popular affection has encircled with a peculiar halo. "He
robbed the rich to give to the poor;" and his reward has been an immortality of fame, a
tithe of which would be thought more than sufficient to recompense a benefactor of his

species. Romance and poetry have been emulous to make him all their own; and the
forest of Sherwood, in which he roamed with his merry men, armed with their long bows,
and clad in Lincoln green, has become the resort of pilgrims, and a classic spot sacred to
his memory. The few virtues he had, which would have ensured him no praise if he had
been an honest man, have been blazoned forth by popular renown during seven
successive centuries, and will never be forgotten while the English tongue endures. His
charity to the poor, and his gallantry and respect for women, have made him the preeminent thief of all the world.
Among English thieves of a later date, who has not heard of Claude Duval, Dick Turpin,
Jonathan Wild, and Jack Sheppard, those knights of the road and of the town, whose
peculiar chivalry formed at once the dread and the delight of England during the
eighteenth century ? Turpin's fame is unknown to no portion of the male population of
England after they have attained the age of ten. His wondrous ride from London to York
has endeared him to the imagination of millions; his cruelty in placing an old woman
upon a fire, to force her to tell him where she had hidden her money, is regarded as a
good joke; and his proud bearing upon the scaffold is looked upon as a virtuous action.
The Abbe le Blanc, writing in 1737, says he was continually entertained with stories of
Turpin -- how, when he robbed gentlemen, he would generously leave them enough to
continue their journey, and exact a pledge from them never to inform against him, and
how scrupulous such gentlemen were in keeping their word. He was one day told a story
with which the relator was he the highest degree delighted. Turpin, or some other noted
robber, stopped a man whom he knew to be very rich, with the usual salutation --" Your
money or your life!" but not finding more than five or six guineas about him, he took the
liberty of entreating him, in the most affable manner, never to come out so ill provided;
adding that, if he fell in with him, and he had no more than such a paltry sum, he would
give him a good licking. Another story, told by one of Turpin's admirers, was of a
robbery he had committed upon a Mr. C. near Cambridge. He took from this gentleman
his watch, his snuff-box, and all his money but two shillings, and, before he left him,
required his word of honour that he would not cause him to be pursued or brought before
a justice. The promise being given, they both parted very courteously. They afterwards
met at Newmarket, and renewed their acquaintance. Mr. C. kept his word religiously; he
not only refrained from giving Turpin into custody, but made a boast that he had fairly
won some of his money back again in an honest way. Turpin offered to bet with him on
some favourite horse, and Mr. C. accepted the wager with as good a grace as he could
have done from the best gentleman in England. Turpin lost his bet and paid it
immediately, and was so smitten with the generous behaviour of Mr. C. that he told him
how deeply he regretted that the trifling affair which had happened between them did not
permit them to drink together. The narrator of this anecdote was quite proud that England
was the birthplace of such a highwayman.
[The Abbe, in the second volume, in the letter No. 79, dressed to Monsieur de Buffon,
gives the following curious particulars of the robbers of 1757, which are not without
interest at this day, if it were only to show the vast improvement which has taken place
since that period :-- "It is usual, in travelling, to put ten or a dozen guineas in a separate
pocket, as a tribute to the first that comes to demand them: the right of passport, which

custom has established here in favour of the robbers, who are almost the only highway
surveyors in England, has made this necessary; and accordingly the English call these
fellows the 'Gentlemen of the Road,' the government letting them exercise their
jurisdiction upon travellers without giving them any great molestation. To say the truth,
they content themselves with only taking the money of those who obey without
disputing; but notwithstanding their boasted humanity, the lives of those who endeavour
to get away are not always safe. They are very strict and severe in levying their impost;
and if a man has not wherewithal to pay them, he may run the chance of getting himself
knocked on the head for his poverty.
"About fifteen years ago, these robbers, with the view of maintaining their rights, fixed
up papers at the doors of rich people about London, expressly forbidding all persons, of
whatsoever quality or condition, from going out of town without ten guineas and a watch
about them, on pain of death. In bad times, when there is little or nothing to be got on the
roads, these fellows assemble in gangs, to raise contributions even in London itself; and
the watchmen seldom trouble themselves to interfere with them in their vocation."]
Not less familiar to the people of England is the career of Jack Sheppard, as brutal a
ruffian as ever disgraced his country, but who has claims upon the popular admiration
which are very generally acknowledged. He did not, like Robin Hood, plunder the rich to
relieve the poor, nor rob with an uncouth sort of courtesy, like Turpin; but he escaped
from Newgate with the fetters on his limbs. This achievement, more than once repeated,
has encircled his felon brow with the wreath of immortality, and made him quite a pattern
thief among the populace. He was no more than twenty-three years of age at the time of
his execution, and he died much pitied by the crowd. His adventures were the sole topics
of conversation for months; the print-shops were filled with his effigies, and a fine
painting of him was made by Sir Richard Thornhill. The following complimentary verses
to the artist appeared in the "British Journal" of November 28th, 1724.
"Thornhill! 'tis thine to gild with fame Th' obscure, and raise the humble name; To make
the form elude the grave, And Sheppard from oblivion save!
Apelles Alexander drew-- Cesar is to Aurelius due; Cromwell in Lilly's works doth shine,
And Sheppard, Thornhill, lives in thine!"
So high was Jack's fame that a pantomime entertainment, called "Harlequin Jack
Sheppard," was devised by one Thurmond, and brought out with great success at Drury
Lane Theatre. All the scenes were painted from nature, including the public-house that
the robber frequented in Claremarket, and the condemned cell from which he had made
his escape in Newgate.
The Rev. Mr. Villette, the editor of the "Annals of Newgate," published in 1754, relates a
curious sermon which, he says, a friend of his heard delivered by a street-preacher about
the time of Jack's execution. The orator, after animadverting on the great care men took
of their bodies, and the little care they bestowed upon their souls, continued as follows,
by way of exemplifying the position:-- "We have a remarkable instance of this in a
