
Chapter 9 Trade Execution

179

Trade Journal
A trade journal is an effective means of preparation to track potential setups. A trade journal
should include the type of pattern, the completion point of the AB=CD, and the Fibonacci
retracements within the reversal zone. Also, a written journal is helpful in recording your
personal thoughts regarding the relative price action within a reversal zone.
It is important, especially in the early stages of learning these techniques, to keep track of
your thoughts. The questions that arise and the ideas generated during the trade execution
process are your personal signals that help gauge the price action. It is important to record
these feelings and expectations relative to the current price action as a template for comparing
what was expected versus what happened. The key to trade execution of harmonic setups still
requires the accurate analysis of the price action within the reversal zone. Achieving this “feel
for the numbers” requires an understanding of your own personal signals. A trade journal will
record your mental processes and trading behavior. It is only through such study that you will
improve your executions and become a more successful trader.
I have included a sample of my own journal that shows how I approach trade setups. I line
the various setups in “my sights” and wait for them to materialize. If they don’t work out the way
that I have projected, I move on to the next trade. If I do see a setup that comes together, I
gauge the price action. After the opportunity is over, I summarize the events and my response
to the opportunity. If I accept a trade, I will record my thoughts and feelings throughout the
entire experience until I am out.
October 8th
• SP500 Mini-Contract (ES_Z9) = AB=CD @ 1032.75; Down 5 in the pre-market; major
0.618 retracement at 1028.25.
• Microsoft (MSFT) = Retesting Bullish Gartley. Look for 0.618 retracement off pattern
at $26.
• Semiconductor Index ($SOX) = Retesting major Bearish AB=CD. Look to buy calls
on retest under 330 area for eventual 0.886 test. Looks like an eventual blowout of this
harmonic resistance.
• NASDAQ 100 Tracking Stock (QQQ): Setting up Bullish Crab on 60-minute chart in the
$33 area in prior daily resistance area. Looks like prior harmonic resistance is offering
support.
As you can see by my journal entries, I have identified several trade setups listed as
potential opportunities. It is not uncommon for me to follow a potential trade for quite some
time, especially when I am tracking price action after a nice harmonic setup.
Trade journals are an effective means to learn a great deal about price action and harmonic
set-ups. Most important, a trade journal can teach many lessons about personal insights and
perceptions regarding these opportunities. It is even more essential in the beginning stages of
your study because each person’s trade executions are unique. Although two people may utilize
these harmonic methods and calculate the same reversal zone, their execution prices will not
be exactly the same. One person might take the trade, while the other avoids it. The difference
in the perception of the price action at the pattern’s completion point might cause one person

180

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

to wait for a clear reversal from the zone while another enters the trade in the PRZ without
hesitation.
Over time, the trading journal will help you gauge your own personal signals to interpret the
market action. You will develop a feel for what “should be happening.” For example, let’s say that
you have identified a valid harmonic set-up with several numbers within a very tight zone.
Specifically, you have identified a great Bullish Bat pattern. You are looking to buy but the price
action suggests a potentially failed setup because of an extreme price range, tail close, or gap.
You might record in the journal that the pattern looks great but the price action at the reversal
point is too strong or has a warning signal, so you avoid the trade. Also, you might record
that an ideal reversal “should” bounce off this zone quickly and show strong signs, such as a
positive close above the harmonic area. In this example, since the stock is not reversing the
way it “should,” you have not accepted the trade.
During this time, it is important to record the reasons why or why not you accepted the
trade, and the emotions that were associated with your actions. Also, after the opportunity
has abated, it is important to record how the trade turned out and how you responded to the
experience. Did you find yourself biting your nails throughout? Were you feeling confident with
your position or did you doubt your analysis? Recording these events helps to instill confidence
in your ability to decipher price action and develops technical intuition as a chart reader.
Although not all harmonic setups are ideal, developing certain standards of price action
helps create a framework to gauge the reversal zone. A trading journal that records these
experiences is the key to developing your intuition. Each person’s response to price action is
unique. So, it is imperative to learn the signals that you generate during the execution process
to improve future trades.

Trading Checklist
At this point, the identification techniques utilized to define harmonic patterns should be common knowledge. There is a simple checklist of requirements that all valid setups must possess.
1. Is there a pattern?
2. What is it?
3. Is there an AB=CD?
4. Where does it complete?
5. Are there three or more numbers converging in the PRZ?
6. What are they?
7. What are the time cycles (symmetry) suggesting?
8. Are there any warning signs?
9. At what point is the PRZ no longer valid? (Stop Loss)
10. How much must I risk? Am I willing to risk it?

Chapter 9 Trade Execution

181

The guidelines in this section are the result of years of harmonic research. The Harmonic
Trading Checklist summaries a complex process of measurement considerations into a concise
format. Furthermore, this checklist optimizes trade executions by clearly defining all of the
numeric limits of the setup, in advance.

Trade Execution Considerations
When it comes down to the actual execution, several considerations can influence trading
behavior. In essence, trading harmonic patterns versus just analyzing harmonic patterns
are two different endeavors. The trade execution in the PRZ is frequently a short window of
opportunity. Within that time period, a multitude of factors can delay or even cause a trade to
be missed. Therefore, effective execution requires a more intense and disciplined approach
than just identifying harmonic patterns on a chart.
I would like to take a moment to discuss the distinction between actual trading and simple
pattern identification. I trade these patterns almost everyday, and I must emphasize the
discipline required to actively trade this methodology. In fact, pattern identification is merely
the first step in the process. The degree of trading success requires an ability to identify
distinct patterns, to execute trades in the PRZ and to manage positions within the rules of
the Harmonic Trading approach in all types of market conditions. Actual trading situations can
present challenges that can result in missed trades. Although this can be frustrating, it is better
to only execute those pattern completions that offer the clearest price zones. These are a few
of the lessons that must be learned before gaining a “realistic perspective” on the entire
approach.

20/20 Hindsight
For these reasons, Harmonic Trading frequently looks better in the past than it does in the
present or the future. It is easy to identify past patterns in price charts and lay claim to what
could have been. Unfortunately, the uncertainties involved with real-time executions frequently
alter the true outcome. Furthermore, it can be difficult to know exactly which setups will yield
valid reversals. It would be great if “conditional” orders could be executed the day after a valid
reversal is confirmed and execute trades exactly at the reversal points. Although such hindsight
trading would be immensely profitable, it is possible to interpret the price action at certain
harmonic price zones to determine the validity of a reversal.
The problem arises when price action does not act as anticipated or reverse ideally. This can
lead to missed trades and create uncertainty about future set-ups. Although these realities are
a part of the execution process, there are some considerations that can help attain a “20/20”
success level:

182

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

1. Prepare in advance. It is critical to maintain a list of prospective trades that are
approaching their PRZ. Setting software alerts and monitoring setups as they get close
to their entry point will improve executions.
2. Trades will be missed. Although certain situations may possess seemingly perfect
patterns, it is important to note that not all trades should be taken. Extreme price action
can warn about invalid setups. Sometimes, setups still reverse in the desired direction,
despite these indications.
3. Use 20/20 hindsight. The keys to correcting mistakes and developing more effective
trading strategies can only be discovered through reviewing prior trades.

Harmonic Trading Psychology
There are numerous books on trading psychology that can outline a variety of techniques to
improve the mental aspects of trading. I believe it is an important area of the market to study.
But, I would like to offer a few ideas to improve your trading psychology:
• Keep it simple. Although there is a definite advantage to learning as much as you can
about the markets, overanalysis of potential opportunities can create confusion and
second-guessing. It is important to incorporate only those techniques that have clearly
proven to be effective tools. Yes, certain indicators can be reliable, but it is ridiculous to
try to incorporate every technical measure when assessing a trade.
• Stick to a winning plan. They key ingredient in preventing this confusion is to create
and stick to a winning trading plan. Although I may consider extraneous variables when
assessing a potential trade, Harmonic Trading techniques as defined in my trading plan
are the fundamental basis for entering a position.
W. D. Gann discussed the importance of a trading plan in many of his writings:
“Have a well-defined plan before you start trading, then follow that
plan, as the architect does in building a house, or the engineer in
constructing a bridge or driving a tunnel.
The man who changes his ideas or his plan, which are based on something practical, for no other reason than that he hopes or fears the market
will do something different, will never make a success.”
(Truth of the Stock Tape [Pomeroy, WA: Lambert-Gann Publishing, 1923]).

• Full-time trading is not a full-time job. One of the most common reasons for lacking a
clear mental perspective is the simple fact that many traders trade too much. Could you
stop trading for more than a week? A month? A year even? Or do you have to trade? If
you have to trade, you might as well go to Las Vegas because you have just entered the
world of a gambling addict. It is important to take a break after a certain period of time
and pace your trading efforts.

Chapter 9 Trade Execution

183

• Study the masters. In my desire to learn the most pertinent information on the market,
I discovered many books that were more than 50 years old that contained incredible
market insights that remain valid to this day. Today’s “pop trading” books have been
penned by high-profile market celebrities. Unfortunately, many of these people are not
active traders. In fact, at the first online trade show that I attended I met with several
notable authors. It was amazing that many of these people were not active traders, and
many stated that they have not traded for years. Authors such as W. D. Gann, J. M.
Hurst, and R. N. Elliott contain pertinent insights into past markets that are as effective
as they were 100 years ago.
• Review your work. The only way to overcome your trading errors is to study your
trades. Although losses are a part of the business of trading, it essential to review those
trades and the mistakes that caused the faulty judgment to prevent repeating the same
mistakes. If you must pay tuition at the University of Wall Street to learn how to trade
successfully, you have to do your homework and review your mistakes. Otherwise, you
will be doomed to repeat them.
• Don’t care. The proper psychology required in the execution of any trade should entail
an almost careless attitude. After defining all trade parameters (entry, exit, stop loss) in
advance, the pure execution of the trade should be nearly emotionless. Such an attitude
can be difficult because the money risked in each trade can stimulate fear or greed.
However, the key is to focus on the price action before, during and after a pattern has
completed. Any other thoughts, emotions or considerations outside the realm of the
price action at the completion of the defined pattern are meaningless. Furthermore, it is
really not about money. This is a game of strategy and tactic. The level of success
depends upon the proper application of an effective approach such as the Harmonic
Trading methods to turn patterns into profits

Trading Questionnaire
This list of questions is an excellent means to review your overall trading goals. A personal
assessment review is effective in that it can outline your personal beliefs and basic
expectations of trading in general. I recommend writing answers to these questions and
incorporating these guidelines into your overall trading plan:
1. Why do you want to trade?
2. When was the first time you realized you wanted to trade? Why?
3. What was your first trade?
4. What was your last trade?
5. What was your best trade ever?
6. What was your worst?
7. What is your preferred time frame for trading? (Day/Position/Investor)
8. What is your greatest benefit of trading outside of the money?
9. What is your greatest fear associated with trading?
10. How do you know when to buy/short a stock?
11. How do you know when to cover that position?

184

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

12. What is your greatest strength in your trading?
13. What is your greatest weakness?
14. What areas of trading do you think you need to learn more about?
15. Do you review your past trades?
16. What do you expect to get out of trading? (List three accomplishments.)
17. What will your trading be like within each of the following time periods?
• Six months
• One year
• Five years
Effective trade execution requires discipline and preparation. Although a variety of mental
aspects are involved in the decision-making process, the rules that define harmonic setups
must serve as the foundation for all trading behavior. Executing in the PRZ and identifying
patterns with three harmonic numbers in a specific area are examples of the types of basic
rules that must be consistently followed if success is to be achieved. These questions should
be reviewed from time to time, as a follow-up to your trading progress.

Chapter 10

Price Action in the Potential
Reversal Zone (PRZ)

Ideal Reversals
An ideal reversal usually possesses several characteristics that clearly separate it from other
types of price reactions. An ideal reversal usually tests all of the numbers in a Potential
Reversal Zone on the initial test. The predominant trend usually reverses from this initial test of
the entire PRZ and continues in the reversal direction shortly thereafter. In an ideal reversal, the
price bar that tests all of the numbers in the PRZ is called the Terminal Price Bar (T-bar).

Ideal Bullish Reversal
In an ideal bullish reversal, the price action should reverse after the entire range is tested (see
Figure 10.1). Although price action may seem strong as it declines into the Potential Reversal
Zone, the critical determining point is the reaction of the predominant trend at the completion of
the pattern. The Terminal Price Bar should stabilize after completing the test.

TERMINAL PRICE BAR

Figure 10.1

185

186

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Dow Jones Industrial Average
(^DJI): Weekly
The Dow Jones Industrial Average formed this Bullish Bat after retracing the initial rally of the
2003 low following an extended three-year decline from the 2000 peak (see Figure 10.2).

Figure 10.2

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

187

The index tested the entire PRZ on the week it completed the pattern. Although the weekly
candlestick represented the Terminal Price Bar for the pattern, the following chart of the price
action in the PRZ in Figure 10.3 shows an ideal reversal on the daily time frame.

Figure 10.3

Clearly, the index established the T-bar on the day it tested the entire PRZ. It is important to
note that the sell-off was quite severe as the price action approached the harmonic support.
Despite the extreme decline, the Dow Jones Industrials stabilized and reversed nicely after the
Terminal Price Bar was established.

188

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Ideal Bearish Reversal
In an ideal bearish reversal, the price action should reverse after the entire range is tested (see
Figure 10.4). Although price action may seem strong as it rallies toward the Potential Reversal
Zone, the critical determining point is the reaction of the predominant trend at the completion of
the pattern.

TERMINAL PRICE BAR

Figure 10.4

The most ideal bearish situations continue immediately to the downside after the entire PRZ
is tested and the T-bar is established. The Terminal Price Bar should close below the range of
harmonic numbers in the best cases.

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

189

Pepsi
(PEP): 15-Minute
Pepsi completed this Bearish Butterfly on the following 15-minute chart (see Figure 10.5). The
stock rallied sharply into the PRZ but stalled after testing all of the numbers.

Figure 10.5

190

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

The reversal in this case exemplified an ideal situation, especially with the Terminal Price
Bar being clearly established after testing the entire range of harmonic numbers. The chart of
the price action in the Potential Reversal Zone in Figure 10.6 marks the T-bar with the arrow.
The dotted line marks the top of the Terminal Price Bar, defining the price level that would
negate the harmonic resistance established by the pattern. Essentially, a violation above this
level would question the validity of the trade, and it could even trigger a reversal of the pattern
to get long on a breakout above this area. I will cover these strategies later in this material. For
now, it is important to focus on the elements that define a Terminal Price Bar and the type of
reversal that should occur after it has been established.

Figure 10.6

Warning Signs in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
It is common for price action to exhibit extreme signs warning in invalid harmonic patterns. In
many situations, as the price action enters into a PRZ, price gaps and extreme extension
moves can be the trigger of failed setups. Although valid patterns may possess price action that
is extreme, warning signs like these must be considered when assessing the validity of a PRZ.
I refer to these situations as “blowouts,” since warning signs can frequently trigger blatant and
convincing price behavior that invalidates the projected completion of a harmonic pattern.

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

191

Price Gaps Through the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
Price gaps at the completion of harmonic patterns are a common development that must be
handled carefully. Patterns like the Crab frequently possess sharp price action in their PRZ.
Despite these situations, the determining factor is the extent of the price gap as the action tests
the PRZ.

Price Gap Through a Bullish Potential Reversal
Zone (PRZ)
As price action approaches the harmonic support defined by the PRZ, it typically will “bypass”
the entire range of numbers on a price gap that invalidates the pattern. A price gap THROUGH
the PRZ, as Figure 10.7 demonstrates, is quite different from a price gap INTO the PRZ. The
obvious price gap-warning signal occurs when the price action trades completely past the PRZ,
failing to test any other numbers.

PRICE ACTION GAPS
THROUGH THE
POTENTIAL
REVERSAL ZONE (PRZ)

Figure 10.7

192

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Wal-Mart
(WMT): Daily
The daily chart of Wal-Mart in Figure 10.8 demonstrates extreme price action that trades
completely through the harmonic support established by the completion of the Bullish Gartley.

Figure 10.8

The blowout in this case exemplified the ideal price gap-warning signal. The stock opened
below the PRZ, gapping down past the critical range of numbers at the completion of the
pattern. The 52.20 level was an extremely critical harmonic support level, as the three numbers
converged in a narrow PRZ. Since the stock opened below these numbers and rolled over
quickly a few days later, the validity of the pattern was negated. Again, it is important to focus
on the action on the initial test of the harmonic numbers. Although the stock bounced a few
days following the violation, the price gap on the open through the entire PRZ exemplified this
warning signal (see Figure 10.9).

Chapter 10 Price Action in the Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)

193

Figure 10.9

Another important element of a blowout is the action that follows the violation. Clearly, a
price bar that blows out a PRZ, trading completely past the numbers, invalidates the projected
completion point. However, it is common for price gaps to materialize IN a PRZ but still yield
a valid reversal. In these cases, it is best to wait for the following price bar to provide further
evidence of the extent of the action. The action will frequently continue in the predominant
trend immediately after the test of the PRZ if the pattern is invalid. These issues will be covered
further in the Trade Management section later in this material. For now, the clear violation of a
price gap THROUGH the entire PRZ will negate a completion point of the pattern.

194

Harmonic Trading: Volume One

Blowout of Bearish Potential Reversal Zone (PRZ)
Bearish blowouts that gap through harmonic resistance zones commonly offer obvious warning
signals, if the projected completion of the pattern is invalid (see Figure 10.10). In many
instances, price gaps that blowout bearish PRZs can act as tremendous continuation signals to
follow the predominant trend.
