
authors are by competition for readers, listeners, and viewers, media accounts
tend to be superficial and thus to encourage basic misconceptions about the
market. A conventional wisdom of sorts, stressing the seemingly eternal
durability of stocks, has emerged from these media accounts. The public has
learned to accept this conventional—but in my view shallow—wisdom. To
be fair to the Wall Street professionals whose views appear in the media, it is
difficult for them to correct the conventional wisdom because they are limited
by the blurbs and sound bites afforded them. One would need to write books
to straighten these things out. This is such a book.
As noted earlier, the conventional wisdom holds that the stock market as
a whole has always been the best investment, and always will be, even when
the market is overpriced by historical standards. Small investors, in their
retirement funds, are increasingly shifting their investments toward stocks,
and the investment policy of 100% stocks in retirement funds is increasingly
popular. They put their money where their mantra is. This attitude invites
exploitation by companies who have an unlimited supply of equities to sell.
“You want stocks? We’ll give you stocks.”
Most investors also seem to view the stock market as a force of nature
unto itself. They do not fully realize that they themselves, as a group,
determine the level of the market. And they underestimate how similar
to their own thinking is that of other investors. Many individual investors
think that institutional investors dominate the market and that these “smart
money” investors have sophisticated models to understand prices—superior
knowledge. Little do they know that most institutional investors are, by and
large, equally clueless about the level of the market. In short, the price level
is driven to a certain extent by a self‑fulfilling prophecy based on similar
hunches held by a vast cross-section of large and small investors and reinforced by news media that are often content to ratify this investor‑induced
conventional wisdom.
When the Dow Jones Industrial Average first surpassed 10,000 in March
1999, Merrill Lynch took out a full‑page newspaper ad with a headline saying, “Even those with a disciplined long‑term approach like ours have to sit
back and say ‘wow.’” In the bottom left corner of the page, next to a stock plot
ending up at 10,000, appeared the words “human achievement.” If this is an
achievement worth congratulating, then we should congratulate employees
whenever they submit glowing self‑evaluation reports.
At present there is a whiff of extravagant expectation, if not irrational
exuberance, in the air. People are optimistic about the stock market. There
is a lack of sobriety about its downside and the consequences that would
ensue as a result. If the Dow were to drop to 6,000, the loss would represent
something like the equivalent value of the entire housing stock of the United

PREFA C E T O T H E F IRS T E D ITIO N , 2000

xxix

States. There would be harmful and uneven effects on individuals, pension
funds, college endowments, and charitable organizations.
We need to know if the price level of the stock market today, tomorrow, or
on any other day is a sensible reflection of economic reality, just as we need to
know as individuals what we have in our bank accounts. This valuation is the
future food on our tables and clothes on our backs, and nearly every decision
to spend money today ought to be influenced by it. We need a better understanding of the forces that shape the long‑run outlook for the market—and it
is such an understanding that this book is intended to provide.

Acknowledgments

J

eremy Siegel, while clearly not agreeing
with me on all points, urged me to set
down my ideas in this book. He is its real instigator. Jeremy has been a lifelong
friend. Our families regularly vacation together, and I learned a distinctive
approach to finance from him while strolling the beach together or watching
our children fish. In the years since the first edition of this book appeared, he
and I have frequently been cast as antagonists, he the bull and I the bear. But
in fact we share a lot of the same worldview, and his new book The Future for
Investors in many ways complements this book.
John Campbell, my former student, then co‑author on a dozen scholarly
papers on financial markets, and for years a close friend, has been my intellectual other half in formulating many of the ideas that led to this book. My
original work on volatility in financial markets was refined and significantly
advanced with his collaboration. He has also offered many helpful suggestions for this book and comments on the manuscript.
Peter Dougherty, my editor at Princeton University Press, has been an
extremely important formative influence on the book, helping to define
the fundamental aspects of its structure. He has been a great colleague
and more—really almost a collaborator. Peter Strupp and his colleagues at
Princeton Editorial Associates have as always been most helpful throughout
the production process.
My assistants Carol Copeland, Minhua Wan, Sumithra Sudhir, and now
Bonnie Blake have kept me going through difficult times with their steadfast support. I was fortunate to have a number of excellent student research
xxxi

xxxii

AC KNOWLEDGMENT S

assistants to help me during the writing: Eric Bair, Yigit Bora Bozkurt, Peter
Fabrizio, Jon Fougner, Gerardo Garcia Lopez, Michael Gousgounis, William
“Drew” Haluska, Erik Hjalmarsson, Yuanfeng Hou, Murad Jivraj, Leora
Kelman, Alston E. Lambert II, Anthony Ling, Luis Mancilla, Steven Pawliczek,
Stefan Schneeberger, and Kinde Wubneh.
I am also blessed with a number of friends and colleagues who read drafts
of the manuscript and provided extensive comments: Stefano Athanasoulis,
John Geanakoplos, William Konigsberg, Stephen Morris, Sharon Oster, Jay
Ritter, Martin Shubik, and James Tobin.
My colleagues at the Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics at Yale
University—Glena Ames, Donald Brown, Stefan Krieger, Stephen Morris, and
William Nordhaus—have been a great help. I must also take this occasion to
express gratitude to our late founder, Alfred Cowles III, an investment manager in the early part of this century and patron of mathematical economics,
who tabulated the pre‑1926 dividend and earnings data used in this book.
Help from my colleagues at the Yale International Center for Finance—its
director, William Goetzmann, as well as Zhiwu Chen, Roger Ibbotson, Eli
Levy, Jim Snyder, Ivo Welch, and Jeffrey Wurgler—is also acknowledged.
Roger, who in 2000 was giving talks titled “Dow 100,000” and predicting a
brilliant future for the stock market, was a willing foil for my ideas. The Dow
has just surpassed 17,000, and so I think he will eventually be right.
My research with colleagues at Barclays Bank, who have collaborated in
research on the dynamics of sector stock market indices, is another source of
enlightenment for this book. Among the many collaborators I would mention
Laurence Black, Oliver Bunn, Kenneth Crawford, Anthony Lazanas, Vytautas
Martinaitis, Benedict Redmond, Richa Singh, Arne Staal, Cenk Ural, and
Ji Zhuang.
Support from my colleague Prof. Karl E. Case of Wellesley College has also
been most important. I met him after hearing about an article he wrote in 1986
that attempted to enumerate the reasons for the surge in home prices in the
Boston area. We first did a questionnaire survey of attitudes of homebuyers
in 1988. He has been working with me ever since to understand the psychology of real estate markets. Case and I continue to update the survey data with
the support of the Yale School of Management, our latest work now joint with
Anne Kinsella Thompson of McGraw Hill Construction.
I am grateful to Bracebridge Capital, Fuller and Thaler Asset Management,
LSV Asset Management, and the Russell Sage Foundation for sponsoring the
behavioral finance workshops that Richard Thaler and I have been organizing
since 1991 at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and to the Russell
Sage Foundation and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston for sponsoring the
behavioral macroeconomics workshops that George Akerlof and I organized
there in 1994–2007. The term behavioral economics refers to research on markets

A CKN O W L E D G M E N TS

xxxiii

that takes into account the details of human behavior, including human
psychology and sociology. This book benefits immeasurably from the work
of the many scholars in the emerging field of behavioral economics, which
is now beginning to take a solid place in university economics and finance
departments.
The U.S. National Science Foundation has supported much of my basic
research on financial markets. Their continuing support of my work for over
twenty years enabled me to focus attention on issues independent of financial
pressures. Whitebox Advisors, under the leadership of Andrew Redleaf, has
given a grant to Yale University to support research on behavioral economics,
and this grant also helped support the revisions of this book for the second
edition.
I am also grateful to Brad Barber, Scott Boorman, David Colander, Robert
Ellickson, Ray Fair, Peter Garber, Jeffrey Garten, Christian Gollier, Sunil
Gottipati, Trevor Greetham, Stanley Hamilton, Anne Laferrere, Jonathan
Laing, Ricky Lam, Xindan Li, Yan Li, Justin Yifu Lin, Benoit Mercereau,
John Rey, Colin Robertson, Tsur Somerville, Nassim Taleb, Philippe Trainar,
Mark Warshawsky, Oleg Zamulin, Yong Zhang, and Ning Zhu for helpful
discussions. Yoshiro Tsutsui of Osaka University and Fumiko Kon‑Ya of the
Japanese Securities Research Institute have collaborated with me for many
years on questionnaire survey research exploring investor attitudes in Japan
as well as the United States. Help from Josephine Rinaldi and Walt Smietana
at CompuMail has been much appreciated. I should certainly also thank the
numerous investors who have taken the time to fill out questionnaires for me.
To my wife, Virginia Shiller, who is a clinical psychologist at the Yale Child
Study Center, I owe fundamental gratitude for getting me really interested in
psychology and convincing me of its importance in economics. She has given
the most careful reading and criticism to the entire book and has helped me
greatly in articulating my ideas. She also kept the home fires burning while
I spent long days and nights working.

One

The Stock Market in
Historical Perspective

W

hen Alan Greenspan, then Chair of the
Federal Reserve Board, used the term
irrational exuberance to describe the behavior of stock market investors, the
world fixated on those words.1 He spoke at a black-tie dinner in Washington,
D.C., on December 5, 1996, and the televised speech was followed the world
over. As soon as he uttered these words, stock markets dropped precipitously.
In Japan, the Nikkei index dropped 3.2%; in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng
dropped 2.9%; and in Germany, the DAX dropped 4%. In London, the FTSE
100 was down 4% at one point during the day, and in the United States, the
next morning, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down 2.3% near the
beginning of trading. The sharp reaction of the markets all over the world to
those two words in the middle of a staid and unremarkable speech seemed
absurd. This event made for an amusing story about the craziness of markets,
a story that was told for a time around the world.
The amusing story was forgotten as time went by, but not the words
irrational exuberance, which were referred to again and again. Greenspan did
not coin the phrase irrational exuberance, but he did cause it to be attached to a
view about the instability of speculative markets. The chain of stock market
events caused by his uttering these words made the words seem descriptive
of essential reality. Gradually they became Greenspan’s most famous quote—
a catch phrase for everyone who follows the market.
Why do people still refer so much to irrational exuberance years later?
I believe that the words have become a useful name for the kind of social
phenomenon that perceptive people saw with their own eyes happening in
1

2

TH E S TO CK MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

the 1990s, and that in fact, it appears, has happened again and again in history,
when markets have been bid up to unusually high and unsustainable levels
under the influence of market psychology.
Many perceptive people were remarking, as the great surge in the stock
market of the 1990s continued, that there was something palpably irrational
in the air, and yet the nature of the irrationality was subtle. There was not
the kind of investor euphoria or madness described by some storytellers, who
chronicled earlier speculative excesses like the stock market boom of the 1920s.
Perhaps those storytellers were embellishing the story. Irrational exuberance
is not that crazy. The once-popular terms speculative mania or speculative orgy
seemed too strong to describe what we were going through in the 1990s. It
was more like the kind of bad judgment we all remember having made at
some point in our lives when our enthusiasm got the best of us. Irrational
exuberance seems a very descriptive term for what happens in markets when
they get out of line.
Irrational exuberance is the psychological basis of a speculative bubble.
I define a speculative bubble as a situation in which news of price increases
spurs investor enthusiasm, which spreads by psychological contagion from
person to person, and, in the process, amplifies stories that might justify
the price increase and brings in a larger and larger class of investors, who,
despite doubts about the real value of the investment, are drawn to it partly
through envy of others’ successes and partly through a gambler’s excitement. We will explore the various elements of this definition of a bubble
throughout this book.
Greenspan’s “irrational exuberance” speech in 1996 came during the biggest
historical example to date of a speculative upsurge in the U.S. stock market.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average (from here on, the Dow for short) stood at
around 3,600 in early 1994. By March 1999, it passed 10,000 for the first time.
The Dow peaked at 11,722.98 in January 14, 2000, just two weeks after the
start of the new millennium. The market had tripled in five years. Other stock
price indices peaked a couple of months later. The real (inflation-corrected)
Dow did not reach this level again until 2014, and, as of this writing, the real
Standard & Poor’s 500 index has still not quite returned to its 2000 level. It is
curious that this peak of the Dow (as well as other indices) occurred in close
proximity to the end of the celebration of the new millennium—it was as if the
celebration itself was part of what had propelled the market, and the hangover
afterward had brought it back down.
Figure 1.1 shows the monthly real (corrected for inflation using the
Consumer Price Index) Standard and Poor’s (S&P) Composite Stock Price
Index, a more comprehensive index of stock market prices than the Dow,
based, since 1957, on 500 stocks rather than just the 30 stocks that are used
to compute the Dow.2 Inflation correction was used here because the overall

3

T HE S T O C K M A R K ET IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS P E CTIVE

450
2000

2000

2014

2007
!

1500

2003
2009

1973

300

200
150
100

1929

500

350

250

Price
1000

400
Real S&P composite earnings

Real S&P Composite Stock Price Index

2500

50
0
1870

Earnings
1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

0

Figure 1.1
U.S. Stock Prices and Earnings, 1871–2014
Real (inflation‑corrected) S&P Composite Stock Price Index, monthly, January
1871 through June 2014 (upper curve), and real S&P Composite earnings (lower
curve), January 1871 to March 2014. Source: Author’s calculations using data from
S&P Statistical Service; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; Cowles and associates,
Common Stock Indexes; and Warren and Pearson, Gold and Prices. See also note 3.

level of prices has been very unstable over parts of this period (the government printed a lot of money, which pushed all prices up) so that the un­­
corrected numbers would give a misleading impression of the real increase in
the stock market. The stock prices are shown from 1871 through 2014 (upper
curve), along with the total earnings (corporate profits per share) that the
corporations that comprise the index made in doing their businesses (lower
curve) for the same years.3
This stock market chart is unusual: most long-term plots of stock prices
are not this long term, and most are done in nominal terms, without inflation
correction. On this chart, the magnitude of the boom beginning in 1982 and
peaking in 2000 stands out especially well. It is a unique event in history.
The 2000 Millennium Boom peak in world stock prices was followed by the
Ownership-Society Boom, 2003–7, which I have named after a slogan used by
George Bush in his 2004 presidential campaign. This peak was followed by
the world financial crisis in 2008–9. Starting in 2009, after the crisis lessened,
there was another major upswing in world stock markets, which I will call the
New-Normal Boom, after a phrase popularized by Bill Gross, then of PIMCO,
in 2009.4 The news media have shown a tendency since 2000 to dramatize the

4

TH E S TO CK MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

“new records” set in stock markets in 2007 and 2014. But, in fact, these post2000 booms were not record setting. The biggest-ever upswing in the real
(inflation-corrected) U.S. stock market was from July 1982 to August 2000, when
the market went up 7.7-fold, dwarfing the 5.2-fold upswing from December
1920 to September 1929, and also dwarfing the 5.1-fold upswing from June 1949
to December 1968. The upswings from 2003 to 2007 (1.5-fold) and from 2009
to 2014 (2.3-fold) are mild by comparison. For the purpose of understanding
irrational exuberance, I will emphasize the 1982–2000 Millennium Boom,
particularly its later years, when this exuberance became most palpable.
The stock market increase from 1994 (when the real stock market had
already more than doubled since 1982) to 2000 could not obviously be justified in any reasonable terms. Basic economic indicators did not come close to
tripling. Over the same interval, U.S. gross domestic product rose less than
40%, and corporate profits rose less than 60%, and that from a temporary
recession‑depressed base. Viewed in the light of these figures, the stock price
increase appears unwarranted.
Large stock price increases occurred in many countries at around the
same time, and the peaks in the stock markets were often roughly simultaneous in many countries in early 2000. Figure 1.2 shows the paths of stock
prices for ten countries and for the world as a whole from 1995 to 2014. As
can be seen from Figure 1.2, between 1995 and 2000 the real stock market
valuations of Brazil, France, China, and Germany roughly tripled, while
that of the United Kingdom roughly doubled. In 1999, the year before the
peak, real stock price increases averaged 58% over the ten countries shown
in Figure 1.2. The prices of all countries went up sharply in 1999; in fact, the
smallest increase, occurring in the United Kingdom, was still an impressive 16%. Stock markets in Asia (Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia,
Singapore, and South Korea) and Latin America (Chile and Mexico) also
made astounding gains in 1999. It was a truly spectacular worldwide stock
market boom.
The end of the 2000 boom brought stock markets down across much of
the world by 2003, as can be seen in Figure 1.2. Once again, the next boom,
peaking in late 2007 or early 2008, had huge impacts over much of the world.
After that, the world slipped into the most serious recession since the Great
Depression of the 1930s, economic growth rates faltered, and the post-bubble
weakness of the world economy continued for years after. Despite the weakness of the world economy, the third stock market boom that began around
2009 affected many countries.
Looking back to Figure 1.1, which shows a longer history for the S&P Index,
we can see how differently the market behaved up to 2000 compared with
the long past. The spiking of prices in the years 1982 through 2000 was most
remarkable: the price index looks like a rocket taking off through the top of

5

T HE S T O C K M A R K ET IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS P E CTIVE

900
China

800

Index (January 1995 = 100)

700

Brazil

600

United States
Germany

500

Mexico
Brazil
United States
Germany
China

France

400
300

France

World
India
United Kingdom
Korea
Japan

200
UK

100
0
1994

Korea

1999

2004

2009

2014

Figure 1.2
Real Stock Prices in Ten Countries and the World,
January 1995–July 2014
Monthly closing prices in Brazil (Bovespa), China (SE Shang Composite), France
(CAC), Germany (DAX), India (Sensex), Japan (Nikkei), Korea (KOSPI), Mexico
(Mexbol), United Kingdom (FTSE 100), the United States (NASDAQ Composite),
and the Morgan-Stanley Capital International All Country World Index, all
deflated by the monthly Consumer Price Index for the currency, all rescaled to
January 1995 = 100. Source: Bloomberg and International Monetary Fund Inter­
national Financial Statistics (1999).

the chart, only to sputter and crash. This—the largest stock market boom
ever—may be referred to as the Millennium Boom or, now that it is over, the
Millennium Bubble.5
The boom and crash in the stock market in the years after 1994 are clearly
related to the behavior of earnings. As can be seen in Figure 1.1, S&P Composite
earnings grew very fast in the late 1990s before they crashed after 2000, rose
again until 2007, utterly crashed in 2009, and then rose with the market.
Earnings seem to have been oscillating around a slow, steady growth path
that has persisted for over a century.
Inspection of Figure 1.1 should make it clear that nothing like the
Millennium Boom had ever happened before in the entire stock market history since 1871. There was of course the famous stock run‑up of the 1920s,
culminating in the 1929 crash. Figure 1.1 reveals this boom as a cusp‑shaped
price pattern for those years. If one corrects for the market’s smaller scale then,

6

TH E S TO CK MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

one recognizes that this episode in the 1920s does somewhat resemble the
recent stock market increase, but it is the only historical episode that comes
even close to being comparable.

Price Relative to Earnings
Figure 1.3 shows the cyclically adjusted price‑earnings ratio (CAPE), that is, the
real (inflation‑corrected) S&P Composite Index divided by the ten‑year moving average of real earnings on the index. The points shown reflect monthly
data from January 1881 to June 2014.6 The price‑earnings ratio is a measure
of how expensive the market is relative to an objective measure of the ability
of corporations to earn profits. John Campbell and I originally defined CAPE
using the ten‑year average, along lines proposed by Benjamin Graham and
David Dodd in 1934.7
The ten‑year average smooths out such events as the temporary burst of
earnings during World War I, the temporary decline in earnings during World
War II, and the frequent boosts and declines that we see due to the business
cycle.8 Note again that there was an enormous spike after 1997, when the ratio
rose until it hit 47.2 intraday on March 24, 2000. Price‑earnings ratios by this
measure had never been so high. The closest parallel was September 1929,
when the ratio hit 32.6.
In 2000 earnings were quite high in comparison with the Graham and
Dodd measure of long‑run earnings, but nothing here was startlingly out of
the ordinary. What was extraordinary in 2000 was the behavior of price (as
also seen in Figure 1.1), not earnings.
Part of the explanation for the remarkable price behavior between 1990
and 2000 may have to do with the unusual behavior of corporations’ profits
as reflected in their earnings reports. Many observers remarked then that
earnings growth in the five‑year period ending in 1997 was extraordinary:
real S&P Composite earnings more than doubled over this interval, and such
a rapid five‑year growth of real earnings had not occurred for nearly half a
century. But 1992 marked the end of a recession during which earnings were
temporarily depressed.9 Similar increases in earnings growth following
periods of depressed earnings from recession or depression have happened
before. In fact, there was more than a quadrupling of real earnings from 1921
to 1926 as the economy emerged from the severe recession of 1921 into the
prosperous Roaring Twenties. Real earnings doubled during the five‑year
periods following the depression of the 1890s, the Great Depression of the
1930s, and World War II.
It was tempting for observers in 2000, at the peak of the market, to extrapolate this earnings growth and to believe that some fundamental changes
in the economy had produced a new higher growth trend in earnings.
