the stock so much that he was willing to pay the spread or take the offer; we can say
that this is a buyer-motivated trade. By analyzing the number of orders that hit the
bid (seller-motivated trades) compared to those that take the offer (buyer-motivated
trades), whether through computer-aided analysis or careful observation, traders can get
a deeper sense of the conviction levels and urgency behind price moves. For instance, a
stock may move from 50 to 51 in a series of back-and-forth motions with orders printing
on both the bid and the offer. At another time, the same price change could occur in a
straight line as buyers keep paying the offer and keep that buying pressure on the offer
for the entire move. Simple observation would note that both moves began at 50 and
ended at 51, and perhaps even occurred in the same amount of time and with the same
amount of volume being done, but each of these moves suggests something different
about the underlying conviction in the market.
A trader who buys something in anticipation of it going higher is said to be long that
instrument. For most people, this is a natural and intuitive concept: buying something
relatively cheaply, planning to sell it later for a higher price, and pocketing the difference
(minus any costs of financing or insurance incurred in the interim). One of the divisions

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

Appendix A: Trading Primer

May 11, 2012

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

403

between professional and amateur traders is that professionals are often just as willing to
go short (or just to short) a market, but the public often has a bias against shorting. There
are several reasons for this; most equity traders have a natural inclination toward owning stocks, and think that shorting is a very complex transaction, or that it is somehow
immoral to bet on a company’s value going down. (In some markets it is theoretically
complex, as the instrument must first be borrowed, then sold, later bought back, and
finally returned to the lender.) This prejudice is unfounded and is one of the key differences between the public and most professionals. Shorting is nothing more than the
opposite of being long. Whereas the buyer seeks to make a profit as prices rise, the short
seller anticipates falling prices and hopes to cover the short (buy it back) at lower prices.
Short selling is an important part of the trader’s tool set.

Spread Trading
It is also worth considering that a certain amount of the buying and selling pressure in
the market represents more complex interests than simple buying and shorting. Imagine
a farmer who knows he will have a grain crop coming in September. This farmer might
sell his grain in the futures market before the harvest comes in (technically, a short sale),
but this does not in any way mean that he expects that prices will be going down. This
is a simple example of a hedging transaction, and more complicated examples exist in
all markets.
Spread trading is another type of transaction involving buying one asset and selling
another, looking to profit from the change in value between the two. Imagine that a trader
feels that Assets A and B should trade in a more or less predictable relationship, perhaps
with Asset A at a premium due to production costs and so forth. This trader could track
the spread, or the difference between Assets A and B. If she feels that the premium is too
small, she can go long the spread by buying Asset A and shorting Asset B. This is not a
bullish or bearish bet on either of the assets, but a bet that the spread between the two
will widen. She will make money if A goes up and B goes down, if they both go up but
A goes up more, or even if they both decline as long as B declines more. The key is that
the percentage change of A must be greater than the percentage change of B (assuming
an equal-weighted position) from the time the trade is entered. Conversely, if the trader
felt the spread was too wide, she could short the spread by doing the reverse of this
transaction.
This just scratches the surface of these complex, multileg transactions, which exist
in and between all markets in virtually unlimited combinations. The message here is that
much of the buying and selling we observe in markets may be part of spread trades like
this. In this case, we might see the trader buying Asset A and assume she was bullish on
it, when in fact, she does not care if it goes up or down—all she cares about is the spread
relationship. Spreads can be created between different asset classes, regional markets,
or international markets, and these trades can even be initiated with different timings on
each leg. Do not assume that buying is always bullish and selling is always bearish; there
may be much more going on behind the scenes.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

404

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

APPENDIX A: TRADING PRIMER

CHARTS
The most basic language of the market is price changes, perhaps with associated volume.
In the case of XYZ, we might see 500 shares done at 50.00, 300 @ 50.03, 500 @ 50.04, and
so on. (A more complete record would include a time stamp and whether the order was
executed on the bid, on the offer, or in between.) This record is sometimes referred to as
the “prints on the tape” in memory of the old-style ticker tape machines, which really did
print prices on paper tape. A very active instrument can “print” hundreds or thousands of
trades in a single minute, so a trader would quickly become lost without some reference
of historical activity. A chart of these price changes is the natural solution, and many
discretionary traders find that charts present market information in a way that is both
intuitive and useful.

Tick Charts
The most primitive type of chart would simply be the information in the prints plotted on
a graph with price on the y-axis and trade number on the x-axis. The chart in Figure A.1

FIGURE A.1 A Single-Tick Chart of AAPL

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

Appendix A: Trading Primer

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

405

is a single-tick chart of the market’s opening for Apple, Inc. (Nasdaq: AAPL) on 7/12/2011
(trade numbers not shown). The single-tick chart is interesting from an intellectual perspective because it is the most fundamental language of the market—every single trade,
every transaction that hits the consolidated tape, is displayed on the chart. From a practical perspective, a single-tick chart is not very useful, for the simple reason that it is
difficult to fit much trading history on a single chart. This AAPL chart shows only the
first 30 seconds of the trading day. In an extremely active stock, it is even possible that
less than a single second’s trading could fit in the same space; it is not possible for the
human eye and brain to process this information in a meaningful manner.
The obvious solution is to aggregate many ticks into a single space on the chart.
When this is done, we refer to the chart by how many ticks (trades) are put together
into a single space on the x-axis. In Figure A.2, each bar represents 25 individual trades,
and, now, approximately five and a half minutes of activity fit on the same chart space. It
is important to remember that the x-axis is not scaled to time. This is one of the main
advantages of aggregate tick charts: as the market becomes more or less active the
x-axis expands or contracts to accommodate the activity. In many cases, this can

FIGURE A.2 A 25-Tick Chart of AAPL

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

406

APPENDIX A: TRADING PRIMER

FIGURE A.3 Comparison of Bar and Candlestick Charts

create some advantages over simple time-scaled charts by making readable patterns out
of very illiquid or extremely volatile markets.

Bars and Candles
Once we start aggregating trades on the x-axis, a graphical device is needed to explain
the activity in that space. One logical solution is simply to plot a vertical bar, with the top
and bottom of the bar representing the high and low extremes reached during the period
(right panel in Figure A.3). Traders often find it useful to mark the first trade of the period
with a tick on the left side of the bar (the open) and the last trade of the period with a tick
on the right side (the close). These four data points, plotted like this, create the classical
bar chart. An alternate format is the candlestick chart, which prints a wide body between
the open and close of the bars, with thinner shadows (also called “tails” or “wicks”) above
and below the body, reaching to the high and low of the period (left panel in Figure A.3).
Candlestick charts were first used in medieval Japan for rice trading, so much of the
terminology associated with patterns of candles is also Japanese. Traditionally, the body
of the candle is filled in if the close is lower than the open and left empty if the close is

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

Appendix A: Trading Primer

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

407

higher than the open. Modern charting software packages usually fill the body of every
candle but change the color to something intuitive like red for downward-closing candles
and green or blue for upward-closing candles.

Time Charts and Other Options
Though the strength of tick charts is their ability to adapt to activity levels in the markets,
traders and analysts often prefer a format where each bar corresponds to a predictable
unit of time. These time charts are by far the most commonly used in most applications,
and are especially useful for traders looking at daily and longer time frames. The chart
is referred to by the length of each time unit (as in a 5-minute chart), which may also be
called the time frame of the chart. Many traders choose to look at different time frames
(for instance, 5-minute, hourly, and daily charts) for the same market to get a better sense
of the forces affecting prices at any time.
There are other possibilities for scaling the x-axis, but these tend to be less used
except in certain specific contexts. It is possible to aggregate bars not by ticks (transactions) but by trading volume. In this case, a bar would contain a certain number of

FIGURE A.4 Market Proﬁle Chart of AAPL

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp01

408

JWBT634-Grimes

May 11, 2012

8:31

Printer: Hamilton Printing

APPENDIX A: TRADING PRIMER

shares or contracts, after which the next bar would begin. Another possibility is to have
each bar end after a certain range is reached, so that, for instance, each bar would be
0.25 wide. (Be aware that the range bars created at the end of a trading day will be different from the ones created as the market unfolds. This makes backtesting and analysis
on range bars virtually impossible.)
Other types of charts include swing charts, point and figure charts, kagi charts, line
charts, and many others, but these are much less common and are outside the scope of
this primer, with one exception. One other chart worth mentioning is Market Profile, created by Peter Steidlmayer in the 1980s. Market Profile charts essentially allow the trader
to look inside the bar to see where most volume and trading activity occurred in the time
period. Market Profile displays this information in a graphical format attached to the right
of each bar, with wider horizontal bars indicating more trading activity at that price level.
(See Figure A.4.) While most charting methods only reprocess the same open, high, low,
and close (OHLC), volume, and open interest information, Market Profile is an important
innovation—it adds detail and perspective that is not visible on a standard chart.

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp02

JWBT634-Grimes

May 10, 2012

8:27

Printer: Hamilton Printing

APPENDIX B

A Deeper Look at
Moving Averages
and the MACD

he charts and the discussion that follow may look a little strange, but the thought
process is important. Too many times, traders use indicators or tools on their charts
that they do not understand. Rules are developed based on the action of a squiggly
line without fully understanding what that line measures and represents. Though some
traders will find some success with an approach like this, it misses much of the potential
in these tools. To fully understand a technical tool, it is useful to peer deeply into its
construction, and to understand how it reacts to changes in the underlying market. One
of the best ways to do this is to “feed” an indicator an artificially created dataset that
focuses on specific types of market action. Think of this as a way to look at the indicator
in a laboratory environment, isolating and controlling for various influences.

T

MOVING AVERAGES
If you want to really understand the tools you are using and how they will react to extreme situations, it helps to understand how they will react in the most simple, basic
contexts as well. Of course, everyone grasps the basics of moving averages: add higher
prices and the average will go up. When price flattens out, the average eventually will
flatten, too. When price turns down, it will cut through the moving average, and, at some
point, it will start pulling the average down with it. This is all simple, but it is not the
point. The point is to build an intuitive and intimate understanding of the behavior of the
average as it responds to changing market data. One of the best ways I have found to foster this intuition with any technical tool is to generate simple price patterns in artificial
price series, and then to plot the indicator on this synthetic price data. (Nearly all charting packages allow users to import ASCII data, but if this is not possible, the indicator
may be calculated directly in an Excel spreadsheet and graphed there.) Think of this as a
409

P1: OTA
JWBT634-bapp02

JWBT634-Grimes

410

May 10, 2012

8:27

Printer: Hamilton Printing

APPENDIX B: A DEEPER LOOK AT MOVING AVERAGES AND THE MACD

