
Q.: What gives you confidence in knowing where it’s going?
A : The candles, the volume.

Quin candles what you are looking for?

A : I'm looking for a medium-size candle with a small wick on
both sides. Those are golden.

Q.: okay.

A : I'm looking for the big fight, like just a small wick on top and
bottom. Then I will get inside that candle, inside that fight and I
will put my orders inside that candle and usually put my stop three
to five ticks above the body of the candle.

Q.:s0 not even above the top of the candle?

A : No. No the true fight, where the fighting is going on that’s the
body. Not the wicks, the wicks are worthless.

321


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Really? You don’t even use the candle high/low as your refer-
ence points? It’s only the body of the candle that you're interested
in?

A : The body, I use the bodies. I love the bodies.

Qcin that kind of a scenario, generally how frequently do you
get stopped out versus you being right?

A : Rarely. I think it’s about an 88 percent of the time, I’m right.

: Because you know a three-to-five-tick stop is a sneeze in the
ER. [Authors’ note: The ER or Russell 2000 index can move 200
ticks on average day.]

A : This seems to work. The markets change. You have to go with
what works right now. It might not work six months from now, but
right now it works. I don’t believe in adding. If I’ve got my position
in there and it starts going against me I’m not going average down.
I'd rather have it go down and add more.

Q: How many times a day do you trade? How many round turns?

A : Depending upon the market, but usually I look back and it’s
about one to five trades a day. Today I had four and I was done.
Once I get to a certain number, I usually quit unless the market’s
really, really good. I mean, once that volume tapers off, I don’t like
to trade.

Q.:s0 generally you trade the open?
A : First two hours.

322


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

Q.- what about the last hour of the market?

A : It depends if I’ve got a hunch, or just how I’m trading that
day. It just depends on circumstances. But the first two hours is
really my bread and butter.

Q. what do you do after 11 o’clock East Coast time? Once you've
done your trades, do you watch the markets?

A : I watch, yes. I watch. I do a lot of homework at night. I go
back and look and I spend about two hours every night and look
and see why I did something wrong, what happened. I don’t like
to lose—period—in anything. I like to win in everything that I do.
I get frustrated even if I have one small loser. I don’t want that. So
I go back and do homework.

Q: Do you always enter every trade with a stop?

A : Most of the time, but not always. I have a mental stop in my
head.

Quit youre trading with such tight stops, let’s say three to five
ticks, which is nothing in ER—where is your mental stop? Do you
say, “I’m never going to give up more than a point”?

A: Yes, 1.2, 1.3, I think. If it goes beyond that, I think the market
is telling you that you are wrong.

Q. pia you ever have a hard time bailing out of position?
A : Admitting I’m wrong?

323


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.- Yes.

A : The biggest loss I’ve ever taken in the ER was two points.

Q. what is your typical day is like? How early do you get to the

screen before the market starts to trade?

A : About 8 o’clock. I’ve got three kids, a two-and-a-half-year-old
and two twins, so they get up about 7:30. Then I come on down
here to trade, setting up shop at about eight o'clock.

Q.: What do you look at? What is your routine in the morning?

A : Well, pretty much I’ve done my homework from the night
before. I like to have a plan. For the next day, I write down my
bias, where the market went at the end of day to give me some
flavor. I try to think like the guys on the floor, meaning, if I were a
rookie, where would I put my stop? I try to figure out where they
are going to run their stops. I really try to get into their melons
because they usually run these things just above their resistance or
just below support.

Q.: Right. Is that your bread and butter routine—try to figure
out where they are going run the stops that day?

A : Yes, that’s kind of one of them.

Q.- Let's say you have a general game plan of where the points of
vulnerability are, where the stop runs are going to happen. Once
that happens, what do you do? Do you wait to see if it bounces
back or clears those stops and starts to have more momentum? Is
that when you start to develop your directional bias?

A : Yes. Exactly.

324


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

QO. - That's when you start to formulate a trade?

A : Right.

Q - instead of just having a bias?

A : Right.

Q: Do you read the news at all?

A : No, I don’t really care about it. It’s not necessarily what the
news is, it’s how the market reacts to the news.

Q.: Do you watch CNBC?

A: Yes, CNBC. I've got it on right now. I turn the volume down,
way down.

Q.-But you are aware basically of what economic indicators came
out that day?

A : Oh yeah.

Q.- and how the game is going to be played?

A : Yes, for FOMC. I play that. [Authors’ note: FOMC stands
for the Federal Open Market Committee of the New York Fed.
It meets 10 times a year to set short-term interest rates and its
policies can have huge impact on the financial markets.] I didn’t
do anything in the morning and I just waited for the FOMC.

325


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.; Right, run us through your FOMC game plan yesterday
because FOMC is always one of the more interesting days in the
futures markets.

A : What I do is I usually watch whatever the initial reaction is.
I’m not a big fader, but I will fade that.

Q : How do you fade it? Do you wait for the candles to turn
around?

A : When the announcement comes out and they yank it up, I'll
fade that. Or vice versa if it also comes up and they yank it down,
I'll buy.

: At what point do you start? Yesterday they yanked it up first,
then they brought it down, and then they brought it back up. On
that first initial thrust forward, did you get short?

A : I shorted it, yes. It hit a moving average that I watch right on
the noggin.

Qe at that point you weren’t waiting for any weakness in the
price action, you just got short on the move?

A : Right.

: What would you have done if it continued to move forward?
How much of a rubber band were you willing to give yourself at
that point, on that trade?

A : I let that go about 1.6 to 1.8 against me. However, I have a
few spots. I won't put all my stuff in at one spot—so that I get a
nice average—and it really doesn’t go above that. Like I said, if it
does ... hasta la vista. Yesterday I played it to a T. I shorted from
my moving average, and then I caught most of that bottom.

326


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

QO. once it fell into the support level, did you turn it back around
and go long?

A.No.

: You were done. What makes you stop? Is it a money target
for the day?

A: It’s kind of a money target. I don’t like giving it back to them.
I’ve done that too many times where I overtrade and start giving
money back. I had my plans for the day and that was to trade the
FOMC and fade it. It worked accordingly and then I didn’t really
have a plan after that. That was it, bears make money, bulls make
money, and pigs get slaughtered.

Q.:s0 it was almost like a one shot, one kill, kind of a deal.

A : Yes. And that’s kind of what I did this morning. The big move.
My honest opinion is there’s really only two good moves during
the day. Why does a guy need more than that? One to five trades
a day to make some bread and you are done.

Q.: What's your general target for the day? Do you set a morning
target for yourself?

A : Yes, 3,500.

: And generally are you trading 10 lots? How much leverage
do you allow yourself to trade?

A: Oh, I’m trading anywhere from 2 to about 25 depending upon
what the move looks like or what my plan is—what I saw the night
before I decided how many I’m going to trade. I traded that FOMC
with 24 contracts.

327


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: That was basically in multiple entries. You started out with
five and then you added five more, right?

A : Yes, but I won’t be afraid. If it’s going one way or the other, I
will not be a afraid to hit bids. I'll go market, I'll just bank it.

Q.: You mean get into the trade with market orders instead of
limit orders if you feel that it’s the right trade?

A : Absolutely.

Quis that because you'd rather be in a trade than miss it?

A. Yes.

Q.: Given your capital base, how much leverage do you allow
yourself?

A : I don’t go crazy. I have a $350,000 account. I take a draw out
of there at about $15,000 a month.

Q_ Basically it’s no more than four-to-1 leverage, so it is not
exorbitant.

A : Yes, I use one contract per $10,000.

Q.- That's your rule of thumb?

A : Yes, in my head. Like if I had $20,000 account, I would trade
two at most. I mean, I started this thing two years ago with 30
grand.

328


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

QO. How many contracts were you trading when you had 30 grand
in the account?

A : One to three. I followed Chuck’s rules to a T and that’s the
way I’m going to continue to do it. I’m not sure if I'll ever trade or
need to trade 50 to 100 or 200. I might.

: At this point obviously liquidity is not an issue for you because
basically ER2 is 10 to 20 up on every price level. [Authors’ note:
The ER contract usually displays a minimum of 20 contracts on
the bid and the offers at the inside price.] Therefore, even when
you get stopped slippage is not bad.

A. Exactly.

Q.: Was there a period of time when you had days or weeks
where you were just missing your trades? And if you did, how did
you deal with that kind of pressure?

A: The whole time I’ve been in this, I’ve never had a losing week.
This month of October here I've had two losing days, one was
October 3 for about $800 and the other one was October 24 for
575 bucks.

Q.- pia you get upset both of those days?

A : Oh hell yeah. Absolutely. Like I said, I don’t like to lose
anything. I mean playing cards with my wife, just playing, I don’t
like to lose. Hate it. Can’t stand losing. Can’t stand it! Drives me
crazy. I’m very, very competitive.

Q.p id you play sports when you were younger?

A : Yes. I played them all and I expect to win. I have high expec-
tations of myself. I do get bummed out when I lose.

329


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q. Yet losing is such a fundamental part of this game.

A : Right. To relieve stress, I go golfing a lot. I really like to leave
the whole thing at work and just be done with it. It’s just money. It
can be made back. I’ve learned that there’s more important things
than money. I’ve got three healthy kids. I’ve got a great wife. I've
a great family that I’m married into and a great family myself with
three brothers. I think having three brothers is where a lot of
competitiveness came from.

Q.- what order were you in the brotherhood?

A : [was oldest and a couple of my younger brothers are compet-
itive, too. I have one that challenges me constantly in golf.

Qu that your off-the-field competition?

A : Yes. Absolutely—and my stress reliever, too. A lot of times
after wrap-up here in Minnesota, I'll just play golf by myself. I like
to go by myself, do thinking, and just kind of relax.

Q.: you play 18 holes by yourself or just drive and putt?
A : 18 holes by myself.

: So, as time has gone by, you learned to walk away from the
losing days? Just closed off the screen and said, “Hey, tomorrow’s
another day, tomorrow’s another trade”?

A: Yes.

Q_ : obviously your wife is very supportive, so that is a huge

positive.

A : Huge! It’s come back to reward her because she hated work,
hated the 9 to 5. We have three kids and she wanted to spend more

330


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

time with the kids. This has given her the ability to do that. So she
was able to quit her job and she found out by being home she
didn’t want to be a housewife per say. So she started her own little
gig and works 15 hours consulting. This whole thing has helped us
to just be able to do what we love to do and spend a lot of time
with our family. That’s why I wanted to do this because I hate
working for someone else. I love my own hours. I love my own
stuff and family time is a big thing to me. I’ve been able to do
that, spend a lot of time with my kids. Back in my day, the thing I
regretted most is my dad and mom had to work three jobs and I
didn’t get to spend a lot of time with both of my parents when I was
growing up. That was one the thing I was hoping I would be able
to do.

Q.: and now you get a chance to do that. That’s very nice.

A: Yes.

OQ): Aside from Chuck, did you have mentors in the business?

A : There was a stockbroker friend of mine. He is the guy who
taught me technical analysis early on when I was an intern.

: How about now, do you mentor other traders? We know
you're in Chuck's room. Is there any other community that you
participate in or are you pretty much on your own?

A : Pretty much on my own. That’s about it. You know every once
in while Chuck will get a new guy and we'll work with him for a
while and then he'll come here and watch me. I’ve actually done
that recently with a guy who has passion for the stock markets.
He’s actually starting to get it quick. He didn’t do well in stocks.
But he is starting to get it in the futures.

331


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q: Have you traded any other futures instrument besides
ER2?

A: Yes, I traded the ES [the e-mini S&P 500] a few times. I found
it was pretty boring though.

Qu moves in quarters instead of dimes.

A : And it takes forever to move a quarter sometimes.

Q.-ts much harder to make bid/ask on ES, almost impossible.
[Authors’ note: Trader slang for being able to buy on the bid and
sell on the ask.]

A : Right. No, I love helping people because it also helps me.
I learn from it and maybe someone who I’m helping out knows
something that I don’t. I want to learn, I’m a sponge. I don’t claim
to be great, because I think you can always be greater and I strive
to be. I want to win 100 percent. I know that’s impossible, but I
strive to just get better and better.

Q. would you say most of your own learning is derived from your
own experience rather than from any academic environment?

A : Absolutely.

Q.- You basically study yourself, refine yourself, continuously?

A : Yes. There’s no book. There’s no class that can teach you any
of this. My opinion again. My own experiences have helped me
become what I am today and the key is to learn from what you did
wrong and use discipline.

332


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

Q. ; speaking of discipline, would you say that trading is really
about entries or exits? Clearly it’s both, we all know that. But does
the edge lie in the entries or does the edge lie in the exits?

A : Exits.

Qi tes how you manage your exits that ultimately turn you into
a winner or a loser.

A : That’s right.

Q.: any particular insights as to how people should manage their
exits that you might care to share?

A : Do not let it get way out of control. It’s easier said than done
but you can always reenter.

Q.- But you can never get back that one catastrophic loss.
A : That’s right [laughter].

: Final questions that we ask everybody. Your number one rule
for trading, if you were to boil it down to one thing?

A : Discipline. I don’t know how many times and how many guys
I’ve worked with that hang onto their losers and they get into this
hope mode. They think it’s got to come back. But no it doesn’t
have to come back. Discipline. I’ve got discipline posted in big
black letters, right here on my desk, discipline.

Q.- Even though you hate to lose, are you perfectly willing to cut
your losses when it’s necessary?

A : Right. I’m a gracious loser. I mean if someone beats me on
the course, I’ll shake their hand. But I’m mad that I lost and I want
to understand why I lost because it’s all in your head.

833


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

QO: s0 you believe that most of the time you lose it’s not because
of your physical handicaps, but because of some mental mistake?

A : Yes. There are so many guys that are better than me in golf,
but I can beat them every time because I can get in their head.

Q.- and would you say that’s probably your biggest skill that you
try to refine every day?

A : Absolutely.

Q_: Because moving averages, candlesticks, all of those things are
just supporting indicators?

A. That’s right. It’s a big psychological game. If I had a fight with
my wife or something like that I might not even trade, if I’m in the
wrong state of mind.

Q.: you wake up you have a cold, you're feeling sore, you're
tired, you’re hung over, whatever, you're just not on top your game
physically, will you pull back sometimes?

A : Absolutely.

Q.: 80 before you read the market you read yourself first and
foremost, right?

A: Yes.

Q.- what about the best trade ever?

A : The best trade ever was in January of this year, or February,
I can’t remember. There was also another one in May. I made

334


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

$12,000. What can I say? It wasn’t anything that I did in particular.
I just followed my rules. Everyone in the room said it’s got to turn,
it’s got to tun. But I just kept lowering my stop, lowering my stop,
and it became a huge winner.

Q.-You were lowering your stop by candlesticks?

A. Yes.

Q:s0 basically your rule is I’m not going to get out of it until the
market takes me out of it?

A : You got it. Yes, the market will tell me when to get out of it.
It’s gone against me too. But my big huge days have been letting
the market tell me where the bottom is.

: How often during 20 trading days of the month does that
kind of dynamic develop where it’s just a one-way, you catch it and
it’s the grand slam?

A. For me grand slam is taking three pointers here and there and
I probably get those, oh two to three times a week.

: I’m talking about where it goes four or five continuous points
without really retracing a lot?

A : The four and fivers? Actually two or three times a month.

Qe That's quite a lot actually.

A : I got a couple 10 pointers. I think I had an 18 pointer [an
$1,800 gain on single futures contract] once.

335


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q.: Really?
A : Yes.

: When you have those kind of very, very long trades are you
scaling out? You obviously take one third off on an initial move just
to bank some profit?

A : Yes. Exactly.

Q.: What kind of proportionality do you typically use?

A : What I like to do if, let’s say, I have 24 on, is to take five off
right away, then another five at 1.1 points, and then I'll another
five at 1.9 points, and then I'll start breaking it down into twos and
threes.

: Twos and threes. So basically the last third of the trade you'll
just kind of let it float out there for a while?

A: Yes.

Q.: And what happens is that even though you're left with maybe
10 to 15 percent of the initial position, you may still be able to ride
the move.

A: Yes.

Q.: That 10 or 15 percent has such a massive gain that it con-
tributes disproportionately to the overall profit, right?

A : Yes, exactly.

336


THE ALL-AMERICAN TRADER

Q.- what about the worst trade ever?

A : Worse trade ever was that one where I thought I was right
and then lost the two points. Then I added to it too, to boot. That
was when I tried to get a top. I tried to pick a top and I shorted the
top and it just kept going. Lo and behold, it was good. I took the
loss because it ended up going to the moon.

Q.- After you did your post-market analysis, did that have a very
strong impact on you? You never did that again. You never tried to
pick a top the way you did in that particular trade?

A : Oh, absolutely. That’s another one of my big things—don’t try
to pick tops and bottoms. No reason.

Q.: what's the most interesting part of this job?

A : Most interesting part is the high I get when I’m right. It’s the
flexibility. It's the ability to spend large amount of time with my
family.

Q.: Anything that’s boring about this job?

A : Well, it’s tedious. Every day you start with zero again and
there’s no paycheck coming in if I don’t work, if I don’t do well.
It’s all on me. You make a few bad moves and then things could
get a little tricky.

Q - How do you deal with that type of daily pressure? Golf?

A : Golf. Yeah. Golf and I just try not to think about it, I really
do. I don’t think about it. I focus on the trade, I come up with plan
and that’s it.

337


MILLIONAIRE TRADERS

Q. you could say that you focus on doing the trade rather than
worrying about the trade.

A : That’s right.

LESSONS FROM PAUL WILLETTE
Support from Loved Ones Is Key

One of the least appreciated aspects of trading is that it requires an
enormous amount of emotional support and understanding from
family members. Because the game is so fundamentally psycho-
logical in nature, criticisms from loved ones will exacerbate tenfold
the normal doubts and pressures of the job. Every successful trader
who we interviewed was either completely and totally autonomous
or enjoyed the strong support from his family and spouse. No one
exemplifies this dictum more than Paul Willette, whose wife es-
sentially put him through trading school by going to work while he
stayed at home and refined his day-trading skills. Willette’s story is
extremely unusual. Few spouses would be willing to back someone
in such a high-risk venture. But fortunately for both of them, it
resulted in a very successful career for Paul that provides secu-
rity and freedom for their whole family. Yet even Paul is the first
to admit the fragile nature of the job. He will often pass up on
trading if he has had an argument with his wife the night before.
Just like athletes or actors, traders need complete peace of mind in
order to perform well. The game requires not only concentration
but more importantly, emotional equanimity. While support from
your loved ones certainly doesn’t guarantee success, hostility from
those closest to you will almost always result in failure.

Do the Small Things Well

Paul Willette’s trading strategy is fairly straightforward. No fancy
customized indicators. No complex statistical algorithms. He trades
what he calls “the meat of the candle,” ignoring the wicks on either
side and while his entry criteria are proprietary, his exit rules are
crystal clear. Paul maintains at least a partial position in the trade
