one of the most credulous princes of the day, whose court absolutely swarmed with
alchymists, conjurers, astrologers, and quacks of every description, made several attempts
to discover the philosopher's stone, and thought he knew so much about it, that he
determined to enlighten the world with a treatise. It is called the "Royal Work of Charles
VI. of France, and the Treasure of Philosophy." It is said to be the original from which
Nicholas Flamel took the idea of his "Desir Desire." Lenglet du Fresnoy says it is very
allegorical, and utterly incomprehensible. For a more complete list of the hermetic
philosophers of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the reader is referred to the third
volume of Lenglet's History already quoted.

PART II.
PROGRESS OF THE INFATUATION DURING THE SIXTEENTH AND
SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES AND -- PRESENT STATE OF THE SCIENCE.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the search for the philosopher's stone was
continued by thousands of the enthusiastic and the credulous; but a great change was
introduced during this period. The eminent men who devoted themselves to the study,
totally changed its aspect, and referred to the possession of their wondrous stone and
elixir, not only the conversion of the base into the precious metals, but the solution of all
the difficulties of other sciences. They pretended that by its means man would be brought
into closer communion with his Maker; that disease and sorrow would be banished from
the world; and that "the millions of spiritual beings who walk the earth unseen" would be
rendered visible, and become the friends, companions, and instructors of mankind. In the
seventeenth century more especially, these poetical and fantastic doctrines excited the
notice of Europe; and from Germany, where they had been first disseminated by
Rosencreutz, spread into France and England, and ran away with the sound judgment of
many clever, but too enthusiastic, searchers for the truth. Paracelsus, Dee, and many
others of less note, were captivated by the grace and beauty of the new mythology, which
was arising to adorn the literature of Europe. Most of the alchymists of the sixteenth
century, although ignorant of the Rosicrucians as a sect, were, in some degree, tinctured
with their fanciful tenets: but before we speak more fully of these poetical visionaries, it
will be necessary to resume the history of the hermetic folly where we left off in the
former chapter, and trace the gradual change that stole over the dreams of the adepts. It
will be seen that the infatuation increased rather than diminished as the world grew older.
AUGURELLO.
Among the alchymists who were born in the fifteenth, and distinguished themselves in
the sixteenth century, the first, in point of date, is John Aurelio Augurello. He was born at
Rimini in 1441, and became Professor of the belles lettres at Venice and Trevisa. He was
early convinced of the truth of the hermetic science, and used to pray to God that he
might be happy enough to discover the philosopher's stone. He was continually
surrounded by the paraphernalia of chemistry, and expended all his wealth in the
purchase of drugs and metals. He was also a poet, but of less merit than pretensions. His
"Chrysopeia," in which lie pretended to teach the art of making gold, he dedicated to
Pope Leo X, in the hope that the Pontiff would reward him handsomely for the
compliment; but the Pope was too good a judge of poetry to be pleased with the worse
than mediocrity of his poem, and too good a philosopher to approve of the strange
doctrines which it inculcated: he was, therefore, far from gratified at the dedication. It is
said, that when Augurello applied to him for a reward, the Pope, with great ceremony and
much apparent kindness and cordiality, drew an empty purse from his pocket, and
presented it to the alchymist, saying, that since he was able to make gold, the most
appropriate present that could be made him, was a purse to put it in. This scurvy reward

was all that the poor alchymist ever got either for his poetry or his alchymy. He died in a
state of extreme poverty, in the eighty-third year of his age.
CORNELIUS AGRIPPA.
This alchymist has left a more distinguished reputation. The most extraordinary tales
were told and believed of his powers. He could turn iron into gold by his mere word. All
the spirits of the air, and demons of the earth, were under his command, and bound to
obey him in everything. He could. raise from the dead the forms of the great men of other
days, and make them appear "in their habit as they lived," to the gaze of the curious who
had courage enough to abide their presence.
He was born at Cologne in 1486, and began, at an early age, the study of chemistry and
philosophy. By some means or other which have never been very clearly explained, he
managed to impress his contemporaries with a great idea of his wonderful attainments. At
the early age of twenty, so great was his reputation as an alchymist, that the principal
adepts of Paris wrote to Cologne, inviting him to settle in France, and aid them with his
experience in discovering the philosopher's stone. Honours poured upon him in thick
succession; and he was highly esteemed by all the learned men of his time. Melancthon
speaks of him with respect and commendation. Erasmus also bears testimony in his
favour; and the general voice of his age proclaimed him a light of literature and an
ornament to philosophy. Some men, by dint of excessive egotism, manage to persuade
their contemporaries that they are very great men indeed: they publish their acquirements
so loudly in people's ears, and keep up their own praises so incessantly, that the world's
applause is actually taken by storm. Such seems to have been the case with Agrippa. He
called himself a sublime theologian, an excellent jurisconsult, an able physician, a great
philosopher, and a successful alchymist. The world, at last, took him at his word; and
thought that a man who talked so big, must have some merit to recommend him -- that it
was, indeed, a great trumpet which sounded so obstreperous a blast. He was made
secretary to the Emperor Maximilian, who conferred upon him the title of Chevalier, and
gave him the honorary command of a regiment. He afterwards became Professor of
Hebrew and the belles lettres, at the University of Dole, in France; but quarrelling with
the Franciscan monks upon some knotty point of divinity, he was obliged to quit the
town. He took refuge in London, where he taught Hebrew and cast nativities, for about a
year. From London he proceeded to Pavia, and gave lectures upon the writings, real or
supposed, of Hermes Trismegistus; and might have lived there in peace and honour, had
he not again quarrelled with the clergy. By their means his position became so
disagreeable, that he was glad to accept an offer made him by the magistracy of Metz, to
become their Syndic and Advocate-General. Here, again, his love of disputation made
him enemies: the theological wiseacres of that city asserted, that St. Anne had three
husbands, in which opinion they were confirmed by the popular belief of the day.
Agrippa needlessly ran foul of this opinion, or prejudice as he called it, and thereby lost
much of his influence. Another dispute, more creditable to his character, occurred soon
after, and sank him for ever in the estimation of the Metzians. Humanely taking the part
of a young girl who was accused of witchcraft, his enemies asserted, that he was himself
a sorcerer, and raised such a storm over his head, that he was forced to fly the city. After

this, he became physician to Louisa de Savoy, mother of King Francis I. This lady was
curious to know the future, and required her physician to cast her nativity. Agrippa
replied, that he would not encourage such idle curiosity. The result was, he lost her
confidence, and was forthwith dismissed. If it had been through his belief in the
worthlessness of astrology, that he had made his answer, we might admire his honest and
fearless independence; but, when it is known that, at the very same time, he was in the
constant habit of divination and fortunetelling; and that he was predicting splendid
success, in all his undertakings, to the Constable of Bourbon, we can only wonder at his
thus estranging a powerful friend through mere petulance and perversity.
He was, about this time, invited both by Henry VIII. of England, and Margaret of Austria,
Governess of the Low Countries, to fix his residence in their dominions. He chose the
service of the latter, by whose influence he was made historiographer to the Emperor
Charles V. Unfortunately for Agrippa, he never had stability enough to remain long in
one position, and offended his patrons by his restlessness and presumption. After the
death of Margaret, he was imprisoned at Brussels, on a charge of sorcery. He was
released after a year; and, quitting the country, experienced many vicissitudes. He died in
great poverty in 1534, aged forty-eight years.
While in the service of Margaret of Austria, he resided principally at Louvain, in which
city he wrote his famous work on the Vanity and Nothingness of human Knowledge. He
also wrote, to please his Royal Mistress, a treatise upon the Superiority of the Female
Sex, which be dedicated to her, in token of his gratitude for the favours she had heaped
upon him. The reputation he left behind him in these provinces was anything but
favourable. A great number of the marvellous tales that are told of him, relate to this
period of his life. It was said, that the gold which he paid to the traders with whom he
dealt, always looked remarkably bright, but invariably turned into pieces of slate and
stone in the course of four-and-twenty hours. Of this spurious gold he was believed to
have made large quantities by the aid of the devil, who, it would appear from this, had but
a very superficial knowledge of alchymy, and much less than the Marechal de Rays gave
him credit for. The Jesuit Delrio, in his book on Magic and Sorcery, relates a still more
extraordinary story of him. One day, Agrippa left his house, at Louvain; and, intending to
be absent for some time, gave the key of his study to his wife, with strict orders that no
one should enter it during his absence. The lady herself, strange as it may appear, had no
curiosity to pry into her husband's secrets, and never once thought of entering the
forbidden room: but a young student, who had been accommodated with an attic in the
philosopher's house, burned with a fierce desire to examine the study; hoping, perchance,
that he might purloin some book or implement which would instruct him in the art of
transmuting metals. The youth, being handsome, eloquent, and, above all, highly
complimentary to the charms of the lady, she was persuaded, without much difficulty, to
lend him the key, but gave him strict orders not to remove anything. The student
promised implicit obedience, and entered Agrippa's study. The first object that caught his
attention, was a large grimoire, or book of spells, which lay open on the philosopher's
desk. He sat himself down immediately, and began to read. At the first word he uttered,
he fancied he heard a knock at the door. He listened; but all was silent. Thinking that his
imagination had deceived him, he read on, when immediately a louder knock was heard,

which so terrified him, that he started to his feet. He tried to say, "come in;" but his
tongue refused its office, and he could not articulate a sound. He fixed his eyes upon the
door, which, slowly opening, disclosed a stranger of majestic form, but scowling features,
who demanded sternly, why he was summoned? "I did not summon you," said the
trembling student. "You did!" said the stranger, advancing, angrily; "and the demons are
not to be invoked in vain." The student could make no reply; and the demon, enraged that
one of the uninitiated should have summoned him out of mere presumption, seized him
by the throat and strangled him. When Agrippa returned, a few days afterwards, he found
his house beset with devils. Some of them were sitting on the chimneypots, kicking up
their legs in the air; while others were playing at leapfrog, on the very edge of the
parapet. His study was so filled with them that he found it difficult to make his way to his
desk. When, at last, he had elbowed his way through them, he found his book open, and
the student lying dead upon the floor. He saw immediately how the mischief had been
done; and, dismissing all the inferior imps, asked the principal demon how he could have
been so rash as to kill the young man. The demon replied, that he had been needlessly
invoked by an insulting youth, and could do no less than kill him for his presumption.
Agrippa reprimanded him severely, and ordered him immediately to reanimate the dead
body, and walk about with it in the market-place for the whole of the afternoon. The
demon did so: the student revived; and, putting his arm through that of his unearthly
murderer, walked very lovingly with him, in sight of all the people. At sunset, the body
fell down again, cold and lifeless as before, and was carried by the crowd to the hospital,
it being the general opinion that he had expired in a fit of apoplexy. His conductor
immediately disappeared. When the body was examined, marks of strangulation were
found on the neck, and prints of the long claws of the demon on various parts of it. These
appearances, together with a story, which soon obtained currency, that the companion of
the young man had vanished in a cloud of flame and smoke, opened people's eyes to the
truth. The magistrates of Louvain instituted inquiries; and the result was, that Agrippa
was obliged to quit the town.
Other authors besides Delrio relate similar stories of this philosopher. The world in those
days was always willing enough to believe in tales of magic and sorcery; and when, as in
Agrippa's case, the alleged magician gave himself out for such, and claimed credit for the
wonders he worked, it is not surprising that the age should have allowed his pretensions.
It was dangerous boasting, which sometimes led to the stake or the gallows, and therefore
was thought to be not without foundation. Paulus Jovius, in his "Eulogia Doctorum
Virorum," says, that the devil, in the shape of a large black dog, attended Agrippa
wherever he went. Thomas Nash, in his adventures of Jack Wilton, relates, that at the
request of Lord Surrey, Erasmus, and some other learned men, Agrippa called up from
the grave many of the great philosophers of antiquity; among others, Tully, whom he
caused to re-deliver his celebrated oration for Roscius. He also showed Lord Surrey,
when in Germany, an exact resemblance in a glass of his mistress the fair Geraldine. She
was represented on her couch weeping for the absence of her lover. Lord Surrey made a
note of the exact time at which he saw this vision, and ascertained afterwards that his
mistress was actually so employed at the very minute. To Thomas Lord Cromwell,
Agrippa represented King Henry VIII. hunting in Windsor Park, with the principal lords

of his court; and to please the Emperor Charles V. he summoned King David and King
Solomon from the tomb.
Naude, in his "Apology for the Great Men who have been falsely suspected of Magic,"
takes a great deal of pains to clear Agrippa from the imputations cast upon him by Delrio,
Paulus Jovius, and other such ignorant and prejudiced scribblers. Such stories demanded
refutation in the days of Naude, but they may now be safely left to decay in their own
absurdity. That they should have attached, however, to the memory of a man, who
claimed the power of making iron obey him when he told it to become gold, and who
wrote such a work as that upon magic, which goes by his name, is not at all surprising.
PARACELSUS.
This philosopher, called by Naude, "the zenith and rising sun of all the alchymists," was
born at Einsiedeln, near Zurich, in the year 1493. His true name was Hohenheim; to
which, as he himself informs us, were prefixed the baptismal names of Aureolus
Theophrastus Bombastes Paracelsus. The last of these he chose for his common
designation while he was yet a boy; and rendered it, before he died, one of the most
famous in the annals of his time. His father, who was a physician, educated his son for
the same pursuit. The latter was an apt scholar, and made great progress. By chance the
work of Isaac Hollandus fell into his hands, and from that time he became smitten with
the mania of the philosopher's stone. All his thoughts henceforth were devoted to
metallurgy; and he travelled into Sweden that he might visit the mines of that country,
and examine the ores while they yet lay in the bowels of the earth. He also visited
Trithemius at the monastery of Spannheim, and obtained instructions from him in the
science of alchymy. Continuing his travels, he proceeded through Prussia and Austria
into Turkey, Egypt, and Tatary, and thence returning to Constantinople, learned, as he
boasted, the art of transmutation, and became possessed of the elixir vitae. He then
established himself as a physician in his native Switzerland at Zurich, and commenced
writing works upon alchymy and medicine, which immediately fixed the attention of
Europe. Their great obscurity was no impediment to their fame; for the less the author
was understood, the more the demonologists, fanatics, and philosopher's-stone-hunters
seemed to appreciate him. His fame as a physician kept pace with that which he enjoyed
as an alchymist, owing to his having effected some happy cures by means of mercury and
opium; drugs unceremoniously condemned by his professional brethren. In the year 1526,
he was chosen Professor of Physics and Natural Philosophy in the University of Basle,
where his lectures attracted vast numbers of students. He denounced the writings of all
former physicians as tending to mislead; and publicly burned the works of Galen and
Avicenna, as quacks and impostors. He exclaimed, in presence of the admiring and halfbewildered crowd, who assembled to witness the ceremony, that there was more
knowledge in his shoestrings than in the writings of these physicians. Continuing in the
same strain, he said all the universities in the world were full of ignorant quacks; but that
he, Paracelsus, over flowed with wisdom. "You will all follow my new system," said he,
with furious gesticulations, "Avicenna, Galen, Rhazis, Montagnana, Meme -- you will all
follow me, ye professors of Paris, Montpellier, Germany, Cologne, and Vienna! and all
ye that dwell on the Rhine and the Danube -- ye that inhabit the isles of the sea; and ye

