
F I G U R E

4-1

Frequency and Cumulative Distribution for In-Sample Trades

of $0 was repeatedly tested on independent samples, only about 14% of the time
would it show a profit as high as that actually observed.

Although the t-test was, in this example, calculated for a sample of trade profit/loss figures, it could just as easily have been computed for a sample of daily
returns. Daily returns were employed in this way to calculate the probabilities
referred to in discussions of the substantitive tests that appear in later chapters. In
fact, the annualized risk-to-reward ratio (ARRR) that appears in many of the tables
and discussions is nothing more than a resealed t-statistic based on daily returns.
Finally, a con$dence interval on the probability of winning is estimated. In
the example, there were 16 wins in a sample of 47 trades, which yielded a percentage of wins equal to 0.3404. Using a particular inverse of the cumulative binomial distribution, upper 99% and lower 99% boundaries are calculated. There is a
99% probability that the percentage of wins in the population as a whole is
between 0.1702 and 0.5319. In Excel, the CRITBINOM function may be used in
the calculation of confidence intervals on percentages.
The various statistics and probabilities computed above should provide the
system developer with important information regarding the behavior of the trading model-that is, if the assumptions of normality and independence are met and

CHAPTER

4

Statistics

61

if the sample is representative. Most likely, however, the assumptions underlying
the t-tests and other statistics are violated; market data deviates seriously from the
normal distribution, and trades are usually not independent. In addition, the sample might not be representative. Does this mean that the statistical evaluation just
discussed is worthless? Let’s consider the cases.
What if the Distribution Is Not Normal? An assumption in the t-test is that the
underlying distribution of the data is normal. However, the distribution of
profit/loss figures of a trading system is anything but normal, especially if there
are stops and profit targets, as can be seen in Figure 4- 1, which shows the distribution of profits and losses for trades taken by the lunar system. Think of it for a
moment. Rarely will a profit greater than the profit target occur. In fact, a lot
of trades are going to bunch up with a profit equal to that of the profit target. Other
trades are going to bunch up where the stop loss is set, with losses equal to that;
and there will be trades that will fall somewhere in between, depending on the exit
method. The shape of the distribution will not be that of the bell curve that describes
the normal distribution. This is a violation of one of the assumptions underlying the
t-test. In this case, however, the Central Limit Theorem comes to the rescue. It states
that as the number of cases in the sample increases, the distribution of the sample
mean approaches normal. By the time there is a sample size of 10, the errors resulting from the violation of the normality assumption will be small, and with sample
sizes greater than 20 or 30, they will have little practical significance for inferences
regarding the mean. Consequently, many statistics can be applied with reasonable
assurance that the results will be meaningful, as long as the sample size is adequate,
as was the case in the example above, which had an n of 47.
What if There Is Serial Dependence.3 A more serious violation, which makes
the above-described application of the t-test not quite cricket, is serial dependence, which is when cases constituting a sample (e.g., trades) are not statistically independent of one another. Trades come from a time series. When a series of
trades that occurred over a given span of dates is used as a sample, it is not quite
a random sample. A truly random sample would mean that the 100 trades were
randomly taken from the period when the contract for the market started (e.g.,
1983 for the S&P 500) to far into the future; such a sample would not only be less
likely to suffer from serial dependence, but be more representative of the population from which it was drawn. However, when developing trading systems, sampling is usually done from one narrow point in time; consequently, each trade may
be correlated with those adjacent to it and so would not be independent,
The practical effect of this statistically is to reduce the eflective sample size.
When trying to make inferences, if there is substantial serial dependence, it may
be as if the sample contained only half or even one-fourth of the actual number of
trades or data points observed. To top it off, the extent of serial dependence cannot definitively be determined. A rough “guestimate,” however, can be made. One

such guestimate may be obtained by computing a simple lag/lead serial correlation: A correlation is computed between the profit and loss for Trade i and the
profit and loss for Trade i + I, with i ranging from 1 to n - 1. In the example, the
serial correlation was 0.2120, not very high, but a lower number would be preferable. An associated t-statistic may then be calculated along with a statistical significance for the correlation In the current case, these statistics reveal that if there
really were no serial correlation in the population, a correlation as large as the one
obtained from the sample would only occur in about 16% of such tests.
Serial dependence is a serious problem. If there is a substantial amount of it,
it would need to be compensated for by treating the sample as if it were smaller
than it actually is. Another way to deal with the effect of serial dependence is to
draw a random sample of trades from a larger sample of trades computed over a
longer period of time. This would also tend to make the sample of trades more representative of the population,
What ifthe Markets Change? When developing trading systems, a third assumption of the t-test may be inadvertently violated. There are no precautions that can
be taken to prevent it from happening or to compensate for its occurrence. The reason is that the population from which the development or verification sample was
drawn may be different from the population from which future trades may be taken.
This would happen if the market underwent some real structural or other change.
As mentioned before, the population of trades of a system operating on the S&P
500 before 1983 would be different from the population after that year since, in
1983, the options and futures started trading on the S&P 500 and the market
changed. This sort of thing can devastate any method of evaluating a trading system. No matter how much a system is back-tested, if the market changes before
trading begins, the trades will not be taken from the same market for which the system was developed and tested; the system will fall apart. All systems, even currently profitable ones, will eventually succumb to market change. Regardless of the
market, change is inevitable. It is just a question of when it will happen. Despite
this grim fact, the use of statistics to evaluate systems remains essential, because if
the market does not change substantially shortly after trading of the system commences, or if the change is not sufficient to grossly affect the system’s performance,
then a reasonable estimate of expected probabilities and returns can be calculated,
Example

2:

Evaluating

the

In-Sample

Tests

How can a system that has been fit to a data sample by the repeated adjustment of
parameters (i.e., an optimized system) be evaluated? Traders frequently optimize
systems to obtain good results. In this instance, the use of statistics is more important than ever since the results can be analyzed, compensating for the multiplicity
of tests being performed as part of the process of optimization. Table 4-2 contains
the profit/loss figures and a variety of statistics for the in-sample trades (those

taken on the data sample used to optimize the system). The system was optimized
on data from l/1/90 through l/2/95.
Most of the statistics in Table 4-2 are identical to those in Table 4-1, which
was associated with Example 1. Two additional statistics (that differ from those in
the first example) are labeled “Optimization Tests Run” and “‘Adjusted for
Optimization.” The first statistic is simply the number of different parameter combinations tried, i.e., the total number of times the system was run on the data, each
time using a different set of parameters. Since the lunar system parameter, LI, was
stepped from 1 to 20 in increments of 1, 20 tests were performed; consequently,
there were 20 t-statistics, one for each test. The number of tests mn is used to make
an adjustment to the probability or significance obtained from the best t-statistic
TABLE

4-2

Trades from the S&P 500 Data Sample on Which the Lunar Model
Was Optimized

800417
800501
800516

900501
800516
900522

800615
900702
800731
800814
SO0828
900911

900702
800716
800731
800802
900828
800811
~OOSZB

5750
11700
-2500
150
2300
4550
6675
-2500
8500
575
7225

801010
*01028
~0,109
801128
801211
80,225
810108

90,ow
80,028
*0,,,2
80,211
80,225
s10,02
910108

-2875
-2500
-2700
8125
-875
-2500
-2500

010208
010221

-2504
4550

910322
810408
9m423
810507

5600
-2500
-2.500
3800

17450
14950
15100
1,400
2,950
28825
28125
35425
38200
43425
40825
38050
35550
32850
40875
40100
37600
35100

computed on the sample: Take 1, and subtract from it the statistical significance
obtained for the best-performing test. Take the resultant number and raise it to the
mth power (where m = the number of tests mn). Then subtract that number from
1. This provides the probability of finding, in a sample of m tests (in this case, 20),
at least one t-statistic as good as the one actually obtained for the optimized solution. The uncorrected probability that the profits observed for the best solution were
due to chance was less than 2%, a fairly significant result, Once adjusted for multiple tests, i.e., optimization, the statistical significance does not appear anywhere
near as good. Results at the level of those observed could have been obtained for
such an optimized system 3 1% of the time by chance alone. However, things are
not quite as bad as they seem. The adjustment was extremely conservative and
assumed that every test was completely independent of every other test. In actual
fact, there will be a high serial correlation between most tests since, in many trading systems, small changes in the parameters produce relatively small changes in
the results. This is exactly like serial dependence in data samples: It reduces the
effective population size, in this case, the effective number of tests run. Because
many of the tests are correlated, the 20 actual tests probably correspond to about 5
to 10 independent tests. If the serial dependence among tests is considered, the
adjusted-for-optimization probability would most likely be around 0.15, instead of
the 0.3 104 actually calculated. The nature and extent of serial dependence in the
multiple tests are never known, and therefore, a less conservative adjustment for
optimization cannot be directly calculated, only roughly reckoned.
Under certain circumstances, such as in multiple regression models, there are
exact mathematical formulas for calculating statistics that incorporate the fact that
parameters are being tit, i.e., that optimization is occurring, making corrections for
optimization unnecessary.
Interpreting

the

Example

Statistics

In Example 1, the verification test was presented. The in-sample optimization run
was presented in Example 2. In the discussion of results, we are returning to the natural order in which the tests were run, i.e., optimization first, verification second.
Optimization Results. Table 4-2 shows the results for the in-sample period. Over
the 5 years of data on which the system was optimized, there were 118 trades (n
= 118). the mean or average trade yielded about $740.97, and the trades were
highly variable, with a sample standard deviation of around +$3,811: i.e., there
were many trades that lost several thousand dollars, as well as trades that made
many thousands. The degree of profitability can easily be seen by looking at the
profit/loss column, which contains many $2,500 losses (the stop got hit) and a significant number of wins, many greater than $5,000, some even greater than
$10,000. The expected standard deviation of the mean suggests that if samples of
this kind were repeatedly taken, the mean would vary only about one-tenth as

much as the individual trades, and that many of the samples would have mean
profitabilities in the range of $740 + $350.
The t-statistic for the best-performing system from the set of optimization
mns was 2.1118, which has a statistical significance of 0.0184. This was a fairly
strong result. If only one test had been run (no optimizing), this good a result would
have been obtained (by chance alone) only twice in 100 tests, indicating that the
system is probably capturing some real market inefficiency and has some chance of
holding up. However, be warned: This analysis was for the best of 20 sets of parameter values tested. If corrected for the fact that 20 combinations of parameter values were tested, the adjusted statistical significance would only be about 0.3 1, not
very good; the performance of the system could easily have been due to chance.
Therefore, although the system may hold up, it could also, rather easily, fail.
The serial correlation between trades was only 0.0479, a value small enough
in the present context, with a significance of only 0.6083. These results strongly
suggest that there was no meaningful serial correlation between trades and that the
statistical analyses discussed above are likely to be correct.
There were 58 winning trades in the sample, which represents about a 49%
win rate. The upper 99% confidence boundary was approximately 61% and the
lower 99% confidence boundary was approximately 37%, suggesting that the true
percentage of wins in the population has a 99% likelihood of being found between
those two values. In truth, the confidence region should have been broadened by
correcting for optimization; this was not done because we were not very concerned about the percentage of wins.
Vetificution
Results. Table 4-1, presented earlier, contains the data and statistics
for the out-of-sample test for the model. Since all parameters were already fixed,
and only one test was conducted, mere was no need to consider optimization or its
consequences in any manner. In the period from M/95 to t/1/97, there were 47
trades. The average trade in this sample yielded about $974, which is a greater
average profit per trade than in the optimization sample! The system apparently
did maintain profitable behavior.
At slightly over $6,000, the sample standard deviation was almost double
that of the standard deviation in me optimization sample. Consequently, the standard deviation of the sample mean was around $890, a fairly large standard error
of estimate; together with the small sample size, this yielded a lower t-statistic
than found in the optimization sample and, therefore, a lowered statistical significance of only about 14%. These results were neither very good nor very bad:
There is better than an 80% chance that the system is capitalizing on some real
(non-chance) market inefficiency. The serial correlation in the test sample, however,
was quite a bit higher than in the optimization sample and was significant, with a
probability of 0.1572; i.e., as large a serial correlation as this would only be
expected about 16% of the time by chance alone, if no true (population) serial correlation was present. Consequently, the t-test on the profit/loss figures has likely

66

overstated the statistical significance to some degree (maybe between 20 and
30%). If the sample size was adjusted downward the right amount, the t-test probability would most likely be around 0.18, instead of the 0.1392 that was calculated. The confidence interval for the percentage of wins in the population ranged
from about 17% to about 53%.
Overall, the assessment is that the system is probably going to hold up in the
future, but not with a high degree of certainty. Considering there were two independent tests--one showing about a 31% probability (corrected for optimization)
that the profits were due to chance, the other showing a statistical significance of
approximately 14% (corrected to 18% due to the serial correlation), there is a good
chance that the average population trade is profitable and, consequently, that the
system will remain profitable in the future.

OTHER
USE

STATISTICAL

TECHNIQUES

AND

THEIR

The following section is intended only to acquaint the reader with some other statistical techniques that are available. We strongly suggest that a more thorough study
be undertaken by those serious about developing and evaluating trading systems.

Genetically

Evolved

Systems

We develop many systems using genetic algorithms. A popular$fimessfunction (criterion used to determine whether a model is producing the desired outcome) is the
total net profit of the system. However, net profit is not the best measure of system
quality! A system that only trades the major crashes on the S&P 500 will yield a
very high total net profit with a very high percentage of winning trades. But who
knows if such a system would hold up? Intuitively, if the system only took two or
three trades in 10 years, the probability seems very low that it would continue to
perform well in the future or even take any more trades. Part of the problem is that
net profit does not consider the number of trades taken or their variability.
An alternative fitness function that avoids some of the problems associated
with net profit is the t-statistic or its associated probability. When using the t-statistic as a fitness function, instead of merely trying to evolve the most profitable
systems, the intention is to genetically evolve systems that have the greatest likelihood of being profitable in the future or, equivalently, that have the least likelihood of being profitable merely due to chance or curve-fitting. This approach
works fairly well. The t-statistic factors in profitability, sample size, and number
of trades taken. All things being equal, the greater the number of trades a system
takes, the greater the t-statistic and the more likely it will hold up in the future.
Likewise, systems that produce more consistently profitable trades with less variation are more desirable than systems that produce wildly varying trades and will

yield higher t-statistic values. The t-statistic incorporates many of the features that
define the quality of a trading model into one number that can be maximized by a
genetic algorithm.
Multiple Regression

Another statistical technique frequently used is multiple regression. Consider
intermarket analysis: The purpose of intermarket analysis is to find measures of
behaviors in other markets that are predictive of the future behavior of the market
being studied. Running various regressions is an appropriate technique for analyzing such potential relationships; moreover, there are excellent statistics to use
for testing and setting confidence intervals on the correlations and regression
(beta) weights generated by the analyses. Due to lack of space and the limited
scope of this chapter, no examples are presented, but the reader is referred to
Myers (1986), a good basic text on multiple regression.
A problem with most textbooks on multiple regression analysis (including
the one just mentioned) is that they do not deal with the issue of serial correlation
in time series data, and its effect on the statistical inferences that can be made from
regression analyses using such data. The reader will need to take the effects of
serial correlation into account: Serial correlation in a data sample has the effect of
reducing the effective sample size, and statistics can be adjusted (at least in a
rough-and-ready manner) based on this effect. Another trick that can be used in
some cases is to perform some transformations on the original data series to make
the time series more “stationary” and to remove the unwanted serial correlations.
Monte Carlo Simulations

One powerful, unique approach to making statistical inferences is known as the
Monte Carlo Simulation, which involves repeated tests on synthetic data that are
constructed to have the properties of samples taken from a random population.
Except for randomness, the synthetic data are constructed to have the basic characteristics of the population from which the real sample was drawn and about
which inferences must be made. This is a very powerful method. The beauty of
Monte Carlo Simulations is that they can be performed in a way that avoids the
dangers of assumptions (such as that of the normal distribution) being violated,
which would lead to untrustworthy results.
Out-of-Sample Testing

Another way to evaluate a system is to perform out-of-sample testing. Several time
periods are reserved to test a model that has been developed or optimized on some
other time period. Out-of-sample testing helps determine how the model behaves

68

on data it had not seen during optimization or development. This approach is
strongly recommended. In fact, in the examples discussed above, both in-sample
and out-of-sample tests were analyzed. No corrections to the statistics for the
process of optimization are necessary in out-of-sample testing. Out-of-sample and
multiple-sample tests may also provide some information on whether the market
has changed its behavior over various periods of time.
Walk-Forward Testing

In walk-forward testing, a system is optimized on several years of data and then
traded the next year. The system is then reoptimized on several more years of data,
moving the window forward to include the year just traded. The system is then
traded for another year. This process is repeated again and again, “walking forward” through the data series. Although very computationally intensive, this is an
excellent way to study and test a trading system. In a sense, even though optimization is occurring, all trades are taken on what is essentially out-of-sample test
data. All the statistics discussed above, such as the t-tests, can be used on walkforward test results in a simple manner that does not require any corrections for
optimization. In addition, the tests will very closely simulate the process that
occurs during real trading--first optimization occurs, next the system is traded on
data not used during the optimization, and then every so often the system is reoptimized to update it. Sophisticated developers can build the optimization process
into the system, producing what might be called an “adaptive” trading model.
Meyers (1997) wrote an article illustrating the process of walk-forward testing.
CONCLUSION
