
161

Exits
When a cowboy at a rodeo hops on the back of a wild bronco, how
long does he ride it? Twenty seconds, 35 maybe, 50 if he is good and
lucky. Wild momentum trades don’t last long either. Try to hop off while
you’re still in the money.
The time to buy into a momentum trade is when all your ducks are
in a row, that is, when the weekly trend is up and the daily EMA and
MACD-Histogram are rising. Hop off as soon as a single indicator
turns down. Usually, daily MACD-Histogram turns first as the upside
momentum starts weakening. When the buy signal disappears, sell
without waiting for a sell signal.
Reverse the procedure in downtrends. A momentum trade on the
short side starts when the weekly trend turns down and the daily EMA
and MACD-Histogram also fall, showing that the downward momentum is accelerating. Cover shorts as soon as one of those indicators
stops giving a sell signal. The most dynamic part of the decline is over,
and your momentum trade has fulfilled its goal.
The Impulse System encourages you to enter cautiously but exit fast.
This is the professional approach to trading, the total opposite of the
amateurs’ style. Beginners jump into trades without thinking too much
and take forever to get out, hoping and waiting for the market to turn
their way.
The Impulse System, like Triple Screen, is a method of trading rather
than a mechanical system. It identifies islands of order in the ocean
of market chaos by showing when the crowd, usually so aimless and
disorganized, becomes emotional and starts to run. You get in when its
pattern emerges and hop off when it starts to sink back into chaos.
Test the Impulse System on your own market data to answer several
important questions. Should you enter and exit at the open, after seeing the signal in the evening, or should you try to anticipate those signals? What if you do your homework 15 minutes before the close and
buy or sell without waiting for tomorrow? Experiment with several different parameters of the EMA and MACD-Histogram.
You must be very disciplined to trade this system because it is hard
to place an order when the market is already flying, but even harder
to quit while you’re ahead without waiting for a reversal. You are not
allowed to kick yourself if the trend continues after you get out. Do
not touch this system if you have the slightest problem with discipline.

162

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

The Impulse System can help you trade other systems. Check its
message when Triple Screen gives you a signal to buy. If the Impulse
System flashes a sell signal, hold off buying; do not trade against it. You
want to buy a dip, not a waterfall decline. Reverse the procedure in
downtrends. Hold off shorting if the Impulse System flashes a buy
signal. Such “negative rules,” designed to keep you out of trouble, are
among the most useful for serious traders.

MARKET THERMOMETER
A beginner needs to learn a battery of standard technical indicators and
start tweaking their parameters. Some traders create their own indicators to gauge different aspects of crowd behavior and identify market
moves. Let us walk through the process of creating a new technical indicator and see how to go about building your own private indicators.
All good indicators reflect some aspect of market reality. Market
Thermometer helps differentiate between sleepy, quiet periods and hot
episodes when market crowds become excited. It can help you adapt
your trading to the current environment.
Quiet markets typically have narrow bars that tend to overlap one
another. Hot, boiling markets tend to have wide bars whose highs and
lows extend far outside the previous day’s range. Beginners jump into
trades during those wide bars, afraid to miss a runaway move. If you
enter when the markets are quiet, your slippage is likely to be lower.
Hot markets are good for taking profits because then slippage may
work in your favor.
When gold recently ran up $40 in one week, a journalist asked a
famous investor whether it was a good buy. Gold was good, he said,
but the time to get on this bus was when it stood in front of the station, and not rolling down the highway at 40 miles an hour. Market
Thermometer helps you recognize when the bus slows down in front
of the station, picks up speed, or roars down the highway.
Market Thermometer measures how far the most extreme point of
today, either high or low, protrudes outside of yesterday’s range. The
greater the extension of today’s bar outside of yesterday’s, the higher
the market temperature. Here’s the formula of Market Thermometer:
Temperature = the greater of either (Hightoday − Highyesterday)
or (Lowyesterday − Lowtoday)

TRADING

163

To program Market Thermometer into Windows on WallStreet software, use the following formula:
if (hi<ref(hi,−1) and lo>ref(lo,−1), 0, if ((hi − ref(hi,−1)) >
(ref(lo,−1) − lo), hi − ref(hi,−1), ref(lo,−1) − lo)).
It is easy to adapt this formula to other software packages.
Market temperature is always a positive number, reflecting the absolute value of either the upward or the downward extension of yesterday’s range, whichever is greater. Plot temperature as a histogram
above zero. Calculate a moving average of market temperature, and
plot it as a line on the same chart. I use a 22-day EMA because there
are 22 trading days in a month, but feel free to experiment with shorter
EMA values if you want to make this indicator more sensitive to shortterm swings.
When markets are quiet, the adjacent bars tend to overlap. The consensus of value is well established, and the crowd does little buying
or selling outside of yesterday’s range. When highs and lows exceed
their previous day’s values, they do so only by small margins. Market
Thermometer falls and its EMA slants down, indicating a sleepy market.
When a market begins to run, either up or down, its daily bars start
pushing outside of the previous ranges. The histogram of Market Thermometer grows taller and crosses above its EMA, which soon turns up,
confirming the new trend.
Market Thermometer gives four trading signals, based on the relationship between its histogram and its moving average:
The best time to enter new positions is when Market Thermometer
falls below its moving average. When Market Thermometer falls below
its EMA, it indicates that the market is quiet. If your system flashes an
entry signal, try to enter when the market is cooler than usual. When
Market Thermometer rises above its moving average, it warns that the
market is hot and slippage more likely.
Exit positions when Market Thermometer rises to triple the height
of its moving average. A spike of Market Thermometer indicates a
runaway move. When the crowd feels jarred by a sudden piece of
news and surges, it is a good time to take profits. Panics tend to be
short-lived, offering a brief opportunity to cash in. If the EMA of
Market Thermometer stands at 5 cents, but the Thermometer itself
shoots up to 15 cents, take profits. Test these values for the market
you are trading.

164

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

A

C
B

D

F

G

E

Figure 6.7 Market Thermometer
Nvidia Corp (NVDA) is one of the current favorites among active traders.
Just look at its many tradable features—a powerful rally to 100, its triple
top, a MACD bearish divergence, and a subsequent downtrend. Markets
oscillate between quiet and active periods, and the Thermometer helps
you identify them.

Get ready for an explosive move if the Thermometer stays below its
moving average for five to seven trading days. Quiet markets put amateurs to sleep. They become careless and stop watching prices. Volatility
and volume fall, and professionals get a chance to run away with the
market. Explosive moves often erupt from periods of inactivity.
Market Thermometer can help you set a profit target for the next
trading day. If you are a short-term trader and are long, add the value
of today’s Thermometer EMA to yesterday’s high and place a sell order
there. If you are short, subtract the value of the Thermometer’s EMA
from yesterday’s low and place an order to cover at that level.
I had two purposes in presenting the Market Thermometer. I wanted
to give you a new indicator, but even more I wanted to show you how
to use your understanding of the markets to design your own analytic
tools. Once you understand the principles of market analysis, you can
create your own indicators. Use your knowledge, understanding, and
discipline to get on the right side of the markets.

TRADING

165

At point A, the stock is in an uptrend, while the Thermometer has been
below its 22-day EMA for five days. This is a quiet before the storm. An
explosive move in the direction of the trend (point B) rewards buyers. At the
same time a very high Thermometer reading, three times above the average,
warns that the fun and games are over; the move is exhausted, and it is time
to take profits. At point C the Thermometer shrinks again, spending five days
below its EMA and warning that a sharp move is coming. Since prices are
above their EMA, expect a decline. A similar message emerges at point D.
After the next rally (point E), an extremely high reading of the Thermometer,
more than four times the average, warns that it is a good time to take shortterm profits. Prices make a triple top near 100, MACD-Histogram traces a
severe bearish divergence, and at points F and G prices hang flat. This is
another quiet before the storm as bears swing the stock down.
The EMA of the Thermometer tells you how far today’s high or low is
likely to be above or below yesterday’s extreme. This is a useful piece of
intelligence for those who like to buy low or sell high; you can place your
order for the day near the projected extreme.
At the right edge of the chart, prices have just shot up to their declining EMA. They deserved a rally after sliding from 100 to below 70, but a
very high reading of the Thermometer, three times above average, indicates that the excitement is overdone, a pause is coming, and the downtrend is about to resume.

EXITING TRADES
Whenever you enter a trade, three factors must be crystal clear in your
mind—where to get in, where to take profits, and where to bail out in
case of an emergency. Daydreaming about profits will not make you
rich. You must decide in advance where you’ll take your winnings off
the table or cut and run if the market turns against you.
Beginners keep looking for promising trades and assume that finding them will make them money. They search for entries, while professionals spend a lot of time and energy planning their exits. They
always ask themselves where to take profits or cut losses. Survivors
know the essential truth—you don’t get paid for entering trades, you
get paid for exiting them.
Why think about an exit before you enter a trade? Isn’t it better to get
in, monitor the trade, and exit in response to price action? There are two
main arguments for deciding on an exit before you enter a trade.

166

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

First, knowing your targets and stops allows you to weigh rewards
and risks. If you have a clear signal to buy, with a price target of $2
above and a stop $4 below, is that trade worth taking? Do you want
to risk $4 to gain $2? Price targets and stops prompt you to focus only
on trades whose potential rewards far outweigh the risks. The ability to
walk away from a potential trade is as important as the ability to decline
a drink when you want.
Second, setting profit targets and stops before entering trades helps
sidestep the pernicious “ownership effect.” We get attached to things
we own and lose objectivity. That old ratty jacket hanging in your
closet should have been given to the Salvation Army years ago. That
trade you entered last week is starting to come apart at the seams. Why
don’t you chuck it? You own both the jacket and the trade; they feel
comfortable, familiar. That’s why you need to decide on exits before
you enter, before a trade becomes yours.
A friend who is a top-notch technical analyst temporarily took a job
as a broker after falling on hard times when his hedge fund closed.
Naturally, I moved one of my accounts to him. Whenever I called to
place an order, he would not let me hang up unless I gave him a stop.
Sometimes I’d plead for a little more time and he’d take my order, on
the condition that I call back within five minutes to give him a stop, or
else he would call me. Six months later he found work as a technical
analyst, and I have never seen another broker like him since. He really
stressed the need to know your safety parameters before you took on
market risk.
Before entering a trade, you should set two specific price levels, a
target and a stop, one above and the other below current prices. This
is all you need for a short-term trade, where you shoot at a clearly visible target. You may find a broker who accepts OCO (one cancels
other) orders. Then, if your profit target is hit, the stop is automatically
cancelled, and vice versa. If your broker does not accept OCO orders,
give him your stop and keep an eye on your profit target.
What if you’re planning a fairly long-term trade that may last for several days or even weeks? Profit targets shift with the passage of time,
and protective stops need to be tightened as the trade moves in your
favor. You must write down your rules for exiting trades and follow
them from that piece of paper without arguing, haggling, or hoping for
a better price. For example, you may decide to exit if the upper channel line gets hit or if the market makes lower lows for two days in a

TRADING

167

row. Whatever rules you use, write them down and execute immediately once the market hits a profit target or a stop-loss level in accordance with your rules.
Very experienced traders know how to recognize unusually forceful
trends, during which they shift exit strategies, take partial profits, and
carry the balance of their positions with a modified exit strategy for
runaway trends. As you become more experienced, you can become a
little more relaxed with your plans, but a beginning or an intermediate
trader must be very strict. Entries are easy because any clown can buy
a lottery ticket, but exits separate winners from losers.

Channel Targets
Traders all over the world squint at their charts, trying to recognize patterns, and let their imaginations run wild. Statistical studies, however,
consistently confirm only one pattern—the tendency of prices to fluctuate above and below value. Markets may be chaotic most of the time,
but their overbought and oversold conditions create islands of order that
provide some of the best trading opportunities. Markets swing between
elation and despair, and we can make money from those moods.
Channels are technical tools that help us take advantage of market
swings. We draw them parallel to the moving average in the intermediate timeframe, usually daily. A well-drawn channel contains approximately 95% of recent prices. Its upper line represents the manic
and the lower line the depressive moods of the market.
If we buy value near a rising moving average, we can sell mania in
the vicinity of the upper channel line. If we go short near a falling moving average, we can cover at the depressed level near the lower channel line. Channels provide attractive targets for profit taking.
People say that a neurotic is a person who builds castles in the
clouds, a psychotic lives in them, and a psychiatrist is the fellow who
collects the rent. Channels help us collect rent from what drives most
investors crazy—the relentless swings of the markets. The idea is to buy
normalcy and sell mania or go short normalcy and cover depression.
Straight channels or envelopes work better for profit taking than
standard deviation channels, or Bollinger bands. Those bands grow wide
when volatility rises and narrow when it declines. They help options
traders, who depend heavily on volatility, but those of us who trade
stocks or futures are better off with straight channels.

168

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

Channels are for traders, not investors. If you want to invest in a $10
stock and ride it to $50, channels are not for you. Exits from investments or very long-term trades are based on the fundamentals or such
long-term technical signals as the reversals of a 26-week moving average. Envelopes or channels work best when you trade relatively shortterm swings between undervalued and overvalued levels.
If you buy near a rising EMA, place a sell order where you expect
the upper channel line to be tomorrow. If the upper channel line has
been rising a half a point a day for the past few days and closed at 88
today, then you can place a sell order at 88.50 for tomorrow. Adjust
this number every day as the channel moves higher or lower.
Whenever I teach a group how to use channels for profit taking,
someone raises a hand and points to an area where prices overshot
their channel. Taking profits at that channel line would have caused us
to miss a large part of a rally. What can I say? This system is good but
not perfect. No method, except for hindsight, nails down all tops and
bottoms. Robert Prechter, who used to be a famous market analyst, put
it well when he said, “Traders take a good system and destroy it by trying to make it into a perfect system.”
If a trend is very strong, you may want to ride swings a little farther.
Sell half of your position when prices hit the upper channel line, but
use your judgment to dance out of the second half. You may monitor
intraday prices and sell on the first day when they do not make a new
high. Use your judgment and skills, but do yourself a favor—give up
the idea of nailing tops. Greed is a very expensive emotion.
If a rally is weak, prices may begin to sink without reaching their upper
channel line. There is no law that says the market must become manic
before returning to value. Force Index can help measure the strength of
a rally. When the two-day Force Index rises to a new high, it confirms
the power of bulls and encourages you to hold until prices hit the upper
channel line. If the two-day Force Index traces a bearish divergence, it
shows that the rally is weak and you better grab profits fast.
An A trader is someone who takes 30% or more out of a channel.
That is a little more than half the distance from the moving average to
the channel line. Even if you buy slightly above the moving average
and sell below its upper channel line, you can be an A trader and profit
handsomely. Channels help catch normal tops and bottoms, and you
can become very rich by steadily raking in normal profits. Channels
help set up realistic profit targets.

TRADING

169

Protective Stops
Amateurs swing between fantasy and reality, making most decisions in
the realm of fantasy. They dream of profits and avoid unpleasant
thoughts about possible losses. Since stops force us to focus on losses,
most traders resist using them.
A friend told me she needed no stops because she was an investor.
“At what price did you buy that stock?” I asked. She had gotten in at 80
and now it was at 85. “Would you still hold it if it fell back to 80?” She
said she would. “What about 75?” She said she would probably buy more.
“What about 70?” She winced. “What about 55? Would you still want to
own it?” No, no, she vigorously shook her head. “Well, then you need
a stop somewhere above 55!”
I recently had dinner with a lawyer who obtained inside information
that a certain penny-stock company was about to announce a strategic
partnership with a telecom giant. Questions of legality and morality
aside, he put most of his money into that stock at an average price of
16.5 cents a share. Once the announcement came out, his stock ran up
to $8, but by the time he told me his secret over a tray of sushi, it was
down to $1.50. He had no stop. I asked him whether he would continue to hold if his stock slid to 8 cents, half of what he paid. He was
shocked and promised to put in a stop at $1. Did he do it? Probably
not. It is easier to dream and close one’s eyes to reality.
You must put in a stop immediately after entering a trade and start
moving it in the direction of that trade as soon as it starts moving in
your favor. Stops are a one-way street. When long, you may raise, but
never lower them. When short, you may lower but never raise them.
Only losers say, “I’ll give this trade a little more room.” You already
gave it all the room it needed when you placed your stop! If a stock
starts moving against you, leave your stop alone! You were more
rational at the time you placed it than you are today, with prices hovering and threatening to hit it.
Investors must reevaluate their stops once every few weeks, but
traders have a harder job. We must recalculate our stops every day and
move them often.
A Deadly Delusion Many traders think they can stay out of trouble
without using stops, thanks to their superior market analysis. Trading is
a high-wire act. You may walk that wire a hundred times without a safety

170

THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING

net, but the very first fall can cripple you. You cannot afford to take that
chance. No amount of brains will help you if you abandon stops.
Several years ago I got a call from a world-famous developer of trading software. He invited me on a camping trip, and mentioned in passing that he had developed a fantastic system for trading futures. It was
based on computerized pattern recognition, backtested on 20 years of
data with breathtaking results. He had no money to trade that system,
having lost his capital on an earlier venture, but showed his discovery
to a group of money managers. They were so impressed they began to
set up a hedge fund for him, and in the meantime gave him what they
called a small account—$100,000.
I flew across the country and spent the first evening admiring my
friend’s system. “Are you trading anything now?” The system had given
him six signals: in soybeans, Swiss francs, pork bellies, and three other
markets. He had entered trades in all six. “How much did you allocate
to each?” He had divided his account into six parts, one for each
market. No reserves. Fully margined. “Where did you put your stops?”
He told me in so many words that real men didn’t use stops.
He had mathematical proof that stops lowered profitability. Safety
lay in trading unrelated markets. If one or two went against him, others
would move in his favor. “What about a catastrophic event, with all markets moving against you?” He assured me that was impossible because
he traded unrelated markets, and there was no correlation between Swiss
francs and pork bellies. Furthermore, his system had not a single wipeout in 20 years of backtesting.
I suggested we forget about camping and stay closer to the screen,
since his entire capital was at risk. My friend insisted he had total confidence in his system, and so we drove to the Sierra Nevada, some of
the most breathtaking scenery in America. We had a grand time, and
on the last day my son, who was about 8 at the time, hauled in a plastic pail full of gold nuggets. It was fool’s gold, of course, but to this
day I keep one of them on my desk as a paperweight, engraved “All
that glitters is gold.”
By the time we returned to civilization the impossible had happened. All six markets went against my friend, nearly wiping out his
equity. The next morning we watched in horror as the markets opened
one after another, continuing to go against him in huge gobs. I talked
him into closing two out of six positions, but then it was time to drive
to the airport.
