
Market Profile@with Candlesticks
Exhibit 17.2 reveals how a doji on July 2 and a hanging man during the
next session were candlestick alerts of a top. What did the Market Pro-

261

262

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

9 :47
BDUO DAILY BAR
@ 1990 CQG INC.
O= 9103
H=
L= 9105
9003........................................................................................................................................9600
L= 9OliA
A= -24
I

Source: Market Profile is a registered trademark of the Chicago Board of
Trade Copyright Board of Trade of the City of Chicago 1984.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

EXHIBIT 17.2. Bonds-June 1990, Daily (Market Profile@with Candlesticks)

Candlesticks with Market Profile@

file@say during this time period? July 2 had a relatively small value area
as compared to the prior session. It was also a light volume session
(132,000 contracts as compared to 303,000 the prior session). This hinted
that price was having trouble being accepted at these higher rates. In
other words, there was lack of trade facilitation. It is also a profile with
range extension to both sides. This indicates a tug of war between the
bulls and bears.
July 3 was another light-volume session (109,000 contracts) which
significantly discounts the bullish developments-an upside range
extension and a close at the highs of the day. The next day, July 5, is
where the weakness of the market materializes. During the early part of
the session, new highs were made for the move. In the process, upside
range extensions were also formed. With these range extensions, the
market was advertising for sellers. They got them. The market sold off
toward the latter part of the session (the J, K, and L periods) to close
near the low of the day. The open of July 6 saw initiating selling on the
opening since the market opened under the prior day's value area. This
showed immediate selling activity. July 6 also displayed increased volume and an initiating selling extreme (that is, single prints at the top of
the profile) during the "y" period. This confirmed the market was in
trouble.
In this example, we see an important aspect about the hanging man
previously addressed; it is only what happens after that line that makes
it a bearish indicator. July 3 was the hanging-man day. Here we see the
Market Profile@picture of the hanging-man line was giving some positive indications about the market. It was only on the following session,
July 5 and especially the morning of July 6, that a top was also verified
via Market ProfileB.
Exhibit 17.3 shows that July 5 was a very evident shooting star. After
this line appeared, cotton plunged for three sessions. Was there anything prior to the shooting star a la Market Profile@which gave signs of
trouble? Yes, there was. From June 29 to July 3 prices advanced but by
way of a shrinking value area. This meant less trade facilitation at higher
prices. The market was having trouble accepting these new highs as
value. In addition, volume, as gauged by the total number of those session's TPO counts, was decreasing (actual volume was light on these
sessions. However, since volume is not released until the following day,
the TPO count can be used as a gauge of volume). Notice of a top was
provided by the shooting star of July 5. The Market Profile@on that session showed a range toward the upside failed to get buying followthrough. Additionally, the entry of sellers attracted by these higher
prices drove the market down as indicated by the range extension down
and the weak close. These were bearish signs.

263

264

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

@

CTZO DAILY BAR

1C:51

1990 CQG INC.

.-H=
O= 7588
7588 ........................................................................................................................................... 8000
. L.= 7509
-L= 7525V
.
..
..
A= +I37

..
..

..
..

I... :

.......................

*0+t7:

I

. . . ....................... .....

..
..

.

PI(

a+

Of.

.'T .
: ,r $ 1 ~ ~bb'1A~'
::

+ t ~ .T ? '
I 0.T
..

:

................... .......
.

..
..

t

1:16
7700
7686
7672
7658
7644
7630
7616
7602
7588
7574
7560
7546
7532
7518
7504
7490
7476

0 1990 CQG INC.

CTZO

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

'

KL4

LC
KL
DEFGHIJK
DEFGHIJK

. F
FG
EFGJKL
DEFGHIJKL
DEGHIJL
. ,DEGHL
DGL
DL
1 DL

0- 7588
H= 7588
L= 7509
L= 7512b
A= +I24

1jj .:
0 , .

8.

8.
'.

E '

Shooting
Star
Session

: ,EE

. DEGH
. DEFGH

. E
I; . E
DEFGHI I . DEF
DEFHI P . DEF
DFG
DEFIJ
DEJ
DFG
DEJKL4
DG
. G

' ..'

GL

GHKL
.............................................................................

iTPH
76861'iTPH
74411'lTPH
iTPL
7624: iTPL
7365: iTPL
/TIME 11:15;;JTIME 11:15~:~TIME

Source: Market Profile is a registered trademark of the Chicago Board of
Trade Copyright Board of Trade of the City of Chicago 1984.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

EXHIBIT 17.3. Cotton-December, 1990, Daily (Market ProfileB with Candlesticks)

Candlesticks with Market Profile@

If more proof was needed, all one had to do was wait until the opening of July 6. An initiating selling extreme developed on the opening
under the previous day's value area. This confirmed the presence of sellers and difficulty ahead. Thus, the Market Profile@tools confirmed the
bearish implications of the shooting star.
There are some interesting similarities between Market Profile@concepts and candlesticks. Wider value areas in Market Profile@usually represent facilitation of trade and, as such, increase the probability for price
trend continuation. Thus, in an uptrend, one would like to see widening
value areas. Likewise, with the candlesticks, one would like to see a rally
via a series of longer and longer white real bodies in order to confirm the
power behind the move.
Shrinking value areas in Market Profile@reflect less facilitation of
trade and thus less certainty of a continuation of the price move. So it is
with the candlestick's advance block or stalled patterns. In those formations, the trend is still up but it takes place by means of shrinking white
real bodies. These formations indicate that the prior momentum is running out of steam.
What about a star in candlesticks? A short real body in an uptrend or
downtrend would be a sign of decreasing vigor by the bulls (a star in an
uptrend) or the bears (a star in a downtrend). So would a small value
area after a strong advance (or decline). The small value area would
reflect a lack of trade facilitation. They could be a harbinger of a trend
change. A hammer's lower shadow might be formed due to a buying
extreme in which lower prices induce an influx of buyers. A shooting
star's long upper shadow could be the result of a selling extreme in
which higher prices attracted strong selling.

265

CANDLESTICKS
WITH OPTIONS
+?ha%& h b i f Q i % th 9
"If there is a lid that does not fit, there is a lid that does"

Options, at times, confer advantages over underlying positions. Specifically, options offer:
1. Staying power-buying an option limits risk to the premium paid.

Options are thus useful when trying to pick tops and bottoms. These
are risky propositions, but judicious use of options can help mitigate
some of the inherent risks in such endeavors.
2. The ability to benefit in sideways markets-by using options, one can
profit if the underlying contract trades in a lateral range (by selling
straddles or combinations).
3. Strategy flexibility-one can tailor risklreward parameters to one's
price, volatility, and timing projections.
4. Occasionally superior leverage-for instance, if the market swiftly rallies,
under certain circumstances, an out-of-the money call may provide a
greater percentage return than would an outright position.

268

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

OPTIONS BASICS
Before discussing how candlesticks can be used with options, we'll want
to spend some time on option basics. The five factors needed to figure
the theoretical value of a futures options price are the exercise price, the
time to expiration, the price of the underlying instrument, volatility, and, to a
minor extent, short-term interest rates. Three of these variables are known
(time until expiration, exercise price, and short-term interest rates). The
two components that are not known (the forecasted price of the underlying instrument and its volatility) have to be estimated in order to forecast an option price. One should not underrate the importance that
volatility plays in option pricing. In fact, at times, a change in volatility
can have a stronger impact on option premiums than a change in price
of the underlying contract.
Consider as an illustration an at-the-money $390 gold call with 60
days until expiration. If this option has a volatility level of 20%, its theoretical price would be $1,300. At a 15% volatility, this same option
would be theoretically priced at $1,000. Thus, volatility must always be
considered since it can so forcefully affect the option premium.
Volatility levels provide the expected range of prices over the next
year (volatilities are on an annual basis). Without getting into the mathematics, a volatility of 20% on, say, gold suggests that there is a 68%
probability that a year from now gold's price will remain within plus or
minus 20% of its current price. And there would be a 95% chance that a
year hence golds's price will remain within plus or minus two times the
volatility (that is, two times 20% or 40%) of its price now. For example,
if gold is at $400 and volatility is at 20%, there is a 68% chance that its
price after one year will be between $320 and $480 (plus or minus 20% of
$400) and a 95% probability that it will be between $240 and $560 (plus
or minus 40% of $400). Keep in mind that these levels are based on
probabilities and that at times these levels are exceeded.
The greater the volatility the more expensive the option. This is due
to at least three factors. First, from the speculators' point of view, the
greater the volatility, the greater the chance for prices to move into the
money (or further into the money). Second, from a hedger's perspective,
higher price volatility equals more price risk. Thus, there is more reason
to buy options as a hedging vehicle. And, third, option sellers also
require more compensation for higher perceived risk. All these factors
will buoy option premiums.
There are two kinds of volatility: historic and implied. Historic volatility is based on past volatility levels of the underlying contract. It is usually calculated by using daily price changes over a specified number of
business days on an annualized basis. In the futures markets, 20'or 30

Candlesticks with Options

days are the most commonly used calculations. Just because a futures
contract has a 20-day historic volatility of 15% does not mean it will
remain at that level during the life of the option. Thus, to trade options
it is necessary to forecast volatility. One way to do this is by having the
market do it for you. And that is what implied volatility does. It is the
market's estimate of what volatility of the underlying futures contract
will be over the options's life. This differs from historic volatility in that
historic volatility is derived from prior price changes of the underlying
contract.
Implied volatility is the volatility level that the market is implying
(hence its name). Deriving this number involves the use of a computer
but the theory behind it is straightforward. To obtain the option's
implied volatility, the five inputs needed are the current price of the
futures contract, the option's strike price, the short-term interest rate,
the option expiration date, and the current option price. If we put these
variables into the computer, using an options pricing formula, the computer will spit back the implied volatility.
Thus, we have two volatilities-historic, which is based on actual
price changes in the futures, and implied, which is the market's best
guess of what volatility will be from now until the option expires. Some
option traders focus on historic volatility, others on implied volatility,
and still others compare historic to implied.

OPTIONS WITH CANDLESTICKS
If a strong trending market has pushed volatility levels to unusually high
levels, the emergence of a candlestick reversal indicator may provide an
attractive time to sell volatility or to offset a long volatility trade. In this
regard, the most effective candlestick formations may be those which
imply that the market will move into a state of truce between the bulls
and bears. These include the harami, counterattack lines, and other patterns discussed in Chapter 6.
Selling volatili<could be done in the expectation that with the candlestick's signal, the market's prior price trend will change. If it changes
to a lateral band, all other factors being equal (that is, no seasonal volatility factors, no expected economic reports, and so on), volatility could
decline. Even if prices reverse, if volatility levels were uncommonly high
to begin with, volatility may not increase. This is because the push in
volatility may have occurred during the original strong trend.
Candlestick reversal signals may also be useful in helping the technician decide when to buy volatility (or to offset a short volatility trade

269

270

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

such as a short strangle or straddle). Specifically, if the market is trading
in a lateral band and a candlestick reversal indicator appears, the market
could be forecasting that a new trend could emerge. If volatility levels
are relatively low at the time of this candlestick reversal, the technician
may not only see a new price trend, but also a concomitant rise in volatility. This would be especially likely if there is a confluence of technical
indicators (candlesticks and/or Western techniques) that all give a reversal signal near the same price area.
Candlesticks, as tools to predict shifts in volatility, should be viewed
in the context that these shifts will most likely be shorter term. That is,
if one buys volatility keyed off of candlesticks and volatility does rise, it
does not always mean that volatility will remain high until that option
expires.
Exhibit 18.1 shows that there were two top reversal warnings in midMay. The first was a doji after a long white real body. Next, were the
three black crows. Historic volatility expanded during the selloff which
started from these top reversal formations. The end of this selloff came
with early June's harami cross. Then the price trend changed from lower
to lateral. Volatility contracted due to this lateral price environment.

20-day Historic Volatility

Source: Future source TM

EXHIBIT 18.1. Silver-September 1990, Daily (Candlesticks with Options)

- Z8.88
- 17.50
-

15.88

-

12.58

Candlesticks with Options

Thus, for those who were riding volatility on the way up, the harami
cross could have been viewed as a signal to expect an end to the prior
steep trend and, consequently, the possibility of a decline in volatility.
Based on experience, and for various other reasons, candlestick signals seem to work better with historic volatility than with implied volatility. Nonetheless, as shown in Exhibit 18.2, candlesticks, at times, can
be useful instruments to assist in forecasting short-term moves in
implied volatility. A sharp rally developed in January. During this
phase, implied volatility ascended along an uptrend. For much of February, sugar was bounded in a $.I4 to $.I5 range. In this period of relatively quiet trading, volatility shrank.
On February 26, a hammer appeared (area A in Exhibit 18.2(b)). In
addition, this hammer session's lower shadow broke under the support
area from late January. This new low did not hold. This demonstrated
that the bears tried to take control of the market, but failed. Three trading day's later, on March 2, (area B in Exhibit 18.2(b))the white candlestick's lower shadow successfully maintained the lows of mid-January.
In addition, the March 2 low joined with the hammer to complete a
tweezers bottom. The combination of all these bottom reversal indicators
sent a powerful signal that a solid base had been built. A significant rally
was thus possible. As shown in Exhibit 18.2(b), volatility at areas A and
B were at relatively low levels. With a possible strong price rally (based
on the confluence of bottom reversal signals discussed above) and low
volatility, one could expect any price rallies to be mimicked with expanding volatility. That is what unfolded.
Another use for options and candlesticks is for the risky proposition
of bottom and top picking. Just about any book on trading strategies
warns against this. But let's face it, we all occasionally attempt it. This is
an example' of how the limited risk feature of options may allow one to
place a trade too risky for an outright future. Exhibit 18.3 is an example
of a trade I recommended. I would not have made such a recommendation without the limited risk feature of options.
Cocoa was in a major bull market that started in November 1989 at
$900. This exhibit shows the last three waves of an Elliott Wave count.
The top of wave 3 was accompanied by the shooting star and the bottom
of wave 4 by the bullish piercing line. Based on a Fibonacci ratio, there
is a wave 5 target near $1,520. Thus, near $1,520 one should start looking for candlestick confirmation of a top. And in late May, a bearish
engulfing pattern emerged after the market touched a high of $1,541.
This was close to the Elliott Wave count of $1,520 which signaled a possible top.
I could not resist such a powerful combination of an Elliott fifth wave
and a bearish engulfing pattern! Options to the rescue! I recommended

271

272

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

B7)bB' S hG " ' " '

'

B7

>sB""

""" " : ' " " " " ' , " "

" " ' : "

...............,. . .

..............!....

d

-

- ..............

I...

-

-

:- 11.1,
!Jan

IFeh

l Mar

Source: ~ o m p u ~ r a c ~ ~

Source: Optionomics Corp.

EXHIBIT 18.2. Sugar-July 1990 (a) Daily (Candlesticks with Options) and (b) Implied
Volatility

War

I

Candlesticks with Options

EXHIBIT 18.3. Cocoa-September 1990 Daily (Candlesticks with Options)

a buy of the $1,400 puts (because the major trend was still up, I would
have been more comfortable liquidating longs, but unfortunately I was
not long during this rally). If I was wrong about a top and cocoa gapped
higher (as it did in mid-May), increased volatility could help mitigate
adverse price action. As it turned out, this bearish engulfing pattern and
Elliott fifth wave became an important peak.

273

HEDGING WITH
CANDLESTICKS
$.afmmH
"Take all necessa y precautions"

T h e days of placing a hedge and then forgetting about it are over.
Hedgers are now more sophisticated and technically aware thanks to an
increased information stream. Hedgers are consistently deciding when
and how much of their cash exposure to hedge. These decisions translate into the bottom line of profitability. In this chapter, we'll examine
how candlestick techniques can provide a valuable tool to assist in the
decision-making process. This is because many candlestick indicators are
trend reversal indicators and, as such, can provide valuable assistance in
timing the placement or lifting of a hedge, and when to adjust a hedge.
A hedger seeks to offset his current or anticipated cash price exposure
by taking an opposite position in the futures or options market. A short
hedger is one whose underlying cash position is at risk of declining
prices. A short hedger, for example, could be a copper producer or a
farmer. To help manage this risk of lower prices, the hedger may initiate
a short position by selling futures or by buying puts. If prices fall, the
decreasing value of their cash position will be at least partially counterbalanced by profits in the futures or options position.
An ultimate user of the cash commodity can become a long hedger.
Such a hedger is one whose underlying cash position is at risk of rising
prices. An example of a long hedger is a shirt manufacturer who has to
buy cotton to use in the production of shirts. To assist in managing this
risk of higher prices the manufacturer can place a long hedge by buying

276

The Rule of Multiple Technical Techniques

futures or calls. If prices move up, the higher price needed to purchase
the cash commodity would be offset, at least partially, by the gains in the
futures or options positions.
In many instances, the underlying cash position may not be fully
hedged at one price. The hedger may intend to scale into the hedge
position. Thus, the question a hedger must frequently address is what
percent of his exposure should be hedged. Candlestick techniques can
help answer this question. By exploring the following examples, it
should offer insight into how candlesticks can be used to furnish clues
as to when to adjust the hedged portion of the cash position.
Candlestick techniques can also be used for those who are 100%
hedged. For instance, let's say that you are a corn farmer and the corn
market is trending against your cash position (corn prices are falling).
This should mean, as a short hedger, your futures hedge position is
profitable. If a strongly bullish candlestick reversal formation appears,
and you believe prices will rally, you might want to ease back on the
hedge. In some instances, early lifting of a profitable hedge may improve
cash flow. However, no hedge should be viewed as a strategy to generate profits.
As shown in Exhibit 19.1, an explosive rally unfolded in 1988 as

EXHIBIT 19.1. Soybeans-Weekly (Candlesticks with Hedging)

Hedging with Candlesticks

prices nearly doubled from $6 to $11. In mid-1988, near the peak of the
rally, the candlesticks gave a reversal signal a la the bearish engulfing
pattern. This would have not been seen as a Western top reversal formation using traditional Western techniques. A top reversal formation
would have required a new high for the move and then a close under the
prior week's close. The black candlestick session of the engulfing pattern
did not create a new high. Thus, while not a Western top reversal pattern, it was a reversal formation with candlesticks. This bearish engulfing pattern, for a soybean farmer, could have been used as a warning to
either initiate short hedge positions or, if not already fully hedged, to
raise the percentage hedged.
In 1989, another bearish engulfing pattern warned of a top (this also
was not seen as a top reversal pattern using Western technicals). Short
hedgers could have placed hedge positions here. The window a few
weeks later was another bearish candlestick signal which would have
told short hedgers to add to their short hedge position (if not already
100% hedged). October's bullish piercing pattern could have been used
as a signal to ease back on short-hedge positions. For those looking at a
long hedge, the piercing pattern could be used as a signal to initiate such
a hedge.
As illustrated in Exhibit 19.2, a confluence of bullish candlestick signals emerged the last week in September and the first week in October
in 1988. The most obvious was the bullish engulfing pattern. These two
weeks also created a tweezers bottom. Additionally, the white candlestick was a bullish belt hold which closed at its high. It also engulfed the
prior five candlesticks. For long hedgers, these would have been signs to
start, or add to, their hedges.
In early 1989, the harami cross (an important reversal signal), could
have been used by long hedgers to scale back on hedges. Also, the fact
that this harami cross was formed by a long white candlestick and a doji
would indicate that the market was in trouble. As discussed in Chapter
8, a doji after a long white real body is often a sign of a top.
Exhibit 19.3 explores how a long crude oil hedger could use a candlestick signal to get an early signal of a bottom reversal and then use Western technical tools to confirm. a bottom and add to the long hedge. The
first tentative bottom reversal clue came with a hammer on July 5 . Since
this hammer session gapped under the prior lows, it should have not
been taken as a bullish sign unless it was confirmed by other bullish
indicators during the next few sessions. The next clue was the bullish
engulfing pattern which provided bullish confirmation to the hammer.
This engulfing pattern was also an extra important bottom reversal signal. This is because the white candlestick on July 9 engulfed not one but
two black real bodies. At this point, crude oil end users (that is, long
