
Chapter 14: Executing Your Trades
✓ EPS: Earnings per share (see Chapter 6)
✓ Last Ticks: One or more symbols showing the direction of the last few
trades in the stock during the day, or at the end of the day for which
the quote is effective. A plus sign or up arrow indicates a trade that was
higher than the previous trade, or an uptick. A minus sign or down arrow
indicates a trade that was for less than the previous trade, or a downtick.
And an equal sign or a dash indicates a trade at the same price as the
previous trade.
✓ Last Size: The number of shares for the most recent trade.

Understanding bid and ask
Most of the information displayed on the quote system is straight fact, but
a few items need additional explanation. For example, many new traders
are confused by the bid and ask prices through which stocks are auctioned.
Although it seems backward, if you look at it from the point of view of the
market maker (the people who either manage trading activity or actually
execute the trades, see Chapter 2 for more detail), it starts making more
sense. These professional traders make money in several ways. One way is
by buying stocks from a retail investor (that’s what market makers call you
and us) at one price and turning around and selling those shares to another
retail investor at a higher price. They buy at the bid price, and then sell at the
ask price. Their goal is to sell for a price higher than they buy.
A market order tells your broker to buy or sell at the current market price.
This means that if you use a market order when buying, your order is likely to
be filled at the ask price. When selling, your market order is likely to be filled
at the bid price. Occasionally, your broker may be able to fill your order
between the bid and ask prices, but you never should count on it, because it
doesn’t happen very often. Your order can, however, become the highest bid
or the lowest ask, if you use a limit order. A limit order specifies the highest
price you’re willing to pay when buying or the lowest price you’re willing to
accept when selling. If you place your limit order between the current bid and
ask prices, your order becomes either the best bid price if you’re buying or
the best asking price if you’re selling. Note: You run the risk of having your
order not execute at all when using a limit order if the current market price
moves away from your limit price. Also, the NYSE and NASDAQ each handle
this a little differently. Your broker can help you sort through the details if you
encounter problems.

223

224 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
Understanding the spread
The spread is the difference between the bid and ask prices. It sometimes is
referred to as the inside spread, which is the difference between the highest
bid and the lowest ask. Back when stock prices were quoted in increments of
eighths (12.5 cents) and quarters (25 cents), the minimum spread was either
an eighth or a quarter. Today, with decimal pricing, the spreads tend to be
tighter, and can be as low as a penny per share on actively traded stocks.
While the major exchanges do not support spreads less than one cent, some
ECNs (electronic communications networks, see Chapter 2) permit tighter
spreads for a small number of securities.
When you place a limit order within the spread, so that your limit price is
between the current bid and ask prices, your order will usually become either
the best bid if you’re buying or the best ask if you’re selling. This approach
makes sense whenever the spread is particularly wide and the price isn’t
moving very fast. When the spread is narrow, the way it is in Figure 14-1, using
a market order is probably best, that is, as long as the market is open and the
stock is widely traded.
The biggest problem with trying to squeeze a profit out of the inside spread
is that prices move. Remember that stock quotes are only snapshots of
current bid and ask prices. By the time your order reaches the market, these
quotes can (and do) change. Even the fastest real-time quote systems lag a
bit behind the market, so it’s possible that the limit order you just entered
between the spread is now outside the spread, and won’t be filled — and
believe us when we say that can be disappointing.

Devising an effective order-entry strategy
During trading hours, you can be reasonably confident that a market order
will be filled at or near current market prices. But if you’re like most people,
you won’t spend all your time watching the market. As such, you need
another strategy for entering and exiting positions. You can use one or more
of several alternative approaches to better control the terms and prices that
you’re willing to accept when your orders are filled.

Using limit orders
If you’re buying a stock, choose the maximum price that you’re willing to pay,
and then pay no more. That means you can’t use market orders to enter your
positions. Instead, you can use limit orders, which enable you to set the
highest price that you’re willing to pay for a stock, making that your limit
price. If you’re selling short, choose the lowest price at which you’re willing
to sell, and set that as your limit price.

Chapter 14: Executing Your Trades
Limit orders are effective for opening a position, but are problematic for
exiting a position. For example, if you need to exit your position because
the breakout has failed (see Chapter 9), you simply need to exit the position
without trying to finesse the price. Failed trades recover infrequently, and
they often get worse. You have no reason to be patient when things are going
against you.
Similarly, whenever you have a profitable trade and you’re trying to protect
your profits, a limit order rarely is your best choice for exiting the position.
You’re better off exiting the position by using either a market order or a stop
order after you’ve identified a reversal pattern.

Using stop orders and stop-limit orders to enter a trade
Traders normally talk about using stops for exiting or trading out of a position,
but stops are also effective for opening a position. If you identify the stock
that you want prior to an actual breakout, you can enter a buy stop at a price
above the breakout point. These orders can be entered on a GTC (good ’til
canceled) basis, so that even if the trading range lasts a while, your order is
poised to trigger a transaction whenever the breakout occurs.
Most brokers limit the length of time that orders can remain open, so make
sure you know your broker’s GTC policies and remember that NASDAQ
doesn’t have any provisions for handling stop orders. If you’re trying to use
stops when trading NASDAQ stocks, your broker has to provide the mechanism
for triggering these trades when your stop price is hit. Make sure that your
broker can handle the stop orders that you want to use.
The downside to this approach is obvious — you’re unable to confirm
the breakout. If the breakout fails, and you’ve triggered a buy order on the
breakout, you now hold a position that’s losing money.
Although we generally recommend waiting a few days to confirm the breakout,
using this strategy at times may be more appropriate than others. For example,
if you’re convinced that the market is in a bull market phase (as described in
Chapter 13), the stock’s trading range is long and tight, and you can identify
an obvious breakout, then entering a GTC buy stop order at a price that’s a
bit higher than the breakout price is probably okay. However, you need to be
much more tentative when the market is only in a bullish transition or pullback
phase, or when you’re monitoring second and subsequent breakouts. When
that’s the case, make sure the breakout is confirmed — that means the stock
remains above its breakout price for a bullish breakout — within a few days
before entering your order. If you have any doubt, wait for confirmation.
Another problem with this approach is that after the stop price is reached,
your order is triggered and it becomes a market order to buy or sell. You’re in
the exact situation you’d be in if you’d entered a market order while the
market was closed. You have no control over the fill price after your stop is
triggered.

225

226 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
For example, say the stock price gaps higher (Chapter 10) as it breaks out of
its trading range and surpasses your stop price by two or three dollars. Your
order is triggered and will likely be filled at a price that’s much higher than
your stop price, and much higher than you had anticipated. If the stock price
falls below your fill price, you’re now holding a losing position. The only way
to avoid this problem is by using a stop-limit order, which means when your
stop price triggers the release of your order, the order becomes a limit order
rather than a market order and is filled only if the stock price pulls back
below your limit price (see Chapter 2 for more on limit and market orders).
Again, remember to confirm that your broker permits stop-limit orders on
NASDAQ stocks.
You can also use a stop order or a stop-limit order to open a short position.
You specify a sell stop or a sell stop-limit order, while designating your trade
as a short sale. Again, you must confirm that your broker supports these
types of orders for NASDAQ stocks.

Using stop orders to exit positions
After your buy or sell order is filled, you need to enter your stop-loss instructions. You need to protect your open positions and simultaneously stay clear
of short-term traders trying to run the stops. Running the stops is a little game
played by short-term traders where they try to find and execute open stop
orders before driving the stock price in the other direction. It can be very
lucrative for them and infuriating, not to mention expensive, for you. You can
try to avoid being run over when they’re running the stops by keeping your
stop prices away from the most obvious location. For example, if a breakout
occurs at $35.75, don’t put your stop-loss one cent below at $35.74. Move
down a few cents, to $35.69, or even $35.63, to stay away from the obvious
stop-loss spots. Stop-loss measures, and the reasons for them, are discussed
more fully in Chapter 12.

Level I, Level II, and TotalView data
The quote screen shown back in Figure 14-1 is called a Level I quote. The
bid and ask prices, and their associated numbers of shares, give you a little
insight into the current state of the market. However, a Level I quote won’t
show you the full depth of the market or the number of traders and market
makers currently participating in the market for any one stock. For that
information, you need a Level II quote or display, or its updated cousin, a
TotalView display.
A Level II display shows all the outstanding bid and ask prices for a specific
stock, the number of shares associated with each price, and the identification
of key market makers participating in the stock. Some Level II systems offer
a display that consolidates onto a single quote screen all the outstanding
bid and ask quotes from all the exchanges, along with all the bid and ask

Chapter 14: Executing Your Trades
quotes from the ECNs (electronic communications networks, see Chapter 2
for details) where a stock trades. Figure 14-2 shows an example TotalView
display for Apple Inc. (AAPL).

Figure 14-2:
Quote
screen for
AT&T stock.

Although interesting, most of the information available on Level II or
TotalView displays is unnecessary for a typical position trader. Unless you’re
swing trading (see Chapter 16), day trading (see Chapter 17), or trading lowvolume stocks, you’re not likely to need a Level II or TotalView data feed.

Entering orders after the market
closes: Be careful
As long as you’re entering your trades during market hours, using a market
order is fine; however, if you’re planning to check your charts each evening
and then enter your trades before heading to work in the morning, you must
use a different approach. Otherwise you risk having your orders filled at

227

228 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
prices that can differ significantly from the previous closing prices. To make
matters worse, you may discover that your position is losing money soon
after being filled.
Don’t be surprised to discover that many traders trade this way. Because
of their daily schedules, they analyze stock charts in the evening and enter
orders before the markets open. Unfortunately, common breakout and
reversal patterns (see Chapter 9) cause many traders to react in a predicable
fashion. After many traders enter buy orders for the same stock, a scarcity
of that stock is likely to occur just after the market opens. Scarcity causes
prices of individual stocks to rise, sometimes even dramatically, so that all
those aftermarket orders are filled at prices significantly higher than the
previous closing price. Making matters worse, after the buy orders are filled
and buying pressure disappears, the stock price tumbles back toward the
previous closing price.
Professional traders — including floor traders, market makers, day traders,
and swing traders — exacerbate the problem even further. These short-term
traders see the same technical analysis signals that you see, and their goal is
to profit from your enthusiasm, and perhaps your inexperience, as you try to
open your position.
As a result, you need to think about the tactics these short-term traders
employ before you enter any positions. When they see breakout or reversal patterns, short-term traders anticipate a flurry of buying activity in that
stock, and they know that few people are going to be eager sellers when a
stock breaks out of a trading range. Under those circumstances, the only way
buyers can get an order filled is if they bid the price higher or accept whatever price is being asked for the stock. When that happens, the best asking
price is going to be relatively high.
Someone will sell the stock to position traders but only at a relatively high
asking price. Short-term swing traders and day traders, who may not even
own the stock, offer those asking prices, agreeing to provide the stock to
the position traders as long as the buying pressure pushes the price of the
stock upward. If the short-term traders don’t own the stock, they must sell
the shares short, in other words, they must borrow the stock before selling
(see the section “Selling Stocks Short”). After the short sellers absorb all that
buying pressure, the rally fades, the stock’s price falls back toward the breakout price, and that’s when short-term traders buy the stock (at prices lower
than they sold it) so they can cover their short positions, or in other words,
return the shares that they borrowed to sell at higher prices to the position
traders. How’s that for taking a quick profit.
This scenario is at the heart of why being patient usually makes sense. By
steering clear of these moments of buying pressure, you’re more likely to get
a much better fill, and you find out whether enough buying interest is present to keep the stock price above the breakout price. Being patient doesn’t

Chapter 14: Executing Your Trades
always work, of course. Sometimes buying pressure drives the price higher,
forcing short sellers to cover at a loss, which, in turn, drives the price even
higher, resulting in a runaway stock. When that does happen, you’ll probably
be left standing on the platform, watching the runaway stock as it leaves you
behind. Fortunately, runaway stocks don’t happen all that often. Thus,
banking on runaway stocks is a poor tactic.
Our advice remains the same: Don’t chase these breakout and runaway
stocks. When the cycle exhausts itself, as it ultimately must, the stock returns
to a more rational price, and you can reevaluate whether your position
continues to make sense. As a position trader, you can afford to be patient.

Reviewing a week in the life of a trader
To help you get a feel for this, we’d like you to look at a sample trade made
by a hypothetical position trader. The idea is to help you understand the
rationale and the timing. As a position trader, your week begins during the
weekend. You have a few things to accomplish:
✓ Evaluate the current state of the market.
✓ Evaluate the current state of your existing positions.
✓ Find potential replacement candidates for any failing positions.
✓ Find candidates for new trading positions.
We will use the week of December 8, 2008, as the example week.
Before we begin, let’s recap the market’s recent performance. The broad
market indexes peaked in October 2007. Stocks performed poorly over the
next year, but they accelerated to the downside in September 2008.
From the October 2007 peak to the most recent trough in November 2008, the
S&P 500 Index (SPX), like most broad-market indexes, lost over 50 percent of
its value. This downtrend has also seen several short, sharp rallies. The most
recent rally in November carried the SPX 20 percent higher over the span of
five trading days.
Because the markets rallied 20 percent, the major media declared the bear
market over. Rather than taking their word for it, we’ll use our analysis to see
if the persistent downtrend has ended.
The technical analysis indicators and fundamental economic conditions
show a mixed picture:
✓ The economy is clearly in recession, possibly the worst economic
conditions in our lifetime.

229

230 Part IV: Developing Strategies for When to Buy and Sell Stocks
✓ The Fed lowered the Fed funds rate to its lowest point ever, near 0
percent.
✓ The consumer staples, utilities, and healthcare sectors are the bestperforming sectors in the market. The sector rotation model (see
Chapters 5 and 13) suggests that strength in these sectors often occurs
during bear markets, before reaching the bear-market trough.
✓ The weekly MACD indicator (Chapter 13) for both the Standard & Poor’s
500 Index and the NASDAQ Composite Index is far below its zero line.
While the indicator has turned a little higher, it remains below its trigger
line, suggesting that the market remains in a bear phase.
✓ The bullish percent index (BPI, see Chapter 13) for all broad market
indexes is signaling a bull confirmed condition.
Given the above factors, you cannot conclude that a bull market has begun
as the major media are saying. Instead, the market is most likely in a bearish
pullback, but you cannot rule out a bull market transition.
Next, you would analyze your current positions, if you have any. Given the
recent volatility of the market, it would not be a surprise if you were stopped
out of your short positions. And given your conclusion that the market is
probably in a bearish pullback, you have not initiated any new long positions.
Finally, you look for new potential trading candidates. As we write this
chapter, for example, the news-driven market is waiting for the federal government’s decision about bailing out the U.S. auto industry. After the raft
of bankruptcy announcements, including Linens and Things, Circuit City,
and Lehman Brothers, it’s probably best to avoid individual stocks, at least
until you see a clear indication of a new bull market. Instead, you will look at
broad-market-index exchange-traded funds (ETFs), as well as sector ETFs, to
find trading candidates.
You cannot be certain that the market is in a bearish pullback, it might be in
the beginning of a bull-market transition. Therefore, you decide to look for
both long and short trading opportunities. For long positions, you look at the
strongest sectors, including the consumer staples, utilities, and healthcare
sectors. For short positions, you look to the weakest sectors such as financial
stocks and real estate. You can also look at broad-market ETFs for both long
and short trading candidates.
When you search the daily ETF charts, it is not surprising that you find few
exhibiting a long-lasting trading range (Chapter 9). One that may qualify
is the Utilities Select Sector SPDR (XLU). You do find several patterns that
might be attractive for short positions (Chapters 10 and 11). For example,
you find the Short S&P 500 Proshare Fund (SH) recently made a new high and
is in a pullback position. This fund’s price rises when the S&P 500 Index falls.

Chapter 14: Executing Your Trades
Your final step is to determine the breakout points and your entry prices
(Chapter 9) for each of the trading candidates you’ve found. You may enter
buy stop orders for these trades now, or you may monitor the situation and
enter the trades as the trading signals occur.
During the trading week, your daily activities are comparatively easy. At the
end of each trading day, you must
✓ Evaluate the current condition of any new or existing positions.
✓ Evaluate the current condition of any trading candidates you identified
during your weekend analysis.
The markets gapped higher on Monday December 8. The Utilities Selector
Sector SPDR (XLU) also rallied, but did not break out of its trading range. In
fact, it remained in this trading range for the entire week.
The price for the Short S&P Proshare Fund (SH), your short-side candidate,
gapped lower at the open, and traded in a narrow range throughout the
day on Monday. Over the next several days, trading in SH was within a very
narrow range. Although this isn’t the classic breakout setup we discussed
in Chapter 9, it is very similar. The 60-minute intraday chart for SH looks
very much like a long-running trading range. The only difference is that this
trading range is over a period of several days rather than several weeks or
months. You decided that the SH trade was still viable, and you entered a
buy-stop order at $85.96, just above the high of intraday trading range. This
trade was triggered during the day on Thursday, December 11.
Markets gapped lower the following morning, driving the price of SH higher.
The opening price was the high price for the day. The EFT traded lower, and
ultimately touched the top of the prior intraday trading range, but did not fall
back into the trading range, at least not during the week we’re discussing.

Using GTC orders cautiously
You, and you alone, are responsible for monitoring your open orders. It is not uncommon for
many stocks to break out almost simultaneously,
so you need to be careful not to overcommit.
If, by some fluke, all your open orders trigger
simultaneously, or within a short period of time,
you must maintain enough purchasing power to

adequately fund all your trades. Otherwise, your
broker will call and demand that you pay for all
those trades that you inadvertently executed.
Expect repercussions from your broker, including restrictions on your account, if you don’t
send the money immediately.
