value periods. The question arises: are the worries that are holding back
stock values in the present period, such matters as the high cost of ener-
gy or the dangers from the political left or of overextended credit, with
the inevitable resulting drain on the level of business activity as liquidi-
ty is restored, more serious and more apt to stop the future growth in
this country than the fears that held back stock prices in these two prior
periods? If not, once the problems of overextended credit have been
solved, it might be logical to assume that the 1980’s and period beyond
may offer the same sort of rewarding opportunities that characterized
the two former periods of abnormally low prices.

LESSONS FROM THE VINTAGE YEARS

From a business standpoint, the fifteen years from 1954 through 1969
were a magnificent time for me, as most of the relatively few stocks I was
holding advanced significantly more than did the market as a whole.
Even so, I managed to make some bad mistakes. Successes came from
diligent application of the approaches I have already spelled out. It is the
mistakes that are more noteworthy. Each brought its own new lesson.

Good fortune can breed laxness. The mistake which now embar-
rassed me the most, although it was not the most costly, arose from the
careless application of a sound principle.

In the early 1960's, I had technological investments that were prov-
ing quite pleasing in the electronic, chemical, metallurgical, and machin-
ery industries. I did not have a comparable investment in the promising
drug field, and started seeking one. Along the way, I talked to a medical
specialist who was preeminent in his field. At the time, he was tremen-
dously excited about a new drug family about to be introduced by a
small Midwestern manufacturer. These drugs he felt could have quite
favorable impact on the future earnings of this firm relative to others in
this field. The potential market seemed very, very exciting.

1 then talked to just one of the officers of this company and to only
a few other investment people all of whom were equally excited about
the potentials of this new drug. Unfortunately, I did not pursue my
standard checks either with other drug companies or with other experts
knowledgeable in this particular specialty to see if they might have con-
trary evidence to offer. Regretlully, I subsequently learned, none of the
proponents had made a thorough investigation either.


258 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

‘The stock was selling at a price well above its worth before consid-
ering the benefits of this new family of drugs, but at a price which could
have been but a minor fraction of potential value if the new drugs were
all their supporters imagined. I bought the shares only to see them drop,
at first a mere 20 percent and then over 50 percent. Ultimately the
whole company was sold for cash at this low price to a large non-
pharmaceutical corporation seeking to enter the drug field. Even at this
price, now somewhat less than half of what I had paid for the shares,
I subsequently learned that the acquiring company lost money on the
deal. Not only did this new family of drugs fail to measure up to the
extensive hopes that had been enthusiastically projected by my friend,
the medical specialist, but also on painful “post-mortem” reexamination
of the situation, I found that there were management problems in this
smalt drug manufacturer. With a more thorough investigation both fail-
ings would, I believe, have become apparent to me.

From that embarrassing time forward, I have tried to be particular-
ly thorough in making investigations in periods when things were going
well. The only reason this particular investment folly wasn’t more cost-
ly stemmed from my caution. Since I had had only a slight contact with
the management, I made only a smail initial investment, planning to buy
more as I got to know the company better. Their troubles overtook me
before I had a chance to compound my original folly.

As the long bull market was reaching its final peak in 1969 another
mistake occurred.To understand what happened it is necessary to recre-
ate the psychological fever which gripped most investors in technolog-
ical and scientific stocks at that time. Shares of these companies, partic-
ularly many of the smaller ones, had enjoyed advances far greater than
the market as a whole. During 1968 and 1969 only one’s imagination
seemed to cap the dreams of imminent success for many of these com-
panies. Some of these situations did have genuine potential, of course.
Discrimination was at a low ebb. For example, any company serving the
computer industry in any way promised a future, many believed, that
was almost limitless. This contagion spread into instrument and other
scientific companies as well.

Up to this time, I resisted the temptation to go into any of the sim-
ilar companies that had just “gone public” at very high prices in the pre-
vious year or two. Yet, being in frequent contact with those who were
sponsoring these excitement inducing companics, I kept looking for a
few that might be genuinely attractive. In 1969 I did find an equipment


The Philosophy Matures 259

company working in an extremely interesting new frontier of technology;
one that had a real basis for its existence. The firm was run by a brilliant
and honest president. I can remember still, after a long luncheon session
with this man, my pacing up and down the airport awaiting my airplane
home and trying to determine whether I should buy this company’s
shares at the prevailing market. After considerable deliberation, I decid-
ed to go ahead.

I was right in diagnosing the potential of this company for it did
grow in the years that followed. Nevertheless, it was a poor investment.
My mistake lay in the price I paid to participate in the promise. Some
years later, after the company had shown rather respectable growth, I
sold these shares, but at a price very little different from my original
cost. While I believe I was right in selling when I thought the company
had reached a point where its future growth was considerably more
uncertain, nevertheless selling an investment at a meager profit after it
has been held for a number of years is not the way to make capital grow
or even protect it against inflation. In this case, disappointing perform-
ance was the result of being seduced by the excitement of the times into
paying an unrealistic initiation price.

DO FEW THINGS WELL

A policy judgment that was wrong for me engendered quite a different
kind of mistake, and one which did cost a significant amount of dollars.
My mistake was to project my skill beyond the limits of experience. I
began investing outside the industries which I believe I thoroughly
understood, in completely different spheres of activity; situations where
I did not have comparable background knowledge.

When it comes to manufacturing companies that serve industrial
markets or to companies on the leading edge of technology that are
serving manufacturers, I believe that | know what to look for—where
both the strong points and pitfalls may lie. However, different skills
proved important in evaluating companies making and selling consumer-
type products. When the products of competitive companies are essen-
tially rather similar to one another, and when changes in market share
depend largely on shifting public tastes or on fashions greatly influenced
by the effectiveness of advertising, I lcarned that the abilities which I
had in selecting outstanding technological companies did not extrapolate


260 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

to the point where I could identify what produces unusual success in
real estate operations.

Others may do well in quite diverse investment arenas. Perhaps,
unlike the other types of mistakes I have made during my business
career, this one should properly’ be ignored by others. Nevertheless, an
analyst must learn the limits of his or her competence and tend well the
sheep at hand.

STAY OR SELL IN ANTICIPATION OF POSSIBLE
MARKET DOWNTURNS?

Should an investor sell a good stock in the face of a potentially bad
market? On this subject, I fear I hold a minority view given the invest-
ment psychology prevalent today. Now more than ever, the actions of
those who control the vast bulk of equity investments in this country
appear to reflect the belief that when an investor has achieved a good
profit in a stock and fears the stock might well go down, he should grab
his profit and get out. My view is rather different. Even if the stock of
a particular company seems at or near a temporary peak and that a siz-
able decline may strike in the near future, I will not sell the firm’s shares
provided I believe that its longer term future is sufficiently attractive.
When I estimate that the price of these shares will rise to a peak quite
considcrably higher than the current levels in a few years time, I prefer
to hold. My belief stems from some rather fundamental considerations
about the nature of the investment process. Companies with truly
unusual prospects for appreciation are quite hard to find for there are
not too many of them. However, for someone who understands and
applies sound fundamentals, I believe that a truly outstanding company
can be differentiated from a run-of-the-mill company with perhaps 90
percent precision.

It is vastly more difficult to forecast what a particular stock is going
to do in the next six months. Estimates of short-term performance start
with economic estimates of the coming level of general business. Yet the
forecasting record of seers predicting changes in the business cycle has
generally been abysmal. They can seriously misjudge if and when reces-
sions may occur, and are worse in predicting their severity and duration.
Furthermore, neither the stock market as a whole nor the course of any



The Philosophy Matures 261

particular stock tends to move in close parallel with the business climate.
Changes in mass psychology and in how the financial community as a
whole decided to appraise the outlook either for business in general or
for a particular stock can have overriding importance and can vary
almost unpredictably. For these reasons, I believe that it is hard to be
correct in forecasting the short-term movement of stocks more than
60 percent of the time no matter how diligently the skill is cultivated.
This may well be too optimistic an estimate. On the face of it, it doesn’t
make good sense to step out of a position where you have a 90 percent
probability of being right because of an influence about which you
might at best have a 60 percent chance of being right.

Moreover, for those seeking major gains through long-term invest-
ments, the odds of winning are not the only consideration. If the
investment is in a well-run company with sufficient financial strength,
even the greatest bear market will not erase the value of holding. In
contrast, time after time, truly unusual stocks have subsequent peaks
many hundreds of percent above their previous peaks. Thus, risk/reward
considerations favor long-term investment.

So, putting it in the simplest mathematical terms, both the odds and
the risk/reward considerations favor holding. Vhere is a much greater
chance of being wrong in estimating adverse short-term changes for a
good stock than in projecting its strong, long-term price appreciation
potential. If you stay with the right stocks through even a major tem-
porary market drop, you are at most going to be temporarily behind
40 percent of the former peak at the very worst point and will ulti-
mately be ahead; whereas if you sell and don’t buy back you will have
missed long-term profits many times the short-term gains from having
sold the stock in anticipation at a short-term reversal. It has been my
observation that it is so difficult to time correctly the near-term price
movements of an attractive stock that the profits made in the few
instances when this stock is sold and subsequently replaced at signifi-
cantly lower prices are dwarfed by the profits lost when timing is wrong.
Many have sold too soon and have either never gotten back in or have
postponed reinvestment too long to recapture the profits possible.

The example I will use to illustrate this point is the weakest one I
have experienced. In 1962, two of the major electronics investments I
had made had risen to heights that made the outlook for near-term
price movement extremely dangerous. Texas Instruments was selling at
over fifteen times the price I had paid for it seven years before. Another


262 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

company which I bought a year or so later, and which I shall call by the
fictitious name of “Central California Electronics,” had enjoyed a simi-
lar percentage rise. Prices had gone too far. I consequently informed
each of my clients that the prices of these two stocks were unrealistical-
ly high and discouraged them from using these prices in measuring their
current net worth. This is a practice I have rarely followed, and then
only when I had an unusually strong conviction that the next important
move for one or more of my stocks would be sharply downward. Nev-
ertheless, in the face of this conviction, I urged my clients to maintain
their holdings, in the belief that some years ahead both stocks would rise
to very much higher levels. When the correction in values came for
these two stocks, it proved even more severe than I had anticipated.
Texas Instruments at its subsequent bottom sold off 80 percent from its
1962 peak. Central California Electronics did not perform quite so
badly, but still sold off by almost 60 percent. My beliefs were being tested
in the extreme!

However, within a few years Texas Instruments was once again selling
at new high levels more than double its 1962 high. Patience had paid off
here. Central California Electronics’ performance was not a happy one.
As the general stock market started to recover, problems within the
management of Central California Electronics became apparent.
Changes in personnel occurred. I became quite worried and made what
I believe was a thorough investigation. I reached two conclusions and
neither one pleased me. One was that I had misjudged the former man-
agement. I should have been more awarc of its deficicnci¢s, yet wasn’t.
Neither could I be sufficiently enthusiastic about the new management
to warrant continuing to hold the shares. I consequently sold these
holdings in the following twelve-month period at a price only slightly
better than half of the 1962 peak. Even so, my clients, depending on the
applicable purchase price, gained from seven to ten times the original
cost.

As I have already indicated, I am deliberately citing a weak example
rather than a dramatic one to illustrate why I believe it pays to ignore
near-term fluctuations in situations that hold real promise. My error in
the Central California Electronics instance was not in holding the shares
through a temporary decline, but in something far more important. I
had grown too complacent as a result of the enormous success of my
investments in this company. 1 began paying too much attention to what
I was hearing from top management and not doing sufficient checking


The Philosophy Matures 263

with people at lower levels and with customers. When I recognized the
situation and acted upon it, I was then able to make the same kind of
gains | had expected to make in Central California Electronics by
switching these funds to other electronic companies, chiefly Motorola,
which fortunately rose in the next’ few years to a value several times
higher than the prior peak of Central California Electronics.

IN AND OUT MAY BE OUT OF THE MONEY

There is more to learn from the Texas Instruments and Central Califor-
nia Electronics situations. When I originally acquired these Texas Instru-
ments shares in the summer of 1955, they were bought for the longest
type of long-range investment. It seemed to me the company fully war-
ranted this degree of confidence. About a year later, the stock had dou-
bled. With one exception, the various owners of the funds I managed,
familiar as they were with my method of operations, showed no more
interest in taking a profit than did I. However, at that time I had one rel-
atively new account owned by people who, in their own business, were
used to building up inventory when markets were low and cutting it
back sharply when they were high. Now that Texas Instruments had
doubled, they brought strong pressure to sell, which for a time I was able
to resist. When the stock rose an additional 25 percent to give them a
profit of 125 percent of their cost, the pressure to sell became even
stronger. They explained, “We agree with you. We like the company, but
we can always buy it back at a better price on a decline.” I finally com-
promised with them by persuading them to keep part of their holding
and sell the rest. Yet when the big drop occurred several years later and
the shares fell 80 percent from their peak, this new bottom was still
almost 40 percent higher than the price at which this particular holder
was so eager to sell!

After a very sharp advance, a stock nearly always looks too high to the
financially untrained. This client demonstrated another risk to those who
follow the practice of selling shares that still have unusual growth prospects
simply because they have realized a good gain and the stock appears tem-
porarily overpriced. These investors seldom buy back at higher prices
when they are wrong and lose further gains of dramatic proportions.

At the risk of being repetitious, let me underscore my belief that the
short-term price movements are so inherently tricky to predict that 1 do


264 DEVELOPING AN INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY

not believe it possible to play the in and out game and still make the
enormous profits that have accrued again and again to the truly long-
term holder of the right stocks.

THE LONG SHADOW OF DIVIDENDS

In these comments I have tried to show how, as the years have passed,
various experiences gradually helped to shape my investment philoso-
phy. However, looking back, I find no specific event, either a mistake or
a favorable opportunity, which caused me to reach the conclusions |
have on the matter of dividends. Many observations over a long period
of years gradually crystallized my views. I started out taking for granted
the belief, as widely accepted forty years ago as it is today, that dividends
were something highly favorable to the stockholder and something
which should be welcomed enthusiastically. Then I began seeing com-
panies that had so many exciting looking new ideas flowing from their
research departments that they could not capitalize upon them all.
Resources were too scarce or too expensive. I began thinking how
much better it might be for some stockholders if, instead of paying div-
idends, more of the company’s resources were retained and invested in
more of these innovative products.

I began increasingly to recognize that the interests of all stockhold-
ers were not identical. Some investors needed dividend income to sup-
port their lifestyle. These stockholders would undoubtedly prefer cur-
rent dividends to greater future profits and increased value for their
shares resulting from increased investment in promising products and
technologies. These investors could find investments in firms whose
needs and opportunities for productive use of capital were not too
demanding.

But how about the stockholder whose earning power or other
income sources exceeded needs and who was regularly saving money
anyway? Would it not be better for this investor if the company passed
up its dividends, which would often be subject to a fairly high income
tax rate, and instead reinvested the funds, tax-free, in future growth?

Shortly after World War II, when I started concentrating my invest-
ment activities almost solely on the attainment of major, long-range
capital appreciation, another aspect of the dividend payout issue became
even more apparent. The companies with the greatest growth prospects


The Philosophy Matures 265

were under tremendous pressure to pay no dividends at all. Their need
for funds and their ability to use funds productively was too large. The
cost of developing these new products was just the first heavy drain on
capital needed to finance growth. There followed the heavy marketing
expense needed to introduce them to the customer. With success, plant
expansion was needed to service a growing volume. Once the new line
was on its way, there were further capital requirements for the increased
inventories and accounts receivable which, in most cases, grow almost
in direct proportion to the volume of the business.

There seemed a natural fit of interest between those firms with
bountiful investment opportunities and certain investors who sought to
make the greatest possible profit in relation to the risk involved and
who neither needed additional income nor wanted to pay unnecessary
taxes. Such investors should, I believe, mainly confine investments to
non-dividend-paying companies with strong earning power and with
attractive places to reinvest their earnings. These were the clients I
sought to serve.

Recently, however, the situation has become less clear-cut. Institu-
tional holders have become an increasingly dominant force in day-to-
day stock transactions. Institutions such as pension and profit sharing
funds pay no income tax on their dividends. Many of them as a matter
of policy will not invest in a company unless it pays some dividend, no
matter how small. Attracting and holding these buyers have caused many
companies with unusual prospects to initiate modest dividend payments
of rather small percentage total annual carnings. Managers of some
would-be growth companies have concurrently reduced their payout
dramatically. Today, the skill in investing retained earnings wisely has
become a more critical factor in separating the unusual company from
the pack.

For these reasons, T have come to believe that the most that can be
said on this subject of dividends is that it is an influence that should be
downgraded very sharply by those who do not need the income. In
general, more attractive opportunities will be found among stocks with
a low dividend payout or none at all. However, so general is the feeling
among those who determine dividend policies that paying out divi-
dends is beneficial to the investor (as it is for some) that occasionally I
have found truly attractive opportunities among higher dividend payout
companies, although this has not happened very often.

