
THE CARRY TRADE: USING DIRECT FOREX TRADES
AS AN INCOME VEHICLE

While the previous section combined careful selection of forex trends and income instruments for
better income investing, carry trading is the classic pure forex play for income. Note right from the
start that it uses leveraged instruments, and depends greatly on your forecasting a given currency trend
correctly, so carry trading is for more active investors who understand leverage and have the RAMM
skills to deal with it. Income investors without the time or expertise should approach carry trading by
using a proven trader via a managed account or social trading network. If you want to do it yourself,
first get four to six profitable months using practice accounts, then you can more safely consider doing
your own carry trading.
In essence, carry trading is just:
Buying the currency that pays you a higher annual yield and getting that interest paid daily into
your account.
Selling the lower-yielding one and paying out the daily portion of that annual interest.
Earning an income on the difference.
That means you're either taking long positions in pairs that have base currencies with much higher
yields than their quote currencies (like the AUDJPY) or taking short positions in pairs with higheryielding quote currencies (like the GBPAUD).
Given retail forex's justified reputation as a tool for short-term speculators, you may find it
surprising that you can earn steady income via carry trading (which we first introduced in Chapter 6).

Differences between Forex Carry Trade and Traditional Long-Term
Buy-and-Hold Instruments
Here's how carry trading differs from typical long-term buy-and-hold income instruments. The carry
trade is a classic kind of forex trade and so carries higher risk and demands more time than buy-andhold investing.

Greater Risk and Reward via Leverage
The use of leverage magnifies both gains and losses.

The Reward: Magnified Interest and Price Appreciation
Concerning carry trading, if you're long a pair that has higher-yield base currency (the one on the left),
leverage magnifies the actual interest earned. Recall that back in Chapter 6 we wrote that the net
interest of 4.65 percent you collected on the AUDJPY trade we presented was on the full amount of
currency you controlled, not the margin deposit.
For example, if you are using 100:1 leverage with a $1,000 margin deposit to control $100,000 of
AUD via having borrowed $100,000 of JPY, that annual income is based on the full $100,000 of
AUD controlled, not the $1,000 margin deposit. Thus the annual income here is 4.65 percent of
$100,000 or $4,650 (paid out on a pro rata daily basis). Using just $1,000 allocated to that position,
this is a 465 percent return before considering changes in the AUDJPY's price.
As always, if the pair rises in value, leverage magnifies those gains, too. For example, at 100:1
leverage every 1 percent move is a 100 percent profit on your margin deposit, which would be
another $1,000 in the previous example.

The Risk: Magnified Loss
As previously noted, as long as you're going long on pairs that have higher-yielding base currencies
compared to their counter currencies, the magnified interest income can only help. If, however, you
were short a pair like the AUDJPY, you'd be paying out that interest for each day you held the short
position.
The real risk of loss from leverage with carry trading is no different than with any other kind of
forex trade—the risk that price moves against you. Using the previous example, every 1 percent move
against you is another 100 percent of your margin deposit. This is why in our chapter on RAMM we
recommended having cash in your account equal to at the very least 10 times your typical margin
deposit as a general guideline. So while in the previous example you may be earning 465 percent on
the $1,000 deposit, you need to keep enough cash on hand (either in your forex account or somewhere
else where it's quickly accessible) to absorb whatever percentage move against you you're willing to
tolerate. That would cut your overall income yield from your account, but at 465 percent returns on
the margin committed, the net yield can still be handsome. You could keep less cash in your account
and more in a higher-yielding account elsewhere as long as you're able to transfer funds into your
forex account on short notice. In addition to wire transfers, most forex brokers accept deposits via
credit cards, allowing for quick deposits over the phone.
Here's another way to deal with the amplified loss risk from leverage: punctuated buy-and-hold.
Using the proper RAMM covered earlier, you can enter and exit positions as needed. So rather than
simply buying and holding through possibly crippling losses, just keep entering and exiting your
selected high-interest-differential currency pairs over time, riding a multiyear trend for various
periods, exiting and then reentering as per our technical analysis and RAMM criteria summarized
here.
Carry trading works only in times of optimism or risk appetite.
Higher-yielding currencies generally hold their value or appreciate only in times of optimism, so
carry trades are generally not successful during bear markets in risk assets. You risk losing more
from falling markets than you earn from the interest.
Carry trading requires more careful use of technical analysis and RAMM.

Because leverage adds to risk compared to traditional nonleveraged income investments like
bonds or dividend stocks, we employ the full range of risk and money management (RAMM)
techniques discussed in Chapter 5, such as:
Not risking more than a small percentage of your trading capital.
Proper setting of stop losses.
Adequate capitalization.
Position sizing.
Entries near strong support.
Risk-reward ratios of at least 1:2, preferably 1:3 or better.
Every trade based on a written plan.

The Key to Carry Trading

Ideally, you want to be long a currency with a rising interest rate and short a currency with a stable or
falling rate. If there is any significant chance of the opposite occurring in your planned holding period,
don't take the trade; your capital losses could easily outweigh your income—remember that leverage
magnifies losses as well as income. Using the previous AUDJPY example, assuming you held the
position for one year and earned 4.65 percent, a mere 4.65 percent drop in the pair would wipe out
your gains for the year. It's not uncommon to see pairs move that much in a matter of days. You can
ride out those moves if you're confident in the longer-term trend and have the cash to avoid a margin
call. Otherwise, skip the trade.
In sum:
Your technical analysis should indicate a healthy uptrend for your intended holding period. Those
seeking a long-term (multimonth or multiyear) hold should look for pairs with healthy multiyear
rising trends on monthly charts.
Your fundamental analysis, or the analysts you follow, should indicate that the currency you're
considering being long has interest rates steady or rising relative to those of whatever currency
you'll be shorting.
At minimum, you want to be long one of the higher-yielding currencies and short one of the lower
yielders, the difference in their interest rates expected to widen, or at least not shrink.
For example, you want one of the following:
A long-established long-term uptrend on weekly or monthly charts (again, we want a longestablished uptrend) in a currency pair with a high-yielding base currency and low-yielding
counter currency like the AUDJPY, NZDJPY, AUDUSD, NZDUSD, AUDCHF, or NZDCHF.
The minimum age for the trend is a judgment call, but the longer the better. As we noted in
Chapter 3, because economic fundamentals of countries change slowly, forex markets produce
some very stable long-term trends or trading ranges, making them well suited to long-term
positions as long as a trader or investor can either eliminate or cope with the leverage typically
used in most forex trading and the risks it entails. These trends or trading ranges are out there
waiting for you to find them.
If there isn't a long-term uptrend, you should at minimum have good reason to believe one is
starting. Because high-yield currencies tend to be risk currencies (i.e., they rise or fall along with
other risk assets), these pairs are best played when you believe risk markets have begun at least a
multiweek (or longer) uptrend, or your chosen technical indicators suggest there's an established
uptrend on the weekly or monthly charts.
Instead of a trend, a long-established trading range combined with a chance to open either a long
position at the low extreme or a short position.
Here is one important note about playing bounces off support, be it for long or short positions.
These dips to support should only be technical pullbacks, not those pullbacks fueled by a major news
item or other sign of breakdown in the longer-term underlying fundamentals of the pair; that might
suggest support is likely to break down. You're trying to buy low or sell high, not catch the proverbial
falling knife. So pay attention to fundamentals, to what's going on in both the global economy and the
economies of the specific currencies involved.

The Key to Trading Range-Bound Markets

By their very nature, trading ranges imply that conditions haven't changed. If, however, you have
reason to believe that the big fundamental factors behind a long-established trading range may be
changing, be cautious when attempting to trade bounces off of the lows and highs of that range.
For example, remember the EURUSD weekly chart from Chapter 6 on fundamental analysis shown
here in Figure 12.7.
FIGURE 12.7 EURUSD Weekly Chart, May 30 to September 6, 2011
Source: MetaQuotes Software Corp.

Based purely on a simple technical picture, the convergence of two kinds of support for the
EURUSD, the 1.4000 level and the rising trend line from June 6, 2010, it looked like we had a dip to
strong support that could be an entry point for going long the EURUSD.
However, the European Union sovereign debt and banking crisis was entering a new crisis stage for
a variety of reasons, including:
A rising risk that Greece would not receive its second round of bailout loans in little more than a
year, due to both Greek failure to meet conditions for the loans and rising opposition to further
loans in funding nations.
Dangerously high Spanish and Italian bond yields that indicated rising risks that these countries,
considered too big to rescue with bailout funds available at the time, would need assistance to
avoid default.
EU banks having increasing trouble getting funding in global credit markets because their large
exposure to Greek, Portuguese, Spanish, Italian, and Irish bonds made these banks themselves
questionable credit risks.
Reports that Germany was preparing plans to stabilize its banks in the event of a Greek default,
which was at the time becoming increasingly more likely on growing doubts that it would receive
additional aid needed to keep it from defaulting on its bonds in the coming weeks.
Thus a conservative trader or investor trading off daily or weekly charts would likely avoid being
long EU-based assets, particularly the EUR, until there were further fundamental and technical signs

of stability.

Carry Trade Steps
Here are the basic steps. As with much in this book, we are merely introducing a topic worthy of a
book in itself.

Part 1: Use Fundamentals to Screen Pairs
Like any currency trade, you've still got to be right about the overall direction of the pair. The only
difference is that the pair doesn't have to rise for you to win; all it has to do is hold steady. However,
the relatively narrow interest rate differentials on which you earn your income won't outweigh any
material move against you. So the first step is to evaluate fundamentals and be looking for pairs with
the best chances of longer-term appreciation, because the longer you hold the pair, the more carry
income you earn. You can move in and out of the pair, but doing that often will eat into your income
earnings.

Wide Rate Differentials
Find currency pairs with a wide enough interest rate differential, at least 2.5 percent (250 basis
points), to justify holding it as a long-term carry trade. As a quick guide, Bkassetmanagement.com and
other top content sites typically keep a table of current benchmark central bank rates on their
homepages.

Best Prospects for Rising Rate Differentials
Identify pairs with the best odds for significant changes in the interest rate differentials between the
two currencies. In other words, you'd look for currencies that are most likely to see improving
expectations about the extent and pace of changes in rates relative to the other currency in the pair.
You'd do that by studying the fundamental data most directly related to interest rate expectations, like
recent central bank statements, economic conditions, and inflation outlook, and quality commentaries
on these. For example, from 2009 to 2011, the AUD was in a period of rising rates, whereas the rates
for the USD and JPY were clearly not going anywhere. The rate differences between the AUD and
these others were significant, so the AUDJPY or AUDUSD was a good carry trade as long as risk
assets were rising.
If you're not sure which pairs to investigate, don't worry; plenty of traders already have. Do your
online searches, and ask around in trader forums. It's a hot topic.

Part 2: Apply Normal Technical Analysis Criteria
After applying fundamental analysis to screen for the currency pairs with the best potential for a
change in interest rate differentials between the two currencies, then apply technical analysis and
RAMM to find the pair(s) with the lowest-risk, highest-yield entry and exit, as we would for any
other trade. For example,
Stop losses should risk no more than 1 to 3 percent of your capital, yet be far enough away to
avoid being stopped out of your position by normal price moves for a selected period.

Entry at strong support, and consider staged entries with partial positions.
Choose only trades in which the loss implied by your stop loss is no more than a half to a third of
the distance from likely resistance.
For additional criteria, refer to relevant chapters for details.
Because it takes time to accumulate income from the interest differentials, these trades are ideally
done off of weekly or monthly charts, but there's nothing wrong with using daily charts and aiming for
shorter holding periods in which you move in and out of your selected pairs as conditions warrant.
Note that there are numerous variations on this basic form of carry trade, you don't have to actually
buy or sell currency pairs. For example, you can convert currencies and buy stocks, bonds, or other
assets denominated in the currency of your choice as multimonth or multiyear investments.

Notes
1. Andrew J. Johnson, “Small Businesses Try Hand at Forex,” Wall Street Journal (August 2011),
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424053111903639404576514560310571904.html?
mod=rss_whats_news_us.
2. Joe Weisenthal, “If You Had Bought Swiss Franc in 1970…” Business Insider (August 2011),
www.businessinsider.com/if-you-had-bought-swiss-franc-in-1970-2011-8#ixzz1l9z0UdPr.

CHAPTER 13
Now What? Next Steps
Here's what we've covered and what you should do next.

WHERE YOU’VE BEEN
Chapters 1 through 9 give you the very basics, which you'd find in some form in most forex books, but
with the advantage of greater:
Clarity and detail.
Detail and emphasis on keeping your losses and stress lower, via obsessive RAMM, and focus
on longer-term holding periods needed to exploit the more reliable longer-term trends and
ranges.
Detail and emphasis on discovering which kinds of trading styles fit you best.
While these were of more direct use to traders, long-term passive investors should be very familiar
with this material as well because it will help them make better decisions and lower their risk by
getting better entry points, and by knowing when a planned long-term investment is best abandoned as
a mistake, at least for the time being.
Chapters 10 through 12 are for the more passive long-term investors, showing how you can still
benefit from forex markets even if regular online leveraged spot market trading isn't for you. For many
of you, it won't be appropriate, and that's fine. You can still profit handsomely from forex markets
using the alternatives presented. No one talks about these (maybe because they're relatively new), but
they should, because everyone needs some forex exposure for reasons cited in the introduction,
Chapters 1, 2, and 12. It can lower your currency risk, which can be substantial when you're
overexposed to currencies of mismanaged economies, and can increase your returns.

WHERE YOU’RE GOING
Following are some suggestions for how to proceed now that you've finished the book.
For Traders or Those Seeking Exposure to Forex Trading
Select one or more brokers to start using their practice accounts. You may find after just a few
weeks that you start getting friendly calls from their representative checking on your progress and
encouraging you to start trading with real money. Politely but firmly tell them you want to first
use the practice account for a “number of months” until you become consistently profitable on a
weekly or monthly basis. Usually they'll give you all the time you want. If they don't, then they're
not even making a pretense of looking out for your interests, so move on. See Appendix F, tips on
selecting a broker.

Once you have your practice account, start creating a basic trading system, which again is just
some rules for how you select trades, when you enter and exit, what RAMM rules you'll use, etc.
You'll draw primarily on what we covered in Chapters 2 though 8 (especially 5 through 7). Your
simple systems should include the technical and fundamental indicators you're going to try, your
likely time frame, what percentage of your account you'll risk with any given trade, the riskreward ratio you seek, and so on, as illustrated in Chapters 5–7. Don't drive yourself crazy
making elaborate plans at this stage. The first ones will be glorified guesses. You will change
your systems repeatedly as you experiment with them by simple manual back testing, and gain
experience and insight into what sets of rules work best with which currency pairs. The first goal
is to just get used to always trading with some kind of system (set of rules) in mind, and then
building trading plans based on the RAMM, time frames, indicators, and so forth of your system.
You'll know you're on the right path if you have a written set of rules and can justify every entry
and exit based on those rules, and have each trade fully recorded in a trade journal that you
periodically review. I assign bonus points to those who include screen shots of the charts on
which they based their decisions in their journals, and so on. Successful trading will come
eventually because you, unlike most others, have a way to identify and learn from your mistakes.
Conversely, you'll know you're on the path to failure if you start trading based on hunches that
“just feel right,” or tips, or anything other than a set of rules that you followed. If they don't work,
analyze what the problem is and change your system. Using a trade journal is invaluable because
it forces you to articulate your rules and reasons for what you're doing, including why you may
chose to depart from them in a given situation.
When choosing your technical indicators, remember what we taught in Chapter 9, apply the “gang
of four” principle to select three to seven indicators that give you the different kinds of
information you need. You want to know about the s/r points, trend direction and momentum (or
strength), and have some indication of where the move is likely to halt or make a normal
retracement. Then start manually back testing these indicators for a given currency pair (or other
asset) and time frame (daily, weekly, monthly, etc.) as discussed in Chapter 9. The goal is to find
a set of rules, using these indicators, that tells you when to enter and exit a position. With time
and experimentation you'll find some. The goal isn't to come up with a foolproof system. You just
want to get used to the thought process and find some rules that increase your odds. Again, your
plans and systems may not be great at first; that's normal. They should become successful in time
as you learn from your mistakes and find what kinds of trading styles suit you. If time permits, do
an online search for the various trader forums or social networks and visit them (as well as the
ones we've mentioned) and ask for guidance.
In general, when attempting to refine your system, change only one aspect of it at a time, be it an
indicator, time frame, whatever, rather than making multiple changes. That way you'll know how
each change affects your performance.
After trying assorted combinations of rules for a number of months, you should find a set of rules
that appears promising. The system needn't be amazing. If it keeps your losses low, appears to
produce net profits over a few months, and fits your personal needs (skill level, time to monitor,
risk level, etc.) then you've got a starting point. Start applying this system consistently over a
period of months on your practice account. Get comfortable with using it: how to apply the
indicators, change time frames, draw trend lines, enter stop and limit orders, keep track of funds

in your account, use tools like pip value calculators (so you know how much cash is at risk from
your entry and stop loss points), and so on.
Start looking for the kind of low-risk, high-potential yield trades we discussed. That is, those that
allow you to enter near strong support, with likely resistance much farther away from your entry
than your stop loss, so that you have planned 1:2 risk-to-reward ratios or better.
At the same time that you're getting comfortable with the mechanics of applying your plan, you
should be getting used to using a trading journal as covered in Chapter 5, both to plan trades and
to review them afterward, noting what went right, what didn't, and any ideas you have about why
and how to improve. You'll find that you'll improve format and organization of your journal to
include the information you need and make the review and learning process easier.
From the preceding steps you should have some idea of how much time you can dedicate per day
or week to both practice trading and continuing education. You'll also be getting a better idea of
the trading styles and time frames that work best for you.
Seek out sources of analysis and further education for your daily and/or weekly reading.
Consider those mentioned earlier and those suggested in Appendix A on free trader resources.
While you're there, explore the available trader forums, and don't be shy about asking for
guidance on the various aspects of how to proceed, like recommended reading, trading methods,
and so on.
Strongly consider joining at least one social network as another source of advice and guidance.
Those simply looking for some forex exposure to hedge currency risk and who aren't interested in
trading should stick to the ideas covered in Chapters 0 through 12.
Finally, visit www.thesensibleguidetoforex.com periodically. In addition to bonus material,
we're planning to have a growing archive of training material, as well as conservative trading
ideas.
For Those Seeking Currency Diversification for Longer-Term Investment Portfolio
Study long-term forex trends as mentioned in Chapter 2 and make a list of the currencies and
currency pairs with the strongest long-term trends. As of this writing, I'd be seeking exposure to
the CAD, AUD, CHF, NOK, SEK, and SGD. The CNY is likely to make the list when China
produces trustworthy data, but currently I view the AUD as a safer way to play China, for a
variety of reasons. Those without USD exposure should have at least some, possibly a lot if your
long term outlook for the EU, Japan, and UK is very bearish, or you believe China is due for a
major slowdown. As reckless and inept as the US deficit management has been, leaders of the
aforementioned nations appear determined to be as bad or worse. Moreover, most of the USD's
fundamental troubles can be corrected by a change in political will to do so. It does not suffer
from an ungovernable currency union like the EU, or a terminally aging population like Japan. As
bad as the USD may look, it may yet prove to be one of the relatively stronger currencies by
default. Moreover, if things get really ugly, the US is still arguably the least vulnerable of any
nation to economic or military coercion. Should the Euro-zone ultimately contract to include only
the nations with a hard money tradition, the EUR could then be attractive.
Decide what percentage of your portfolio of stocks, bonds, or other assets you want denominated
or exposed to these currencies. Then research them as you would for any domestic asset. You
may need to locate new research sources and identify salient differences in tax and transactional
details, but otherwise the research and criteria you seek are similar.
