Contents
Foreword
Preface
Disclaimer
Chapter 1: Be Prepared
Fundamental and Technical Analysis
Conclusion
Chapter 2: Let’s Get Started
Patterns
Volume
Price Momentum
Price and Moving Averages
Combining the Four Dimensions
Beyond Technical Analysis
Financial Astrology
Keeping Count
Conclusion
Chapter 3: Essential Patterns
Open
High
Low
Close
Candlestick Patterns
Divergence Patterns
Diagonal Patterns
Patterns Continued
“M” and “W” Patterns
Head and Shoulders Patterns
Rectangle Patterns
Saucer Patterns
AB=CD Patterns
Gaps
Conclusion
Chapter 4: Elliott Waves
Wave 1
Wave 2
Wave 3

Wave 4
Wave 5
Extended Waves
Three-Wave Structures
Corrective 3-3-5 Patterns
Corrective 5-3-5 Patterns
Rule of Alternation
Fibonacci Retracement and Projection
Application of Elliott Wave Analysis
Conclusion
Appendix: Ratios and Wave Relationship
Chapter 5: Volume
Basic Volume Plots
Reading Volume
Money-Flow Indicator
Deciphering Trend with Volume
Conclusion
Chapter 6: Key Indicators
Momentum Oscillator
Queuing Theory of Moving Average Crossovers (QMAC)
MACD
Average Direction Index
Protective Stops
Conclusion
Chapter 7: Applied Systems
Catching That Trend
Built-In Color Trend Indicator
Supporting Moving Averages
Trade on Daily Signals
Trading with Ichimoku
Conclusion
Chapter 8: Formulating Your Trading Plan
Determining Your Time Frame
Selecting Stocks
Risk Management
Determine Entry Points
Determine Exit Strategies
Reality Check
Chapter 9: Financial Astrology

Using Lunar Cycles in Trading
How to Pick Winning Stocks
Choosing the Best Periods for Trading
Market Projection
Conclusion
Appendix 1: Ruling Planets of the Natural Horoscope
Appendix 2: Effects of Various Aspects
Appendix 3: Characteristics of the Twelve Zodiac Signs
Appendix 4: Formulas in MetaStock Format
Glossary
Bibliography
About the Authors
Index

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing company in the
United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Australia and Asia, Wiley is globally
committed to developing and marketing print and electronic products and services for our
customers’ professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Trading series features books by traders who have survived the market’s ever
changing temperament and have prospered—some by reinventing systems, others by getting
back to basics. Whether a novice trader, professional or somewhere in-between, these books
will provide the advice and strategies needed to prosper today and well into the future.
For a list of available titles, please visit our Web site at
www.WileyFinance.com
.

Copyright © 2012 by John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd.
1 Fusionopolis Walk, #07-01, Solaris South Tower, Singapore 138628
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as expressly permitted by law, without either the prior written permission of
the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate photocopy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center. Requests for permission should be addressed to the Publisher,
John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd., 1 Fusionopolis Walk, #07-01, Solaris South Tower,
Singapore 138628, tel: 65–6643–8000, fax: 65–6643–8008, e-mail:
enquiry@wiley.com
.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional
where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising
herefrom.
Other Wiley Editorial Offices
John Wiley & Sons, 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, P019 8SQ, United
Kingdom
John Wiley & Sons (Canada) Ltd., 5353 Dundas Street West, Suite 400, Toronto, Ontario, M9B
6HB, Canada
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd., 42 McDougall Street, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
Wiley-VCH, Boschstrasse 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
ISBN 978-1-118-33917-6 (Hardcover)
ISBN 978-1-118-33918-3 (ePDF)
ISBN 978-1-118-33919-0 (Mobi)
ISBN 978-1-118-33920-6 (ePub)

Foreword
Like many practitioners, my collection of books on technical analysis has grown over the years.
In the initial years, during the 1980s, when such books were few and far between, I bought
almost indiscriminately. Later, as my knowledge of the markets and analytical methods grew,
my purchases became more selective. This well-written book, which focuses solely on the
equity markets, will occupy an important place on my bookshelf along with Robert’s first little
gem of a book, Power Tools for Traders (1997).
Timing Solutions for Swing Traders has something for the novice as well as the seasoned
trader. The first few chapters serve as both a learning aid for beginners and as a refresher
course for the more experienced practitioner, while the latter chapters show how to combine
and use the indicators and methods discussed to create a trading plan.
I found Robert’s innovative approach to multiple moving averages, which he calls the
Queuing Theory of Moving Average Crossovers (QMAC), to be very interesting. I particularly
liked the way he dissects the interplay of long-term moving averages to anticipate major
support and resistance levels and his use of colored candlesticks to differentiate between
trending and non-trending phases based on simple but effective concepts.
It is the last chapter, on financial astrology, written by Peter, that I found to be most
fascinating. Having never explored this area before—and not being very esoterically inclined—I
found the material quite easy to follow. The astrology-based approach to selecting stocks, in
combination with the more accepted methods of analysis along with the section on projecting
future trends based on planetary influences, definitely merits further study. I hope the authors
explore this fascinating new area in more detail, with examples from other equity markets and
perhaps the currency markets, in a future publication.
I have known Peter since he was a rookie broker, and in recent years, I have come to know
Robert as well. I have observed firsthand how their approach to analyzing the stock market can
produce quite extraordinary results. Robert and Peter have many more innovative indicators
and methods between them and I look forward to reading their next offering.
Ananda Bhaumik
Private Banker
Hong Kong

Preface

The title of this book, Timing Solutions for Swing Traders: Successful Trading Using Technical
Analysis and Financial Astrology, defines its mission. It is all about detecting trend and exploring
the best timing to trade. The first eight chapters are authored by Robert and cover
comprehensive aspects of technical analysis, including a summary on the Theory of Elliott Wave
Principle and the Queuing Theory of Moving Average Crossovers. The last chapter was
contributed by Peter. It introduces the application of financial astrology to picking stocks and
cycles, to finding the best period to trade, and to ascertaining the best period of your personal
Part of Fortune.
The book covers four dimensions related to trend analysis: price patterns, volume, price
momentum, and price moving averages. The objective is to decipher price trend and to develop
the most effective and profitable method to trading. It will show how to use financial astrology
in lunar cycle trading, select stocks with the best potential, and find the best time for profitable
trading. And, it will introduce readers to the emerging trend of fusing technical analysis with
cycle analysis and financial astrology.
This book is not about day trading of stocks and is not intended for day traders. Day traders
are very short-term players and they make trades during market hours in one trading day. This
is a book primarily for people who work from “9 to 5” and who do not have the spare time to
monitor their stocks closely during the day. They are more likely to be position traders who
make longer-term trades that may last from several days to several months, and can only find
time after office hours in the evening. Many of them would like to have some sort of technical
analysis method that can help them take better care of their trades, but they just do not know
where to start. They would like to read charts. However, there are so many methods and
systems to pursue that the whole process becomes somewhat overwhelming. This book is
dedicated to these people who want to be more proactive traders. It will demonstrate a simple
and practical approach to doing just that. It will not require the purchase of expensive and
sophisticated software, as we are dealing only with end-of-day data and not real-time data.
Other than the examples of charts in financial astrology, we are using MetaStock software and
end-of-day data subscribed from data vendors to illustrate the charts. The formulas in the
samples of this book are enclosed for the benefit of the readers. These formulas are not
exhaustive or definitive; readers can of course amend them to suit their own style of trading.
MetaStock also has many other popular indicators and systems available.
Our purpose is to show swing traders or non–day traders a concise method to trading and
encourage them to take the subject to a higher level, particularly in configuring the indicators
they will use for trading, management of risk, and use of financial astrology. In financial
astrology, we try to show the application of astro-harmonics and how they are being used with
common technical tools to give an extra edge in timing market turns. Every trader has his or her
own habit of trading, such as preferred use of certain indicators and methods, and margin of
acceptable risk. Most traders, however, depend entirely on the standard formula of a packaged
program. Many of them have good ideas of what indicators they would like to use in their
trading, but lack the time and patience to implement their concepts into a program. Others are
still exploring different options to develop a trading program that suits all their criteria.
After countless hours of research, we have put together the essentials of a practical course
on technical analysis in nine chapters, as described in Chapter 2, Let’s Get Started. We feel the
subjects covered will be more than adequate for trading stocks. There are many dos and don’ts
regarding interpretation of analysis that we have encountered in our 35 years of trading

experience, and the book describes how to interpret developing patterns and trends. It also
gives examples of how mechanical trading systems are designed, and how a standard indicator
could be incorporated into a system. Taken together with the emerging trend of fusing
technical analysis with cycle analysis and financial astrology, it is hoped the book may serve as a
useful guide and inspire novice as well as veteran traders to further their techniques in the
areas covered.
How to gauge different market scenarios is one of the trickiest issues facing traders every
day. To help develop your trading techniques, the book contains many charts illustrating how to
assess and analyze different kinds of conditions. The charts have been produced from various
vendors’ software programs. By the end, traders should have further advanced to an all-around
understanding of using technical analysis in formulating a profitable trading plan
In the book, we have demonstrated a simple concept of a trading method. The stocks are
selected at random and are not selected to fit the system. The system is not a mechanical or
fully automated trading system, and parameters of the system and indicators are not
optimized. The basic formulas used in the system are provided for reference. The formulas are
simple and easy for traders to use. It should be easy also to adjust them for incorporation (with
their personal system design) into their personal trading method. The program has a built-in
color trend indicator to alert traders to the state of the stocks in the short time frame, and to
validate the short-term trend by the medium-term indicators of the system. In essence, we
want to trade when the short-term trend is moving in tandem with the medium-term trend,
and trade signals are executed only in the direction of the longer trend frame. The application
requires discretionary traders’ decisions to anticipate market outlook for the intermediate
trend. It uses candlestick patterns, Elliott Wave Principle, volume, and the interplay of three
longer-term moving averages to decide whether relevant price rallies or corrections are
expected to be short-lived or the start of a longer trend. It is also recommended to include a
protective stop-loss system in every trading system. There are no standard parameters or
definitive methods for applying stop-loss. Each trader has to define his own acceptable risk to
set the appropriate stop-loss. For reference, the formula of a simple indicator for stop-loss has
been included together with formulas of the various indicators mentioned in the book.
To a large extent, the success of trading depends on your frame of mind, money
management ability, and trading methodology. Having a healthy frame of mind is a prerequisite
for trading stocks. The mind greatly influences how you trade and how you manage your
financial risk. Trading is all about making mental decisions. A frame of mind that is negative,
tired, or anxious is not the right condition for trading anything. On the other hand, a healthy
and cheerful attitude and learning to take a break from trading are indispensable factors in the
unceasing quest to achieve the best trading results.
Robert T. H. Lee
Peter A. Tryde

Disclaimer
This book is sold with the understanding that neither the publisher nor the authors are engaged
in offering legal, accounting, or other professional services or advice by publishing this book.
Thus, if legal or financial advice or other expert assistance is required in a specific situation, the
services of a competent professional should be sought to ensure that the situation has been
evaluated carefully. The publisher, the authors, and any other person connected with the
writing of this book disclaim any liability for any losses that may be sustained as a result of
applying the methods suggested in this book.
This book should not be deemed to be a definitive investment guide and should not be taken
to replace advice from a qualified financial planner or other competent professionals. There are
always risks in investments of almost any kind and there is no guarantee that the investment
methods described in this book will be profitable. System trading is a risky business and can
result in heavy losses. Do not assume that the theories, systems, methods, or indicators
mentioned in the book would be profitable or that they will not result in losses. The trading
systems presented in this book are for guidelines only and serve to illustrate the relative
theoretical results between different trading systems. They were produced from various
technical analysis software programs developed by various vendors who are in no way
responsible for the results. They do not warrant or make any representation regarding the use,
or the results of the use of their software programs, or written materials in terms of
correctness, accuracy, reliability, or otherwise. They are not responsible for any losses resulting
from investment decisions based on information obtained through the use of the systems.
Certain information contained herein has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable,
but which cannot be guaranteed as to accuracy or completeness, and is subject to change
without notice. The risk of using any trading program or method rests with the user.

CHAPTER 1

Be Prepared

Trading stocks is 100 percent mental. Trading means the buying and selling of one or multiple
stocks to take advantage of price fluctuations, rather than just holding on to the stocks
indefinitely. Success as a trader is a difficult achievement; it has never been easy. Added to this,
the 2008 financial crisis brought to the market a new age of volatility, as well as new thinking
and new approaches in trading. If you do not know what you are doing, trading will now be
even harder.
Markets consist of a multitude of investors from individuals to institutions, each with their
own investment agenda. In aggregate, investors’ emotions of greed, fear, hope, and despair
dictate market fluctuations and directional movements. Similarly, the psychological state of a
trader may affect his trading results because his emotions influence his decision making. To
outperform the market and to succeed in trading, a trader needs to take charge of his
emotions. To start off, he requires a patient and confident mind. If a trader is confused about
what he is doing, the probable win ratio is zero and he might as well give up trading. The mind
is mischievous and it often is the primary cause of failures. The market is always creating noises
and if a trader fails to control his inner noises, how can he listen to what the market is trying to
tell him?
In
Figure 1.1
, the Hang Seng Index showed that the market was in an optimistic mood for about 55
months from April 2005 to its exuberant high in October 2007. Fear began to take over in
November 2007, and the market finally cracked in January 2008. The financial crisis struck
across the globe, creating panic among investors. The collapse of confidence lasted about 13
months until the U.S. government began to announce concerted efforts to calm investors. Hope
returned to the market with the announcements of the government’s financial stimulus
packages.
FIGURE 1.1
Greed, Fear, Hope, and Despair form the four psychological states of the market, swinging
sentiment states from optimism to pessimism and repeating it all over again, time after time.

After approximately eight months, the buoyancy of the market slowed down and investors
seemed to return to an anxious mood. Notice that the volatility of the market, shown by the
wide monthly range, was greater toward the end of the greed and fear states of the market.
The top window shows that the momentum oscillator stayed in the oversold zone for 12
months during the state of fear. During the optimism state, the momentum oscillator stayed
continually above the oversold line and rose steadily to the overbought zone, supported by
increasing volume.
The market is always dynamic. It is oblivious to your wins or losses. But too many traders
blame the market for their failures. They do not consider for a moment that their failures are
caused by a lack of preparation and irrational emotions. Whatever the cause, the best solution
is just to move on to the next trade with a clear mind and in good spirits. A good trader should
not dwell on the past. A trader’s ego is his greatest hindrance to being successful. The best
approach is to turn emotion into a positive tool. Whenever any negative emotions stir in him, a
trader should take it as a wake-up call. He should not allow such emotion to blur his judgment
and derail his trading plan. The most common fault in trading is overthinking—dwelling on the
past and not keeping to the trading plan. Besides thinking too much, a trader may believe he is
always correct and will refuse to accept the reality of the market. Thus, he should make extra
effort to understand more of himself and his emotion, so that he will trade better and feel
better.

FUNDAMENTAL AND TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
When a stock price is compared to its intrinsic value, it is termed as “fundamental analysis.”
When the stock price is looked at from the angle of supply and demand, it is known as
“technical analysis.” Each method of analysis is just as useful and important as the other, and
both methods should be used in combination when reading the market and selecting stocks.
However, it must be remembered that all analysis serves as a means to estimate the value of
stocks.
Fundamentals refer to the financial information reported by the listed companies, which is
always historical. A fundamental analyst calculates the stock’s future worth based on the
company’s past reports, and projects its value and relative earnings. Fundamental analysts
study the change in profitability of the corporation relative to its revenue trend, costs, and
expenses, which will include an analysis of its business competition, its capitalization, and the
strength of its business sectors. Fundamental analysts should be aware of the potential risk of
change between the company’s latest report and its current situation. It takes generally at least
three months from the cutoff date of the financial statements to have the audited results
published. During that period, many things can happen and, as a result, the published results
may not reflect the current state of the company’s financial position. Nonetheless, one would
be foolish to ignore all fundamental analysis.
Fundamentals are more determinable and deliver fewer surprise punches. After studying
companies with consistent earnings and growth, it should be possible to forecast these
companies’ earnings per share (EPS) and the likely range of their revenue and earnings growth.
It might also be possible to estimate the return on equity and the dividend payout ratio based
on each company’s dividend policy. However, it would be difficult to do so for companies with
volatile levels of revenue and earnings. Investors look for steady growth in both earnings and
dividend payout over time. This does not mean the investment dividend has to increase each
year. The dividend payout ratio is an important sign. If the dividend payout ratio starts to make
a series of declines, business may be turning negative and it should trigger an alert to reassess
the investment.
Fundamental analysis is more likely to be based on a uniform standard, which makes it easier
for investors to understand the results. Fundamental and technical analyses are not alike, but
there is a growing trend to combine both forms of valuation. In fundamental analysis, the P/E
ratio is the indicator most often used. It indicates the multiples of earnings represented in the
current price. However, the indicator has a major flaw; it tends to distort if and when the
current information and the cycles of an industry have changed since the latest earnings report.
In spite of this, the P/E ratio has remained a popular and decisive indicator used by many
analysts for valuing stocks. Other ratios are important as well, including dividend yield and price
to book value.
Investors have a tendency to overvalue stocks by pushing their prices to extreme levels,
especially when such stocks are in hot demand for one reason or another. In such instances,
P/E ratios can be used as a comparative guide of the stock’s value against other similar stocks in
its industry, and when the P/E ratios are well above a specific level, the ratio can be used to
eliminate such stocks. Also, P/E ratios make it practical and easy to search for stocks trading at
a bargain price. Sometimes, stocks may have extraordinarily low P/E ratios because they may
be priced too conservatively and the potential for profit is limited. Other times, very low P/E
stocks should be avoided, as there may be certain undisclosed reasons why they are being
shunned by knowledgeable investors. A more sensible way, perhaps, is to tread the middle
