182.00
171.00

163.99

162.00
153.00
144.00
136.00
128.00
121.00
114.00
108.00
101.00

Aug Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

05

Feb

Mar

Apr

May
Created with TradeStation

FIGURE 205.8.2. You thought all the tulips and bulls had been exhausted in the
tulipomania in 2000? Silly you. There is an inexhaustible supply. All you need is a
company and a story and an underwriter to peddle it. Sometimes there are even
earnings. Sometimes the earnings are even real. Sometimes the earnings are skating
uphill on roller blades. And sometimes the characters are so appealing that you are
almost willing to buy the IPO at face value. But not if you are a cynic as all technical
analysts are. Google was rumored at $200 or more on the IPO. The editor offered to
sell all of it at that price and throw in the Brooklyn Bridge for free. This offer (well,
there may have been other factors also) knocked the IPO down to $85 (still an arrant
speculation), but only insane, not unreasonable. The oversubscription in an innovative offering revealed that the tulip virus was not dead, but very much alive and
infecting not just the same old suspects, but many new ones. We love a horse race
and this is a great one. Notice the obvious defensive lines and support and resistance.
How long Google can defy gravity (a galactic P/E ratio) remains to be seen. Prudent
gamblers will have a stop identified. On this chart, for the long-term gambler it might
be in the 182 area. For the more agile gambler it might be failure of the support
around 204, or closing of the breakaway gap there. No opprobrium is attached to
the-term gambler. In fact bolder investors (competent readers of this book) should
take a flyer from time to time with about 5% of their capital. This, of course, is the
flyer which should have been taken. The breakaway gaps in October and April,
operating against disbelief, were signals of enormous technical strength. And Google
went to 475!! The lesson here, which must be learned and relearned and…ad infinitum… is: Trust the chart. Ignore the story.

AU3772_book.fm Page 419 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty-four

The Probable Moves
of Your Stocks
At first glance, all stocks appear to move helter-skelter without rhyme or
reason, all over the lot. All stocks go up at times, and all go down at times —
not always at the same time. But we already have seen that in these rises
and falls stocks do follow trends, make various typical patterns, and behave
in a not completely disorderly manner.
It is also true that each stock has its own habits and characteristics, which
are more or less stable from year to year. Certain stocks normally respond
to a Bullish Phase of the market with a very large upsurge, while others,
perhaps in the same price class, will make only moderate moves. You will
find that the same stocks which make wide upward swings are also the ones
which make large declines in Bear Markets, whereas the ones that make less
spectacular up-moves are more resistant to downside breaks in the market.
In Appendix A you will find in a discussion of Composite Leverage that
there are stocks which ordinarily move many, many times as fast as others.
We do not know, for example, whether a year from now Glenn Martin
(EN: Read, Microsoft, Ebay) will be moving up or down, but we do know, and
it is one of the most dependable things we know, that whichever way it is
going, it will be covering ground much faster than American Telephone and
Telegraph. (EN9: Even T accelerated into hyperspace after its ill-advised divestment
of local Bells. And, unlike the leopard, completely changed its spots.) These differences of habit, of course, are due to the size of issue, floating supply, nature
of business, and leverage in the capital structure, matters we have touched
on briefly before. As a matter of fact, we are not especially concerned with
why the differences exist. We are interested mainly in what the differences
are, and how we can determine them.
This is important: stocks which habitually move in a narrow range,
although excellent for investment purposes where stability and income are
the chief desiderata, are not good trading stocks. A fairly high degree of
sensitivity (EN: volatility), with wide percentage moves, is necessary in order
to make possible profitable commitments that will cover costs and leave a
net gain. In order to be in a position to make a profit, you should see the
probability of at least a 15% move in your stock.
How then are you going to tell which stocks are most sensitive and
potentially most profitable?
419

AU3772_book.fm Page 420 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

420

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

CORN PRODUCTS REF.

CFG
100
96
92
88
84
80
76
72
68

80
76
72
68
64
60

SCHENLEY DIST.

SH

1945

1946

64
60

56

56
52
46
44

1946

1945

40
36
32
28

M

J

J

A

S

O N

D

J

F

M A M

J

J

A

S O

M

J

J

A

S

O N D

J

F M A M

J

J

A

S O

FIGURES 206 and 207. Some stocks move faster than others. We have already
noticed that low-priced stocks have much larger percentage moves than high-priced
issues. But even between two stocks, which may, at a particular time, be selling at
the same price, there are enormous differences in their habits. Furthermore, these
habits change very little from year to year.
Here we have a weekly chart of Corn Products Refining Company (left), covering
an 18-month period in the years 1945 and 1946. Also a chart of Schenley Distillers
(right) for the same period. The average price between the high and low on these
charts is about 64½,the same for both stocks.
However, during this period, we see “CFG” moving between a low of 58½ and a
high of 71, a range of 12½ points, while at the same time, “SH” has moved between
28½ and 100, a range of 71½. A thousand dollars put into outright purchase of “CFG”
at its extreme low would have grown to $1210 at its extreme high, whereas the same
amount used for outright purchase of “SH” at its low would have grown to $3510.
Your gain of $2510 in “SH” would be more than 10 times the gain of $210 in “CFG,”
and this without using margin.
It is not likely, of course, that you would actually purchase either stock at the
extreme low, nor sell at the extreme high. The point we are bringing out here is that
there are enormous differences in the swing habits of stocks.
Individual stocks have their characteristic habits, and so do some entire industries.
In general, the food stocks, of which “CFG” is one, are stable and slow-moving. On
the other hand, liquor stocks make wide moves on any general advance or decline
of the market. At this time “CFG” had a Sensitivity Index (EN9: Or beta equivalent) of
0.58, whereas Schenley’s was 2.05.

A
S
O
N

D
J
F
M
A
M
J

J
A
S
O

M

J

J

A

S

O

1945

N

D

J

F

M

A

M

J

1946

J

A

S

EB

O

The Probable Moves of Your Stocks

FIGURES 208 and 209. Another example of the difference in swings between stocks. In this case also, the stocks show the same
average price between the high and low of the period, and both stocks are plotted for the same 18 months in 1945 and 1946.
Although in a lower price range and even though the disparity in their Sensitivity Indexes is less, there is a considerable difference
in their actions. Cuban–American Sugar (left), a food stock, shows a range of 76% from its low of 16½ to its high of 29, whereas
Electric Boat (right), a shipbuilding concern, advances more than 140%.

J

16

16

J

18

18

M

20

20

14

22

22

1946

24

24

1945

26

26

ELECTRIC BOAT

Chapter twenty-four:

14

28

36
34
32
30

CSU

28

CUBAN - AMERICAN SUGAR

30

36
34
32

AU3772_book.fm Page 421 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

421

AU3772_book.fm Page 422 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

422

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

By examining the record of a certain stock for a number of years back,
and comparing the percentage moves it has made with the percentage moves
of the market as a whole, you can obtain a fair picture of that stock’s habits.
You will not be able to say, at any particular moment, “This stock is now
going to move up 25%,” but you can say, with a good deal of confidence,
“If the market as a whole makes an advance of 10%, this stock will probably
advance about 25%.” Or, conversely, of course, “If the market goes down
10%, this stock will very likely go down at least 25%.”
Many methods have been used for measuring and checking these percentage-move habits, differing only in detail. Indexes on several hundred
important stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange have been computed by the authors and are presented in Appendix A.
EN: Current day betas may be compared with these and/or substituted for them
in other computations suggested in this book, for example in Composite Leverage
formulas. The reader may read in the following text “beta” for “Sensitivity Index”
and avoid the annoyance of excessive notation by the editor.
The Indexes are relative. They show that stocks with a high Sensitivity
Index (EN: beta) will move much faster in either Bull Markets or Bear Markets
than stocks with low Indexes, and about how much faster, relative to the
other stocks.
EN: As is obvious to the experienced reader, and new to the inexperienced,
Magee’s method predates the compilation of betas. Beta measures the systematic
risk of a stock, or for those who are not into financial industry jargon, the sensitivity
of a stock to the market. Thus, if the market moves one point, a stock with beta of
1.5 will move 1.5 points. And a stock with a beta of .5 will move a half a point.
Approximately. Or more or less. For readers who like to roll their own, I offer here
the formula for computing the beta of a stock, which is somewhat more sophisticated
than Magee’s method:

(( N )(Sum of XY )) − ((Sum of X)(Sum of Y ))
where
N = the number of observations
X = rate of return for the S&P 500 Index
Y = Rate of return for stock or fund.
The general investor may not be avidly interested in this calculation, especially
when the beta is readily available at Value Line and is published regularly by Merrill
Lynch.
Of equal or greater importance is the individual risk of a stock which professionals like to determine by computing its volatility. Somewhat akin to Magee’s
“normal range for price,” volatility measures the variability of a stock’s returns
(price movement). The general investor should be informed that the study of volatility is an extremely sophisticated subject, and that professionals expend enormous

AU3772_book.fm Page 423 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-four:

The Probable Moves of Your Stocks

423

resources dealing with the question. Numerous methods are used to derive volatilities, but these mainly come into play in options arbitrage and professional trading
on exchange floors.
For the private investor it is sufficient to know of the dangers of this arcane
area. Before venturing into “volatility plays,” the newcomer should take a postgraduate course. For the general investor who wants to know enough to calculate his
own volatilities (not recommended or necessary), I note the formula here:
To calculate the volatility of a portfolio, first find the difference between each return
and the average. Then square each difference and add them together. Divide the sum
by the number of returns minus one. This result is known as the variance. Finally,
take the square root of the variance to get the volatility. Combining these steps into
a formula:
n

•
•
•
•
•
•

2
Step 1: Calculate the average return.
R i − μ)
(
Step 2: Calculate the deviation of each return.
σ = i =1
Step 3: Square each period’s deviation.
n −1
Step 4: Add them together.
Step 5: Divide the sum by the number of periods – 1. This is the variance.
Step 6: Take the square root.

∑

The less punctilious investor may find volatilities at optionstrategist.com,
cboe.com, as well as other locations findable at google.com.

AU3772_book.fm Page 424 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

AU3772_book.fm Page 425 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

chapter twenty-five

Two Touchy Questions
This chapter is directed largely to the new trader, to the investor who has
followed other analytical methods, and to the investor type who is now, for
the first time, taking up the technical trading of stocks for the shorter term.
The first question here is the use of margin. There are many people who,
knowing of the disastrous margin calls of 1929 and the staggering way losses
can be multiplied against one in a margined account during a sharp break
in the market, take the attitude that the use of margin is intrinsically bad,
dangerous, foolish, and unsound. They will tell you that they are willing to
risk their own money, but they never speculate on borrowed funds. They
will tell you that by buying securities outright, they are safe against any kind
of break in the market.
There is something to this line of argument, although very often you
will find that the arguer has not really thought the case through all the way.
If he had, he might realize that, in buying outright stocks which are sensitive
or highly leveraged, he is accomplishing almost exactly the same thing as
someone else who buys more conservative stocks on a margin basis. Very
often, despite his feeling that outright purchase is more conservative than
margin buying, he is a speculator at heart. He is not really interested in
dividends and a stable investment. Rather, he is looking for “something with
appreciation opportunity.” And because he is not facing the issue squarely,
he may fall into expensive errors.
To be thoroughly consistent here, a man who shuns the risks inherent
in margin trading should shun the risks of leverage and volatility. He should
avoid risk, forget “opportunity for appreciation,” and confine himself to
sound, income-producing stocks of a sort that will not fluctuate widely.
If we are looking for stability, we do not want excessive fluctuation. And
there are securities that provide stability. In this work, however, we are
looking for “swing power.” We want the highest degree of fluctuation we
can handle safely. We can secure this by buying outright a stock that is
normally subject to fairly broad swings; that is, a stock with a high Sensitivity
Index (EN: beta). We can get the same effect by trading in a stock of more
conservative habits, but increasing the Composite Leverage (EN: or simple
leverage) by using margin. (The method of computing and comparing Composite Leverages in various situations is covered in Appendix A.)
Let us assume, for example, that we will buy 100 shares of a rather
speculative stock, which we will call UVW, on an outright basis. It has a
425

AU3772_book.fm Page 426 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

426

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

Sensitivity Index of 1.50, and now sells (let us say) at 20. At the same time,
we buy a somewhat less speculative stock, XYZ, also selling at 20; but in
this case, we buy on 70% margin, putting up only three quarters of the value
of the stock. In a general advance affecting both of these stocks, the probabilities would favor a somewhat greater percentage move in UVW than in
XYZ. If such a general rise should bring UVW to 30, we might expect XYZ
to rise to a lesser degree, say to 28. Now the advance of 10 points on the
$2000 invested in outright purchase of LVW will represent a gain of $1000
or 50%. The advance of XYZ to 28 on the $1400 invested at 70% margin will
mean a gain of $800 or 57%. In other words, we have, by the use of margin,
increased the effective leverage of XYZ; made it, in fact, slightly more speculative than UVW.
The effect of margin use is simply to accentuate or increase the sensitivity
of a situation. It is a mechanism for assuming more risks and, therefore, more
opportunities for faster gains. Assuming you are willing to assume risk (as
you must be if you intend to make speculative commitments), it is simply
a matter of knowing approximately what risks you are taking and whether
you can afford to take them. The danger in margin lies in cases where the
customer grossly overextends himself, taking on a risk far beyond his ability
to protect himself. This will not happen if he sets a reasonable limit to his
total leverage (EN: put another way, his portfolio risk).
The margin transaction is simply a matter of buying (or selling short)
more stock than you have money to pay for in full. The purchase of a home
on a mortgage is essentially a margin transaction. The financing of business
operations, using borrowed money for part of the capital, is the same. The
buying of anything where the purchaser puts up part of the capital and
borrows the rest, using the value of the purchased property as security for
the loan, is exactly similar to the trading of stocks on margin. In each case,
any change in the value of the property will cause a larger net change in the
value of the margin capital. Thus, if a man buys a home for $100,000, paying
$50,000 cash, and later sells it for $150,000 (an increase of 50% in the value
of his property), he will benefit to the extent of $50,000 profit, or 100% on
his invested capital.
The question of margin calls, being “wiped out” on margin transactions,
will seldom, if ever, come up if you protect yourself properly by maintaining
stops at all times or by closing out the transaction when it has violated certain
predetermined danger points. Needless to say, if you have allowed a trade
to go so bad that it has reached the minimum margin maintenance range,
the best thing is to take your loss and forget it; not try to meet the margin
call. But again — this need not ever happen.
As we will see in discussions of sensitivity and leverage, stop levels, etc.,
there are certain limits which can be fairly well defined, beyond which you
cannot safely venture. If you could buy stock on a 10% margin, as you could
at one time, you might have visions of highballing a thousand dollars up to
a million in one Bull Market. But that is not a reasonable hope, and it is not

AU3772_book.fm Page 427 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

Chapter twenty-five:

Two Touchy Questions

427

safe to risk your capital on a 10% margin, since, in many cases, your perfectly
logical purchase would sag enough to wipe you out entirely before going
ahead to the normal advance you expected. EN: In a nutshell, the risk of trading
commodities and futures. In judging how much margin you can or should use,
within the limits of margin trading laid down by law, you must take into
account the method of trading you are using, the amount of adverse fluctuation you must expect in the normal operation of your method, the nature
of the stock you are dealing with, that is, its Sensitivity Index and Normal
Range-for-Price (EN: at the risk of being repetitive, beta and volatility) at the time
you make the original commitment.

Short Selling
The other touchy question is that of short sales. A majority of traders avoid
the short side of the market. Six out of seven you meet, who have bought
or sold stocks, will tell you that they would never sell a stock short under
any conditions, at any time. In fact, short selling is limited, very largely, to
skilled professionals. EN: The private investor, because of his fears and prejudices,
voluntarily grants this “edge” or advantage to professionals. Magee dealt with this
subject at length in Winning the Mental Game on Wall Street, which I wholeheartedly recommend to the reader. EN9: The widespread proliferation of hedge funds
in the new century attests to the frustration of professional managers with mutual
fund rules requiring them to maintain only long positions. Even with this development short selling by the general investor remains a limited technique — to the
disadvantage of the nonprofessional.
Now, if you have studied long-term charts (weekly and monthly), and
the daily charts in this book, you will recognize several facts about the action
of markets. Most stocks go up most of the time. There are almost always
more advances than declines in the list of most active stocks published each
day. Stocks, in general, advance about two thirds of the time, and go down
only about one third of the time. (EN9: Probably a truth over the long term, but
in the modern context ample short opportunities exist.)
Furthermore, most of the news releases, rumors, and comments in the
press related to stocks and corporate affairs have to do with the brighter side
of industry. It is only natural that executives, public relations people, and
the reporters themselves should be interested in forward-looking developments, new processes, expansion of facilities, increased earnings, and the
like; and that such items should prove more newsworthy than less optimistic
reports.
These various factors may explain why “the public” is always Bullish.
The public is always hoping and expecting stocks to go up all the time. If
stocks are rising and in a Bullish Phase, the public expects them to go still
higher. If stocks have declined sharply, the public will argue that they are
now better buys than before and must surely go up soon. But it is up, up UP,
always up, in the mind of the public.

AU3772_book.fm Page 428 Saturday, November 18, 2006 5:29 PM

428

Technical Analysis of Stock Trends

And, yet, examination of the long-term charts, covering the action of the
Averages over many years, will show you that through these long periods,
the levels rise and fall about the same amount.*
This being the case, it must follow that stocks come down as far as they
go up, and since they go up about two thirds of the time, they must come
down much faster than they go up. This you will find is true. The angles of
decline in the Averages and also in individual stocks are usually steeper in
Bear Market Moves than the advances are in Bull Market Moves. A corollary
to that is that profits can be made faster on the downside of the market than on
the upside.
Such profits are made by selling short. It is important if you are a trader
that you understand the meaning of a short sale. When you sell a stock short,
you borrow that stock from someone who owns it, and then you turn around
and sell it to someone else, agreeing with the original owner to replace his
shares at some unspecified time in the future. All of the detail of this transaction is, of course, handled by your broker. Shares of most stocks of large
outstanding issue are available for loan at all times in the hands of brokers,
and your own broker has access to them. The mechanics of this borrowing
and sale are interesting; you may wish to get from your broker the whole
story of how these operations are carried out. For all practical purposes,
however, all you need to do is tell your broker what you wish to sell and
leave the rest to him.
He will advise you if, by any chance, the stock you have selected for
short sale is not available for loan. Another practical point, although of minor
consequence, is that a slight additional tax is assessed against short sales.
EN: In that gains on short sales are not eligible for long-term capital gains tax.
It is important also, if you are a trader, that you accept opportunities to
sell short as readily as you go long stock. Unfortunately, there are psychological barriers to short selling. There are, for example, the unintelligent and
entirely irrelevant slogans about “selling America short.” There is the feeling
on the part of many who are poorly informed that short selling is the
somewhat unethical trick of the manipulator. Others have the impression
that, in selling short, one is hoping to profit by the misfortunes of others at
times of disaster and Panic. It is not the purpose of this book to persuade
anyone to sell stocks short, any more than it is our purpose to advise anyone
who shouldn’t to speculate on the long side of the market. But so many
questions are constantly raised, even by fairly sophisticated investors, about
* This principle probably still holds even after the extension of the Dow Industrial Average into
new all-time high ground since late in 1954. EN: And into the economic stratosphere at the turn of
the millennium with predictions — we will not assess their credibility — being made that the Dow will
in good time reach 36000. In spite of the long-term “secular trend” and the history of these recent
years (EN: 1950s and 1960s) in the Average, it seems safe to assume that there will continue to
be major general declines in the future as there have been in the past. As a matter of fact, a
number of important stocks have been in Major Downtrends throughout the past few years of
the mid-20th century Bull Market: Celanese, for example, Kresge, Lorillard, Schenley, and
Studebaker–Packard. EN: Compare the historic Bull Markets of the 1990s and Kodak, Avon, Xerox,
General Motors, and IBM, all of which were under their 1990 benchmarks in 2000.
