
 I will tell you the secret of getting rich on Wall Street. [Pause.] Close the doors. You try to be greedy when others are fearful and you try to be very fearful when others are greedy. § 

 When Buffett lectured, he would stand behind the desk and awkwardly bend his right arm, so that his elbow was at his hip and his hand was at his cheek, as if he were holding the phone. Then he’d take his left arm and hold the right elbow, as if to make sure it didn’t fall off. And he would stare above his pupils’ heads, as if he were afraid to make eye contact. 
 Yet he spoke with such an obvious fervor that the students were spellbound. Elizabeth Zahn, a Spanish teacher who enrolled with her husband, an IBM salesman, in 1953, was so struck by Buffett’s manner that she made detailed descriptions of his every gesture. In particular, Zahn was puzzled by a seeming contradiction. Buffett was very “low-gear,” but at the same time, he was intensely committed to what he was saying. His informal manner was set off by a focused quality that was other than casual. “Even in low gear, I was mesmerized by him,” Zahn recalled. 
 When he got deep into a thought, he would pace the room, shyly keeping his head down, and just as Zahn was afraid he’d bump into the wall he’d reverse course and do it again the other way. And nothing could distract him. Buffett would go from one point to the next, railroad-track straight, as if he had a blueprint of the lecture pasted to his brain. 
 Unlike Graham, Buffett would not give stock tips. The students would try to get one, indirectly. They would ask about a company with seeming casualness, but Buffett would just laugh them off. Zahn even read aloud a plaintive ballad: 

 Biz-whiz counselor 
 This is our cry 
 Why oh why won’t you tell us what YOU buy? 

 Buffett laughed—but no dice. The young salesman actually advised the class not to take tips from brokers. He said they weren’t to be trusted. 64 The entire subject of sharing information touched a nerve, as though he considered it fraught with the potential for abuse on either side. He regarded the majority of tips as a waste, which is why brokers passed them along. But good ideas— his ideas—he treated as intensely private. He regarded them as his creation—as a tiny bit sacred. 
 Howard Buffett, who had retired from the House in 1952, thought his son was an honest broker, and admired him for it. 65 According to Herbert Davis, a colleague, “Howard was proud of Warren long before he had a record to be proud of. He talked about him all the time, and with great affection.” And Warren was extremely loyal to his father. 
 In 1954, a Nebraska U.S. Senate seat opened up due to the death of Senator Hugh Butler, and Howard—who very much wanted to succeed him—was a front-runner for the nomination. But moderates in the Republican Party quietly tried to stop him. The matter came down to the party’s state central committee, which met with an air of intrigue at the Cornhusker Hotel, a GOP watering hole in Lincoln. 
 According to Warren’s sister Doris, Warren secretly went to the Cornhusker to support their dad and overheard the painful news that Howard had been beaten by Roman Hruska, a moderate. ‖ Doris said, “He went down there to help our father. He overheard them in the coffee shop. He came back and said, ‘Daddy’s throat was slit from ear to ear.’ ” 66 
 As far as others recalled, Warren didn’t mention it. His father had been crushed, and Warren had been crushed with him. But like his father, Warren kept it buried. And then, just as Howard’s dream was squashed, Warren’s was realized. Ben Graham called and said the religious barrier had been dropped 67 —and offered Buffett a job. Without bothering to ask his salary (it turned out to be $12,000 a year), Buffett was on the next plane. 68 
 The Wall Street that greeted Buffett had been in a time warp. The old men who ran it lived in fear of another Depression. The younger men had never arrived. Of the most recent graduates of the Harvard Business School, merely 2.9 percent had gone to Wall Street. The new generation considered it unglamorous. Outside its gargoyled stone fortresses, black limousines waited for men with weary memories. Inside, it was masculine, aging, and unchanged by technology. At Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Beane, customers’ orders were borne on tiny slips of paper, which were dropped onto conveyor belts to “ride jauntily on to [their] appointment with destiny.” 69 
 The country, it is true, was prospering, and the Dow Industrials had topped 380. But caution was the watchword. The last time that stocks had been so high had been 1929. It was hardly necessary to remind people such as Graham what had happened then . He was so wary of what he termed the “new speculation” that he kept handy a set of Moody’s manuals from 1914—as if anything more recent were suspect. 70 
 Graham-Newman was located in the Chanin Building, on 42nd Street. It had a stock ticker sitting beneath a glass bubble, making a perpetual clicking. Buffett, one of a half-dozen employees, shared a small room with Walter Schloss, and later with Tom Knapp. He wore a gray cloth jacket, like the others, and spent his time as they did, perusing the Standard & Poor’s Stock Guide for companies. According to Knapp, Buffett 

 felt very confident right from the start. I think his father offered to give him, or lend him, some money. He said no. He wanted to make a record starting from zero . And he wanted to make a very clean type of income. A couple of times I remember saying, “Gee, Warren, this thing isn’t reported” [to the government]. And he said, “I’m putting it in.” 

 Graham-Newman, a mutual fund, bought stocks according to a few select techniques. Graham’s favorite was to hunt for stocks that traded at one-third less than their net working capital—in other words, stocks that were insanely cheap. a When Buffett or another associate found such a stock, he would take it to Graham. (The associates did their best to avoid Jerry Newman, Graham’s partner, who was as nasty as Graham was sweet.) And Graham would decide on the spot whether to buy it. It wasn’t a matter of persuading Graham. A stock either met his criteria or it didn’t. He did it by the numbers. 
 Buffett’s trouble was that he could find more stocks than he could sell. He went through the S&P guide—for him, a grown-up version of One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000 —like a buzz saw. He seemed to be bursting to replicate Graham’s entire oeuvre. 
 One time, a broker in Philadelphia offered him an obscure insurance stock known as Home Protective, at 15 a share. There was no published material on it, and hence no way of valuing it. But Buffett went to the state insurance office, in Harrisburg, and dug up some numbers. What he saw convinced him that Home Protective was a steal. However, Jerry Newman rejected it. So Buffett and Knapp bought it for their own accounts. A bit later, Home Protective went winging up to 70. 71 
 Buffett also found a block of Union Street Railway of New Bedford, Massachusetts, which was trading at 45 and had $120 a share in cash alone. 72 Buffett couldn’t believe his luck—but Graham wasn’t convinced. Once again, Buffett bought it for himself. 73 
 Still, Buffett managed a coup in his first year on the job. In 1954, Rockwood & Co., a Brooklyn chocolate concern, offered to redeem some of its stock in exchange for cocoa beans, of which it had a large inventory. Buffett deduced that trading the stock for beans and simultaneously selling beans on the commodities market—where the price had soared—would produce a huge profit. As he later described it: 

 For several weeks I busily bought shares, sold beans, and made periodic stops at Schroeder Trust to exchange stock certificates for warehouse receipts. The profits were good and my only expense was subway tokens. 74 

 Such a trade, taking advantage of price discrepancies in separate markets, is known as arbitrage. Arbitrage was a staple in the Graham-Newman playbook—but Buffett was a couple of subway stops ahead in terms of spotting the application. 
 In fact, Buffett was quicker at everything. Graham would amaze the staff with his ability to scan a page with columns of figures and pick out an error. But Buffett was faster at it. Howard Newman, Jerry Newman’s son, who also worked there, said, “Warren was brilliant and self-effacing. He was Graham exponential.” 
 Warren and Susie had rented a garden apartment in White Plains, a suburb. As in Omaha, Warren was watching his pennies. Not long after they arrived, they had a son—christened Howard Graham. Though Warren was making a good living now, he borrowed a crib for him. 75 
 Within their circle of young Wall Street couples, Warren and Susie, for different reasons, were both causing a stir. Roxanne Brandt, whose husband, Henry, was a stockbroker, said: 

 They were different from the other young people we knew. They were simpler, or at least they seemed that way. Susie was very interested in why I had not had any children. She drew me out. 

 Compared to the stiff, Brooks Brothers culture of the fifties, Warren and Susie were noticeably less formal. At a dinner at the Buffetts’, after young Howie had begun to crawl, Roxanne Brandt had a sense of “kids and toys all over the place.” The Buffett children weren’t “put away” like children at Manhattan dinner parties; they were part of the evening. 
 What interested Henry Brandt, who had graduated at the top of his Harvard Business School class, was that Buffett knew more about stocks than anyone. And he explained them so simply and unassumingly. When the Brandts entertained the Buffetts and other Wall Street couples, the group would settle into a curious ritual. After dinner, the men would go into the den and Buffett would nestle into a comfortable black-and-white-tweed club chair with sturdy armrests. And the other men, who were older than Buffett, would sit on the floor and listen to Buffett talk—demurely explaining the universe, just as he had at fraternity parties. Roxanne Brandt called them “Jesus and the apostles.” 
 Graham thought that Buffett was the cream of his disciples 76 and recognized a similarity between them. One day, as they were going to lunch at a delicatessen near the office, Graham said, “Money won’t make any difference to you and me, Warren. We’ll be the same. Our wives will just live better.” 77 
 Graham was a thoughtful boss, and got Buffett a movie camera and a projector when his son was born—a generous gift for an employee of only a few months. 78 On Graham’s own birthday, he would give out presents to the employees, figuring that he was the lucky one to have been born. 79 
 But Buffett doesn’t seem to have worked as closely with Graham as he had hoped. 80 In Buffett’s words, Graham “had this kind of shell around him. Everybody liked him. Everybody admired him [and] enjoyed being around him … but nobody got close.” 81 The same could have been said of Buffett. 
 In any case, Buffett was frustrated at Graham-Newman. The fund had only $5 million in capital, which didn’t leave room for many investments. The partners also ran a private fund, Newman & Graham, but between the two operations, the office was managing only $12 million—a very small sum even then. 82 And Graham was so nervous about the stock market that he asked the partners of Newman & Graham to withdraw some of their capital. 
 In short, Buffett’s opportunities were limited. At one point, he told Bob Dwyer, his high school golf coach, that he was learning a lot, but also that Graham was “sitting on $4 million, trying to decide when to get back in the market.” It was hardly how Buffett wanted to start his career. 
 Ironically, shares of Graham-Newman were in such demand that they traded at a $200 premium to the portfolio value, roughly $1,200. (Many people bought a single share just to see the portfolio.) Had he wanted to, Graham could have turned his operation into a big business. But Graham’s first goal was never to make money—it was to avoid losing any. 
 Because of his conservatism, he refused to analyze companies subjectively, preferring to stick to his mathematical guidelines. According to Irving Kahn, an assistant to Graham, when anyone tried to talk to Graham about a company’s products, “Ben would look out the window and get bored.” 
 Kahn said Buffett and Graham “argued on this”—a phrase that rings of overstatement, given the temperament of each. But their differences were real. Buffett was interested in what made one business better than another and wanted to pursue it. But Graham, who mistrusted corporate managements, discouraged Buffett from visiting companies. 83 And his formulaic approach cost him. 
 Walter Schloss tried to get him to buy Haloid, a humdrum photographic business that owned the rights to a technology known as xerography. The stock was at $21, of which Haloid’s ongoing business accounted for about $17. Thus, Schloss figured that for $4 you could take a flier on the Xerox machine. But Graham wasn’t interested in any speculation. He said, “Walter, it’s not cheap enough.” 84 
 When the market roared ahead, Graham grew more nervous still. In 1955, the Dow hit 420—10 percent above the high of 1929. There was no reason, a quarter century having passed, why it should not have risen. But the old-timers kept looking back to 1929. Congress was so unnerved by the prospect of a bust that it scheduled hearings. John Kenneth Galbraith went before the Senate Banking Committee in March with proofs of his forthcoming study of 1929, The Great Crash —which shocked the market into a sharp one-day swoon. Was the next crash on its way? 
 No one knew, but the real purpose of the hearings was not the stated one; it was the desire, recurring in politicians, to get to the bottom of Wall Street. From the time of J. P. Morgan, Sr., each generation had summoned the priests of finance to Washington. When Graham appeared, J. William Fulbright, the committee chairman, was all too cognizant that he had the era’s preeminent stockpicker on the stand. Eager to unearth his secrets, Fulbright inquired about every aspect of the trade. At times, he sounded like a man about to call his broker. 

 THE CHAIRMAN : 
 Mr. Graham, in connection with your own company … How do you determine whether a special situation is undervalued or not? 85 

 Graham patiently took the senator to school. At one point, when Graham voiced skepticism of stock options, Fulbright tried to flatter him. 

 THE CHAIRMAN : 
 I agree with your views quite often. 

 MR. GRAHAM : 
 Senator, I have no intention of shaping my views with the expectation of your agreement. 

 Finally, Fulbright got to the heart. 

 MR. CHAIRMAN : 
 One other question and I will desist. When you find a special situation and you decide, just for illustration, that you can buy for 10 and it is worth 30, and you take a position, and then you cannot realize it until a lot of other people decide it is worth 30, how is that process brought about—by advertising, or what happens? 

 Rephrasing: What caused a cheap stock to find its value? 

 MR . GRAHAM : 
 That is one of the mysteries of our business, and it is a mystery to me as well as to everybody else. [But] we know from experience that eventually the market catches up with value. 

 However elliptical, his answer was the basis for Buffett’s career. Stocks would rise to value; therefore, an investor who trusted his judgment could be patient. 
 But Graham himself no longer cared. In 1956, a year after the hearings, he retired to Beverly Hills, to teach at the University of California at Los Angeles and pursue a life of financial writing, skiing, and the classics, accompanied by his wife, and also by a French mistress. He gave much of his money to charity and offered that anyone who died with more than $1 million to his name was a fool. 86 
 Graham-Newman’s record had been very good, if not spectacular. Over its twenty-one-year life (1936–1956) it had earned an average of nearly 17 percent a year, compared to just under 14 percent for the Standard & Poor’s index. The figure, though, does not include what was easily its best investment, its GEICO shares, which were distributed to Graham-Newman’s stockholders. Investors who kept their GEICO through 1956 did twice as well as the S&P 500. 87 
 But Buffett, quietly investing on his own, had done better. Since leaving college in 1950, Buffett had boosted his personal capital from $9,800 to $140,000. 88 And now that he had a kitty, he was eager to go “home”—to Omaha—yet again. Standing on the train platform surrounded by a sea of New York commuters didn’t seem like a life to him. 89 
 In the spring of 1956, he and Susie rented a house on Underwood Avenue, two blocks from the Buffett grocery. This time, Buffett had no thought of Working for anyone else. On May 1—virtually as he arrived in Omaha—he organized a pool for family and friends. Seven limited partners—sister Doris and her husband, Aunt Alice, Doc Thompson, his ex-roommate Chuck Peterson and his mother, and Dan Monen, his lawyer—put up $105,000. Buffett, the general partner, put in $100. It was a minuscule sum, but Buffett was running money not for his father or for Ben Graham, but for a partnership of his own: Buffett Associates, Ltd. 
 Around that time, Homer Dodge, a physicist and Graham-Newman investor, asked Graham the question that had occurred to not a few of his investors: “Who will carry your mantle?” Graham suggested Warren Buffett. When Dodge was driving west for a summer vacation, he stopped in Omaha, a canoe strapped to his car. He had a brief chat with Buffett and left for the great outdoors—having agreed to put in $120,000. 90 
 Buffett now had three tiny partnerships, which he ran from his bedroom. And he had begun to envision that his family pool might become something more. In August, he returned to New York for the final stockholders’ meeting of Graham-Newman Corp. He mentioned to Ed Anderson, another Graham disciple, that he was thinking of setting up a partnership along Graham’s model—maybe with a $50,000 minimum. Yet who was to say if he could carry Graham’s torch? As the stockholders formally voted Graham-Newman out of existence, an investor named Lou Green offered an ironic eulogy. Green, the head of a Manhattan brokerage, averred that Graham had made “one big mistake”—that of failing to develop talent. Laying it on the line, Green elaborated: “Graham-Newman can’t continue because the only guy they have to run it is this kid named Warren Buffett. And who’d want to ride with him?” 91 

 * The New York Society of Security Analysts was established three years later, in 1937. Graham was a cofounder. 
 † In later public comments, Buffett shielded Graham. He liked to joke that after he had volunteered, “Ben made his customary calculation of value to price and said no.” 
 ‡ He wasn’t bluffing. After he left Wharton, Buffett had lunch with Rep. Jasper Bell, the father of his friend in Washington. The congressman said Buffett “knew more about tax law than any lawyer in the country.” 
 § This excerpt is from an off-the-cuff talk to Capital Cities/ABC, in 1987. His classroom lectures were not taped. 
 ‖ Howard had vilified Eisenhower in the 1952 primaries and backed Ike’s right-wing opponent, Robert Taft. The then Nebaraska governor, Robert Crosby, later recalled: “The party was badly split between Eisenhower and Taft. Buffett was in the conservative wing. I was in the moderate wing. When Hugh Butler died, there was a big fight in the central committee—my recollection is, at some room of the old Cornhusker Hotel. I was on the telephone to my close political friends. I got them geared up to do what they could for Roman Hruska. I felt—why not be brutally frank?—Roman was a close friend.” 
 a Net working capital is the total of current assets such as cash, inventory, and receivables (but not including plant and equipment) after deducting all liabilities.

Buffett: The Making of an American Capitalist 

   Chapter 4 BEGINNINGS 

 A series of market decisions does add up, believe it or not, to a kind of personality portrait 
 A DAM S MITH , T HE M ONEY G AME 

 With the partnerships up and running, Buffett was troubled by a seemingly bizarre concern. As he wrote to “Big Boy” (Jerry Orans), he was afraid that his estate would eventually be so big that the money might spoil his children. He couldn’t figure out “the logical thing to do with the dough.” 

 This is no problem now but viewing things optimistically it may become one and my thinking produces no results. I am sure I don’t want to leave a barrel of money to my kids, unless I do it at an elderly age when I have time to see what the tree has produced. However, how much to leave them, what to do with the balance, etc. bothers me considerably. 1 

 Buffett was twenty-six. He had modest savings and no steady income. Another young man fretting over his unearned millions might be worthy of a snicker, yet in Buffett there was no hint of bravado. He knew, as much as anyone can, that he would be rich—not just successful, but rich enough to have trouble figuring out what to do with it all. He had anxiety over spending his “dough”—before, indeed, he had any—but not over making it. 
 At a time when his accomplishments were modest, Buffett’s awesome self-confidence was the thing that propelled him. In 1957, he was managing a mere $300,000 for just a few relatives and friends. If he was ever to be more than a quiet stockpicker in Omaha, Buffett would need capital , and lots of it. And if Buffett was to raise capital, what was there—besides that yawning self-assuredness—that would induce investors to trust him? 
 Buffett had no track record as an independent operator. He had nothing, on paper, to indicate that he was worthy of people’s trust. And he did not want mere discretion over people’s money, he wanted absolute control over it. He wanted no one to answer to for his decisions on stocks—no wary customers as at Buffett-Falk, no skeptical bosses as at Graham-Newman. 
 By now, Buffett was familiar with virtually every stock and bond in existence. Line for line, he had soaked up the financial pages and the Moody’s books; day after day, he had built up a mental portrait of Wall Street. He could measure each stone against the skyline, and there was no one else whose analysis he trusted better than his own. 
 Writing to Orans, he could critique the leading mutual funds, dispense advice on Treasury securities, and rip the conventional wisdom as regards investing for capital or income in a couple of breathless paragraphs. And all of that knowledge he focused on a single, unrelenting purpose. When Orans wrote for advice on mutual funds, Buffett breezily replied: 
