
338

//

exit trades using the modified standard exit

// strategy along with the neural
iflentrypasted
//

signal

exit

z 0) (

initialization and exits for longs on entry day

limprice

I entryprice

+ pt1im

* exitatrLcb1;

stpprice

= entryprice

- mstp

* exitatr[cbl ;

ts.exi~longlimit(,A',

limprice);

339

ts.exitlo*gstop~‘B’,

srppsice);

if(prd[cbl > thresh)

ta.exitlongclose('C');

1
e1ae if~entryposted < 0) (
/I initialization and exits for shorts on entry day
limprice - entryprice - ptlim * exitatr[cbl;
stpprice = entryprice + mmstp * exiratr[cbl;
ta.exitshortlimit('o', limprice);
t~.exiCshortst~p('E', atpprice);
if(prdLcbl < loo.o-thresh, te.exirshortclose('P'l:
)
else (

The code fragment above implements the logic of the exit strategy. The parameters ptlim and mmsrp are set to 4.5 and 1.5, respectively; these are the values
that gave the best overall portfolio performance (see Table 14-1, Chapter 14). The
thresh parameter, i.e., the threshold used to generate exits based on the neural forecasts, is optimized. The logic of the additional exit can be seen in the “if’ statements that compare the prediction of the network with the threshold and that post
an exit at close order based on the comparison. The parameter thresh is stepped
from 50 to 80 in increments of 2.
RESULTS OF THE NEURAL EXIT TEST
Baseline Results
Table 15-l contains data on the baseline behavior of the MSES. The threshold
..was set high enough to prevent any net-based exits from occurring. The numbers
in this table are the same as those reported in Chapter 14 (Table 14-I) for an opti-

346

ma1 fixed stop and profit target. The abbreviations in Table 15-l may be interpreted as follows: SAMP = whether the test was on the training or verification
sample (IN or OUT); NETL = the total net profit on long trades, in thousands of
dollars; NETS = the total net profit on short trades, in thousands of dollars; PFAC
= the profit factor; ROA% = the annualized return-on-account; ARRR = the
annualized risk-to-reward ratio; PROB = the associated probability or statistical
significance; TRDS = the number of trades taken across all commodities in the
portfolio; WIN% = the percentage of winning trades; AVTR = the average profit/loss per trade; and TRDB = the average number of bars or days a trade
was held.
There was great consistency between in- and out-of-sample performance:
The average trade lost $1,581 in-sample and $1,580 out-of-sample; both samples
had 39% winning trades; and the risk-to-reward ratios were - 1.46 in-sample and
- 1.45 out-of-sample.
Neural Exlt Porlfolio

Results

Table 15-2 is the standard optimization table. It shows the in-sample portfolio performance for every threshold examined and the out-of-sample results for the
threshold that was the best performer during the in-sample period.
In-sample, an improvement in overall results was obtained from the use of
the additional neural network exit. The average trade responded to the threshold in
a consistent manner. A threshold of 54 produced the best results, with an average
trade losing $832. There were 41% wins and an annualized risk-to-reward ratio of
-0.87. The numbers represent a dramatic improvement over those for the baseline
presented in Table 15-l. Out-of-sample, however, no improvement was evident:
Performance was not too different from that of the optimal MSES without the
neural signal element. In the tests conducted using the neural net for entries, performance deteriorated very significantly when moving from in-sample to out-ofsample data. The same thing appears to have happened in the current test, where
the same net was used as an element in an exit strategy.

Baseline Performance Data for the Modified Standard Exit Strategy
to Be Used When Evaluating the Addition of a Neural Forecaster
Signal Exit
SAW 1 NETI. 1 NETS 1 PFAC 1 RCA% / ARRR I PRO6 I l-R06 1 WIN% [ AVTR ITRDB
IN
I -19761
-4073)
0.831
-10.31
-1.461
1.0000~
38261
391
-15811
6
OUT
I
-9741
-163zl
0.641
-21.61
-1.451 O.BS651
16491
391
-15501
8

CHAPTER 15

341

Adding AI to Exits

T A B L E

15-2

Portfolio Performance of the Modified Standard Exit Strategy with an
Added Neural Signal Exit Evaluated over a Range of Threshold
Parameter Values

Neural

Exit

Market-by-Market

RBBUitB

Table 15-3 shows the performance data for the portfolio, broken down by market,
for the optimal MSES with the added neural signal exit. The results are for tire
composite exit with the best threshold value (54) found in the optimization presented in Table 15-2.
Live Hogs was the only market that was substantially profitable in both samples. A number of markets (e.g., the Deutschemark and Japanese Yen) showed
strong profitability in-sample that was not evident out-of-sample. On the long side,
the NYFE and Unleaded Gasoline were profitable in both samples. This could easily be a statistical artifact since, in-sample, a large number of markets had profitable performance on the long side.
TEST METHODOLOGY FOR THE GENETIC EXIT
COMPONENT
Since it is almost certain that different rules are required for the long side, as opposed
to the short side, two tests are rtm. In the first test, random entries are generated for
long positions using the standard random entry strategy. Any short trades generated
are simply not taken. Rules are genetically evolved for inclusion in the MSES for the
long positions. In the second test, only short entries are taken. Any long entries generated by the random entry strategy are ignored. An attempt is made to evolve rules
that work well as additional elements to the MSES for the short side.

342

T A B L E

I S - 3

Market-by-Market Performance for the Modified Standard Exit with a
Neural Signal Addition Using Random Entries

345

The code above shows the logic of both the entries and exits. The modeltype
parameter controls whether the longs or shorts are tested. Parameters ptlim and
mmsfp are for the profit target and stop (respectively). They are fixed at the same
optimal values used in the neural network test earlier, Each of the three rules is calculated as a series of TRUE/FALSE values, and if all three rules are TRUE, a rulebased exit signal (exitrig) is generated. In the exit code, “if’ clauses have been
added. For example, an exit at the close is generated ifan exit signal is produced
by all three rules being TRUE (exitsig = TRUE). The evolution of rules for the
long and short sides follow the same steps as in the chapter on genetics, in which
similar rules were evolved for use in entries. The same 12 parameter chromosomes,
broken into three genes (each specifying a rule), are employed, and there is no
change in that logic in the current test, Rules for the short side and for the long
side are produced by allowing 2,500 generations to pass (2,500 runs using
OptEvolve). The top 10 solutions for the longs and for the shorts are then tested
on both the in-sample and out-of-sample data.

346

Top 10 Solutions with Baseline Exit
Table 15-4 shows the top 10 solutions found for the long side and for the short
side. In the table, LINE = the line or generation number; PROB = the probability or statistical significance (the decimal point is omitted but implied in the formatting of these numbers); $TRD = the average dollars-per-trade; TRDS = the
total number of trades taken; PFAC = the profit factor; and AROA = the annualized return-on-account.
The best solution for the longs was discovered in the 845 generation of the evolutionary process. For the short side, it was in the 1,253 generation. ln contrast to the
situation when rules were evolved for use in an entry model, none of the solutions
were profitable. However, Table 15-5 shows that when genetically evolved rule-based
exits were added, substantial improvement over the baseline was achieved.
The rules in Table 15.4 were translated into plain language. The rules for
exiting a long position were as follows: If the close on the current bar is greater

TOP I 0 Solutions from the Evolutionary Process
for Longs and for Shorts

than a 12.bar exponential moving average (EMA) of the closes, but is less than a
49-bar EMA of the closes, and the current bar represents a 6.bar new high, then
exit the long trade. The rules seem to be searching for a situation in which the
longer trend is down, but a short-term retracement against the trend has occurred
and has reached a point where completion of the retrxement is likely and the
longer-term downward trend will resume-a sensible point to exit a long position.
The rules for the short side suggest that an exit should occur if the close on the
current bar is greater than the 16-bar EMA of the closes and a 22.bar simple moving average of the closes, and if the MACD is sloping down. The specific MACD
used employs a 6-bar EMA for its faster moving average and a lo-bar EMA for
its slower moving average. The idea encapsulated in these rules seems to be that
it is wise to close out short positions if the market, when smoothed, still appears
to be moving down, but the most recent close broke above two moving averages,
indicating the market may be starting a new trend up.
Results

of

Rule-Based

Exits

for

Longs

and

Shorts

Table 15-5 presents the performance data for best of the top 10 solutions (longs
and shorts) for the MSES with the addition of genetically evolved, rule-based
signal exits. Trades were entered randomly. The table is broken down into results
for long positions and results for short positions. It is further broken down by sample and test. Sample (IN or OUT) and test may be BSLN (when the rules were not
used) or RULE (when the mles were. used).
On the long side, in-sample, the addition of the genetically evolved rule-based
exit substantially reduced the loss on the average trade from a baseline of $688 to $324.
The percentage of winning trades increased from 41 to 43%. The annualized risk-to-

T A B L E

19-B

Performance of the Modified Standard Exit Strategy with an Added
Genetically Evolved Rule-Based Signal Exit When Trades Are
Entered Randomly

reward ratio improved from -0.35 to -0.17. Out-of-sample, the benefit of the genetically evolved mle-based signal exit was maintained, but not quite as dramatically. The
loss on the average trade was cut from $1,135 to $990. The percentage of winning
trades increased from 39 to 41%. The risk-to-reward ratio improved slightly from
-0.61 to -0.60. Overall, adding the genetically evolved rule-based element to the exit
strategy worked. In contrast to the neural exit, the benefit was maintained out-of-mm
ple, suggesting that curve-fitting and over-optimization were not major issues.
On the short side, similar benefits were observed in both samples. In-sample,
the addition of the genetically evolved rule-based element reduced the loss on the
average trade from a baseline of $2,084 to $1,645. The percentage of winning
trades remained unchanged. Paradoxically, the annualized risk-to-reward ratio
worsened somewhat, going from - 1.09 to - 1.15. Out-of-sample, the loss on the
average trade dropped substantially, from $1,890 in the baseline test to $1,058,
when the rule element was active. The percentage of winning trades rose from 38
to 40%, and the annualized risk-to-reward ratio improved, from - 1.02 to -0.73.
Again, the addition of the genetically evolved rule-based signal exit to the MSES
worked and continued to work out-of-sample.
Market-by-Market
for Longs

Results

of

Rule-Based

Exits

Table 15-6 contains information regarding the market-by-market performance of
the MSES for the long side, with the added rule-based signal exit. Several markets
showed profitability in both samples: the NYFE, Light Crude, Unleaded Gasoline,
and Live Hogs. Other markets were profitable in-sample, but lost heavily out-ofsample (and vice versa). The consistency between in-sample and out-of-sample
results was not high.
Market-by-Market
for Shorts

Results

of

Rule-Based

Exits

Table 15-7 shows the same market-by-market breakdown as in Table 15-6, but
only the short side is represented. More consistency was evident between in-sample and out-of-sample performances for the short side than for the long. Most
notably profitable in both samples was the Japanese Yen. Light Crude, Unleaded
Gasoline, Feeder Cattle, Live Hogs, Soybean Meal, and Coffee were also profitable in both samples.

CONCLUSION
Several important points were demonstrated by the above tests. First, neural networks hold up less well in out-of-sample tests than do genetically evolved rulebased solutions. This is no doubt a result of the greater number of parameters

Market-by-Market Performance of the Modified Standard Exit with
Added Genetically Evolved Rule-based Signal Exit When Tested
Using Random Long Trade Entries

an

involved in the neural network model, as compared with the rule-based models
being used. In other words, the effects of curve-fitting were damaging to the neural network solution. Also discovered was the fact that the addition of a sophisticated signal exit, whether based on a neural net or a set of genetically evolved
entry rules, can greatly improve an exit strategy. When the more robust, genetically evolved rules were applied, the performance benefits obtained persisted in
out-of-sample evaluations.
The neural network and the rule templates (but not the actual rules) that were
used in developing the signal exits were originally developed for inclusion in an

350

T A B L E

15-T

Market-by-Market Performance of the Modified Standard Exit with
Added Genetically Evolved Rule-Based Signal Exit When Tested
Using Random Short Trade Entries

an

entry model. When the rules were used in an entry model, it was acceptable for
them to generate rare event trades. In an exit strategy, however, rules that tire more
frequently would be more desirable. There is every indication that a set of rule
templates (and ways of combining the rules to obtain signals), specifically
designed for use in an exit strategy, would provide much better results than those
obtained here. The same should be true for neural networks.

WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
Curve-fitting can be bad not only when building entries, but also when
building exits.
n Sophisticated technologies, including genetic algorithms, can be effectively used to improve an exit strategy.
. Even crude efforts to improve exits, such as those carried out here, can
enhance profits by several hundred dollars per trade.
n

Conclusion

A long road has been traveled since beginning the study of entry and exit strate-

gies. Sometimes the trip has been tedious and discouraging; at other times, stimulating and surprising. As usual after extended journeys, the questions “What
knowledge has been gained?” and “How may that knowledge be applied?’ beg to
be answered. The first question will be addressed by a successively more detailed
examination of the results: going from discoveries made about the portfolio performance of entire classes of models, to more specific model-order combinations,
down to an inspection of individual markets and how they are best traded.
The perspectives taken in the following discussions of what has been
achieved are analogous to views from an airplane flying at night. At first, the plane
is at a very high altitude: All that can be seen when looking down are large patches of darkness (classes of models that are ineffective or lose) and some patches of
light (classes of models that, overall, work fairly well or, at least, perform better
than chance). This view provides a basic idea of which models are, overall, viable
relative to the entire portfolio of tradables.
The plane then descends. More detail is seen. It becomes evident that the
brightest spots are often formed by clusters of light having various luminosities
(model-order combinations that are, to one extent or another, profitable).
Occasionally the dark patches also contain small isolated points of brightness
(successful model-order combinations amid approaches that usually are ineffective). At this level, a number of dim areas can be seen as well (model-order combinations that are not profitable, but that have better than chance performance that
could be enhanced if combined with a good exit).

Finally, landing is imminent. It is possible to look inside the bright spots and
see their detail, i.e., the individual markets the various model-order combinations
trade best. The second question above can now be addressed: By identifying the
consistently profitable (across samples) model-order combinations and the markets best traded by them, a good portfolio trading strategy can be developed. At
this time, it will become clear that out of all the studies performed during the long
trip, enough has been learned to assemble a lucrative portfolio of systems and tradables. By way of demonstration, such a portfolio will be compiled and run with
the standard exit strategy.
THE BIG PICTURE
For this perspective, each class of entry model (e.g., all trend-following moving
average models, all breakouts, all small neural networks) was examined in its
entirety. All the tests for each model type were averaged. Out-of-sample and
in-sample performances were separately evaluated.
By far the best out-of-sample performer was the genetic model: Out of all the
models, it was the only one that showed a substantial profit when averaged over
all the different tests. The profit per trade was $3,271.
Next best, in terms of out-of-sample behavior over all tests, were the small
neural networks. The neural network models were broken down into those for
small and large nets because curve-fitting appeared to be a serious issue, especially affecting large nets. The breakdown was a natural and easy one to accomplish
because, in the tests, each model was tested with one small and one large network.
Out-of-sample, all the small neural networks taken together averaged a loss of
$860 per trade. This indicates a significantly better than chance entry in that random entries produced an average loss of over $2,000, with a standard deviation of
slightly under $400.
Going down in quality, the next best overall approach involved seasonal&y.
Altogether, all tests of seasonality models showed an average loss of $966 per trade.
Three of the moving average models (crossover, slope, and supportIre&
tance) followed the performance of seasonality. These models, when averaged
across tests, lost around $1,500 per trade, which is close to the $2,100.per-trade
loss expected when using random entries. In other words, the moving average
models were only marginally better than random.
All the remaining models tested provided entries that were very close to random. Cycles were actually worse than random.
In-sample, the genetic models ($12,533 per trade), all the neural network
models (small, $8,940, and large, $13,082), and the breakouts ($1,537) traded
profitably. Out-of-sample, the genetic models continued to be profitable, the nets
were better than chance (although there was significant shrinkage in their performance due to curve-fitting), and the breakouts deteriorated to chance (optimization cannot be a factor in this case).

The next best performers in-sample were the support/resistance moving average
models ($300 loss per trade) and the seasonality models ($671 loss per trade).
Further down the ladder of best-to-worst performers were the lunar and solar
models, which lost $1,076 and $1,067, respectively. Losses in the $1,300 to
$1,700 range were observed for the moving average models. The oscillator and
cycle models exhibited losses of over $2,000 per trade; when taken as a whole,
these models were no better than chance.
It is interesting that the genetic model and the small neural network models
were the ones that held up out of sample. Such models offer great opportunities
for curve-fitting and tend to fail in out-of-sample tests and real trading.
Seasonality, which is only rarely the topic of articles, also exhibited potential. On
the other hand, the most popular methods (e.g., moving average, oscillator, and
cycle models) performed the worst, trading badly both in- and out-of-sample. The
breakout models are noteworthy in the sense that, taken as a group, they worked
well in the past; but, due to increased market efficiency, have since deteriorated to
the point where they currently perform no better than chance.
Table C-l contains the annualized return-on-account (the first line of each modelorder combination) and average dollars-per-trade (the second line of each model-order
combination) data for all the tests (all model and order combinations) conducted for entry
models using the standard exit strategy. The data presented arc for portfolio performance
as a whole. The model descriptions (leftmost column) are the same as used elsewhere in
this book. The last six lines of the table contain data that can be used as a baseline against
which the various entry models can be compared. The baseline data are derived from
using the random entry strategy with the unmoditied standard exit strategy. Mean ROA%
is the average return on account over several sets of random entries; StdLh ROA% is the
standard deviation of the return-on-account. Mean $TRD is the average dollars-per-trade
over several sets of random entries; and StdDev $TRD is the standard deviation of the
dollars-per-trade.
Breakout models had the unique characteristic of being consistently profitable
in-sample across almost every model-order combination tested. Except for the
volatility breakouts, these models performed much better than chance, albeit not
profitably, out-of-sample; i.e., the loss per trade was under $1,000, sometimes under
$300 (the average loss to be expected was around $2,000 with random entries). In
other words, the breakouts, taken together, were better than random. However, outof-sample, the volatility breakouts did much worse than chance: With at-open and
on-stop orders, the model lost more than $5,000 per trade, as though the market’s
current behavior is precisely designed to make these systems costly to trade.
The trend-following moving average models (crossover and slope) all performed slightly better than chance in-sample: They all lost rather heavily, but the
losses were almost always less than $2,000. None of the systems, however, did
very well. Out-of-sample, the picture was somewhat more variable, but had the
same flavor: Most of the models were somewhat better than chance, and one or
two were much better than chance (but still not profitable).
