
Pullback Reversals
Should we conduct a survey among technical traders to get an idea
of the most popular setups around, then any variant of the pull:back

reversal will probably rank high on the list. It is not hard to grasp the
attraction if we consider how often this setup is glorified in trading lit­
erature and how easy it is to cherry-pick perfect examples from virtually
any chart. But how rightfully earned is this reputation, really?
Before we try to answer this, let us examine the characteristics of the
pullback first. In its most classic definition, it is a corrective price swing
that travels somewhat diagonally against the prevailing trend. True as
that is, there are many more variations of the pullback and probably
the majority of them have very little to do with countering a "trend". The

20

Chapter 2

Price Action Principles-Theory

ranging market, for example, is flooded with seesaw motions and half
of them are pullbacks, whichever way you look at it. And then there are
the so-called "corrections in time" that hardly retrace in price at all, yet
are pullbacks nonetheless. Furthermore, since the idea of superior and
inferior moves is a matter of perception to begin with and highly depen­
dent on the time frame of choice, we may rightfully ask ourselves who
is actually countering who at any moment in time in the bigger scheme
of things.
Naturally, it is always best to establish a view on these matters from
one's own perspective and a trader's first task, therefore, is to recognize
the line of least resistance in his chart. If there is dominance to be de­
tected in the current technical picture, any decent retracement within
it is worthy of attention. But there is always a tricky issue to solve: just
when exactly have prices retraced far enough to "safely" anticipate a
favorable turn?
In our discussion on the false highs and lows, we already touched
upon a reversal technique, which was to trade the break from a small
buildup progression in the anticipated lows of a corrective swing (Figure
2 . 5 , Situation 1 , entry above 3). In the following paragraphs, we will dig
a bit deeper into the practice of turning point recognition.
In the wide array of pullback reversal tactics, two popular strate­
gies stand out, both contillning elements that can be implemented in
our own plan of attack. The most universal approach is to measure the
length of the dominant move and then wait for the pullback to retrace
a certain percentage of it. If the trending move is, say, 1 0 points tall,
many traders will wait to deploy their reversal positions until they have
seen a retracement of about 4 to 6 points, so in essence the conven­
tional retracement levels of 40, 50 and 60 percent.
Regardless of how this technique holds up statistically, it is easy to
point out its most apparent drawback: with no further discretion built
in, it needs a relatively wide stop to survive all corrections deeper than
anticipated.
To counter the element of uncertainty to some degree, another popu­
lar tactic is to wait for the pullback to first reach an area of support
or resistance within the trending swing-preferably residing at a cor-

21

Understanding Price Action
rection level of 40 to 60 percent-and then fire in it, in anticipation of
a favorable bounce. This technique can be referred to as waiting for
a technical test. Since most trending swings will show some form of
sideways activity on the way up or down, and not seldom halfway or
thereabouts, corrections back to these levels are highly anticipated and
can make for great bounce candidates indeed.
For a technical test to earn attention, there is no need for a classic
trend/pullback situation. Any kind of correction that hits upon a for­
mer level of support or resistance, major or minor, can be referred to
as a technical test and thus harbors within it a potential for a bounce.
Should one insist on playing a reversal without waiting for buildup, fir­
ing into a technical test is certainly superior over firing into a void. But
there is still a large degree of aggression involved.
A more conservative route, and the one we will explore in more detail
later on, is not to buy or sell straight into a retracement spot, technical
test or not, but to monitor how prices handle themselves in the poten­
tial reversal area first. This wait-and-see tactic is based on the premise
that most pullbacks will not turn on a dime. On our 5-minute frame we
often get to see at least one or two, if not many more bars that reflect a
little bull/bear skirmish right in the anticipated end of the correction.
This not only allows for extra time to assess the likelihood of the rever­
sal itself, it builds up the required tension prior to it, and at the same
time it tends to offer a better view on the exact level of the break.
Obviously, this is not to suggest that by showing a little more patience
we will never get stopped out or tricked into a premature entry-or fully
miss our ride, for that matter; but if we aim to play reversals with a tight
stop, this more conservative route definitely deserves preference over
blindly buying and selling into the market without waiting for prices to
stall first. Let us examine some textbook examples to get an idea of how
these tactics can be put into practice.

22

Chapter 2

Price Aaion Principles-Theory
d

a

situation 1

a

d

Figure 2.6. Pullback reversals are often initiated from a key level of support or re­
sistance. Rather than trading into these levels straightaway in anticipation of an
immediate bounce (both at point e), it may pay to allow the market a little extra time
to set up the turn in buildup fashion.

In Situation 1 in Figure 2.6, pullback d-e represents a classic technical
test in the level of b, which was a function of the earlier sideways activ­
ity within bull trend a-d.
It can safely be stated that the level of b plays a crucial role in this
chart: ( 1 ) it built up pressure towards another leg in the trend; (2) it
worked as a technical magnet for the pullback later on; (3) it provided
a level for a technical test in a 40/50 percent correction; (4) it offered
a platform for bulls and bears to fight it out in order to determine the
"definitive" lows of the correction, thereby setting up a pullback reversal
in buildup fashion (e-j).
As already hinted, by waiting for buildup, it is inevitable to occasion­
ally miss a turn. In fact, it is quite a frequent occurrence. But it will
save us also from many a quick shake. On balance , patience will prove
a much better ally than eagerness, as countless chart examples will
aim to demonstrate in the chapters ahead. In Situation 1 , the buildup
between e and fis a very common development, and a favorable one at
that. It resided pleasantly in technical support of b, while building up
tension below the level off Should the pressure escape on the bull side,
this is very likely to trigger a double-pressure response.
Regardless of entry preference, however, it is important to note that
the higher entry above f does not necessarily compare unfavorably to
the more economical entry at e. First of all, the buildup below f shows
more confirmation on the likelihood of the reversal, which is already a
plUS. But there is another issue to take into account that will affect the

23

Understanding Price Action
clinical odds on both wagers. It regards the levels for protection and tar­
get in relation to the level of entry. If we assume both the bounce trade
at e and the break trade above I to have been protected "technically"
with a stop below the last distinctive low prior to entry, there are some
interesting things to point out.

On the trade above f, the last low of significance prior to entry re­

sided at the level of b. A stop, therefore, could have been placed a little
below the latter.
On the bounce trade at e, a technical stop may have been placed
below the first low on the left, below point c. Let us further assume that
both traders had the high of d as a technical target in mind. Should it
have been met, the aggressive trader, since his entry was lower in the
chart, may have scored more pip on reaching target, but not necessarily
more profit in terms of percentage. To examine this, we have to consider
the ratio between risk and reward. For example, should the stop level
on the bounce trade have resided at, say, 1 6 pip away from entry and
the target at 32, then this particular venture would have yielded a ratio
between risk and reward of 1 :2 . It is not unthinkable, however, that the
conservative trader, despite his entry higher up, could also have applied
a ratio quite similar to this. The distance from Ito the target level of d
may now only have been about, say, 24 pip, but the stop below b was
set at a smaller distance also. Should it have resided at about 1 2 pip
away from entry, then this too would have yielded a ratio of 1 :2 .
Even when adhering to a "more conservative" mode of operation, it
can be a fine line between acting prematurely and acting too late; the
market is certainly not always so kind as to grant us the most effec­
tive entry if only we be patient. There is little point also in arguing over
which approach is the statistically more viable, for all is a matter of
perception within the situation at hand. From where we stand, we can
generally label an entry more aggressive than conservative when there
is relatively little buildup involved prior to the break.
Situation 2 in Figure 2 . 6 nicely demonstrates what exactly it is that
we aim to avoid when waiting for buildup. The downtrend a-d is basi­
cally a mirror image of the earlier bull trend in Situation 1 , but this
time the pullback reversal played itself out a little differently. Techni-

24

Chapter 2

Price Action Principles-Theory

cally seen, the level of b once again presented itself as the most likely
candidate for a possible turnaround (a 50/60 percent retracement in
an area of former support, now resistance), but an immediate short at
point e would have put an aggressive bull in serious trouble before the
actual turn set in.
Take note of the fact that in this situation, prices once again put in
a technical test before reversing, but instead of using a former level of
support to bounce away from (b) , the market opted for a former level
of resistance to turn around in if matches c). Both e and f are valid
technical tests and equally common in occurrence. But since we have
no way of knowing beforehand which level the market will pick in any
one situation, the idea is to remain on the sidelines until more clarity
comes along. Not always will the market offer us this extra information,
but it will do so often enough to consider patience a vital ingredient in
operating tactics.
As to the conservative short in Situation 2, an entry below the level
of g and a tight stop above the level of f will certainly have suited many
bears just fine.

Ceiling Test
In our discussions on the pullback reversal, we came to appreciate the
technical test as a potential base for a bounce should prices hit upon
it (bounce effect) . Equally intriguing, however, is this level's ability, and
tendency, to initiate the correction in the first place (magnet effect).
To see the logic in the magnet and bounce principles going hand in
hand, let's imagine a bullish price move from A to B, some stalling in B
and then another move up to C. If we were on the sidelines with bullish
views on this market and then saw prices come down from the high of
C, what would be a defensible play? Of course, we can only answer this
in general terms, but it is fair to suggest that waiting for prices to hit
upon the level of B makes for a decent tactic. This implies that we deem
the level of B a "safer" zone to operate from, than say, a little above B,

with the level yet to be hit. The point is, if we see reason within this

25

Understanding Price Action
approach, based on technical grounds, then so will many other players
with us, and they too may postpone their purchases until the level of
B is hit. As a logical consequence, this unanimous absence of buying

enthusiasm is exactly what may cause the correction to carry on until
the magnet in question is hit.
Needless to mention, this is not to say that the magnet will be tested,
it merely suggests the potential; yet in the marketplace, the mere likeli­
hood of an event often plays a major role in the development of it. Such
can be the self-fulfilling nature of price action.
Observation has it that this magnet-and-bounce principle is not just
the prerogative of the typical trend/ pullback situation, it is basically
present within any seesaw motion in the chart, even within in the tini­
est of technical shapes. This then leaves us to discuss how we can put
these mechanics to our benefit in regard to future operating tactics. For
this purpose, let's have a look at the technical test's more subtle cousin,
the ceiling test.
A good way to introduce its workings is to explore the ceiling test
principle from the perspective of a range breakout situation. The reader
may remember the three qualifications used to rank the likelihood of
follow-through on these type of events: a terribly, poorly or properly
built up break. Another way to describe these distinctions is to regard
a break as either very premature, slightly premature or ready-to-go.
Evidently, our purposes are best served by the latter, since this type
will show the desired buildup prior to breaking out. The very premature
break, however, is not likely to cause much problems either; this one is
so devoid of buildup that we will simply decline it without much further
thought. With this in mind, the trickiest situation usually regards the
slightly premature break, which may show just enough promise to trap
a trader into the market a little too soon.
When confronted with a break of this kind (a potential tease break
trap) , the best course of action, from where we stand, is to decline the
offer; but we shouldn't take our eyes off the situation just yet-quite
the contrary. Should prices indeed fail to follow through on the initial
break, but not fully retreat either, we may soon see the attacking par­
ties give it another shot. If so, an element that could play a telling role

26

Chapter 2

Price Action Principles-Theory

in whether or not we should participate in the subsequent breakout is
the presence or absence of a ceiling test. Let's explore some examples.

Figure 2.7. Principle of the ceiling test at work in a ranging market (both at 5).

First off, to grasp the concept of a ceiling, picture an arch-shaped for­
mation in the chart and then zoom in on the series of bars that make up
its top. In Figure 2 . 7 , in Situation 1 , progression 1 -2-4 depicts a bear­
ish arch. By definition, any arch, before rolling over from the highs to
the lows, will show a little sideways progression in the top, even if it is
made up of one single bar (pointy arch) . The highs of it, obviously, form
an intermediate top in the chart, but at the same time, the lows of this
topping progression form a ceiling, basically a small level of support (3) .
Naturally, in a bullish arch, a U or V-shaped formation, this "ceiling"
level would reside at the top of a bottoming progression (floor). For ease
of use, we will refer to a floor as a ceiling, too.
By extending the level of 3 to the right, we can see how at some
point a pullback came to test this mini barrier from below (5) . This is a
textbook example of a ceiling test following a tease breakout, and it is a
highly anticipated event. In fact, the mere ceiling test potential is one of
the core reasons why the breakout at 4 is regarded premature.
But tease break traders may not be the only parties at risk by the
adverse magnet of the ceiling. Sideline bears who declined the initial
breakout may get into trouble also should they too eagerly decide to take
their chances on the first pullback to hit the range barrier from below
(circle) . This approach defies a price technical concept that is best not
taken lightly when playing with tight stops: rather than turning around
in the most obvious level of former support (resistance of the bottom
barrier), a bullish pullback is known to gun for the last level offormer
support, even when less prominent within the bigger picture (the level of

27

Understanding Price Action
3) . We could say this is to "fill up" the hollow space between the range

barrier and the ceiling test extension. This is essentially a function of
the magnet effect described above, and by no means a rare occurrence.
Where eager players run a risk of an adverse magnet to work against
them, patient traders stand excellent chance to benefit from it. Should
prices indeed bounce back from a ceiling test and then go on to attack
the range barrier second time around, this shows a persistence on the
part of the assailers not likely to go unnoticed. As a result, the defend­
ing parties may now prove more intimidated, and possibly more willing
to dump their holdings on a subsequent break.
Situation 2 in Figure 2 . 7 shows a variant of the very same principle.
The arch of interest in this picture is progression 1 -2-4. The range high
is broken at 4, but not from a buildup progression directly below the top
barrier; so that puts this break in the tease break category, too (regard­
less of outcome) .
By declining the offer at 4, bulls may have had their suspicions
about the potential for immediate follow-through, but not necessarily
about the bullish prospects in general. It is therefore not unthinkable
that they are actually hoping for this tease break to fail. After all, should
prices indeed be forced to retreat, their typical tendency is to be sucked
towards a level of support back inside the range (low of 5 put in a ceiling
test with the highs of 3). And that could serve as an excellent platform
from which to launch another upside attack.
Note that this particular "ceiling" (a floor in a V-shape) is not really
located in the deepest part of the 1 -2-4 arch; but since this level repre­
sents the last level of former resistance inside the range, it is the first
magnet of interest to qualify as potential support on the way back from
the tease breakout, and we can refer to this as a ceiling, too. Aggressive
parties may already buy straight into this level in anticipation of an im­
mediate bounce (5) ; more conservative players may want to see how the
market handles the test first, and take it from there; others may decide
to remain on the sidelines until they actually see the top barrier of the
range broken second time around (point 6).
None of the above is to suggest that tease breakouts are merely a
postponement of a superior break later on, but it is very common prac-

28

Chapter 2

Price Action Principles-Theory

tice, especially when the dominant pressure is working in favor of the
breakout. In the total of hints and clues with which to paint our view on
the price technical picture, the ceiling test's presence, or absence, can
have a major say in whether or not to accept a break. (Entry specifics
are taken up in Chapter 5 . )
Like most price action phenomena, the ceiling test principle i s not
limited to any particular market environment. It is present in both rang­
ing and trending markets and can play a role in basically any type of
reversal or break. Situation 1 in Figure 2.8 shows another textbook
eX?IDple of a ceiling test, when the low of 4 came to test the top of the
bottoming cluster in arch progression 1 -2-3.
3

situation 1

situation 2

Figure 2.8. Some more examples of the ceiling test principle (4 and 8) .

Note: If you scan your charts for higher lows and lower highs, major or

minor, you will often find that plenty of turnarounds were initiated by
a perfect ceiling test bounce. Especially when the chart shows strong
continuation prospects, say, bullish, a correction may not make it all
the way back to a former low, because bulls already buy the ceiling test
level.
Another interesting variant of a ceiling test is shown in Situation 2 .
In this chart, the bullish dominance came under pressure when the
lows of 6 were broken. As bulls fought back to undo the implications, a
pullback emerged, which offered sideline bears an opportunity to take
position from higher up. The parties who already fired short at 7, in the
extension of the lows of 5, may have had good reasons to do so, but they
did expose themselves to the danger of a ceiling test at 8. Since the lows
at 6 represented the last level of former support, it was a more likely
magnet for the pullback to gun for and possibly reverse in (all this in
terms of probability, of course) .

29

Understanding Price Action
Round Number Effect

The directional effort of any currency pair is a big players game. The
volume necessary to significantly move the currency markets is simply
beyond the realm of the average home office trader, even if he were to
operate on a scale that could be considered huge by whatever home
trading standard. Corporate banks, central banks, institutions and
hedge funds are the typical big parties competing heavily with one an­
other in the Forex arena. There is no point in trying to figure out these
parties' motives for doing what they do at any moment in time. They
may be considering macro-economical releases, fundamental outlooks,
interest rate decisions, chart technicals, you name it. Even if we knew
what one big party was up to, most certainly there will be a bunch of
other big players doing the exact opposite. In all cases, we best concen­
trate on the chart. Mter all , whatever is bought and sold, it should show
up in the price action.
To complete the series of core price action principles, let us explore
the round number effect. One does not need to observe the charts for
long to find constant evidence of how the price action tends to work
up to, and then revolve around, a notable round number of interest.
Whatever causes these particulars, anything that shows up as a regular
occurrence is always worthy of examination.
What is a round number level in a currency chart? Most pairs have
a four digit quotation after the decimal mark (ignoring the pipette) and
whenever the last digit shows a 0, we can consider it a round number.
On a tiny scale, say a 1 -minute time frame, a quote like 1 .2630 can be
seen as a relevant round number, and the next one in line would either
be 1 . 2620 or 1 .2640. On a bigger intraday frame, say a 2 or 3-minute
chart, the relevant levels usually move up a notch and we often get to
see the price action zigzag between the so-called "20-levels" ( 1 .2600,
1 .2620, 1 . 2640, and so on) . But arguably the most notable round num­
