
Summing Up Trading Tips

Weekly target support was 8414,
nearly a 600-point DOW decline
from the high of 12/02/02.

FIGURE 7.15

Aftermath of doji top. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

sponding weekly calculations, in addition to the bullish harami cross candle pattern, alerted a trader to a nearly 150-point Dow rally. This is another
excellent example of how a textbook setup would help a trader identify an
executable trade.

SUMMING UP TRADING TIPS
Here are some suggestions that may help you in day-trading or short-term
swing trading:
• I use all sessions for the high, low, and close for the markets that trade
24 hours a day. Some quote vendors split the data between night and
day. I combine both sessions as one day because that’s what they are.
Last night’s high applies to the next day session’s range, so I use that for
my data in calculating the numbers.

132

DAY-TRADING, SWING TRADING: Acting on Analysis

Bullish harami cross

Weekly support was 8528.

Daily support was 8468.

FIGURE 7.16

Short-term bounce. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

• Tops take longer to form than bottoms so I will usually look for a second bearish candle formation at an important resistance number as a
place to sell short.
• There are five business days in every week and usually four weeks in
every month. One day within a month will mark a high, one day will generally mark a low, and the market will close somewhere between those
points. That is what is called the range. The difference between a successful trader and a not so successful trader is the successful trader does
not make a habit of buying the high of the range or selling the low of the
range. When you are trading, at times it is hard to keep your emotions in
check, so it is good to apply time and price logic in your thinking.
• Technical analysis is considered by most professionals to be an art and
not an exact science. As technicians, we look at indicators or we rely
on price pattern recognition techniques to give us clues to help interpret
or anticipate the price direction or price movement of a market. Using
these pivot point techniques combined with a discretionary method
such as charting and chart pattern recognition allows a trader to have
freedom of decision making while incorporating the flexibility of a me-

Summing Up Trading Tips

133

chanical trading method with prescribed numbers. This precise methodology will help eliminate and potentially solve the problem of trading
on emotions and spur-of-the-moment hunches.
• Candle charting helps me clearly visualize chart pattern signals, and
pivot point analysis alerts me to the potential highs and lows of a given
time period of a particular market. Including other forms of technical
analysis such as stochastics, moving averages, MACD studies, volume,
and open interest helps me to make a logical, informed trading decision, where I can set my entry and exit points as well as define my risk
parameters.
• As a trader, if you are out of money and have no more capital to work
with, you are out of business. The elements necessary for generating
profits as a trader are identifying and then acting on good trade signals.
More important, when you are wrong, know when to get out, and act accordingly. These are the key elements for continuing to be a successful
trader.
• Using pivot point analysis in your trading plans can help you not only
plan your trades but also help establish and pinpoint entry and exit
points as your personal target trading techniques. Most traders who are
not familiar with using pivot points become excited and amazed at its
consistency in predicting support and resistance in different time frames
and for most markets.
• To stay on top of your technical analysis skills, I strongly recommend
that all readers expand their knowledge and continue to learn new techniques as well as take a refresher course on the old ones.

CHAPTER 8

Technical
Indicators
Confirming Evidence

The three purposes of thinking are to solve problems, to create opportunities, and to enrich the
human condition.
—Abraham Lincoln

incoln’s statement was made long ago, but it really is the essence of
this trading business. Which way will the market go? What indicators
do I have to rely on? What influences are there on the market from a
fundamental perspective? How can I benefit from this knowledge? Is the
risk worth the reward? If I’m right, how much can I make? All of these questions require thinking.
To put more light on your analysis that will help you form an opinion
about market direction, I would like to introduce you to other forms of indicators that can be applied in conjunction with pivot point and candle chart
analysis—trading tools related by the use of mathematical formulas. Let me
emphasize up front what follows is not a comprehensive explanation of all
the indicators available. There are dozens of indicators, and some may be
more valuable to you than those I describe. However, these are the indicators
I use most frequently in my analysis.

L

MOVING AVERAGES
A moving average is defined as dividing the sum of two or more figures by
the number of figures. In trading, that means adding up the price inputs for

135

136

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

a given number of time periods and then dividing the sum by the number of
time periods. Thus:
(Price 1 + Price 2)
Moving average = ————————
n
where n = the number of time periods.
Calculating simple moving averages can be useful for trend analysis and
even in advanced computer trading systems. They are also used for identifying levels of support and resistance. Traders can use one moving average or
combine a few different ones to overlay on their charts. By using short-term,
intermediate-term, and long-term averages on top of a chart, you can see the
trend direction of market prices from a different perspective. Typical time
periods for multiple moving averages are 4, 9, and 18 periods, but today’s
software allows you to use any number of periods you want.
Linearly weighted moving averages can be calculated by taking, say,
a five-day time period and multiplying the close of the last time period by
five, multiplying the close of the previous time period by four, multiplying the
close of the time period before that by three, and so on. Add the sum of all
five time periods and then divide by five to get a weighted average that gives
more significance to the most recent price action.
Exponential moving averages are calculated from complex formulas
and have become the most common averages used today by many quote
vendors, analysts, and traders as they also are weighted to give more importance to the latest data from current market conditions, and older data that
becomes less important as time passes are eventually filtered out.
Calculating all of these numbers by hand or even with a calculator is tedious and time-consuming, but, fortunately, computers can now figure all of
that out for us. I believe in the KISS method—keep it simple, stupid.
Many rules can be applied in moving average analysis. Different time
periods can be used from, say, 3 minutes to 200 days. Generally speaking,
longer-term time periods in moving average calculations will generate fewer
trade signals than shorter-term time period calculations will. Different price
points or averages of an average can be used. For example, you can take the
average on a closing basis, or you can include the high, low, or even the
range of a given time period average in an average.
Here are the simplest rules for trading moving averages:
• If the market is trading above the moving average, you should be long.
• If the market is trading below the moving average, you should be short.
• When the market has been trading below a moving average and then
breaks out above it, you have a buy signal.

Moving Averages

137

• When the market has been trading above a moving average and then
breaks out below it, you have a sell signal.
• Buy or sell signals can also be generated when a short-term moving average crosses over a longer-term moving average.
Moving average techniques are numerous, from the simple to the complex trading system that a programmer can create for a computer to generate signals based on crossovers or price breakouts of moving average
points of interest.
First, however, you should realize an important aspect about moving
averages: They do not work well in volatile, choppy conditions or in markets that are in a trading range. In these trading range conditions, buy and
sell signals will be generated every time the market gyrates above and
below the moving average lines. Responding to this activity will simply kill
you and your trading capital. A market spends most of its time in a consolidation phase and only about a third of its time in a trending mode, so
that is a factor you have to keep in mind before relying on moving averages
too much.
A more proven method of trading moving averages is the dead cross that
occurs when a shorter-term moving average falls below the longer-term average and a downtrend is initiated. When a golden cross occurs, the shortterm moving average crosses above the longer-term average.
Moving average crossover signals can get you positioned for some nice
trends, as shown on Figure 8.1, the weekly crude oil chart showing moving
averages of 5, 10, and 20 periods. You can watch various time frames, but
my favorites are 3, 9, and 18 periods for most markets on a daily basis. The
most popular longer-term moving averages for equity markets and individual stocks are 50, 100, and 200 days.
Most of the time the point of crossover is a significant point of resistance or support for future reference points of interest. Why? Because this
is the actual point from which traders see a signal generated. Whenever you
look at a chart, it is easy to see the old highs or lows. But to examine where
the breakdown of support and the breakout of resistance occurred, overlay
the 3-, 9-, and 18-period moving averages on a chart. A lot of time you will
see that a market does not rally to test the old highs but, instead, goes up to
test the point of the moving average crossover.
Does this move to a crossover point guarantee a winning trade every
time you sell when a market revisits the old crossovers? Of course not. What
it can do is illustrate a potential turning signal. It is wise to have other forms
of verifying analytical methods to increase your odds of a successful trade.
Note on Figure 8.1 that the crude oil market shows both a dead cross before
a price decline and a golden cross before a price advance.

138

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

Moving average cross

Moving average cross

FIGURE 8.1

Crossing over. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

Resistance levels such as this crossover point can have one of three
qualities: (1) create a reversal level, (2) cause a pause in an advancing trend,
or (3) have little effect at all. That is why momentum traders reverse their
positions if an important resistance level is violated. Generally, you do see
markets return to test old highs or lows—that is what creates the double
tops and double bottoms. But, in other instances, the moving average
crossover is the actual signal point.
Figure 8.2, the daily chart of crude oil, shows moving averages of 3, 9,
and 18 days with the crossover point in March at or near $31 a barrel. This activity illustrates that a market tends to test the point of crossover, as it did
in June, rather than the actual high.
In preparing my newsletter on Friday, June 6, I noted that not only was
the week’s pivot point resistance number $31.05, but it also was a monthly
pivot point resistance level as well. Checking to see what relevant resistance there was near $31, I overlaid the 3-, 9-, and 18-day moving averages.
Lo and behold, there was the dead cross that occurred back in March when
the market peaked near $32.50. My expectation was for a significant reversal, based on the confluence of resistance points plus the dead cross. The

Moving Averages

139

3 period M/A crosses over 9 period.
9 period M/A crosses over 18 period.

FIGURE 8.2

Test of moving average crossover. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted

with permission.)

recommendation was to sell near $31, using $31.49 as a stop. I also suggested
looking at buying September 28 put options. (See more on the topic of options in Chapter 13.)
My analysis of the potential for a rally to test and then fail at or near $31
was an accurate decision based solely on these methods of technical analysis. The market did make a high the following week on Wednesday, June 11,
at $31.15 and then proceeded to sell off nearly $2.40 per barrel to a low at
$28.75 within two days. As a trader, I am only interested in capturing a
trade, not a long-term investment in crude oil.
Arguably, the hardest part of this move would be to manage the exit
point to determine a profit amount, right? Wrong. First, you should have
moved stops down to the level above the 3-day moving average, which is
$30.23. That at least locks in a profit. Second, if you were a multiple contract
trader, you would get out of half of your positions as the market touched
the 18-day moving average as that level will act as support—and it did! Rule
of thumb: If you make 100 percent of your initial margin requirement, get out
of the trade if you are a one-contract trader. Multiple position traders should

140

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

move stops down and get out of half of their positions. Placing stops above
the 3-day and even the 9-day moving average on the balance of positions is
a smart placement level as these moving averages have a solid history of
acting as a support or resistance level.
If the greatest story ever told is the Bible, I believe the second greatest
story ever told is a chart. There are no opinions, only facts and pure price
data. That is why they say charts don’t lie.
The daily silver chart shown as Figure 8.3 paints a great story and helps
to substantiate the lesson about moving averages. The beginning point of
interest is the crossover that occurred in March around $4.67 an ounce. Note
that this is where the market paused (Point A) after testing the crossover
resistance point. It actually helped to generate a small 12-cent pullback, coincidently right back near the 18-day moving average (Point B). Then a belt
hold (or benchmark) candle blasted through that resistance level (Point C).
Earlier in this chapter I mentioned that once a significant resistance level
is violated, momentum traders may reverse positions. Also, I mentioned that

Moving average crossover

C

The beginning point of interest!

D

Candle
midpoint

A

B

FIGURE 8.3
permission.)

Testing reference points. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

141

Moving Averages

the midpoint of a benchmark candle will offer a first support level on pullbacks—after all, isn’t the midpoint the average of the range? Figure 8.3
shows an example as that candle’s midpoint served as a strong level of support for nearly 13 trading sessions. Once that failed, the market continued
lower. That final break below the candle’s midpoint was also about the time
when the 3-period moving average formed a dead cross, confirming that the
bull trend had ended.
You can analyze the same silver chart to point out where silver prices
might stop descending and find support (Figure 8.4). Recalling that a support or resistance level may act as a reversal point or a pausing point or fail
and do nothing at all, here is how I analyzed this situation in making a recommendation to go long in my weekly newsletter for the week ending June
13. I like to use other methods of analysis, as you may have guessed, particularly pivot points. The weekly pivot point support was $4.49, the monthly
support number was calculated as $4.39. The moving average crossover in
early April occurred in the $4.45 area. Plus a gap existed near that level. Silver made a brief low on Wednesday, June 11 (coincidentally, the same day

M/A crossover forms.

Moving average crossover.
Look for “test of the cross”
rather than the test of an
actual price low.

Midpoint
candle
fails.

Old low

FIGURE 8.4

Signs of the end. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with permission.)

142

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

crude oil made its high). It rallied 16 cents from that low to the high of $4.60
two days later—certainly not a substantial move, but it was a nice trade after
spotting the potential reversal signal from the 3-period moving average
crossover level.
My most fervent advice: Use the pivot point numbers on a weekly and
monthly basis when they coincide with a moving average support or resistance level or a crossover intersection. Act on the signal with an appropriate stop or risk level. Generally, that should be a point established below
the actual low or high in relationship to the area of the moving average
crossover.
For example, based on the weekly pivot point number, the buy signal on
the silver chart (Figure 8.4) was $4.49. The moving average crossover was at
$4.45. The previous low was $4.38. A good trading plan would be to buy near
$4.45 up to $4.49 with stops below $4.38. Once the market moves off that
low, manage the trade by monitoring the price action and moving stops up
to the breakeven point. As silver prices move higher, adjust your stops to
start protecting a profit.
Never—I mean never!—keep your stop at breakeven all the time. My
reason is that once you establish the trade, you enter a risk situation. Once
the trade moves to breakeven, you still need to keep your stop at the original loss amount. You do not want to be stopped out prematurely. Besides,
the market really hasn’t moved. However, once the market finally does advance, look to adjust your stop from risk to breakeven.
Remember the rule of thumb: If you make a 100 percent return on your
initial margin requirement, liquidate half of your position, especially if the
move occurs in a short period of time such as a day or two. This book is
about trading, which is another way of saying base hits. Futures is not about
long-term investing or waiting for each trade to turn into home runs.
Victor Niederhoffer gave a great word of advice on my radio program
on June 18, 2003: “Don’t try to be number one always looking to be in the top
25 percent.” His point was not to get too aggressive and to take profits.

MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE/DIVERGENCE
More commonly known as MACD, moving average convergence/divergence
in simplest terms is an indicator that shows when a short-term moving average crosses over a longer-term moving average. Gerald Appel developed
MACD as we know it today, and it is my understanding that he developed it
for the purpose of trading stocks.
MACD includes three exponential moving averages (EMA). The initial
inputs for the calculations were 9, 12, and 26 periods. Because traders are

Moving Average Convergence/Divergence

143

now more computer savvy than ever before, it is easy to change or tweak the
variables in the original calculations. You can increase the time periods in
the moving average calculations to generate fewer trade signals or shorten
the time periods to generate more trade signals.
The 12-period and 26-period EMAs are usually based on closing prices
(you could choose some other price component). When you subtract the
26-period EMA from the 12-period EMA, you get a difference known as the
fast MACD line. Then you use the fast line to calculate a 9-period EMA, which
gives you the slow line. When the fast line crosses above the slow line, a buy
signal is generated. When the fast line crosses below the slow line, a sell signal is generated.
MACD signals react quickly to changes in the market. That is why many
analysts including myself use this indicator, which helps to clear the picture
when moving average crossovers occur. One of the most useful clues provided by this indicator, as with a number of other indicators, is known as
divergence. This is a condition where the market price makes a low that is
lower than a previous low but the underlying MACD pattern makes a higher
low. This divergence indicates that the low is weak or a false bottom due to
less selling pressure and signals a potential price reversal. The same is true
in an uptrend when prices make a higher high but MACD makes a lower
high, indicating a potential change to lower prices.
The weekly S&P 500 cash index provides an example (Figure 8.5). Prices
made a lower low in September than in the March/April time frame (A), but
the MACD made a higher high, which signaled the low was exhausted and
was a false bottom. The market moved higher for about six months before
the next wave lower formed a potential new setup for a bullish divergence
buy signal (B).
A relatively newer method of using MACD features a graph called a histogram, which indicates the difference between the fast and slow MACD
lines. I personally prefer the regular graph instead of the histogram when
looking at this indicator, but the concept of the histogram is that if the bars
are above the zero line, you should be long, and if the bars are below the zero
line, you should be short. If the bars below the zero line are getting shorter
or if the bars above the zero line are getting longer, it indicates that prices
are rising and you want to trade the market from the long side. Conversely,
if the bars above the zero line are getting shorter or if the bars below the zero
line are getting longer, it indicates prices are falling and you want to trade
from the short side.
Again, divergence is important, as Figure 8.6, the S&P cash index chart,
shows. If prices continue to increase but the histogram bars above the zero
line become smaller, then an impending change may be in store as the histogram suggests the uptrend may be running out of steam. Point C on the
chart provides a good example.

144

TECHNICAL INDICATORS: Confirming Evidence

A
B

FIGURE 8.5

MACD, price convergence. (Source: FutureSource. Reprinted with

permission.)

STOCHASTICS
George C. Lane is credited with creating the formula for a momentum oscillator indicator called stochastics. Here is another example of a person
whose passion for the field of technical analysis motivated research into
price behavior and resulted in a true master technician. George and his
wife Carrie both are excellent teachers and truly care about their students.
These are people that you want to meet and learn from.
Lane’s stochastics indicator is a popular technical tool used to help determine whether a market is overbought, meaning that prices have advanced
too far too soon and are due for a downside correction, or oversold, meaning
prices have declined too far too fast and are due for an upside correction. The
mathematical formula for stochastics compares the settlement price of a specific time period to the price range of a specific number of past periods.
The theory works off the assumption that, in a bull or uptrending market,
prices tend to make higher highs and the settlement price usually tends to be
