
OPTIONS BASICS

255

on these options is about 4.00, or a cost of $400 per contract. I’m going to buy ﬁve contracts at a cost of $2,000.
Again, I’m right, and EBAY rockets to $50. At a delta of
0.5, which then increases to about 0.7 as the calls move
from being at-the-money to being in-the-money, the premium on my calls increases from 4.00 to about 10.00.
Those ﬁve options are now worth $5,000. I have made a
proﬁt of $3,000 less commissions. While this is less than
the proﬁt made with the stock purchase, it represents an
overall gain of an astonishing ⫹150 percent. To put this
into perspective: if I had put the same amount of money
into the options as I had put into the stock ($20,000), I
could have bought 50 calls. Those 50 calls would have
risen to a premium value of $50,000, or a net proﬁt of
$30,000 versus the $5,000 I made trading the stock. That’s
600 percent leverage. That’s what I’m talking about with
options. Leverage, baby, leverage!
So to summarize:
• Buy 5 EBAY 40 calls @ $400: total cost ⫽ $2,000
• Stock goes to $50: proﬁt ⫽ $3,000, or ⫹150

percent
But what happens if EBAY does not move in my
expected direction? If instead of shooting up $10, it drops
$10? What happens to my investment then? Well, if I had
simply bought 500 shares of the stock, I would be down
$5,000. My $20,000 investment would now be worth only
$15,000, for a loss of 25 percent. But if I had bought ﬁve
call contracts instead of the stock, I would also be down,

256

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

but not as much. Again, delta works in our favor in the
event of a loss. As EBAY’s stock price moves against us, and
our options go further and further out-of-the-money, the
rate of decrease in the premium value slows down. I will
lose some time value during the days of EBAY’s sell-off,
but the overall amount of loss in premium tends to decrease
relative to the loss in the underlying stock. This means that
buying the options provides less risk than owning the stock.
For example:
• EBAY goes from $40 to $30 ⫽ $5,000 loss on

stock trade.
• But: My call options go from 4.00 to 2.00 ⫽
$1,000 loss on the options trade (compare this
to a $3,000 gain if the stock makes the same
10-point move to the upside).
• So: The options risk/reward ratio is 3.0 times greater
than the stock purchase, thanks to the power of delta.
There are several other advantages to the purchase of
stock options versus the purchase of the underlying stock.
For one, there is no uptick rule when you want to proﬁt
from a stock’s sell-off. If you short a stock, normally you
must wait for a bid uptick before you can enter the position. Not so with options. You simply buy the put at the
offer price. There is no need for an uptick.
With puts, there are no dividends and margin interest to pay. If you short the stock, however, you will be
charged interest on 50 percent of your investment (margin
fee), and you will also be charged for any payable dividend
if there is one.

OPTIONS BASICS

257

DISADVANTAGES OF OPTIONS
There are some disadvantages with options that should be
pointed out, before anyone thinks they have found the ideal
trading vehicle.
• Time value decay: Options lose value as they

approach expiration, and there is nothing you can
do to stop it.
• The rate of time value decay increases over time: the
closer the option gets to expiration, the faster the
decay-see Figure 12.1.
• Full loss of investment: If the trade goes against you
and you hold the option to expiration (which we
caution strongly against in any case), your option
will expire worthless.
• This means you will have to reduce your per-trade
investment size, thus reducing your overall gains.
• It also makes compounding gains more difﬁcult,
since 100 percent compounding can lead to
irreparable damage if you take a large loss.
• With options there is no pre- or postmarket trading
available: if you see bad news come out overnight
and you own calls, there is nothing you can do
about it until the next trading day.
• There is normally less liquidity in options than in
stocks: Some out-of-the-money options do not
trade every day.
• In general, the more liquid a stock is, and the
closer to being at-the-money the option strike
is, the more liquid the option will be.

258

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• There are larger spreads between bid and ask.
• In well-traded stocks, the spread on the stock

option is usually 0.10 to 0.20.
• In less liquid stocks, the spread can be 0.40
or more.
• Options cannot be traded in some IRAs.
• Some IRAs restrict options trading to purchase
only and forbid the writing of options.
Figure 12.1 is a clear, visual example of the exponential increase in the rate of time value decay as an option
approaches its maturity at expiration. This fact increases the
risk value of options as they are held over time: if the underlying stock does not move in a favorable direction within a

Figure 12.1

Time decay curve.

OPTIONS BASICS

259

short period of time following the option’s purchase, the
chances of that option becoming proﬁtable decrease; the
longer the delay, the less likely the chance for proﬁt.

BASIC OPTIONS PARAMETERS
Option contracts possess four identiﬁers: the underlying,
the expiration month, the strike price, and the type.
• The underlying ⫽ what market the option

represents (stock, index, etc.)
• Expiration date ⫽ the third Friday of the month in
which the option expires
• Strike price ⫽ the price at which the option owner
has the right (not the obligation) to purchase the
underlying
Options are classiﬁed as being in-the-money (ITM), at-themoney (ATM), or out-of-the-money (OTM).
• ITM ⫽ the call strike price is less than the

underlying price; the put strike price is greater
than the underlying price.
• ATM ⫽ the call/put strike price is the same as
the underlying price.
• OTM ⫽ the call strike price is greater than the
underlying price; the put strike price is less than
the underlying price.
Type ⫽ calls or puts. There are only two types of options:
calls and puts (see Figures 12.2 and 12.3).

260

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Figure 12.2

ITM options pricing.

Figure 12.3

OTM options pricing.

OPTIONS BASICS

261

• A call option gives the option buyer the right,

but not the obligation, to purchase the
underlying market (100 shares per option
contract on stock) at a speciﬁed price (the strike
price) at any time between option purchase and
option expiration.
• Calls bought make money as the market goes
up.
• Calls sold or written make money as the market
goes down or stays ﬂat.
• A put option gives the option buyer the right, but
not the obligation, to sell the underlying market
(100 shares per option contract on stock) at a
speciﬁed price (the strike price) at any time
between now and option expiration.
• Puts bought make money as the market goes
down.
• Puts sold or written make money as the market
goes down or stays ﬂat.
Options have two kinds of value, which combine to make
the premium you must pay to own them:
• Intrinsic value (IV) is a function of a variety of

factors including the price of the underlying; IV
increases as the option moves further in-themoney; IV becomes 0 once an option is out-ofthe-money.
• Time value (TV) decreases as the option moves
closer to expiration; TV becomes 0 at expiration.

262

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

Example 1
EBAY Oct 45 calls (EBAY was currently trading in July at

$40).
• Option was trading at 4.00 ($400 per contract).
• IV ⫽ $0; TV ⫽ $4.00.

Example 2
EBAY Oct 35 calls (EBAY was currently trading in July at

$40).
• Option trading at 8.00 ($800 per contract).
• IV ⫽ $3.00; TV ⫽ $5.00.

Note: The volatility of the underlying stock affects time
value:
• Decreased volatility ⫽ lowered TV.
• Increased volatility ⫽ increased TV.

DR. STOXX’S RULES FOR TRADING
STOCK OPTIONS
In this section I am going to outline the basic rules I use
for trading options on our Befriend the Trend Trading
trend trade picks. Many of our newsletter subscribers use
options on our picks with truly incredible results. Some
use options exclusively and so do not trade those picks
whose options do not meet the criteria outlined here. Others use options when the price of the underlying stock is
too high for their accounts. Either way, you will learn

OPTIONS BASICS

263

here how to trend-trade stock options with the least
amount of risk.
If you are already a successful trend trader, then you
will have no problem at all becoming a successful options
trader. Simply follow the rules as I’ve outlined them here.
Remember, these rules are not optional. If you want longterm trading success with options, you must follow these
rules to the letter. You have no choice. Due to their leverage, you cannot trade options in the same way you trade
stocks. It may work in the short term, but longer term, you
will wipe out your account. Please do not skip this section.
Read these rules carefully, write up a brief summary of
them in your own words, and post them next to your trading computer.
1. Never buy options with less than one month to expiration
unless they are to be used for day trading.
• In this way you avoid the worst period for time
value decay and thus take some of the risk out of
your trade.
2. Avoid options on stocks that trade fewer than 1 million
shares per day.
• Options are much less liquid than stocks, so we
can increase our chances of getting a decent ﬁll,
and of a reliable exit, if we trade options only on
the most liquid of stocks.
3. Avoid options with spreads larger than 10 percent (e.g.,
0.2 on 2.00 option).
• The spread is the difference between the asking
price and the bid price; it is a premium you have

264

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

to pay to the exchange’s market makers in order
to put on the trade.
• The greater the spread, the more the underlying stock has to move to get you to a breakeven point; the more the stock has to move, the
greater your risk in the trade.
• A rule of thumb I like to follow is this: if a
spread is greater than 0.10, I usually enter a
limit order between the spread; if the spread is
greater than 0.30, I usually avoid trading that
option. Yes, I miss out on some great trades
doing this, but that’s just me. I hate to pay
premium for anything (just ask my wife!).
• Some options that are heavily traded (such as
options on the QQQQ) have spreads as narrow
as 0.05. New rules have recently come into effect
that allow options exchanges to offer spreads in
0.01 increments. This should serve options traders well, as they will then have greater pricing
control, and thus narrower spreads.
4. On short-term plays (less than two weeks), buy the next
month’s strike (paying attention to rule #1).
• For example, if today is July 6 and I want to buy
EBAY calls because I think EBAY is likely to go
up in price within the next one to two weeks, I
would not buy the July options, since we are less
than one month from July’s expiration date, but
would instead buy the next month out.
5. On longer-term plays (more than two weeks), buy the
strike at least two months out.

OPTIONS BASICS

265

• For example, if today is July 6 and I want to

buy EBAY calls because I think EBAY is likely
to go up in price within the next three to four
weeks, I would not buy the next month out,
since four weeks would put us in the worst
phase of those options’ time value decay curve.
Instead, I would buy the next expiration out
after that, which for EBAY means the
October calls.
6. Buy the closest in-the-money or at-the-money strike.
• For example, if GE is trading at 27.00, you
would buy the 27.50 strike (puts or calls), but if
GE is trading at 26.00, you would buy the 25.00
strike (puts or calls).
• Note: In general (assuming you trade a winning
system) . . .
• Trading far OTM options have a lower winning
percentage but a higher-percentage return if the
trade is successful (lower premiums paid but a
bigger move in the stock is needed to make a
proﬁt).
• Trading far ITM options have a higher winning
percentage but lower-percentage returns
(higher premiums paid but a smaller move in
the stock is needed to make a proﬁt).
7. If you are only trading options, commit no more than
50 percent of your total account at any one time (keep at
least 50 percent reserve in cash), and spread this out over
at least ﬁve positions (roughly 10 percent of your total
account per trade).

266

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

• Options are high risk. Anything less than this

kind of allotment runs the risk of wiping out a
signiﬁcant portion of your account, and your
overall returns will suffer, if you are not forced
to close your account altogether. It will happen.
Even with the most robust of systems, losses
happen. And with options, this can mean a total
loss if you are not careful to pay attention to
position sizing.
• If you trade stocks and options together, as I
do, I suggest putting only 20 percent of your
total account into options and the remaining
80 percent of your capital to work in stocks.
8. Be quicker to take proﬁts on options than on stocks
(because of time value decay).
• Losses can be held a bit longer since delta works
in your favor (delta slows down as the option
moves further OTM).
• Keep in mind that even a nice gain in an option
trade can disappear quickly if you hold on too
long, even if the stock does not move unfavorably.
• At all times, respect the inevitability of time
value decay!
9. Determine a percentage stop price (25 to 40 percent
recommended) and set an audible alert near this price (or
set an alert on the underlying stock).
• Do not set an actual stop-loss on options; due to
their wider spread and lowered liquidity, a real

OPTIONS BASICS

267

stop-loss on an option trade is not recommended.
10. Set a limit sell order at your target based on an estimated
move in the underlying ⫻ delta.
For example, say KLAC is trading in early July
around $50 and you expect the stock to move to 55:
• So you buy KLAC Sept 50 calls @ 5.00 (delta
0.50).
• As soon as you are executed, you should set a
limit sell order, good till canceled (GTC), at
7.50 ($5 move ⫻ 0.50; 50 percent gain).
11. Never take more than a ⫺40 percent loss on any options
position or ⫺5 percent of your total account, whichever is
smaller.
• This rule holds only for the single positions, not
the compound positions, which require the use
of more than one option at once. In the compound positions, your potential loss is generally
limited and is usually nowhere near ⫺40 percent.
• A 5 percent loss guarantees that you will be able
to put on at least 20 options trades before you
run out of money. If you can’t turn a decent
proﬁt with 20 options trades, then you should
be out of the game altogether.
12. Once an option position has a proﬁt of 50 percent, close
the position if it trades down to breakeven.
• There is an old adage said about options: Proﬁts
once lost rarely return. If you have a decent return

268

TREND TRADING FOR A LIVING

in your options position and it suddenly ﬁzzles
back to your entry price, it is probably a good
idea to close the position at breakeven to avoid a
loss. Due to a variety of pricing factors, and unlike the tragic Sisyphus, options have a harder
time climbing the hill the second time around.
13. Hold all compound option positions (covered calls, bull and
bear spreads) to expiration.
• The one exception to this rule is for the straddle,
which you will learn about in Chapter 13.
14. If you are proﬁtable in a single option position (calls, puts,
naked calls and puts), close the position two weeks before
expiration and, if you want to remain in the position, buy
the next month’s position at the nearest ITM strike.
• This is called rolling over your position; if you
reinvest your proﬁts by buying a larger position
in the new option, you are pyramiding your
position. Both are good ideas as long as your
position is nicely proﬁtable. This is how you can
get ten-baggers and more from options.
Okay, those are my must-follow rules for swing trading stock options. Remember, if you are going to buy or
write a stock options contract, you must have a reasonable
degree of conﬁdence in the future direction of the underlying stock, just as you would if you were to buy or sell
short the stock itself. For this you need a sound trading
strategy. And if you employ a market-neutral approach to
an options position, you need to be reasonably sure that the

OPTIONS BASICS

269

stock is about to make a sizeable move, one way or the
other. For this, again, you need a sound trading strategy.
One ﬁnal note, and it is an important one: you can be
a successful stock options trader only if you are already a
successful stock trader. It is strongly recommended that
you not trade options until you have a proven track record
of strong stock-trading gains. You can go a long time losing at the stock-trading game and still maintain enough
capital to mount a comeback once you’ve gained the necessary experience. However, the highly leveraged nature of
options ensures that losing at the stock options game is a
short-lived experience.

This page intentionally left blank

options strategies:
bullish trends

CHAPTER
13

I bears repeating that you need to know, before you
T

enter any options position, whether you are bullish, bearish, or neutral on the underlying stock, and to what degree
you are so. Options trading also requires you to assess your
risk tolerance so that you can select the appropriate option
combination to either increase or reduce your risk exposure.
With this in mind, the following list of optionstrading strategies is offered for your consideration. The list
is set up to allow you to choose the best options strategy
based on:
• Your directional bias on the underlying stock
• Your risk tolerance for the particular trade

