and need any help navigating through the process, feel free to e-mail us at support@tradethemarkets.com.

What Is the Easiest Way to Stay on the Path of Least Resistance?
A trader can watch the 30 stocks in the Dow to get a very good idea of how the index is acting or is going to act. I like to place all 30 Dow stocks in a window and have
them automatically sorted from strongest to weakest each day on a Net % Change basis. Getting a feel for all 500 stocks in the S&P 500 at a glance is impossible. By
doing this with the Dow, I can look at my sorter list and see at a glance that, for example, 26 out of the 30 stocks are red (down on the day).
Figure 4.6 shows all 30 Dow stocks sorted from best to worst on a Net % Change basis. I can watch the list and see that at this moment in time, 7 stocks are down
on the day, while 23 stocks are up on the day. Later in the day, I might see that 11 are up on the day and that 19 are down, and I can tell at a glance that the Dow is
getting stronger—even if the index is still chopping around. If the individual components of the Dow are getting stronger, the entire index will eventually make a run
higher. This filter gives me a clean downward or upward bias to the market, as I can watch more stocks going red or going green as the markets start to fall apart or try
to improve. This type of “at a glance” analysis is very difficult to do with the 500 stocks that make up the S&P 500 index.
Also, with the Dow components, it is easy to see which ones have more weight. If IBM (International Business M achines), CVX (Chevron), and M CD
(M cDonald’s) are all down on the day, this is going to have more of an impact on the Dow than if BAC (Bank of America), AA (Alcoa), and GE (General Electric)
were all down on the day.
Figure 4.7 shows a listing of all of the Dow stocks and the current percentage weighting each has within the index. Again, this would be very difficult to do with all
500 stocks of the S&P 500.

Why Are Futures Easier to Trade Than Stocks?
If traders currently are in an individual stock, there can be all kinds of outside influences that can move the price. M aybe insiders are dumping their own stock. M aybe
an analyst has just issued an upgrade while the analyst’s trading department is dumping shares on an unsuspecting public. M aybe the company is giving positive
forward guidance as its last hope to stave off bankruptcy proceedings. The factors affecting an individual stock are endless.

65

Figure 4.6

However, when investors in general want to sell stocks, the Dow reacts by heading south. If they want to buy, the Dow spurts green. The “Dow effect”
encompasses individual investors, hedge funds, program traders, and arbitrage traders. In addition, the Dow moves actively in all buy and sell programs. It is supply
and demand at its finest, and this is what makes the mini-sized Dow futures contract such a great instrument to trade. Even better, while an individual stock may be
halted, the YM trades on. Even on days where the YM could reach a daily price limit—which is currently a 10 percent move in the entire index—this could still be
offset in the cash market using the Dow Exchange-Traded Funds (DIA). If traders have a stock that they own halted, there is nothing to do but wait—generally for
pain.

66

Figure 4.7

Why Do Newer Traders Do Better with the YM?
It is not an assumption that new traders do better with the YM . It is based on my observation of watching hundreds of traders go through a process in which they
move from trading stocks and jump into the futures markets. They start trading the ES, and they lose money. Then they switch to the YM , and things start taking
shape and they make money. I’ve even watched newer traders start off in the YM , then try the ES, then the NQ, and then the TF—and they always come back to the
YM . Why is this? Part of the reason is psychological—it just sounds better to take a 13-point profit as opposed to an equivalent 1.25 points in the ES. I’ve watched
ES traders let a “small” 1.25 profit turn into a loss, whereas a YM trader with an equivalent 13 points will automatically and unhesitatingly sell off a couple of
contracts in order to cash in some profits. Finally, it is important to realize that the best traders in the world are trading the ES. As a newer trader, it is not the best idea
to go up against these people. If you are just starting out in Tai Kwon Do, do you want to spar with a beginning white belt or an advanced black belt? The YM doesn’t
have the intensity of the ES crowd. Remember, traders are not trading a market—they are trading other traders. Cut your teeth on the YM , then venture into deeper
waters.
This may seem like I’m knocking the ES, but I’m really not. It’s an awesome contract to trade, and later in the book there are plenty of setups in which I utilize this
contract. However, this is a contract for professionals, and I do think it is better for newer and intermediate traders to stick with the YM in order to improve their odds
of success.

67

