 By the 1990s, behavioral finance had become popular. With it came challenges to rational expectations and the EMH. The Nobel laureate Robert Shiller (1992) wrote, “This argument for the efficient market hypothesis represents one of the most remarkable errors in the history of economic thought. It is remarkable in the immediacy of its logical error and in the sweep and implications for its conclusions.” 
 Before then, prominent economists sometimes had to hide in the active management closet. Charlie Munger, Warren Buffett’s right-hand man, wrote, “One of the greatest economists of the world is a substantial shareholder in Berkshire Hathaway and has been for a long time. His textbook taught that the stock market was perfectly efficient, and that nobody could beat it. But his own money went into Berkshire Hathaway and made him wealthy.” 7 
 According to Fortune magazine, that economist was the same Paul Samuelson whose bestselling textbook championed the cause of efficient markets and who had published an academic proof in support of EMH! 8 
 Samuelson’s 1974 paper, “Challenge to Judgment,” is what inspired John Bogle of Vanguard to start the first public index fund in 1976. Afterward, Samuelson wrote the following about what some referred to as Bogle’s folly, “I rank this Bogle’s invention along with the invention of the wheel, the alphabet, Gutenberg printing, and wine and cheese; a mutual fund that never made Bogle rich but elevated the long-term returns of the mutual-fund owners. Something new under the sun.” 9 
 So here we have Samuelson inspiring the first public index fund and then praising it to the high heavens, while Warren Buffett actively manages Samuelson’s own money. Maybe the wheel, the alphabet, and Gutenberg printing were not that great after all. 
 THE MOMENTUM ANOMALY 
 As more people began questioning EMH orthodoxy, an intriguing area started appearing in the academic literature. The burgeoning field of behavioral finance led some to question whether investors always acted rationally and in their own best interests. People acting in emotional and irrational ways could cause prices to depart systematically from their fundamental values in predictable ways. Maybe the markets could be beat after all, since irrational investors might allow anomalies to persist. In light of this possibility, momentum started to receive attention from the academic community beginning in the early 1990s. Behavioral factors could be used to explain many of the characteristics of momentum. 
 After years of momentum research by many academics, even Eugene Fama and Kenneth French, two of the founders of EMH, began paying attention to momentum, which they called the “premier anomaly.” 10 Momentum was powerful, persistent, and not explainable by any of the commonly known risk factors. 
 Not only did momentum research benefit from EMH losing its hold over modern finance, but the findings of momentum researchers added considerably to the body of knowledge that itself contradicted the efficient markets hypothesis. 
 The following chapters will show how I combined the best elements of academic momentum research, added a few ideas of my own, and came up with a simple and practical method for generating exceptional profits with less risk by using momentum. Furthermore, I will show how you can apply this methodology to the largest liquid markets having high expected long-run returns. 
 Before doing this, I will introduce you to the history of momentum theory so you can understand and appreciate momentum’s historical effectiveness and longevity. I will also show how momentum fits into the strange and mysterious world of modern finance. Then we will look at the logical underpinnings behind momentum to help you better understand how and why it works. Next, we will look at asset choices and alternative investment opportunities. I will then be ready to present a simple and effective momentum-based model that you can use. 
 After presenting my model, I will explore other momentum approaches and additional applications using dual momentum. By the end of the book, you should have a good understanding of momentum, as well as everything you need to know in order reap its rewards.

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 10 
 FINAL THOUGHTS 
          What, me worry? 
 — Alfred E. Neuman 
 J OHN MAYNARD KEYNES ONCE SAID, “If economists could manage to get themselves thought of as humble, competent people on a level with dentists, that would be splendid.” I do not know what it is about dentists, but Warren Buffett also said, “Full-time professionals in other fields, let’s say dentists, bring a lot to the layman. But in aggregate, people get nothing for their money from professional money managers.” 
 Unfortunately, I am too old to attend dental school. As an alternative, I came up with dual momentum. Doing so has been an interesting and rewarding adventure. 
 Eugene Fama said that the aim of model development is to get you to know more about the markets afterward than when you started. That has certainly been the case for me with respect to dual momentum. 
 Charles Darwin once wrote, “It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent, but rather the one most adaptable to change.” Dual momentum is nothing if not adaptable. Relative strength momentum goes with the flow in selecting the best-performing assets. Absolute momentum tunes in to market dynamics by adapting to changing market conditions. Adaptation is what ensures our long-run success and ultimate survival. 
 According to Lao Tzu, the best way to manage anything is by making use of its inherent nature. Dual momentum lets us do that by dynamically changing our market exposure in accordance with regime shifts while simultaneously exploiting investor behavioral biases and capturing high-relative-strength returns. One of the ubiquitous sayings of Wall Street is that bull markets climb a wall of worry. With dual momentum, that expression instead becomes, “Don’t Worry. Be Happy.” All we have to do is follow our model. 
 OLD INVESTMENT PARADIGM 
 The old investment paradigm starts with naive investing by individual investors, some of whom make decisions by listening to prognosticators. Warren Buffett commented on this too, saying the only value of stock forecasters is to make fortunetellers look good. Sturgeon’s law also comes to mind: “Ninety percent of everything is crap.” Individual investors often overtrade, underdiversify, and succumb to a number of common behavioral errors. 
 Having others take over the decision-making process through active investment management usually subjects one to high fees, similar overtrading, and some of the same behavioral biases that plague individual investors. 
 The old paradigm also relies on fixed income to reduce portfolio volatility and drawdown. That helped some during the bond bull market of the past 30 years, but it may not be the prudent thing to do now. Risk parity, which substitutes other risks for reduced volatility from equities, takes this to an extreme and may be ill timed now in today’s low-interest-rate environment. 
 Everything-but-the-kitchen-sink diversification may also be disappointing in the years ahead. Too much diversification can lead to mediocre returns due to the lack of decent risk premium. As Warren Buffett said, “Diversification may preserve wealth, but concentration builds wealth.” 
 Those who have been paying close attention to academic research might realize that value and small-cap investing may no longer offer good opportunities for abnormal profits. The same may be true of smart beta, which often turns out to be not very smart after all. 
 Under the old paradigm, investors who stand the best chance of succeeding are those using low-cost, passively managed index funds as recommended by Warren Buffett, Charles Schwab, John Bogle, Bernie Madoff (okay, forget Bernie Madoff), and others. 1 Yet passive index funds are still subject to large drawdowns. They also may still trigger emotional responses and create unwise investor behavior at inopportune times. 
 NEW INVESTMENT PARADIGM 
 In contrast to this old hit-and-miss paradigm, our new dual momentum paradigm puts us in harmony with market forces. It uses simple ideas that work in the real world and are easy to implement. 
 Due to myopic loss aversion and too much focus on short-term return variability, investors may hold more bonds than they should in order to maximize their long-run wealth. This aversion to equities has led to a higher equity risk premium. 
 With dual momentum, we can comfortably focus more on equities, especially U.S. equities, and capture this higher-risk premium. We still use fixed income with its lower expected return, but we use it primarily when equities are weak and it makes the most sense to hold bonds. 
 Our new paradigm uses relative strength momentum to enhance returns by taking advantage of intramarket trends. More importantly, our new paradigm uses absolute momentum to ensure that those trends are positive and to reduce the large drawdowns that would still exist if one used only relative momentum. 
 It is this elegant combination of relative and absolute momentum that translates overall into higher expected returns with lower expected risk. Dual momentum helps remove emotional and behavioral biases in others from the decision-making process. In fact, it allows us to take advantage of these biases instead of having them adversely affect us. 
 CONTINUING EFFECTIVENESS OF MOMENTUM 
 The outperformance of momentum on over the past 200 years of data across dozens of markets and asset classes suggests that the momentum anomaly is not just a short-lived one. Since dual momentum is such a good thing, it might be natural to wonder if it might lose its effectiveness when more people finally discover and start using it. Of course, any anomaly can lose some profitability once it starts to be widely followed. However, the deep-seated behavioral biases behind momentum are quite strong, and human nature does not easily change. Furthermore, due to human inertia and lingering ignorance, it is unlikely that the majority of people will suddenly wake up and become enthusiastic momentum investors. This should help keep many investors trading against momentum rather than with it. 
 As an indication of this, the performance of actively managed funds in aggregate is clearly inferior to the performance of passively managed funds, due largely to the higher costs of active management. 2 People have known this for many years, yet over 70% of all funds are still actively managed. 3 Similarly, ETFs have many advantages over mutual funds, such as intraday liquidity, lower expense ratios, and preferential tax treatment. Yet there is only $1.62 trillion invested in ETFs compared to $14.8 trillion invested in mutual funds. 
 Momentum may very well show this same kind of disconnect. Some of those to whom I have explained dual momentum do not appreciate it as the “premier anomaly,” and regard it as a niche rather than as a core investment strategy. There are several possible reasons for this. First, I may be a terrible communicator. (For the sake of those buying this book, I hope that is not the case.) Then there are the usual behavioral biases of anchoring and conservatism with respect to something new. Investors are slow to learn and prefer the familiar to the unfamiliar. Next is skepticism by some regarding the efficacy of trend-following methods like absolute momentum. Furthermore, one usually has to invest some time and energy to really understand and appreciate the benefits of dual momentum investing. I hope that this book will help in that regard. Those willing to take the time and make the required effort should have a substantial advantage over most other investors. 
 CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES 
 There will undoubtedly be periods when dual momentum underperforms its benchmarks. During those times, investors may lose sight of the big picture and be tempted to behave in ways that hurt them in the long run. The main challenge facing dual momentum investors in the future may very well be their own willingness to follow the model patiently and with the requisite discipline. It is human nature to want to tinker and attempt to add value even when it is impossible to do so. Unfortunately, because of overconfidence, we tend to overweight our own opinions so that most “enhancement” efforts actually end up being counterproductive. 
 Grove et al. (2000) did a meta-analysis, or study of studies, on 136 published papers across a wide range of professions in which they analyzed the accuracy of quantitative models versus expert judgment. 4 Models beat experts 94% of the time. Human judgment prevailed over quantitative models in only eight studies, and all of these had access to information not available to the quantitative models. Even when given access to the quantitative model results, experts still underperformed the models. Quantitative models had become a ceiling rather than a floor. According to Grove et al., “Humans are susceptible to many errors in clinical judgment. These include ignoring base rates, assigning nonoptimal weights to cues, failure to take into account regression toward the mean, and failure to properly assess covariation.” 5 
 Jim Simons, the billionaire founder of Renaissance Technologies and Medallion Fund, is one of the best systems traders on the planet. His personal income in 2013 from managing his hedge funds was $2.2 billion. Simons says, “So if you’re going to trade using models, you should just slavishly use the models. You do whatever the hell it says no matter how smart or dumb you think it is now.” 6 
 I have learned through my experiences with dual momentum the importance of firmly adhering to a proven, disciplined approach that has clearly shown it can successfully adapt to different market conditions. I have also come to recognize that I am no match for dual momentum and to value it as my best investment friend. 
 In the words of Richard Driehaus, “The stock market is like a woman. You observe her. You respond to her. And you respect her.” 7 That is not as easy as it sounds. Just ask my ex-wife. 
 Dual momentum gives one the framework for accomplishing this. It has helped me to respond appropriately and confidently to market forces, and it can help you do the same. In the words of Victor Hugo, “The future has many names. For the weak, it means the unattainable. For the fearful, it means the unknown. For the courageous, it means opportunity.” I wish you all the best on your own dual momentum–based journey. 

 ALL ABOARD! 

 Momentum is like being on an express train bound for the riches of Golconda. On this journey, our main rolling stock is the Equities Special . If it is passed by a faster-moving train, we hop on over to keep moving forward as quickly as possible. Occasionally, all equity trains come to a stop and go into reverse. When that happens, we’re going to ride with old Railroad “Treasury” Bill, who moves along slow and steady. Once the Equities Special gets moving along nicely again, we return to it, settle back down, and enjoy the rewarding ride. 
 On our pleasant journey, we swiftly pass the Lake Wobegon Flyer , actively engineered by former mutual fund managers who all think they are better than each other. We speed by the Buy and Behold Line , with its efficient conductor who randomly walks around shouting, “Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead!” That would be appropriate if he were conducting a smooth-sailing ship, but he has to instead traverse the ups and downs of many hills and valleys, which can cause passenger distress. 
 We pass a trainyard full of expensive, hedged wrecks and long/short conveyances going around and around in silly circles, getting nowhere fast. With not so much to power it now, the Commodities Caboose falls far behind after some bumpy rides hither and yon. We pass the Managed Futures Limited that just ran out of steam, and there lies the steel-drivin’ man, John Henry, along with Casey “Tudor” Jones. 
 Finally, we come to Dante’s Station with its flashing sign, “Abandon All Hope, You Who Enter Here.” “Dazed and Confused” blares from the loudspeakers. We sing out to the poor souls who are sitting on their assets doing nothing now: 
          Now listen to the jingle, and the rumble, and the roar, as she dashes thro’ the woodland, and speeds along the shore, See the mighty rushing engine, hear the merry bell ring out, as we speed along in safety, on the Dual Momentum Route . 8

Dual Momentum Investing: An Innovative Strategy for Higher Returns with Lower Risk 

 CHAPTER 2 
 WHAT GOES UP . . . STAYS UP 
          It may be that the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but that’s the way to bet. 
 — Damon Runyon 
 S O WHAT IS MOMENTUM? IT is the tendency of investments to persist in their performance. Investments that have done well will continue to do well, while those that have done poorly will continue to do poorly. 
 CLASSICAL IDEAS 
 Momentum investing has a long and distinguished history. I will take you through its evolution. The idea of momentum began with Newton’s first law of motion: every object in a state of uniform motion tends to remain in that state of motion. It is unlikely Sir Isaac had investing in mind when he came up with this law. If he did, then he should have paid more attention to apples falling from trees and reminded himself that what goes up, must come back down. Newton lost a fortune in the South Seas stock bubble of 1718–1721 by buying too late and holding on too long. Newton afterward said, “I can calculate the movement of stars, but not the madness of men.” Alas, poor Newton was not alone in that regard. 
 The first notable person to express momentum principles in investment terms was the great classical economist, David Ricardo. Ricardo wisely considered downside as well as upside momentum when he said in 1838, “Cut your losses; let your profits run on.” Ricardo followed his own advice and retired at the age of 42, having amassed a fortune of $65 million in today’s dollars. 
 MOMENTUM IN THE EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY 
 Momentum principles in the form of a disciplined investing style were alive and well early in the twentieth century. Momentum dominates much of the famous book Reminiscences of a Stock Operator by journalist Edwin Lefèvre (2010), originally written in 1923. It describes the thoughts and exploits of legendary trader Jesse Livermore. Livermore once said, “Big money is not in the individual fluctuations, but in sizing up the entire market and its trend.” Trend following is a form of momentum investing. Livermore introduced the momentum idea of buying stocks when they are making new highs. His statement “Prices are never too high to begin buying or too low to begin selling” accurately describes momentum style investing. 
 Richard Wyckoff also wrote books beginning in the 1920s that drew heavily on momentum principles. In his 1924 book, How I Trade in Stocks and Bonds: Being Some Methods Evolved and Adapted During My Thirty-Three Years Experience in Wall Street , Wyckoff advocated buying the strongest stocks within the strongest sectors and within the strongest index when they were trending up during the marking up phase of their accumulation-distribution cycle. Wyckoff used his ideas to amass a fortune in the stock market before he retired to a 9.5-acre estate and mansion in the Hamptons, next to Alfred P. Sloan, the legendary chairman of General Motors. 
 In his bestseller, The Seven Pillars of Stock Market Success , George Seamans (1939) recommended that traders buy stronger stocks during an advance and short weaker stocks during declines, which is very much in tune with relative strength momentum investing. 
 On the quantitative side of things, beginning in the late 1920s, Arnold Bernhard, founder of the Value Line Investment Survey, successfully used relative strength price momentum in conjunction with earnings growth momentum. According to the Value Line website, Group 1 stocks are those ranked highest in performance over the past year and that had accelerating earnings growth. From 1965 through 2012, Group 1 stocks had an average annual gain of 12.9% before dividends, while the S&P 500 gained 6.1%. Group 5 stocks had a –9.8% annual loss. Dividing a stock’s latest 10-week average relative performance by its 52-week average relative price is the price momentum factor still used today by Value Line. 
 H. M. Gartley developed momentum-based relative velocity ratings in the 1920s. The Dow theorist Robert Rhea (1932) subsequently published these ratings in his book The Dow Theory . Gartley (1945) himself wrote an article titled “Relative Velocity Statistics: Their Application in Portfolio Analysis” for the Financial Analysts Journal . In that article Gartley wrote, “In addition to the usual valuation methods applied to stock, analysts should consider its velocity. The velocity statistic is a technical factor in the stock’s price volatility that measures the percentage rise and fall of a stock against an average.” This was yet another way to express relative strength price momentum. 
 In his 1935 book Profits in the Stock Market , Gartley introduced the world to trend-following moving averages. Bernhardt and Gartley were both early pioneers of quantitative, rules-based momentum strategies. 
 The first truly scientific study and published academic paper on momentum was by Alfred Cowles III and Herbert E. Jones (1937). Cowles was a prominent economist who founded the Cowles Foundation for Economic Research, initially at the University of Chicago and now at Yale. There were no computers back then, so Cowles and Jones painstakingly hand-compiled stock performance statistics from 1920 through 1935. This was a remarkable accomplishment at that time. Cowles and Jones found that the strongest stocks during the preceding year had a very strong tendency to remain strong during the following year. In their own words, “Taking one year as the unit of measurement for the period 1920 to 1935, the tendency is very pronounced for stocks which have exceeded the median in one year to exceed it also in the year following.” The same basis underlies today’s relative strength momentum approach to investing, and the conclusions of Cowles and Jones are just as valid today as when they were first revealed in 1937. 
 MOMENTUM IN THE MID-TWENTIETH CENTURY 
