
The Crash of '87

353

after the Second World War. That was the time when many American corporations became "multinational" and the United States
consolidated its hegemony over the world economy. Similarly,
the birth of Japanese multinational corporations will coincide
with Japan's becoming the world's banker and economic leader.
Already, large-scalk Japanese investments give Japan considerable political leverage in the United States. Almost every state in
the Union has establibhed trade-promotion offices in Japan. Their
endeavors are not likely to make much headway if the Congressmen representing the state are too vocal in supporting protectionist measures. In spite of all the posturing, protectionism may no
longer be a viable policy option. And in a few years' time, when
the Japanese have built their factories, they may become the most
ardent protectionists-to keep out competition from Korea and
Taiwan.

.

There have been many instances in the course of history when
economic and financial and, eventually, political and military
leadership passed from one country to another. The latest instance was in the interwar period, when the United States supplanted Great Britain. Nevertheless, the prospect of Japan's
emerging as the dominant financial power in the world is very
disturbing, not only from the point of view of the United States
but also from that of the entire Western civilization.
From the narrowly American standpoint, the damage is too obvious to deserve much elaboration. The loss of our preeminent
position is bound to engender a crisis in our sense of national
identity. Having just expended enormous sums in the pursuit of
military superiority, albeit these sums were borrowed abroad, we
are ill prepared to cope with the fact that we are losing our economic superiority. Our sense of national identity is less firmly
grounded in tradition than in the case of Great Britain, so the
crisis is bound to be all the more deeply felt. The consequences
for our political behavior, both internally and internationally, are
incalculable.
The implications for our civilization are equally profound but
less obvious. The international trading system is an open system;
its members are sovereign states which have to treat each other
on the basis of equality. That would not change if Japan takes over
leadership. On the contrary, the Japanese can be expected to step
more gingerly than the Americans have on occasion.

3 54
t

I

Prescription

The problem is more subtle. The United States and Great Britain are members of the same culture; that is not true of Japan. The
Japanese have shown tremendous capacity to learn and to grow,
but the society in which they live remains fundamentally different from ours. The Japanese think in terms of subordination and
dominance. Contrast this with the notion that all men are created
equal, and the difference between the two cultures is brought into
focus.
Both the United States and Great Britain are open societies:
internally, people enjoy a large degree of freedom; externally, the
borders are open to the movement of goods, people, capital and
ideas to various degrees. Japan is still, to a large extent, a closed
society. The features of an open society, such as a democratic
f o m of government, have been imposed by an occupying power
after a lost war. But the value system which permeates Japanese
society is a closed one: the interests of the individual are subordinated to the interests of the social whole.
This subordination is not achieved through coercion; Japan
bears no resemblance whatsoever to a totalitarian state. It is
merely a country with a very strong sense of national mission and
social cohesion. The Japanese want to be part of a group that
strives to be number one, whether it is their company or their
nation; and they are willing to make considerable sacrifices in the
service of that goal. They cannot be faulted for holding such values; indeed, it is more appropriate to criticize Americans for their
unwillingness to suffer any personal inconvenience for the common good. Japan is a nation on the rise; we have become decadent.
The question is, whether the United States in particular and tha
rest of the world in general will allow itself to be dominated by
an alien society with such a strong sense of national identity. The
question is troubling not only for us but also for the Japanese.
There is a strong school of thought that wants Japan to open up
in order to become more acceptable to the rest of the world. But
there is also a strong commitment to traditional values and an
almost pathological fear, especially in the older generation, that
Japan may lose its drive before it becomes number one. Japan is a
society in transition, and it may well become much more open as
it assumes the role of leadership. There are many internal tensions and contradictions which tend to undermine social cohesion and hierarchical values. Much depends on how fast the

The Crash of '87

355

transition occurs. If,the United States proved itself somewhat
more viable than it has been of late, the value system of an open
society would also become more attractive to the Japanese.
The closed character of Japanese society manifests itself in
many areas. Formally a democracy, Japan has been ruled by one
party since its present constitution was introduced; the succession of prime mini4ters is determined by negotiations behind
closed doors. Although the domestic market is formally open,
foreign companies find it impossible to penetrate it without a
domestic ally. But nowhere is the difference between the openness of the Western system and the closed character of the Japanese more dramatidally demonstrated than in the financial
markets.
The Western world has gone overboard in allowing financial
markets to function unhindered by any government regulation.
That was a grievous mistake, as the Crash of 1987 has demonstrated. Financial markets are inherently unstable; stability can
be maintained only if it is made an objective of public policy.
Instability is cumulative. As I have tried to show elsewhere in
this book, the longer markets are allowed to develop without regulation, the more unstable they become, until eventually they
crash.
The Japanese attitude toward financial markets is totally different. The Japanese treat markets as a means to an end and manipulate them accordingly. The authorities and ttfe institutional
players are connected by a subtle system of mutual obligation.
Recent events have provided an insight into the way the system
operates. The first time the market was set to collapse, after Black
Monday, a telephone call from the Ministry of Finance was sufficient to rally the financial institutions. In the second instance, at
the time of the public issue of Nippon Telephone & Telegraph
shares, financial institutions proved less responsive, perhaps because the Ministry of Finance had used up its chits in the first
phone call. It now had to rely on the brokers, whose survival was
directly threatened. By giving them license to manipulate the
market, the authorities avoided disaster.
Whether a collapse can be avoided indefinitely is one of the
most fascinating questions about the current financial situation.
It still awaits an answer. The authorities have allowed a speculative bubble to develop in Tokyo real estate and in the stock markets whose magnitude has few parallels in history. To illustrate,

356

Prescription

, Nippon Telephone & Telegraph shares were sold to the public at

270 times earnings, while American Telephone & Telegraph was
valued at 18 times. If this were a free market, it would have col-

,
I

lapsed already. There has been no example in history when a
bubble of this magnitude has been deflated in an orderly manner
without bursting. The authorities have been unable to prevent a
crash in the Japanese bond market, but they may be able to do so
in the stock market. The continuing strength of the yen works to
their advantage. If they succeed, it would represent a historic first,
the dawn of a new era in which financial markets are manipulated
for the benefit of the public good.
The effect of the crash was to move the Japanese stock market
nearer to being a closed system. Foreigners owned less than 5%
of Japanese stocks at the outset of the crisis, and they dumped
much of their stock during and after it. The selling was absorbed,
interestingly, not so much by Japanese institutions as by the Japanese public, which was encouraged by the brokers to go heavily
into debt. Japanese brokers did, in fact, speak of buying stocks
during the crisis as a patriotic duty whose accomplishment will
set Japan apart from the rest of the world. Margin debt is at an alltime record. How to reduce the debt load without precipitating
forced liquidation of margin accounts is the task now confronting
the authorities.
Why did the Japanese authorities allow the speculative bubble
to develop in the first place? That is another fascinating question
about which one can only conjecture. There were external pressures-the United States was pushing for lower interest rates in
Japan-but the Japanese would not have yielded if it had not
suited them.
At first, the inflation of financial assets allowed the authorities
to discharge their obligations toward the commercial banks at a
time when the real economy was in deep trouble. Without the
land and stock market boom, the commercial banks would have
seen many of their loans to industrial companies turn sour, and
their earnings would have suffered. Land and stock market speculation allowed them to expand their loan portfolios against
seemingly good collateral and also allowed the industrial companies to make up for their earnings shortfall by earnings derived
from "zaitech"-that is, financial manipulation. The land boom
has also served another purpose: it helped to preserve a high
domestic savings rate and a favorable trade balance in spite of the

The Crash of '87

357

rise in the value of the yen. With the cost of housing rising faster
than wages, Japanese wage earners had good reason to save an
increasing portion of their income. With the domestic economy
in recession, the savings were available for investing abroad. That
was an ideal recipe for amassing wealth and power in the world,
even if the foreign investments depreciated in value. I suspect
that at least a fractioniof the Japanese power elite would be quite
pleased to see investors lose some money: it would prevent the
Japanese from going soft before Japan has become great. How else
can one explain the willingness of a democratic government to
sell shares to its electorate at obviously inflated prices?
But rising land and' stock prices soon started to have adverse
consequences. The high savings rate brought additional pressure
from abroad to stimulate the domestic economy, and the government finally had to give in. Moreover, the gap between those who
owned land and those who did not widened to such an extent as
to threaten social cohesion. As soon as the domestic economy
began to recover, there was no need to allow banks to finance
speculative transactions; on the contrary, it was appropriate to
redirect their resources toward the real economy. The attempt to
rein in bank lending and the money supply set off the chain of
events I have reviewed earlier.
It is ironic that the Japanese should have a better understanding
of the reflexive character of the financial markets than the Western
world does, and it is regrettable that they shou1ct"be using it to
ensure the success of a closed system. If we don't like what is
happening, we should take steps to develop a viable alternative.
The stock market boom has diverted our attention from the
fundamental deterioration in the financial position of the United
States. With the frenetic activity in financial markets and the lure
of quick rewards, it was at least possible to pretend that the policies pursued by the Reagan Administration were working. The
Crash of 1987 comes as a rude awakening. Many of the profits
turned out to be illusory, and frenetic activity will soon be succeeded by the stillness of the morgue. Prospects are dismal. One
way or another, we face a reduction in living standards. Much
will depend on the route we choose.
The most likely path is the one I have outlined earlier. It is the
path followed by Great Britain before us, and it is likely to produce similar results as far as the United States is concerned. The

358'

4

Prescription

effect on the world economy may be much more negative because
of the importance of the dollar.
There is also a temptation to pursue a protectionist policy, but
for the reasons I have stated earlier, it is no longer a viable alternative. Nevertheless, it could do a lot of mischief.
Finally, there is the possiblity of reasserting the leadership we
failed to exercise. This would involve not only putting our own
house in order but also bringing a new international financial
order into existence which is appropriate to the altered circumstances.
We cannot have a smoothly functioning international economy
without a stable international currency. The monetary authorities
began to recognize this fact with the Plaza Agreement of October
1985 and reconfirmed it with the Louvre Accord of February
1987. Unfortunately, the steps they took were inadequate, and the
Louvre Accord fell apart in the Crash of 1987. Since the decision
to stabilize the dollar can be held responsible, one way or another,
for the crash, it is highly unlikely that the Louvre Accord can be
patched up. Whatever agreement is reached, its credibility will
have been diminished by the fact that when it came to the crunch,
the previous agreement had been abandoned. And it is highly
doubtful whether the Louvre Accord should be patched up-after
all, it did cause the Crash of 1987.
Trying to protect the currency at an unsustainable level can
plunge the country into protracted depression; that is what happened to Great Britain in 1926 when it returned to the gold standard at the prewar level.
It could be argued that the dollar is reasonably valued at
DM1.65 and Y132 to the dollar. This is true in the sense that a
further fall in its value would not bring any appreciable improvement in the trade balance in the near term. But this was already
true when the dollar was 10% higher. The reason is that the adjustment process takes time, while a fall in the value of the currency has an immediate negative impactqthe famous J-curve
effect). Moreover, the more unstable the exchange rate, the more
reluctant people are to make the investments necessary to adjust
to it.
The argument only goes to prove that there is simply no realistic exchange rate at which the dollar can continue fulfilling its
role as the international reserve currency: the dollar is unsound
at any price. Holders of financial assets seek the best store of

The Crash of '87
359
value, and the dollar no longer qualifies. A country with a large
budget deficit and a large trade deficit cannot expect foreigners to
accept an ever-increasing flow of its currency. Yet the international financial system cannot function without a stable currency
as its foundation. This is the central lesson that emerges from the
Crash of 1987.
We desperately neqd an international currency system that is
not based on the dollar. Yet the yen is not yet ready to serve as
the international reserve currency-partly because the Japanese
financial markets are not sufficiently open, and partly because the
rest of the world is not ready to accept Japanese hegemony. The
ideal solution would be a genuine international currency, issued
and controlled by a genuine international bank. International
lending for balance-of-payments purposes would then be designated in the international currency, and the value of the currency
would be tied to gold br to a basket of commodities, ensuring that
debts would have to be repaid in full. Only when the dollar loses
its privileged status will the United States cease to flood the world
with dollars. The sooner we make the transition, the better the
chances of arresting the economic decline of the United States.
Unfortunately, we are not yet ready to learn the central lesson
of the crash. The prevailing wisdom still maintains that markets
are self-correcting and exchange rates ought to be allowed to find
their equilibrium levels. The Crash of '87 has, if anything, reinforced this line of thought. As a consequence, w c a n expect a
period of continuing turmoil in financial markets, although the
focus of attention may shift from the stock market to the currency
market and the bond market and, eventually, to the market for
precious metals.
The idealof an international currency and an international central bank hgs few supporters. Ironically, it is likely to get a more
enthusiastic response in Japan than in the United States. There
are many people in Japan who would like their country to develop into a more open society. The Japanese have still vivid
memories of the Second World War when they tried to go it alone.
They would much rather flourish within a worldwide trading and
financial system than embark on the impossible task of creating
their own. As newcomers, they would be willing to accept an
arrangement that does not fully reflect their current strength.
Yet it is the United States that has the most to gain from a
reform of the international currency system. It would allow us to

360
I

Prescription

consolidate our position in the world which we are otherwise in
danger of losing. We are still in a position to strike a favorable
deal, especially in view of our military might. Most important, we
could preserve an open system in which Japan would be one of
the leading members, becoming a more open society in the process. The alternative is a period similar to the 1930s: financial turmoil, beggar-thy-neighbor policies leading to worldwide
depression and perhaps even war.

I

EPILOGUE

The unifying theme of this book is the concept of reflexivity. I
have focused on its implications for the social sciences in general
and financial markets in particular. I have left other areas largely
unexplored. I should like to mention them briefly here, although
my thoughts relating to them are not properly developed. They
ought to form the subject of another book in the future, but I am
afraid I may not have a chance to write it, especially if I remain
involved in financial markets.
First, the question of values. Economic theory has trained us to
a t are
take values as given, although the evidence s u g g e ~ ~ t hthey
shaped by a reflexive process. Most values can be reduced to
economic terms nowadays-the most recent Nobel laureate in
economics earned his prize by interpreting politics as an economic process in which the participants seek to maximize their
own benefits-but that has not always been the case, and even
today there are many parts of the world where profit-maximizing
behavior takes second place to other motivations. Religion and
tradition are less easily amenable to economic analysis than is
politics in a materialistic culture. We have great difficulty in understanding a phenomenon like Islamic fundamentalism; at the
other end of the scale, a movement that we profess to admire,
Solidarity, is also alien to our way of thinking.
The predominance of economic values in Western and westernized societies is itself a function of our economic success. Values
evolve in reflexive fashion: the fact that economic activity has
borne positive results has enhanced the value we put on eco-

362
I

t

Epilogue

nomic values. The same can be said about scientific method: the
triumphs of natural science have raised the status of scientific
method to unsustainable heights. Conversely, various forms of art
have played a much bigger role in cultures not very far removed
from our own just because it was easier to achieve positive results
in art than in economic activity. Even today, poetry carries a
weight in Eastern Europe, including the Soviet Union, that we
find difficult to appreciate in the West. There is little doubt in my
mind that our emphasis on material values, profit, and efficiency
has been carried to an extreme.
Reflexive processes are bound to lead to excesses, but it is impossible to define what is excessive because in matters of values
there is no such thing as normal. Perhaps the best way to approach the subject of values is to start from the position that they
are rooted in fantasy rather than reality. As a consequence, every
set of values has a flaw in it. We can then ask what are the elements of fantasy in a particular set of values and how the elements of fantasy and reality have interacted. Any other approach
would introduce a bias in favor of our own flawed set of values.
Values are closely associated with the concept of self-a reflexive concept if ever there was one. What we think has a much
greater bearing on what we are than on the world around us. What
we are cannot possibly correspond to what we think we are, but
there is a two-way interplay between the two concepts. As we
make our way in the world our sense of self evolves. The relationship between what we think we are and what we are in reality is
the key to happiness-in other words, it provides the subjective
meaning of life.
I could readily provide a reflexive interpretation of my own
development but I am reluctant to do so because it would be too
revealing, not to say incriminating. It will come as no surprise to
the reader when I admit that I have always harbored an exaggerated view of my self-importance-to put it bluntly, I fancied myself as some kind of god or an economic reformer like Keynzs
(each with his General Theory) or, even better, a scientist like
Einstein (reflexivity sounds like relativity). My sense of reality
was strong enough to make me realize that these expectations
were excessive and I kept them hidden as a guilty secret. This
was a source of considerable unhappiness through much of my
adult life. As I made my way in the world, reality came close
enough to my fantasy to allow me to admit my secret, at least to

Epilogue

363

myself. Needless to Fay, I feel much happier as a result. I have
been fortunate enough to be able to act out some of my fantasies
-this book, in particular, fills me with a great sense of accomplishment. Reality falls far short of my expectations, as the reader
can readily observe, but I no longer need to harbor a sense of guilt.
Writing this book, and especially these lines, exposes me in a way
I never dared to expqse myself before, but 1feel I can afford it: my
success in business protects me. I am free to explore my abilities
to their limits, exactly because I do not know where those limits
are. Criticism will help me in this endeavor. The only thing that
could hurt me is if my success encouraged me to return to my
childhood fantasies of omnipotence-but that is not likely to happen as long as I remain engaged in the financial markets, because
they constantly remind me of my limitations. Given my personality I have been extremely lucky in my career choice, but of
course it was not really a choice but a reflexive process in the
course of which both my career and my sense of self evolved in
tandem. I could say a lot more on the subject, but as long as I have
a career in business I have to plead the Fifth Amendment. There
is a point beyond which self-revelation can be damaging and one
of the flaws in my character, which I have not fully fathomed, is
the urge to reveal myself. Perhaps I was exaggerating a minute ago
when I said I am not afraid of exposing myself.
I also have some views on what could be called the meaning of
life in the objective sense-if it were not a contradtiction in terms
to use the word "objective" in this context. I start from the position that every human endeavor is flawed: if we were to discard
(everything that is flawed there would be nothing left. We must
therefore make the most of what we have; the alternative is to
embrace death. The choice is a real one, because death can be
embraced in a number of ways; the pursuit of perfection and
eternity in all its manifestations is equivalent to choosing the idea
of death over the idea of life. If we carry this line of argument to
its logical conclusion, the meaning of life consists of the flaws in
one's conceptions and what one does about them. Life can be seen
as a fertile fallacy.
So far I have spoken mainly in terms of the individual. But the
individual does not exist in isolation; his inherently imperfect
understanding makes him all the more dependent on the society
to which he belongs. The analysis that has led to the concept of
reflexivity also throws some light on the relationship between the
