Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

14
0%

13
0%

12
0%

11
0%

10
0%

90
%

80
%

70
%

60
%

50
%

40
%

30
%

20
%

10
%

0%

0%

206 • Way of the Turtle

Some Like It Rough
As the exercises above have demonstrated, a backtest is at best a
rough approximation of what one may expect in the future. Robust
measures are better predictors of future performance than are their
more sensitive counterparts, but the process is still imprecise. Anyone who tells you that you can expect to see a particular level of
performance is lying or does not know what he is talking about. If
he is trying to sell you something, I strongly suspect the former.
Chapter 13 covers some of the methods you can use to make
your trading more robust—that is, less likely to suffer from wild
swings in performance.

thirteen
BULLETPROOF SYSTEMS
Trading is not a sprint; it’s boxing. The market will beat you up,
screw with your head, and do anything it can to defeat you.
But when the bell sounds at the end of the twelfth round,
you must be standing in the ring in order to win.

ew traders who build trading systems are looking for a single
supercharged trading system that demonstrates the best possible results in historical testing. They believe a system that shows superior performance via historical data will indicate similar performance
in future trading. They look at tests showing a system (call it Omega)
that has a 10 percent better CAGR% and a 0.2 better MAR than
another system (call it Alpha) and conclude that they would be foolish to trade with Alpha when Omega seems so much better.
Later, with more experience, one realizes that there is no such
thing as a perfect system. The Omega system might perform better
in certain types of market conditions, and because of the prevalence of the most favorable conditions in the past the Omega system might have outperformed the Alpha system signiﬁcantly in
testing. Unfortunately, there is no guarantee that those conditions
will occur with the same frequency in the future as they did in the

N

• 207 •
Copyright © 2007 by Curtis M. Faith. Click here for terms of use.

208 • Way of the Turtle

past. In other words, the distribution of the types of markets may
be different in the future from what it was in the past. So if the performance differences that were shown in testing between Omega
and Alpha are a result of the particular distribution of types of markets, those differences could disappear if the distribution is different in the future.
Consider this example. Suppose Omega works much better than
Alpha when markets are trending and quiet but Alpha works better when markets are trending and volatile. Now suppose that in
the 20-year test that was done there were 13 years in which the
trends that occurred were predominantly quiet and 7 years in
which the trends were mostly volatile. If the same distribution
occurs in the future, Omega will have better performance.
But what if 5 of the 7 years of volatile trends occurred during the
last 10 years of testing? What if there were changes in market
behavior as a result of trader effects that would result in trends
being more volatile in the future? This might indicate that the
Alpha system would be more likely to have better performance in
the future since it performs better when there are volatile trends.
Conversely, what if the market seemed to indicate a likely cyclical
shift from quiet to volatile markets and back again? Would this not
make it more likely that the Omega system would perform better
in the future as the markets shifted back to more quiet trends from
the period of recent volatile trends?

The Unknowable Future
In many cases, the reality is that we simply do not have enough information to make these sorts of decisions with any certainty. The rea-

Bulletproof Systems • 209

son for this is that we do not have enough data. Consider the
sequence QQQVVQ. If this sequence represents the periods of quiet
versus volatile markets, can one determine with any reliability the
relative probability of future markets being volatile or quiet? If you
were paying attention in earlier chapters, you’d realize that a sample
size of six is not enough to draw any certain conclusions. Even if we
have a larger sequence such as VQQVQVVQQQQVVQ, it may
appear that there is a cycle, but there is not enough data for us to
make that assessment with any reliability.
In these cases, it is best to come to terms with the fact that we
do not have enough data and therefore do not know what the future
will bring; therefore, we cannot predict the relative performance of
systems in the future accurately except in very broad terms. A
mature understanding of this reality is critical to building a robust
trading program. As is the case with many aspects of trading, seeing the truth is a crucial ﬁrst step. Once you see it, you can make
decisions that reﬂect that truth and adjust your actions accordingly.

Robust Trading
Robust trading is about building a trading program that will perform
well no matter what the future brings. It is founded on accepting
the reality that no one can know the future and that there is a very
large margin of error inherent in any testing based on historical data.
Ironically, you will ﬁnd that your trading performance becomes
more predictable, once you build a trading program that takes into
account the unknowable nature of the future, The reason for this
seeming paradox is simple: If your trading program is built on the
premise that the future is unknowable, you are assured that the

210 • Way of the Turtle

future will bring conditions that your trading program anticipated,
something you did not predict. In contrast, a trading program built
on the assumption of a particular set of market characteristics—
almost any assumption at all, in fact—will suffer if the conditions
on which the program is based are not present.
So how do you build a trading program that is not dependent on
particular market conditions? There are two major attributes in any
robust trading program: diversity and simplicity. Nature provides
the best example of how these factors increase robustness. A strong
analogy can be made between the survival ability of an ecosystem
and individual species within that system and the robustness of a
trading program.

Diversity
At the level of the ecosystem, nature does not rely on one or two
species to perform a task. It does not have only one type of predator, only one food source, only one herbivore, or only one scavenger to clean up the remains of the dead. Diversity is important
because it insulates the ecosystem from the effects of radical change
in the population of one of the species.

Simplicity
Complex ecosystems are more resilient, and complex species seem
to have signiﬁcant advantages over simpler ones when the environment is stable. However, during times of change, complex species
are more likely to die off. At those times, the hardiest species are those
which are very simple, such as viruses and bacteria. Simple organisms are hardier because they are less dependent on their speciﬁc
surroundings. That simplicity is signiﬁcantly beneﬁcial when the

Bulletproof Systems • 211

ecosystem is subjected to major change such as that which might
occur if a large meteor struck the earth or a large volcano eruption
caused a major drop in temperatures. When the climate changes,
dependency on the previous climate is a signiﬁcant disadvantage.

Robust Organisms
There are some species that are complex but still are robust, or able
to survive in varying conditions. Those species generally developed
in climates or conditions where they were subjected to constant
change and therefore developed an ability to survive during those
changes. Those robust species serve as a model that can be used to
develop systems that are robust.
Now that we have considered the two building blocks of robustness in nature—diversity and simplicity—let’s examine ways to add
them to a trading program. Simplicity can be added by minimizing the rules that create dependencies on speciﬁc market conditions. Diversity can be added by trading as many markets as possible
that do not correlate with one another. It also can be added by trading many different types of systems at the same time so that no matter what market conditions the future brings, there will be some
systems in your portfolio that are performing well.

Robust Systems
The primary ways to make systems more robust is to have rules that
allow those systems to adapt to different market conditions and to keep
the systems simple and less susceptible to changes in the market.
You can build systems that are more robust by making them
adapt to market conditions as those conditions change. This

212 • Way of the Turtle

approach is analogous to those complex organisms in nature that
are able to survive in varying conditions because of their superior
adaptability. A human being is one example. People are able to survive in the deserts of the Sahara and the ice of the Arctic because
they have the brain power that allows them to adapt to those very
different environments.
Any system will perform better under certain market conditions.
Trend-following systems do better when markets are trending and
quiet; countertrend systems do better when markets are stable and
volatile. A portfolio ﬁlter is a rule that can make a system more
robust because it can ﬁlter out markets when a particular market
is not in a state that is favorable for a particular system. The
Donchian Trend system, for example, has a portfolio ﬁlter. It does
not allow trades when the market is breaking out against the trend,
as this occurs only when the market is not in a favorable state. A
breakout in the direction of the trend occurs more often in trending markets. The addition of this ﬁlter makes the system more
robust.
In a similar manner, simple rules make systems more robust
because those rules work in a greater variety of circumstances.
Complex systems generally are complex because they have been
designed to take advantage of some conditions or market behavior
that was noticed during system development. The more those rules
are added, the more the system becomes tied to a more speciﬁc set
of market conditions and behaviors. This makes it likelier that the
future will produce markets that don’t have those particular behaviors or in which the rules no longer work as well.
Simple rules that are built on more durable concepts will hold
up in actual trading better than will complex rules that are tailored

Bulletproof Systems • 213

to more speciﬁc market behavior. Keep your systems simple and
you will ﬁnd that they hold up better over time.

Market Diversiﬁcation
One of the most effective ways to improve the robustness of your
overall trading is to include a diverse range of markets. If you trade
more markets, you increase the chance that you will encounter
conditions favorable to your trading system in at least one of those
markets. In the case of trend-following systems, if you trade more
markets, you boost the odds that for any particular period there will
be a trend in one of those markets.
This means that you want to have a portfolio that includes as
many markets as possible. The markets should present new opportunities, and so they should not be highly correlated to other markets. For example, there are several short-term U.S. interest-rate
products that move almost in lockstep. Adding more than one of
these products to your portfolio will not add diversity.
If you are trading systems that do not require close monitoring,
you should consider trading foreign markets. Those markets can add
a lot of diversiﬁcation and help make your trading more robust and
consistent. Any of the systems shown here that buy on the open
based on closing price data will be relatively easy to trade on markets around the world because the time-zone differences are less
important if you have to worry about only market closes and opens.

Deciding Which Markets to Trade
At this time, the most popular platform for testing systems,
TradeStation, has the extreme limitation of being unable to test

214 • Way of the Turtle

more than one market at a time. One side effect of this is that many
traders think in terms of markets, not portfolios. This has led to the
erroneous belief that some markets should not be included in a
trend-following portfolio because those markets are not proﬁtable
or because they underperform compared with others.
There are two problems with this perspective. First, trends may
happen only every several years in some markets, and so short tests
of 5 or 10 years will not show the market’s full potential. Second,
the beneﬁt of diversiﬁcation for a market may outweigh any negative proﬁtability.
Consider the cocoa market example from Chapter 4. Recall
how that market had a long string of losing trades before there
was a good trend. This is very common. Here’s an example from
my Turtle days that is particularly noteworthy. In the early part
of 1985 Rich told us we no longer could trade coffee. I think he
felt that there was not enough volume for us to trade it and we
had been consistently losing money with it. That decision caused
us to lose out on what would have been our single biggest trade
(see Figure 13-1).
Since I did not take that trade, I can’t tell you exactly what I
would have made from memory, and so I performed a test using
the data from the March 1986 coffee contract. At the time of entry,
the value for N was 1.29 cents. This meant that I would have been
trading a unit size of 103 contracts since I traded a $5 million
account for all of 1985. Because we traded four units at a time, I
would have been long 412 contracts of coffee for that trade. The
proﬁt would have been approximately $34,000 per contract. The
aggregate proﬁt for the trade would have been 412 times $34,000,
or approximately $14 million, representing a 280 percent return on

Bulletproof Systems • 215

KC: Coffee-CSCE
280

260

240

Exit
234.37

220

200

180

160

140

Entry
141.91
Initial Stop
139.16

86
n
Ja

D

ec

19

19

85

85
19
ov
N

O

Se

ct

p

19

19

85

85

120

Enter Long
1985-10-10 Day

Figure 13-1

Exit 65 bars
1986-01-16 Open

The Coffee Trade We Missed

Copyright 2006 Trading Blox, LLC. All rights reserved worldwide.

the $5 million account for a single trade. No other trade from the
Turtle era came close to being as big as this trade that we missed.
Does this mean that one should trade all markets? Are there no
good reasons to exclude particular markets from trading? The primary
reason for not trading a particular market is liquidity. Markets that do
not have active trading and sufﬁcient volume can be much harder to
trade. The more successful you become, the more this becomes a limiting factor. It was the reason Rich kept us out of the coffee trade.
When you combined our trading sizes with Rich’s, we were trading
thousands of contracts in coffee when we entered and exited. That
was certainly at the edge of viable volume limits. Therefore, Rich’s
decision was a very rational one, though one I wished he had not
made before the coffee trade discussed above materialized.

216 • Way of the Turtle

You may be thinking that you can trade an illiquid market if you
have a small account size. This may be true depending on the type
of system you are using, but it may be wrong. The problem with
illiquid markets is not that you cannot get in and out most of the
time. The problem is that in certain circumstances you can have
many orders and no traders to take the other side. Illiquid markets
mean few buyers and sellers. So your single contract buy order
may be sitting in a pack of 200 to 500 contracts to buy when there
are no sellers at all. This does not happen as often in more liquid
markets.
Illiquid markets are also more susceptible to price shocks. Take
at look at the charts for rough rice, lumber, propane, and any market that trades less than a few thousand shares a day and compare
the number of large one-day moves with that in more liquid markets. You will ﬁnd that there are many more days with large unexpected price moves in the illiquid markets.

Different Types of Markets
There is another reason you might choose to exclude certain markets from your trading. Although I don’t believe that one should
exclude certain markets because they have not been as proﬁtable
as others when tested in a simulation, I do believe that there are
some fundamental differences between certain classes of markets
that warrant the exclusion of an entire class from trading with a particular class of systems.
Some traders believe that various individual markets are different and should be treated as such. I think the reality is more complicated. I believe that there are actually three classes of markets
that behave distinctly differently but that within those classes the

Bulletproof Systems • 217

differences between markets are attributable largely to random
events. The major classes of markets are as follows:
1. Fundamentals-driven markets. These are markets such as
currencies and interest rates in which the trading is not the
primary force behind the movement; larger macroeconomic
events and forces drive the price. As time goes on this seems
to be less and less true, but I would argue that the Federal
Reserve or a country-speciﬁc equivalent and a country’s
monetary policy still inﬂuence prices more than do
speculators in the currency and interest rate markets. These
markets have the greatest liquidity with the cleanest trends
and are the easiest for trend followers to trade.
2. Speculator-driven markets. These are markets such as
stocks and futures such as coffee, gold, silver, and crude
oil in which speculators inﬂuence the markets more than
governments or large hedgers do. The prices are
perception-driven. These markets are harder for trend
followers to trade.
3. Aggregated derivative markets. These are markets in which
the driving force is speculation, but that speculation is
diluted because the traded instruments are derivative of
other markets that are themselves aggregations of individual
component stocks. A good example is the e-mini S&P
futures contract. It moves up and down, but its range is
constrained by the underlying S&P 500 index. The S&P
index in turn moves only indirectly because of speculators.
Since an index aggregates the purely speculative moves of
many stocks, there is an averaging out and a dilution of

218 • Way of the Turtle

momentum. These markets are the hardest ones for trend
followers to trade.
My proposition is this: Markets in any of these classes trade the
same way. You should trade them or not according to liquidity and
class only. As a Turtle I decided not to trade class 3 at all, whereas
many of the Turtles chose to trade that class of markets. I felt our
systems were not good for derivative aggregated markets. It is not
that you can’t trade them, just that they just cannot be traded as well
with a medium-term breakout trend-following system like the one
we traded; so, I never traded the S&P as a Turtle.
Markets in each of the classes behave similarly. Although you
certainly will see periods, perhaps years or decades, of differences,
you will ﬁnd that over the long run this is simply the reﬂection of
trader memory and the relative rarity and random nature of underlying fundamental causes for large trends.

Trader Memory
A good example of trader memory is gold and silver. When I ﬁrst
started trading, it was impossible to make any money in gold
because the memory of the enormous 1978 trend (when gold went
to $900 an ounce and silver went to over $50 an ounce) was still
too fresh in people’s minds. Every time the price even started to
look like a potential up trend, everyone and his brother would start
buying gold. That made the price movements very choppy. The
price would run up and run down and then run up and run down
again. In short, it was very hard to trade as a trend follower. Now,
20 years later, most people do not remember the 1978 trend anymore, and so the move in the spring of 2006 was much easier to

Bulletproof Systems • 219

trade than it had been earlier; if you looked at the charts, you would
say that gold had changed its character.
I do not think one can tell when the next market such as gold is
going to change or when the next market such as cocoa is going to
trend again. The fact that a market has not had a large trend in the
last 20 years does not make it a bad market to trade. For me, if a
market has enough volume to trade and is different from the other
markets in your portfolio, you should trade that market.
The constraint to market diversiﬁcation is often the amount of
capital required to trade many markets within acceptable risk limits. This is one of the reasons successful hedge fund operators have
an easier time than do individual traders and why large traders have
more consistent performance than do smaller traders. If you can
afford to trade only 10 markets, you can expect more erratic performance than will be the case if you can afford to trade 50 or 60
markets simultaneously. It takes at least $100,000 to trade a longterm trend-following system using futures contracts with reasonable
diversiﬁcation. Even at that level the risk required would be too
high for most traders.

System Diversiﬁcation
In addition to diversifying across markets, you can increase the
robustness of your trading program by diversifying your systems.
Using more than one system at a time can make a trading program
signiﬁcantly more robust, especially if the systems are signiﬁcantly
different.
Consider two systems. The better one has an RAR% of 38.2 percent with an R-cubed of 1.19, and the worse one has an RAR% of

220 • Way of the Turtle

14.5 percent and an R-cubed of 0.41. If you tested both systems,
which one would you trade? Would you trade only the better one?
That seems the logical choice.
However, that choice ignores the beneﬁts of diversiﬁcation when
the systems are not correlated. Those beneﬁts are even greater
when the systems are negatively correlated (i.e., one tends to make
money when the other one is losing money). That is the case with
particular systems that provide very signiﬁcant beneﬁts when they
are combined, as you will see below.
Trading both systems at the same time has an RAR% of 61.2 percent and an R-cubed of 5.20. Needless to say, that is a signiﬁcant
improvement over the performance of either system alone.
The systems mentioned above are actually the two parts of the
Bollinger Breakout system. The better system trades only long
volatility channel breakouts, and the worse system trades only short
volatility channel breakouts. It is fairly easy to understand why these
systems work well when combined, but the improvement in performance is quite dramatic.
One can get the same beneﬁts by combining systems that work
well in different market conditions, such as one that performs well
in trending markets and another that works well in markets when
there are no trends. When one is suffering a drawdown, the other
one may be proﬁtable, and vice versa. This does not always work
out as smoothly as one might hope, but you can improve the robustness of your trading program greatly with approaches like this.
As with market diversiﬁcation, the limit to system diversiﬁcation
is that it often requires signiﬁcant capital or management effort to
trade many systems at the same time. This is one of the reasons successful hedge fund operators have an easier time than do individ-
