
The new electronic exchanges
NASDAQ was the first electronic stock exchange, but it’s now an institution. Several new exchanges have emerged to compete with the NYSE and
NASDAQ. These firms usually started at electronic communications networks
but grew enough to become something else. They have created new trading
opportunities and reduced costs, but they have also added to the volatility
in the market. The following sections discuss the two electronic exchanges in
the stock market now.

55

56

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
BATS Exchange
BATS (www.batstrading.com) stands for Better Alternative Trading
System. It was founded to improve trade execution times, and it is now the
third-largest exchange in the U.S. Several exchange-traded funds are listed
directly on BATS. The exchange had tried to offer stock listings, too, beginning with its own IPO, but a trading system failure stopped the IPO and
scaled back those ambitions — at least for now.

National Stock Exchange
The National Stock Exchange has its roots in the Cincinnati Stock Exchange,
which was founded in 1885. It converted to all-electronic in 1980 and is now
owned by the Chicago Board Options Exchange and a group of brokerage
firms. It is an electronic communications network that trades all exchangelisted equities, but it does not list securities on its own.

The high-risk over-the-counter exchanges
When the traditional floor-based exchanges were the primary game, a few
companies emerged to trade stocks that were not eligible for exchange
listing. These businesses are still around, and many traders like them
because they can find stocks that have good volatility that are too small to
attract the attention of the big guys with their big computers. However, the
risk level is a lot higher: Some of these stocks don’t trade enough for a day
trader, and a few of these stocks are not issued by legitimate companies.

Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board (OTC BB)
The Over-the-Counter Bulletin Board is the market for companies that are
reporting their financials to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
but that don’t qualify for listing in any NASDAQ category. It also includes
some foreign issuers that have not received listing in a U.S. market. American
Bulletin Board companies have four-letter ticker symbols followed by .OB.
For example, Sanborn Resources ticker symbol is SANB.OB. Foreign issuers trade with five-letter symbols, four letters followed by an F. ACS Motion
Control, based in Israel, trades as ACSEF.
Brokerage firms carry quotations on OTC BB stocks through their NASDAQ
workstations or other quotation services, enabling them to find current
prices and locate buyers and sellers for any orders that they have. Quotes
are also posted on the OTC BB website, www.otcbb.com.
In many cases, OTC BB companies are those that used to be on NASDAQ, but
the stock prices have lost too much of their value to maintain their listing. A
Bulletin Board listing is often a last hurrah before oblivion.

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
OTC Link
Once upon a time, few electronic networks existed, and they didn’t have
enough room for many companies to trade on them. Smaller companies did
not trade daily. To find current prices, brokerage firms subscribed to a price
service that sent out a weekly newsletter listing the prices for those companies. The newsletter was printed on pink paper, so it became known as the
Pink Sheets. In the more modern era, the newsletter has moved online and
changed its name to OTC Link (www.otcmarkets.com).
OTC Link does not have listing requirements for companies. Most of the
companies don’t qualify for listing on the NASDAQ or OTC BB, usually
because they aren’t current on their filings with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. These companies have four- or five-letter ticker symbols and
are sometimes shown with the suffix .PK after the ticker. Orders for OTC Link
companies are placed through brokerage firms who use the service to find
prices and match buyers and sellers.
Not all OTC Link companies are legitimate. Because of the minimal listing
requirements, it tends to be the hangout for penny stocks (those trading at
less than $1.00 per share), fraudulent companies, and securities that are easily
manipulated by boiler-room operators. It can be a tough crowd, and a lot of
people get burned.

Dark pools
Don’t be put off by the word dark — dark pools, also known as dark liquidity, are good for traders. These exchanges allow people to place buy and sell
orders that will be executed only if someone takes the other side. Of course,
that’s how most markets operate, but dark pools don’t publish the prices or
the sizes of the orders. Traders use them for low-cost execution, not price
discovery. The downside is that price listings carry information about where
the market is headed.

Bonds
A bond is a loan. The bond buyer gives the bond issuer money. The bond issuer
promises to pay interest on a regular basis. The regular coupon payments are
why bonds are often called fixed income investments. Bond issuers repay the
money borrowed — the principal — on a predetermined date, known as the
maturity. Bonds generally have a maturity of more than ten years; shorter-term
bonds are usually referred to as notes, and bonds that mature within a year
of issuance are usually referred to as bills. Most bonds in the United States
are issued by corporations (corporate bonds) or by the Federal government
(Treasury bonds). Some are issued by local governments (municipal bonds).

57

58

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
Over the years, enterprising financiers realized that some investors needed
regular payments but others wanted to receive a single sum at a future date.
So they separated the coupons, the interest payments on a bond, from the
principal. The principal payment, known as a zero-coupon bond, is sold to one
investor, while the coupons, called strips, are sold to another investor. The
borrower makes the payments just like with a regular bond. (Regular bonds,
by the way, are sometimes called plain vanilla.)
The borrower who wants to make a series of payments with no lump-sum
principal repayment would issue an amortizing bond to return principal and
interest on a regular basis. If you think about a typical mortgage, the borrower makes a regular payment of both principal and interest. This way, the
amount owed gets smaller over time so that the borrower does not have to
come up with a large principal repayment at maturity.
Other borrowers prefer to make a single payment at maturity, so they issue
discount bonds. The purchase price is the principal reduced by the amount
of interest that otherwise would be paid.
If a company goes bankrupt, the bondholders get paid before the shareholders
do. In some bankruptcies, the bondholders take over the business, leaving the
current shareholders with nothing.

How bonds trade
Bonds often trade as single bonds, with a face value of $1,000, although some
brokers take on only minimum orders of ten bonds. Bonds do not trade as
frequently as stocks do because most bond investors are looking for steady
income, so they hold their bonds until maturity. Bonds have less risk than
stocks, so they show less price volatility. The value of a bond is mostly determined by the level of interest rates in the economy. As rates go up, bond
prices go down; when rates go down, bond prices go up. Bond prices are also
affected by how likely the loan is to be repaid. If traders don’t think that the
bond issuer will pay up, then the bond price will fall.
Generally speaking, only corporate and municipal bonds have repayment risk.
The U.S. government could default, but that scenario is unlikely as long as the
government can print money. Most international government bonds have similarly low default risk, but some countries have defaulted. The most notable
was Russia, which refused to print money to repay its debts in the summer of
1998 — a decision that caused huge turmoil in the world’s financial markets,
including the collapse of a major hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management.
Investment banks and the federal government sell new bonds directly to
investors. After they are issued, bonds are said to trade in the secondary
market; some are listed, and some trade over-the-counter, meaning dealers
trade them among themselves rather than over an organized exchange.

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
A bond price quote looks like this:
0.125 July 14 n 99:98 99:99
Translation: This bond is a U.S. Treasury note maturing in July 2014 and carrying an interest rate of 0.125 percent. Similar to stocks, the numbers right
after the n (for note) list the bid and ask. The first number is the bid, the price
that the dealer pays to buy the bond from you if you are selling. The second
number is the ask, the price that the dealer charges you if you’re buying. The
difference is the spread, and that’s the dealer’s profit.
Most bonds are not suitable for day traders. Only Treasury bonds, issued by
the U.S. government, have enough consistent trading volume to attract a day
trader. Because of the capital required to trade and the relatively low liquidity
of many types of bonds, many traders prefer to use futures to bet on interest
rates. I discuss futures in detail later in this chapter.
If you’re one of those day traders who wants to buy or sell bonds anyway or
if you just want to know more about the market, then read on.

Listed bonds
Some larger corporate bonds are traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
Those wanting to buy or sell them place an order through their brokerage
firm, which sends an order to the floor broker. The process is almost
identical to the trading of listed stocks.

Over-the-counter trading
Most corporate and municipal bonds trade over-the-counter, meaning no
organized exchange exists. Instead, brokerage firms use electronic price
services to find out where the buyers and sellers are for different issues.
Over-the-counter bonds don’t trade much. Buyers often give their quality,
interest rate, and maturity requirements to their broker, and the broker waits
until a suitable bond comes to market.

Treasury dealers
Unlike the corporate and municipal bond market, the Treasury market is one
of the most liquid in the world. The best way to buy a new Treasury bond is
directly from the government because no commission is involved. You can
get more information from the Treasury Department’s website, www.
treasurydirect.gov; it has information on all kinds of government bonds
for all kinds of purchasers.
After the bonds are issued, they trade on a secondary market of Treasury
dealers. These are large brokerage firms registered with the government who
agree to buy and sell bonds and maintain a stable market for the bonds.

59

60

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
If your brokerage firm is not a Treasury dealer, it has a relationship with one
that it can send your order to.
Treasury dealers do quite a bit of day trading in Treasury bonds for the firm’s
own account. After all, the market is liquid enough that day trading is possible. Few individual day traders work the Treasury market, though, because
it requires a great deal of capital and leverage to make a high return.

Exchange-traded funds (ETFs)
Exchange-traded funds (or ETFs) are a cross between mutual funds and
stocks, and they offer a great way for day traders to get exposure to market
segments that may otherwise be difficult to trade. The category is sometimes
called exchange-traded products because some of the funds are structured
more as a trading strategy than as mutual funds. A money-management firm
buys a group of assets — stocks, bonds, or others — and then lists shares
that trade on the market. In most cases, the purchased assets are designed
to mimic the performance of an index, and investors know what those assets
are before they purchase shares in the fund. The big advantage for day traders is that an ETF can be bought or sold at any time during the trading day,
long or short, with cash or on margin, through a regular brokerage account.
This flexibility is great for day traders.
Although an ETF looks a little bit like an index mutual fund or a market index
futures contract, it has a very different structure. ETFs have two types of
shares, creation units and retail shares:
✓ Creation units: These shares are held by authorized participants, which
are different trading and brokerage firms that agree to commit cash to
the fund. Creation unit holders can exchange their shares for the actual
securities held in the fund, or they can add the appropriate securities to
the fund in order to make new creation units. They do this to keep the
value of the ETF in line with the underlying market index. So if the price
of an ETF falls below the value of the securities in it, the authorized participants will trade in their creation units for the securities and then sell
them on the open market. If the price of an ETF rises above the value of
the securities, then the authorized participants will buy up the securities and exchange them for more creation units that they can sell at a
nice profit.
✓ Retail shares: These ETF shares are listed on the exchange to be bought
and sold by regular investors and traders. If you day trade ETFs, you’ll
be working with the retail shares.

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
Most of the time, the price of both the creation units and the retail shares are
right in line with the price of the securities. On occasion, though, the value
of the ETF and its investments will diverge. For example, on May 6, 2010, the
U.S. stock market had a major break. Late in the trading day, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average fell almost 1,000 points and then recovered almost right
away. The cause was a single large sale of futures contracts, but it did a lot of
disruption. Stock prices fell and then rebounded so quickly that ETF pricing
couldn’t keep up. ETF traders had a difficult time determining when to buy
and when to sell because fund valuations were just wrong. It added more
uncertainty to an already rough afternoon.
Traditional ETFs are available on the big market indexes, like the Standard &
Poor’s 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. They are also available in
a variety of domestic bond indexes, international stock indexes, foreign currencies, and commodities. Because traders are often interested in a market
segment that doesn’t have an index on it, some ETF companies develop their
own niche indexes and issue ETFs based on them. Hence, you can find ETFs
for such markets as green energy and Islamic investing. The liquidity in the
securities in the underlying index may be low, though, so these funds may be
more volatile in trading — and may even have arbitrage opportunities.
Strategy ETFs are funds that are based on an investing strategy rather than
an underlying index. They can be dangerous for long-term investors who
do not know what they are buying, but hey, this book is for traders! Traders
often find great opportunities in strategy ETFs. For example, an inverse ETF is
designed to move the opposite of the underlying index, and a leveraged ETF
is designed to move in greater magnitude than the index. They give you
a bigger toolbox to use to take on the markets.
You can learn more about the thousands of different ETFs on the market at
www.morningstar.com/Cover/ETFs.aspx.

How U.S. exchange-traded funds trade
For day traders, the advantage of exchange traded funds is that they can be
bought and sold just like stocks, discussed earlier in this chapter. Customers
place orders, usually in round lots, through their brokerage firms. The price
quotes come in decimals and include a spread for the dealer.

Where U.S. exchange-traded funds trade
The firm that sets up the exchange-traded fund gets to choose the market
where it trades, as long as the fund meets the exchange’s requirements for
size, liquidity, and financial reporting. Exchange-traded funds trade anywhere
that listed stocks trade.

61

62

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading

Cashing In with Currency,
the Big Kahuna
Cash is king, as they say. It’s money that’s readily available in your day-trading
account to buy more securities. For the most part, the interest rate on cash
is very low, but if you close out your positions every night, you’ll always have
a cash balance in your brokerage account. The firm will probably pay you a
little interest on it, so it will contribute to your total return, but not by much.
But one type of cash investment can be really exciting for a day trader, and
that’s currency. Every day, trillions (yes, that’s trillions with a t) of dollars of currency are exchanged between governments, banks, travelers, businesses, and
speculators. With every trade and every blip in exchange rates, you have new
opportunities to make money. Currency is a bigger, more liquid market than
the U.S. stock and bond markets combined. It’s often referred to as the forex
market, short for foreign exchange. Foreign currency may be an attractive place
to store some of your trading cash, and it can be a great asset to day trade.
Here’s another neat thing about the currency market: Some types of currency
trades are tax free. (Taxes are covered in more detail in Chapter 15.) These
trades are usually longer-term, involving the currency itself, not day trades
and not trades in the futures or forward market. But still — tax free! In other
words, don’t get suckered by ads for currency trading firms that promise
tax-free income until you read the fine print.

How currency trades
The exchange rate is the price of money. It tells you how many dollars it
takes to buy yen, pounds, or euros. The price that people are willing to pay
for a currency depends on the investment opportunities, business opportunities, and perceived safety in each nation. If American businesses see great
opportunities in Thailand, for example, they have to trade their dollars for
baht in order to pay rent, buy supplies, and hire workers there. This situation
increases the demand for baht relative to the dollar and causes the baht to
go up in price relative to the dollar.
Exchange rates are quoted on a bid-ask basis, just as bonds and stocks are.
A quote may look like this:
USDJPY=X 97.3150 97.5250
This is the exchange rate for converting the U.S. dollar into Japanese yen.
The bid price of 97.3150 is the amount of yen that a dealer would give you

Chapter 3: Deciding What to Trade and How to Trade It
if you wanted to sell a dollar and buy yen. The ask price of 97.5250 is the
amount of yen the dealer would charge you if you wanted to buy a dollar and
sell yen. The difference is the dealer’s profit, and naturally, you’ll be charged
a commission, too.
Note that with currency, you’re a buyer and a seller at the same time, which
can increase the profit opportunities, but it can also increase your risk.
Day traders can trade currencies directly at current exchange rates, which
is known as trading in the spot market. When you exchange money to go
on vacation in a foreign land, you are exchanging on the spot, and you are
allowed to do it as a trader or as an investor. Day traders can also use currency exchange-traded funds (discussed earlier in this chapter) or currency
futures (discussed later in this chapter) to profit from the changing prices
of money.

Where currency trades
Spot currency — the real-time value of money — does not trade on an organized exchange. Instead, banks, brokerage firms, hedge funds, and currency
dealers buy and sell amongst themselves all day, every day.
Day traders can open dedicated forex accounts through their brokers or
currency dealers and then trade as they see opportunities during the day.
If you are interested in trading currencies, be sure to check out the fees
involved. Some banks and brokerages are really set up to do forex trades for
businesses and travelers, so the fees will be too high for you to have a decent
profit potential. You can learn more about different types of accounts that
day traders may have in Chapter 11.

Considering Commodities
and How They Trade
Commodities are basic, interchangeable goods sold in bulk and used to make
other goods. Examples include oil, gold, wheat, and lumber. Commodities
are popular with investors as a hedge against inflation and uncertainty. Stock
prices can go to zero, but people still need to eat! While commodity prices
usually tend to increase at the same rate as in the overall economy, meaning
they maintain their real (inflation-adjusted) value, they can also be susceptible to short-term changes in supply and demand. A cold winter increases

63

64

Part I: Getting Started with Day Trading
demand for oil, a dry summer reduces production of wheat, and a civil war
could disrupt access to platinum mines.
Day traders aren’t going to buy commodities outright. If you really want to
haul bushels of grain around all day, you can do that without taking on the
risks of day trading (you’d get more exercise, too). Instead, day traders who
want to play with commodities can look to other investments. The most
popular way is to buy futures contracts, which change in price with the
underlying commodity (discussed later in this chapter). Increasingly, many
people trade commodities through exchange-traded funds that are based on
the value of an underlying basket of commodities.
Commodity prices affect the broad economy, not just the prices of commodities contracts on the futures exchanges. If you day trade stocks in particular,
you may find that changes in the price of oil or agricultural commodities affect
many of the companies that you are involved with as well as the broader stock
market indexes.

Dealing in Derivatives
Derivatives are financial contracts that draw their value from the value of an
underlying asset, security, or index. For example, an S&P 500 futures contract
gives the buyer a cash payment based on the price of the S&P 500 index
on the day that the contract expires. The contract’s value thus depends on
where the index is trading. You’re not trading the index itself; instead, you’re
trading a contract with a value derived from the price of the index. The index
value changes all the time, so day traders have lots of opportunities to buy
and sell.
Many day traders choose derivatives because these products give traders
access to much of the economic universe, including stocks, bonds, commodities, and currencies. Furthermore, derivatives may have more favorable tax
treatment for day traders than many other assets; more than one new day
trader playing the stock market has been burned by the so-called wash-sale
rule, which limits the deductibility of short-term losses. (I discuss this rule
in Chapter 15.) Futures aren’t subject to wash-sale rules. Read on to find out
more and see if they are right for you!
