
224

Inside the Currency Market

onward, governments began the policy of management in terms of capital
ﬂows, trade policy, movement of goods, taxes, debt, and strengthening of
international institutions to carry out these policies evidenced by further
communications.
Further, the G-10 nations, the forerunner to the G-20, voted in 1999
to change the name and mandate of the Bank of International Settlements
(BIS) euro Currency Standing Committee from a mandate that monitored
off-shore deposits and lending-market issues to the Committee on the Global
Financial System to recognize, analyze, report, and monitor threats to ﬁnancial stability (BIS). Whether manmade or the Invisible Hand, one may never
know. The import is to understand market ebbs and ﬂows, but be aware of
policies that may disrupt the present global-market order.
All ﬁnancial instruments ebb and ﬂow in waves, so each can be
employed as an indicator as a check on the other. Fall is the premier time
for the euro/U.S. dollar to top in its wave pattern, but then it changes as
the wave-pattern falls and a new leader reigns. To be successful at trading
means only to know and ﬁnd these patterns and understand the structural
changes. Unusual economic times may temporarily disrupt a pattern, but
eventually all markets normalize and revert back to the mean of seasonal
wave patterns.
The caveat to stock price rises and falls is the measurement of equity
prices. For example, how can a 50-point rise in the New Zealand stock market be measured? In New Zealand dollar terms, the rise is high, but compared
to U.S. dollar terms the rise is minimal. The same scenario holds with New
Ze aland bond a nd yield s. Some won d e r w hy Ne w Ze al an d
dollar/ U.S. do llar doesn’t move much in Wellington trading, and the
answer is sometimes it can’t because rises and falls in stock market, bond, and
yields don’t move enough for change to occur in U.S. dollar terms, but they
are sufﬁcient for New Zealand dollar terms.
Bonds and yields move currency prices rather than equity markets.
Equity markets are the indication of the overall structure that is measured in
local nation dollars and an insight to bond/yield direction.
The other caveat to New Zealand movement is this market begins a new
trading day and trades by itself for the ﬁrst few hours of trade.
Many methods exist to measure stock market indices. Some employ
Price to Earnings (P/E) Ratios as measured by Index level/Earnings per
share are equal to Index P/E or dividend yields where yields are equal to
Dividends per share per index level. Others employ a volatility gauge, an
indicator such as a moving average, or mathematical formula such as a
Sharpe Ratio.

225

Stock and Bond Markets

Fair Value

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) employs an Index Fair Value
formula:
Index Futures  Cash (1  r (x/360))  dividends
The formula encompasses current index level, index dividends, futures days
to expiration, and present interest rates. Fair value is deﬁned as futures
priced to cash. A vast majority of index pricing occurs around a fair-value
price (CME).
To calculate:
S&P 500 Futures price  1157.00 pts,
S&P Cash index  1146.00 pts,
interest rates  5.7 percent,
dividends to expiration of futures  3.47 pts converted to S&P Index
pts and factored by addition of dividends in index divided by index
divisor, and
days to expiration of futures  78 days.
Fair Value  1146 (1 .057 (78/360))  3.47  1156.68
1157.00 – 1156.68  .32 futures overpriced (CME web site example).
S&P 500 Dividend Yield  1.40, convert to
S&P points  1146.00  .0140
 16 pts yearly, 78/360 (CME website example).
Notice the term futures priced to cash. This says in the market or on the
sidelines to hold cash.
Theoretical Fair Value is the relationship between a stock or the index that
comprises that stock, in this instance the Canadian S&P/TSX 60. Theoretical
Fair Value allows a short in one market and long in another. The formula is:
F  S (1  (i  d) t/365)
where
F  Theoretical fair value of futures contract,
S  Spot index value,
i  interest rate reﬂecting cost of funds,
d  dividend rate, and
t  number of days remaining until expiration of the futures contract.

226

Inside the Currency Market

Bonds

Bond markets open before stock markets in many nations. This dynamic
can presage the performance of stock markets. It’s the premier indicator to
determine if a stock market will open up or down, if a trade can run long
or short.
Stock-market openings ensure that currency-pair direction is established,
whether the trade can run, and how far. The method to check this dynamic is
to monitor the interplay of government bonds and yields. U.S. stock markets
that continually rise means bond yields continue to ascend. Stock markets that
range indicate bond prices and yields ebb and ﬂow throughout any trading session or through given periods. And down U.S. stock markets indicate
bond prices are rising. Any one of the three dynamics may mean a trend or
range. And any of the three dynamics represent proﬁts.
Anyone can track stock markets around the world from any computer,
from any news service, day and night. Stock prices and market information may be delayed by as much as 20 minutes when viewed from an open
computer, real time from a news service. Yet the SIX Swiss Exchange allows
real-time prices to be viewed. The time to really watch is at the time of an
important news announcement in the United States, because all prices rebalance between the two markets.
Bond prices and yields work the opposite way in the world from the U.S.
examples. In the United States, stock markets rise along with yields as bond
prices fall. The opposite scenario holds in other nations. Bond prices are connected to stock market rises and falls and yields move counter. For example,
as the Financial Times and the London Stock Exchange (FTSE) stock index
falls in London trading, so does the government gilt Bond price, while yields
rise. The government gilt bond is then tied to economic performance of the
overall British economy. The British pound/U.S. dollar then falls as the euro/
British pound rises.
The reason for the British pound/U.S. dollar fall is not necessarily the
bond price, although that is important in itself, but the yield may be too high
to borrow in British pound terms along the yield curve. Euro/British pound
is employed then to temper the exorbitant borrowing cost for the premier
currency pair of Great Britain.
Understand the importance of the yield curve in terms of spreads and the
widening, narrowing, and ﬂattening of curves. All have profound importance
for a currency-pair trade in terms of direction, and it answers the question
how far will a pair travel.

Stock and Bond Markets

227

Yields are factored as 0.01is equal to 1/100th of a point. The proper term
is basis point. Bonds are quoted almost the same for most nations, except for
the United States, where it is measured as thirty-seconds of a U.S. dollar.
British gilts are traded on a price basis in 1/100ths with a t  1 settlement
based on actual/actual semi-annual coupons. Prices are clean as opposed to
index gilts, which are dirty priced due to their index link, whose price ﬂoats.
Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs) are traded and quoted based on a
yield basis, while Canada bonds are traded on a price basis in decimals quoted
in hundredths of a point.
Central banks compare, contrast, and calculate each other’s stock markets, bonds, and yields. The purpose is to measure economic performance
in other nations in terms of inﬂation, targets, and gross domestic product
(GDP). Most important is to understand other countries’ economic performance in terms of their own borrowing costs, and highlight possible future
scenarios. Central banks are normally far ahead of any yield curve in their
models, calculations, and possible future scenarios. A few examples follow.
Swiss franc, British pound, Australian dollar, and New Zealand dollar
move in their own markets based on sovereign bonds. If, for example, the
British pound/U.S. dollar rises in price during London trade and gilt purchases aren’t matched by the British pound/U.S. dollar buying, the British
pound/U.S. dollar move was false. It lacks trend and conﬁdence and could be
due to market speculators or possibly from a one-time major purchase in the
spot market by a central bank. Many scenarios exist as to why. The important
takeaway is that trends must have conﬁdence and conviction backed by interbank instruments to support the spot price. Without support, price moves
are false and can be sold at their peak. This example holds for Swiss franc,
Australian dollar, and New Zealand dollar. Yet it holds for any pair.

Reserve versus Funding Currency Pairs

Before we look into the bond-price yield scenario, it’s important to understand the currency-pair arrangement as it relates to a bond. Currency pairs
are arranged as ﬁnancing mechanisms to fund cross-border trade, to ﬁnance
government bonds in whatever nation’s currency, and used as a means for
carry trades.
Carry trades fund one side of a currency pair by selling one interest rate
currency for another. The Japanese yen was the most popular funding currency over the years, due not only to its low interest rate but continuous

228

Inside the Currency Market

drop in interest rates. The yen was then paired with Australian dollar, British
pound, euro, Swiss franc, U.S. dollar, New Zealand dollar, and Canadian
dollar in this general manner, Australian dollar/Japanese yen. Notice Japanese
yen was always the second part of the equation. In this instance, the Japanese yen
was the funding currency while the ﬁrst pair in the equation is known as the
reserve.
A low interest-rate currency will always exist to be matched against a
higher interest-rate currency. It’s the nature of the markets in economic terms.
This strategy worked to earn interest for traders and investors, and allowed
cross-border funding to be completed by importers, exporters, major companies, and governments.
In bond terms, the strategy in the respective market aligned with the
Japanese yen will always be to sell the funding currency and buy the reserve.
A low-yielding currency will always be attached to a higher-yielding currency,
it’s the difference between a successful and nonsuccessful economy. So the
British pound/Japanese yen would always be a buy in London trading, as
stocks in London rise along with gilt prices, and sold as stocks drop along
with gilt prices so the yen will seek its yield. A higher interest-rate currency
will always outperform a low interest-rate currency when matched. But what
if the arrangement was not this simple?
Suppose British pound/Australian dollar was matched against each other
as a misalignment of a funder against a reserve. In this case, Australian dollar
has a 4.50 percent interest rate that rose over the years against 0.50 for the
British pound that dove over the years.
In gilt bond terms, the British pound would always be sold against the
Australian dollar as the U.K. economy deteriorated and the gilt price followed. In Australian bond terms and in Australian markets, no reason exists
to buy this pair. It doesn’t serve any of the above purposes. The result has led
to a continuous downtrend for British pound/Australian dollar since 2002.
Yet this represents overall directional trend. It doesn’t mean that quick shortterm gains can’t be earned in up British pound markets as the gilt rises. Gains
will be very short term and they will come quickly, but the possibility exists
to proﬁt. This strategy goes against trend and it’s never recommended, but
for quick proﬁts, it’s always possible because currency-pair prices are always
mobile.
The same scenario applies for euro/Australian dollar. Australian dollar
rates rose as euro rates decreased, so nobody saw a need to ever buy this
pair, so in turn it, too, dropped. But this scenario represents overall direction
and it doesn’t mean possibilities do not exist for example to proﬁt quickly in
the euro market. In down Australian markets, quick proﬁt opportunity may

Stock and Bond Markets

229

exist, but take proﬁts quickly. What if interest rates are closely aligned and
what if much cross-border trade occurs within one pair? British pound/Swiss
franc ﬁts this category.
British pound/Swiss franc has a 0.50 percent rate for British pound and
0.25 percent interest rate for Swiss franc, so this represents an excellent trade
in terms of a funding and reserve currency pair to represent a balance. Both
sides of this pair need each other to satisfy cross-border trade rather than an
advantage in interest rates. These pairs represent range trades over a period of
time, as Swiss franc will be bought in up markets on the Swiss Market Index
(SMI) and sold in down markets as Swiss bonds decline. Likewise the British
pound will be bought in up London markets, as British pound will follow the
gilt price up, and sold as the gilt price falls.
What occurs is a range trade until one side or the other changes interest rates one way or another. If one side changes its rates and the other side
doesn’t, a trend situation will occur and disrupt the present balance. The
reserve versus funding structure will then align itself in another manner,
depending on which side changes its rates and in what direction those rates
change. The possibility exists to even drop this pair from funding and reserve
arrangements in favor of another pair more conducive to funding arrangements in interest-rate terms. Currency pairs fall in and out of favor over years
as interest rates rise and fall between nations.
For example, when the Federal Reserve signals that interest rates will
be low for a considerable period in the future, it’s the green light to markets
that the U.S. dollar can be employed as a funding currency against a reserve.
In this instance, sell the U.S. dollar against all other currency pairs just as the
Japanese yen was sold against all its currency pair alignments. With present
low interest-rate environments as exist today, more than a few pairs can be
chosen as a reserve. Until the economic situation changes and interest again
rises, this arrangement will be the market order.
Globex and the Currency Bond/Yield Interplay

Currency pairs once shared the bond price/yield connection between each
other, but the historic connection changed with the introduction of Globex
in 1992 by the CME. It’s a matter of semantics.
For example, when it’s said the U.S. dollar follows a yield or bond price
in another nation, the meaning is actually tied to the Dow or Standard &
Poor’s (S&P) futures price. The semantics changed with the introduction of
Globex.

230

Inside the Currency Market

Globex is an electronic trading system that allows CME products to be
traded after normal U.S. market hours close. Globex allowed world traders
to be connected, trade other markets, and monitor trades from market to
market around the world. More importantly, it allowed the U.S. dollar to be a
free-ﬂoated instrument when futures and options were introduced along with
the S&P 500 futures contract in 1993 (CME).
The Japanese connected to other world markets when futures began trading on the Nikkei 225 in 2004. Now Tokyo and U.S. markets had a solid
connection around the clock. The U.S. dollar/Japanese yen relationship then
had a more profound meaning.
No longer was the bond yield connection monitored based on one market. It was now monitored between two markets so the meaning and purpose
of yield curves became more pronounced as a gauge to monitor and evaluate
currency pairs. Yet the bond connection became more crystallized as well
when trading of currencies ventured into the retail market.
Retail traders can now connect with other currency markets around the
world with the help of the Globex connection through use of the home computer. The Globex web site now allows interactive charts to be managed by
anyone, as well as an insight into volumes based on futures contracts on the
S&P 500.
New Zealand

The majority of the world watches and reports on New Zealand’s top companies that comprise the NZX 50 index that trades on the New Zealand Stock
Exchange. Yet the NZX Mid-Cap Index that comprises 35 medium-sized
companies plus the NZX 50 is the better barometer to gauge the health of
New Zealand’s stock market and overall economy. It’s a broader index of companies, therefore a broader index to measure New Zealand’s stock market.
The NZX Group at the NZX issues an operational report every month
that highlights, among other points, trading volumes. September 2010 saw
$2.2 billion of stocks bought compared to $104, 355, 670 in ﬁxed-interest
instruments better known as debt instruments. June 2010 saw $1,716 million
stocks bought and $133 million in bonds. What is missing in this equation is
the delineation between government and corporate bonds.
The New Zealand Debt Exchange (NZDX) is New Zealand’s bond market. The bond market opens for a pre-opening from 8:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
New Zealand time, while the formal market opens at 9:00 a.m. and closes
at 4:45 p.m. This is the opportunity to evaluate trades before the formal

Stock and Bond Markets

231

market opens. The New Zealand dollar 11:00 a.m. ﬁx occurs while the market is open. This should be viewed with more importance than stockmarket performance because it establishes the New Zealand price for the
New Zealand market. This aligns the New Zealand dollar to the bond
price. New Zealand government bonds are tied to economic performance of
the New Zealand economy, so in turn is the stock market. A rising bond price
means a rising stock market.
New Zealand’s NZX pre-open is from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. The NZX
begins at 10:00 a.m. and closes at 4:45 p.m. New Zealand time.
The New Zealand markets do not trade futures, but that will change
in 2011 as index futures and options will begin trade. Whole Milk Powder
futures began trade October 2010 while Skim Milk, Cheese, Milk Fat and
Butter Anhydrous remain in the planning stages. For New Zealand this represents a huge opportunity, as these products are of profound importance to the
health of New Zealand’s economy. Whole milk powder, Skim Milk Powder
and Anhydrous Milk fat futures and options began trade in New Zealand
while the remaining products are in planning stages.
To calculate the NZX 50:
(Gross Index t)   (Indexed Shares)  (Last Price)
  (Indexed Shares)  (Distribution per Share)
 (Gross Index t  1)/  (Indexed Shares)
 (Adjusted opening price)
The NZX is a free-ﬂoat market capitalization. NZX 50 companies
include 18 services, 6 properties, 5 energy companies, 7 goods companies,
and 14 primary companies.
Trade Strategy

New Zealand government bonds are tied to economic performance of the
New Zealand economy. This means that during good economic times bond
prices, along with stock markets, will always rise simultaneously. Currently,
economic performance is ﬁne in New Zealand, so evaluate New Zealand
dollar/U.S. dollar in this context. As stock markets rise, the bond price rises
and in turn New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar will rise. This is a long position
and short when stock markets dive with bond prices
New Zealand stock markets top somewhere in the April to May period.
Historically, April to August see down markets. Up and down markets for

232

Inside the Currency Market

New Zealand generally means two-to-three hundred, even 400 points a
month, on rare occasions.
Measured in New Zealand dollars, when stock markets dive during summer months in the United States, which is actually winter in New Zealand,
Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar rises. View Exhibit 8.1, a historic chart
of Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar along with Exhibit 8.2, a historic
chart of the NZ 50 stock market.
May is the premier uptrend month for Australian dollar/New Zealand
dollar. A note of caution as this pair is very volatile and the payout is small
in U.S. dollar terms and for U.S. traders. A 100-point gain equates to about
$50 in exchange-rate terms.
Trade the New Zealand markets like this. Down stock markets will see
New Zealand dollar/U.S. dollar down and Australian dollar/New Zealand
dollar up as the government bond price falls along with stock markets.
Australian dollar/New Zealand dollar rises along with New Zealand bond
yields and falling stock markets. This serves for trends and general daily ebbs
and ﬂows. Both pairs can be bought and sold continuously as bonds and
yields ebb and ﬂow throughout any trading day.

EXHIBIT 8.1 Historic Chart of Australian Dollar/New Zealand Dollar

Source: Market Scope 2.0. Note: granted permission by FXCM with Attribution.

Stock and Bond Markets

233

EXHIBIT 8.2 Historic Chart of NZ 50 Stock Market

Source: Bloomberg Finance, LP.

Yet the real measure for direction of New Zealand markets is the S&P
500. When U.S. markets close, New Zealand opens, so New Zealand serves
as a direct connection to the U.S. markets. If U.S. markets close down,
chances are good New Zealand markets will trade down and probably close
down because the S&P 500 futures contract will still reﬂect the down U.S.
day. Directional changes occur only if a market event changes the direction.
New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen is another important pair to consider.
Generally, Japanese yen likes bond yields. But like its counterpart Australia,
the New Zealand economy is generally performing well. What does this say
to bonds measured by economic performance and a rising stock market?
It says yields won’t perform quite as well for the Japanese. So look not to sell
New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen, look to buy New Zealand dollar/Japanese
yen for Japanese purposes.

234

Inside the Currency Market

The Japanese would love the yen to be tied to the economic performance
of New Zealand in terms of Japanese yen/New Zealand dollar. It then earns
New Zealand dollars against the yen as the economy continues to perform
well. Both sides of New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen should be considered
before a strategy is implemented. One side will always top as the other pair
bottoms.
Measure New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen against yields between both
nations. As spreads widen, it’s a sell New Zealand dollar/Japanese yen and buy
when spreads narrow. This is a measure of trade and borrowing costs, higher
spreads are more costly. New Zealand dollar spreads narrow when the NZX
is down and the Nikkei 225 is up as Japanese yields will fall and compression
will occur between the two yields. Spreads widen when NZX is up and the
Nikkei is down.
Again the interest-rate disparity with New Zealand and the remaining
nations of the industrialized world must be considered, because capital ﬂows
into New Zealand both as investments and as ﬂows into New Zealand markets, which are quite good. The ofﬁcial cash rate (OCR) in New Zealand is
2.75 percent, far above any nation we discuss in this tome except Australia.
