
60-minute chart where price draws a tight symmetrical triangle. Meanwhile the day trader only sees a breakout
and bull flag on the 5-minute screen. Finding opportunities in one time frame but trading them in another leads to
costly trend relativity errors.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

VOLUME
Emotional forces shape trends through all market conditions. New uptrends build crowd
enthusiasm, which attracts waves of greedy buyers. Gaming mentality slowly overcomes good
judgment as prices push higher and higher into uncharted territory. The frantic rally finally cools
and the herd turns nervous. As the market rolls over, fearful selling replaces greedy excitement. The
decline gathers force and continues well past rational expectations. Panic replaces fear, but just as
pain becomes unbearable, value players jump in and end the correction. Price starts to form a
bottom and a new Pattern Cycle springs to life.
In a turbulent marketplace, distorted expectations characterize both long and short positions. Price
destabilizes and crowd participation swells as bulls and bears swing through emotional battles.
Although these constant waves of accumulation and distribution appear chaotic, they often conceal
an axis of directional movement. To measure this underlying tendency, study the emotional imprint
of buying and selling behavior.
Two simple pieces of data unlock the mysteries of emotional markets: price and volume. While
technicians manipulate price through many patterns and indicators, the best volume analysis arises

from the simple histograms offered through most charting packages. These spikes and valleys in the
lower pane of the price chart often tell swing traders all they need to know about the current crowd.
Common histograms display volume through a single hue or color-code the action based on the
price bar’s closing direction. The two-color (red for down and green for up) version offers a
powerful view of that market’s trend-range axis and uncovers complex insight into crowd direction.
Once this is detected, watch for opportunity as the indicator tracks the interplay between buyingselling behavior and directional price movement.
Volume rarely reveals accumulation-distribution in a straightforward manner. Bursts of emotional
buying or selling may dictate price direction over short periods of time, regardless of the underlying
trend. Effective longer-term analysis requires filtering mechanisms to distinguish between these
pockets of frantic volatility and significant participation that will eventually guide prices higher or
lower.
A hidden spring ties together volume and price change. Accumulation-distribution may lead or lag
trend. As one force steps forward, tension on the spring increases. The leading impulse pauses until
a release point strikes and the other surges to join its partner. This tension measurement between
price and volume offers an important signal for impending market movement. Since positive
feedback requires synchronicity between both elements, volume leadership predicts price change.
Classic technical indicators provide continuous accumulation-distribution readings. Lesser-known
techniques measure the tension on the price-volume spring itself. Like water brought slowly to a
boil, volume reflects latent energy that releases itself through trend. Accumulation-distribution and
histograms measure the power of this emotional force.
Analysis of crowd participation through volume has little value unless it accurately predicts price
change. Profitable setups arise through recognition of climax volume events and identification of
emotional force building at key breakout and breakdown points. Human nature swings greed and
fear between stable boundaries most of the time. The master swing trader can identify those narrow
conditions where volatility will spike and destabilize crowd behavior toward its emotional
extremes.
Accumulation-distribution reaches into herd behavior better than any other form of technical
analysis. It also requires great effort to filter out meaningless data and focus on key crowd
interactions. Markets generate volume for many non-emotional reasons, such as secondary offerings
or block trade reporting. But these technical events never move trends the same way as greed or
fear. In most cases, successful trade execution belongs to those who can consistently read the
paranoid mind of the markets.

CROSS-MARKET ANALYSIS
Market action spins off both internal and external Pattern Cycles. Swing traders must consider both
factors before executing their positions. The complex interplay of world markets works its way
downward into individual stocks and futures on a daily basis. But accurate prediction of the exact
impact during any given session requires a detailed understanding of macroeconomic forces and
arbitrage between different entities.
Consider the influence of the credit and futures markets before entering an equity position. A
sudden selloff in either of these exchanges can have an immediate effect on stock prices. Arbitrage
between equities, futures, and credit also leads to intraday oscillation that runs through all
exchanges. Observe this rhythmic movement on TICK registers and in the cyclical price swing that

runs through all major indices. Swing traders can use this well-known phenomenon to time
executions that synchronize with these larger forces.
Local influences change quickly from day to day. The markets constantly seek leadership. In the
absence of larger forces, that role can shift at any time from the S&P futures to Nasdaq to the Dow
30 Industrials. A major sector can suddenly move into the limelight and carry other markets higher
or lower with little warning. These fluctuations may or may not affect any individual position. The
swing trader must determine the potential impact quickly and shift strategy when required.
Cross-market influences shift between local and worldwide forces. During quiet periods, simple
arbitrage generates primary influence. But world events or broad currency issues may rise to the
surface and shock American markets. Always defend active positions by staying informed and
planning a safe exit in the case of an emergency. Avoid overnight holds during very volatile periods
and think contrary at all times. The best opportunity may come right after the crowd jumps for the
exits.
Follow the charts of the major indices and S&P futures on a daily basis. Intraday traders should
watch their real-time movement throughout each session. Keep track of the current bond yield and
identify major support-resistance levels. Identify market leadership as early in the day as possible.
Then use that price action to predict the short-term flow of the market. When a macroeconomic
event appears, consider taking the day off unless a clear strategy emerges to capitalize upon it.
Promising setups often fail badly on these days because they can’t find the crowd to carry them.

REWARD:RISK
Swing trading requires a serious commitment to skill, knowledge, and emotional control. Treat it as
a business at all times. Prepare a personal trading plan, carefully evaluate risk capital, and set
attainable goals for the future. If personal bias expects this discipline to earn quick wealth, find
another hobby immediately or just take up gambling. The markets have no intention of offering
money to those who do not earn it. And always remember this valuable wisdom: attention to profit
is a sign of trading immaturity, while attention to loss is a sign of trading experience.
Show a willingness to forgo marginal positions and wait for good opportunities to appear. Prepare
to experience long periods of boredom between frantic surges of concentration. Expect to stand
aside, wait, and watch when the markets offer nothing to do. Accept this unwelcome state as all
successful participants do. The need for excitement makes a very dangerous trading partner.
Careful stock selection controls risk better than any stop loss system. Bad timing does more damage
than sustaining large losses. Make wise choices before position entry and face less risk at the exit.
Watch out for secondary gains that have nothing to do with profit. Trade execution will release
adrenaline regardless of whether the position makes or loses money. Always face your true reasons
for swing trading the markets. The primary motivation must be to aggressively take money out of
someone else’s pocket. Rest assured, the skilled competition will do their best to take yours at every
opportunity.
Every setup has a price that violates the pattern. The measurement from this breach to the trade
entry marks the risk for the position. When planning execution, look for levels where price must
move only a short distance to show that the trade was a mistake. Then expand this measurement to
find the reasonable profit target and apply this methodology to every new opportunity. Limit
execution to positions where risk remains below an acceptable level and use profit targets to enter
markets that have the highest reward:risk ratios.

Each swing trader carries a different risk tolerance. Some find comfort flipping NYSE behemoths,
while others play low float screamers. Follow natural tendencies and remember that swing
strategies use discretionary entry. The trader alone must decide when to enter, exit, or stand aside.
Test overall results by looking at profit and loss at the end of each week, month, and year. Good
results make money, while bad results lose it.

MASTERING THE TRADE
Consistent trading performance requires accurate identification of current market conditions and the
application of appropriate strategies to capitalize upon them.
Pattern Cycles provide an effective method for price discovery through all charts and time frames.
This expanded concept of swing trading offers diverse tools to uncover profit opportunities through
continuous feedback, regardless of bull, bear, or sideways markets.
But information does not equal profit. The markets have a limited number of opportunities to offer
at any given time. Price charts evolve slowly from one promising setup to the next. In between, they
emit divergent information in which definable elements of risk and reward conflict with each other.
At times this inconsistency yields important clues about the next trade. More often it represents
noise that must be ignored at all costs. The ability to tell the difference between the two marks an
important passage on the road to trading success.
Trading noise occurs during both positive and negative feedback. It simply represents those periods
when participants should remain on the sidelines rather than jump into the action. Account capital
has limitations and should only commit to the most promising setups. While effective strategies
book profits, many participants experience anxiety between positions and tend to pull the trigger
prematurely. Remember that longevity requires strict self-discipline. Swing traders unconsciously
seek excitement in the place of profits during quiet market periods. Allow boredom to bring down
the emotional level and wait patiently for the next real thing.
Both negative and positive feedback conditions produce rewarding trades, but confusion between
the two can lead to major losses. Classic swing strategies work best during negative feedback, while
positive feedback supports profitable momentum entry. Avoid the danger of choosing the wrong
strategy through consistent application of the expanded swing methods. Regarding of market phase,
use this simple, unified approach for all trade executions: enter positions at low risk and exit them at
high risk. These mechanics often parallel the buying at support and selling at resistance exercised in
classic swing tactics. But this expanded definition allows entry into the realm of the momentum
trader with safety and precision.
Swing traders study both action and reaction when evaluating setups in the momentum
environment. This demands complex planning and detached execution that aligns positions to the
underlying trend but against the current crowd emotions. This strategy naturally favors execution
against traditional momentum tactics. Countertrend reactions provide excellent swing entry levels in
momentum markets. Once filled, these positions find a comfortable exit on the next accelerating
thrust just as new participants jump in from the other direction.
Highly experienced players can use more sophisticated techniques to locate less obvious low-risk
trade entry and enter into accelerating momentum. These high volatility positions require tight
trailing stops that protect risk capital. But successful exit strategy remains the same through diverse
entry tactics. Look for acceleration and feed the position into the hungry hands of other participants
just as price pushes into a high-risk zone.

Execution must synchronize with momentum action-reaction or it will yield frustrating results.
Every player knows the pain of executing a low-risk entry, riding a profitable trend but then losing
everything on a subsequent reaction. Clearly de fined swing exit tactics will avoid this unpleasant
experience. Multi-trend technical analysis and cross-verification techniques identify probable
reversal points well in advance of the price action. Unfortunately, most market participants do not
visualize their exit when they enter a new position and allow greed to overpower analysis as soon as
it moves into a profit. The master swing trader always locates natural escape routes and major profit
levels before new execution.
FIGURE 1.4
The continuous momentum cycle forms a timing core for swing traders to align profitable executions. Trend
surges forward against the friction of countertrend weight. Momentum slows and price falls backward to test prior
boundaries. As it reaches stability, the primary trend finally reasserts itself and ignites new momentum. Use
repeating chart patterns to uncover these pullbacks and enter long or short positions in harmony with the larger
impulse.

Manage risk on both sides of the trade. Focus on optimizing entry-exit points and specialize in
single direct price moves. Remember that execution of low-risk entries into mediocre positions
allows more flexibility than high-risk entries into good markets. Avoid fundamental analysis of
short-term trading vehicles. Mental bias from knowledge of a company’s inner workings can distort
the message of the price chart just when opportunity knocks.
Swing trading allows many methods to improve profitability. Try to adjust position size, manage
time more efficiently, or slowly scale out of winners to retain a piece for the next price thrust. But
careful trade selection does more to build capital than any other technique. Enter new positions only
when signals converge and send a clear message. Standing aside requires as much careful
preparation as entry or exit and must be considered before every execution.
Winning is a tough game. Each swing trader must compete against all other participants to take
their money. House rules ensure that the insiders always retain an advantage. Market makers and
specialists use proven techniques to frighten small players and shake them out of positions. Exercise
original strategies while controlling emotions with strong mental discipline to find that needed edge
over the crowd.
Use technical analysis and drill swing prices into memory. Target acceptable dollar and tick losses.
Remember that the average position gain must be significantly higher than average loss or survival
will depend upon a winning percentage well above 60%. Improve results by reducing losses first
and increasing profits second. Keep current and accurate trading records. The mind will play cruel
tricks when results depend on memory.
Consider the real impact of available capital and leverage. The well-greased competition can
overcome their transaction costs by trading large blocks. But small equity accounts must watch
trade size and frequency closely. Frequent commissions and small capital will eventually end

promising careers in speculation. When trying to grow a small account, lengthen holding period and
go for larger profits per entry. And use any drawdowns as a major signal to lighten up and slow
down.

2 CHAPTER
PREPARING FOR THE MARKET DAY

THE CLOSING BELL
The closing bell signals the start of preparation for the next market day. Use this valuable time to
measure current cycles and find winners for the next session. Probe markets for the best new
opportunities and apply price chart techniques to identify the likely trading conditions. Take a look
back and critique actions taken during the preceding session. Adjust watch lists to remove lost
opportunities and add new stocks that show promise for the future.
Update the personal trading plan and current strategy after reviewing the events of each session.
Make small strategic adjustments on a daily basis, but do significant editing only after weeks of
data mining and personal introspection. Look back at the day with complete honesty. Were exits
taken when offered? Did hope replace good judgment? Were personal rules followed, and did that
make a difference in the profit and loss statement? Make sure to revise all trading records daily to
avoid a backlog of old tickets and account statements.
Every market of interest generates new feedback as the trading day comes to a close. Trendlines
break and shock gaps change important assumptions. Significant news may dictate new strategies or
establish a fresh bias on short-term direction. Review specific issues that will likely move the
markets when the new day begins. How has sentiment changed and what impact will it have on the
crowd? Quickly categorize the current market and refresh tactics that will respond to it.
Review the economic calendar for important government reports. Exercise greater caution on
Fridays that release the unemployment report or unwind options positions. If volatility will surge
sharply due to unpleasant news or conditions, don’t hesitate to take the day off and let the
competition assume the risk. The market will still offer many opportunities after others get caught
in sharp whipsaws or take dramatic profits.
Avoid information overload. Set aside a reasonable time for preparation and limit analysis to focus
on key stocks and indices in detail. Reduce watch lists, news, and charts until they conform to a
healthy personal lifestyle. Get recreation, eat right, and get plenty of sleep before the new market
day begins. Exhausted swing traders make terrible decisions.
Use the quiet hours to locate and evaluate trade setups. Hurried analysis of new opportunities during
the market day invites danger. Important charting features go unnoticed and the pulse of the Level
II screen becomes difficult to ignore. The swing trader also faces many chores that interfere with
clearheaded reward: risk evaluation during the active session. Prior preparation frees the schedule
so that the active session can receive full attention.
When the market opens, be prepared to respond to a flood of fresh data quickly and without
hesitation. Apply original 3D chart skills that quickly filter opportunity and manage risk. Use new
twists on classic strategies to place each issue within its Pattern Cycle and generate continuous
feedback through all conditions. Watch the ticker closely to defend against external influences, and
exercise tactics that swing against the crowd to book consistent profits.

SUPPORT-RESISTANCE
Support-resistance (S/R) organizes the charting landscape into well-marked levels that predict
swings and breakouts. Price action at these important boundaries depends on their unique
characteristics and specific locations within the trend-range axis. Stocks can swing back and forth
across a central S/R pivot rather than find a floor or ceiling. Support-resistance may present an
absolute barrier that cannot be crossed or exhibit elasticity that can be stretched but not broken. In
common horizontal S/R, resistance becomes support when price mounts it and vice versa when it
falls through. Swing traders earn their livelihoods as they find and execute setups along S/R
interfaces.
Diverse S/R boundaries print on every chart in all time frames. Most carry a unique load factor and
will break when buying or selling intensity exceeds it. Once price pierces a level, it normally
expands toward the next S/R barrier. This mechanism provides the source for many profitable
strategies. The classic swing trade buys at support and sells at resistance. Therefore, these levels
define both reward and risk. Look to buy support when the nearest resistance is far above, and look
to sell resistance when the nearest support is far below. But make sure the landscape hides no
dangerous obstacles. A single overlooked level can have disastrous results.
Profitability depends on accurate prediction at S/R interfaces. The skilled eye must quickly locate
these points and evaluate their impact on every setup. Begin with a dense chart template that layers
all types of S/R boundaries directly on price. Then study the individual elements and how each
affects reward:risk. Start with highs and lows in the longest applicable time frame and work down
to recent price action. Pay special attention to shock events that may produce significant S/R in a
single bar. For example, strong gaps can stay unfilled for many years.
Apply a simple hierarchy that rates the importance of each S/R feature. Horizontal levels that persist
over time carry more weight than those from shorter periods. Major highs and lows provide
stronger S/R than moving averages or other price derivatives. Hidden levels offer cleaner
opportunities than well-known ones that invite whipsaws and fading strategies. S/R strengthens
when many barriers converge at the same price and weakens when a single obstacle blocks the
progress of price movement.

TYPES OF S/R
Horizontal price marks the most common form of S/R. These important highs and lows reveal
scarred battlegrounds between bulls and bears. They carry an emotional shadow that exerts lasting
influence whenever price returns. Markets tend to draw bottom support on high volume and then
test it repeatedly. Over time these become significant floors during future corrections. Alternatively,
tops that print during frantic rallies may persist for years. Failed tests at these levels reinforce
resistance and generate a pool of investor supply that must be absorbed before the uptrend can
continue. In both cases, horizontal S/R levels should be obvious at first glance of a promising new
setup.
Look for price to fail the first test of any significant high or low horizontal S/R level. But then
expect a successful violation on the next try. This classic price action has the appearance of a triple
top or bottom breakout. The popular cup and handle pattern offers a clear illustration of this
dynamic process. Also watch closely where the first test fails. If price cannot reach the horizontal
barrier before rolling over, a second test becomes unlikely until the pattern breaks sharply in the
other direction.
