She is widely credited with saving countless lives. Doctors and nurses worldwide use
the Apgar scale for deciding which newborns require immediate medical care.
Most babies are born normal; some have complications, while others are at risk
of dying. Prior to Dr. Apgar, doctors and nurses used clinical judgment to tell those
groups apart, and their mistakes contributed to infant mortality. Dr. Apgar’s scoring
system made their decisions objective.
The Apgar score summarizes answers to five simple questions. Each newborn is
rated on its pulse, breathing, muscle tone, response to a pinch, and skin color. A good
response to any question earns two points, poor zero, or one for an in-between. The
test is generally done at one and five minutes after birth. Total scores of seven and
above are considered normal, 4 to 6 fairly low, and less than 4 critically low. Babies
with a good score are safe to put into general care, while those with low Apgar scores
require immediate medical attention. The entire decision-making process, focusing
on whom to treat aggressively, is quick and objective. Dr. Apgar’s simple scoring
system has improved infant survival rates around the world.
After reading Prof. Kahneman’s book, I renamed my scoring system the “trade
Apgar.” It helps me decide which of my trade ideas are strong and healthy or sickly
and weak. Of course, as a trader, my actions are completely opposite to those of a
pediatrician. A doctor focuses on the sickest kids, to help them survive. As a trader,
I focus on the healthiest ideas and trash the rest.
Before I show you my Trade Apgar, a word of caution: the scoring method you’re
about to see is designed for one system—my “false breakout with a divergence”
strategy. All other systems will require a different test. Use my Trade Apgar as a
starting point for developing a test for your own system.
For example, I recently gave the file of my Trade Apgar to a professional option
writer who consulted with me. He loved the idea of a written test, which reduced impulsivity, one of his key problems. Within a few weeks, he showed me his own Trade
Apgar, which greatly differed from mine. He replaced one of my indicators with his
favorite RSI and Stochastic and added questions directly relevant only to option writing. I was happy to see that he was trading more profitably.
A Trade Apgar demands clear answers to five questions that go the heart of a trading strategy. As you develop a Trade Apgar for your own strategy, I suggest keeping
the number of questions down to five and rating your answers on a zero/one/two
point scale. Simplicity makes this test more objective, practical, and quick.
While looking at a potential trade, I take a blank tradebill from a stack and circle
my answers to its five questions. A circle in the red column earns a zero, in the yellow
column one point, and in the green column two points. I write down each number
in the score box and add up the five lines. Also, if I circle the red column, I may write
in the box next to it at what price the answer will change to a more favorable yellow
or green. That will raise the plan’s score, allowing me to enter a trade at that level.
Figure 58.1 shows a Trade Apgar for going long; Figure 58.2 shows a Trade Apgar
for shorting.
It takes less than a minute to generate a Trade Apgar for any stock. I want to trade
only healthy ideas whose score is 7 or higher, and not a single line rated zero. If the

240

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

FIGURE 58.1â•… Trade Apgar for going long, using a strategy of â•›“false breakout with a divergence.”

(Source: elder.com)
Rate your answers to five questions on a scale from zero to two:
1. Weekly Impulse (described in this book)—zero for Red, one for Green, two for Blue on
the weekly chart.
Red Impulse prohibits buying, Green is OK but could be too late, while Blue (after
red) shows that bears are losing power, which is a good time to buy.
2. Daily Impulse—same questions and ratings on the daily chart.
3. Daily price—zero if the latest price is above value, one if it’s in the value zone, two if
below value on the daily chart.
Prices above value may be too late to buy, in the value zone OK, below value could
be a bargain.
4. False breakout—zero if none, one if it already happened, two if on the verge of happening.
5. Perfection—zero if neither timeframe, one if only one, two points if both look perfect.
I always analyze markets in two timeframes; one of them must show a perfect
pattern for any strategy in order for me to enter a trade. Very rarely both timeframes are perfect—it is fine for one to be perfect and for the other to be merely
good. If neither timeframe looks perfect, it can’t be an A trade—drop this stock and
move on to another one.

score is 7 or higher, I go on to complete my trade plan. I establish my entry, target,
and stop, decide what size to trade, etc.
Trade Apgars provide objective ratings for potential trades. With thousands of
trading vehicles available to us, there is no need to waste energy on poor candidates.
Use a Trade Apgar to help you zoom in on the best prospects.

Using a Tradebill
Once you become interested in a stock and a Trade Apgar confirms your idea for
a trade, completing a tradebill will help you focus on the key aspects of that trade.
Let’s review a tradebill for long positions (Figure 58.3).
I designed my Tradebills in PowerPoint, fitting two to a page. I always keep some
blanks handy, but don’t preprint too many because I keep tweaking these forms.
My tradebill for short trades is the same, except for a different Trade Apgar, as
shown in Figure 58.2.When you start developing your own tradebills, you may want
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

58. CREATING AND SCORING TRADE PLANS

241

FIGURE 58.2â•… Trade Apgar for shorting, using strategy of â•›“divergence with a false breakout.”

This is a mirror image of Trade Apgar for buying, using the same strategy.

1

2

3

4

5
FIGURE 58.3â•… Tradebill for going long, using the strategy “divergence with a false breakout.” (Source: elder.com)

242

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

Part 1: Trade identification.
■■
■■

■■
■■

■■

■■

The green stripe marks it as a long trade.
A thumbnail picture of a bullish divergence with a false breakout is a reminder of the
strategy.
The first box is for the ticker symbol.
The next box is for the next earnings date. You can look it up at several free websites,
such as www.Briefing.com, www.earnings.com, or www.Finviz.com. Most traders avoid
holding stocks whose earnings are about to be reported. A nasty earnings surprise can
do serious damage to your position. Writing down that date forces you to focus on
avoiding trouble.
The next box is the dividend date, if any. I usually look it up at http://finance.yahoo.com.
Dividends create tax consequences for longs, while shorts have to pay dividends, so
they definitely want to avoid holding on that day.
The last box is for the date of my plan.

Part 2: Trade Apgar
■■

■■

My Trade Apgar was described above. Remember that each strategy demands its own
Apgar. You’re perfectly welcome to replace my questions with those that are relevant to
your own system. For example, you may ask whether Stochastic is in the overbought
zone (zero), oversold (one), or oversold with a bullish divergence (two).
After you sum up the numbers for the Trade Apgar, answer this key question in writing:
Is this an A-trade? If the total score is below 7, drop this stock and look for another trade.

Part 3: Market, entry, target, stop, and risk control
■■

■■

■■

■■

The five boxes along the left edge require me to answer questions about the general
state of the market. Is the Spike Bounce signal in effect? Is the indicator that traces
stocks above their MAs bullish or bearish? What is the short interest in this stock and
how many days to cover? All of these studies have been described in this book. The last
box is for a few words of a summary.
Three boxes linked by arrows are at the heart of my decision-making process. They
demand three essential numbers for every trade: the entry, the target, and the stop.
Dollar risk—How many dollars are you willing to risk on this trade? This number can
never exceed two percent of your account equity. I usually keep it considerably below
that threshold.
Size—How many shares or futures contracts will you buy, based on the permitted dollar
risk and the distance from the entry to the stop. This is explained in detail in “The Iron
Triangle of risk control” in Chapter 50.

Part 4: After the entry
■■
■■

■■
■■

The A target is 30% of the daily channel height added to the entry price.
The soft stop is what you may keep in mind, while the hard or catastrophic stop is the
actual order. It may not be any lower than the stop listed in Section 3.
Put in the price level at which you’ll move your stop to breakeven.
Check the boxes on the right as you perform these essential steps: place a stop, create
a diary entry, and place a profit-taking order.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

59. TRADE JOURNAL

243

Part 5: The copyright line
■■

This line shows when this tradebill was updated. As a reader of this book, you’re welcome to write to info@elder.com and request the latest version, which we send to traders as a public service.

to copy sections 1, 3, and 4, but develop your own section 2—the Trade Apgar for
your own system or strategy.

■■59. Trade Journal
Memory is the cornerstone of civilized life. It allows us to learn from our successes and even more from our failures. Keeping a diary of your trades will help you
grow and become a better trader.
Keeping detailed trade records feels burdensome—but that’s what serious traders do. Many people asked me after I published a book of interviews with traders
(Entries & Exits, 2006), what all of them had in common. They lived in different countries, traded different markets, and used different methods—but all kept excellent
records.
The best example came from the woman whose interview was in the first
chapter of that book. While finishing the manuscript, I realized that our interview had been incomplete and I needed to ask additional questions about her
trades. A year later, on another visit to California where she lived, I asked to
meet again. I assumed she’d show me some recent trades, but she went to a filing
cabinet and pulled out a folder with all her trades for the week of my previous visit.
We completed our interview by reviewing her charts from a year ago as if those
trades were made yesterday. A bull market was in full swing, she was doing great,
but still worked to improve her performance. Her detailed diary was her selfimprovement tool.
Let your diary entries serve as your “extra-cranial memory,” a tool for building
the structure of success.
For years, I struggled with developing a record-keeping system that would be
easy to update and analyze. In the beginning, I kept the diary of my trades in a paper
journal, gluing in chart printouts and marking them up—I still keep one of those antiques next to my trading desk. Later I kept my diary in Word, and then in Outlook.
Finally, in 2012, Kerry Lovvorn and I created a web-based Trade Journal1.
This Trade Journal is a joy to keep, and both Kerry and I use it for all our trade
diaries. Our Trade Journal is available to all, and its use is free (up to a limit).The journals are online, password protected, and absolutely private—although SpikeTrade
members have an option of sharing their trade journals for selected trades.
1

We relied on capable programming by Helena Trent and used several ideas suggested by Jeff Parker.

244

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

A

B

D
C

E

FIGURE 59.1â•… Trade Journal (a partial view). (Source: Spiketrade.com)

Section A—The Trade Journal asks why I decided to trade this stock. I usually leave
this box blank because I like to write such comments on the charts, using SnagIt
software. In the case of ADSK, I attached a combination chart, featuring weekly,
daily, and 25-minute charts.
Section B—Documenting entry and exit dates and prices; accounting for slippage and
seeing buy, sell, and trade grades.
Section C—Reasons for exit with an attached combination chart showing both entry
and exit.
Section D—The list of exit tactics is longer than that of trade strategies. I may
exit because my trade hit its target, or its stop, or is reaching the value zone
or the envelope. I may exit if a trade is going nowhere or starting to turn. There
are also two negative exits: couldn’t stand the pain or recognizing a junk trade
after I entered.
Section E—Post-trade analysis. I like to return to every trade two months after the exit
and review it with the benefit of hindsight. I create a follow-up chart, mark my entry
and exit with arrows, and then write a comment on how my trade looks after the
passage of time. This is the best way of learning what I did right or wrong.

Our Trade Journal is shown in Figure 59.1. Even if you prefer to build your
own, look at it to see what must be included in your own record-keeping system.
The Trade Journal is designed to make your record-keeping simple and logical,
helping you plan, document, and learn from your trades. We have already reviewed
several sections of the Trade Journal. Figure 38.1 showed its three sections—Setup,
Risk, and Parameters. Figure 55.2 showed the strategy box in the Trade Journal.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

245

59. TRADE JOURNAL

Most of us quickly forget past trades, but the Trade Journal prompts you to return
to them. The trades you entered and exited at the hard right edge of the chart are
now in the middle of that chart, where you can re-examine your decisions and learn
how to improve them.

Three Benefits
Keeping a trade journal delivers three major benefits. One is immediate—a greater
sense of order. The second comes a month or two later, when you start reviewing
your closed trades. Finally, after you accumulate dozens of records, you’ll have several ways to analyze them and learn from your equity curves.
A Sense of Order and Structure comes from documenting the plan, the entry,
and the exit for each trade. Where exactly will you enter, what is your target, where
will you place your stop? Defining and writing down those numbers will steer you
towards disciplined trading. You’ll become less likely to slip into an impulsive buy,
overstay a profitable trade, or let a loss snowball without a stop. Filling out risk
management numbers will give you a handle on trade sizing. Documenting exits will
make you face your trade grades.

A perfect
trade in good
size

FIGURE 59.2â•… DISCA daily with 13- and 26-day EMAs and a 6% channel. Impulse system with
MACD-Histogram 12-26-9. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Follow-Up Analysis (Shorting a Top)
My strategy for shorting Discovery Communications, Inc. (DISCA) was “fading an extreme;” my exit tactic “started turning.” Entry and exit are marked by arrows. A review two
months later confirmed that both decisions were correct. Lesson: the next time I see this
pattern, jump aboard.

246

GOOD RECORD-KEEPING

Reviewing Every Trade a month or two after your exit is one of the best learning

experiences you can have.Trading signals that may have appeared vague and uncertain
at the right edge of a chart become crystal clear when you view them in the middle
of your screen. Returning to your past trades and adding an “after the trade” chart
makes you reevaluate your decisions. Now you can clearly see what you did right or
wrong.Your journal will be teaching you priceless lessons.
I make my strategic decisions on the weekly charts, tactical on the dailies. Since
my daily charts are formatted to show five to six months of data, once a month I
spend a few hours reviewing trades that I closed two months ago. For example, at
the end of March or in the beginning of April, I’ll review all trades that I closed out
in January. I’ll pull up their current charts, mark my entries and exits with arrows,
and write a comment on every trade. Let me share two examples with you (Figures
59.2 and 59.3).
Such reviews teach you what’s right with your trading, and what needs to be
changed. Soon after I started doing my “two months later” reviews, I became aware of
two problems with my exits. I noticed that my stops were a bit tight and that helped
me figure out that by slightly increasing the amount of risk, I could substantially reduce the number of whipsaws and come out ahead. I also noticed that while my short-

As a short-term
trade good, but
of course missed
the big picture

FIGURE 59.3â•… MCP daily with 13- and 26-day EMAs and a 16% channel. Impulse system with
MACD-Histogram 12-26-9. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

Follow-Up Analysis (Buying a Pullback)
My strategy for buying Molycorp, Inc. (MCP) was “pullback to value”—I thought that a new
uptrend had begun. The following day, I was no longer so sure and sold for a small profit.
A review two months later showed that I missed the resumption of the bear trend; my decision to cut and run with a small profit was correct, but I overlooked a major trade. Lesson:
continue to monitor closed-out trades for a week or so and be prepared to re-enter or to
reverse.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

59. TRADE JOURNAL

247

term swing trades tended to be good, I often missed bigger trends that emerged from
those short-term moves. I used that knowledge to adjust my methods going forward.
Reviewing Your Equity Curve is essential because only a rising curve certifies you

as a successful trader. If your equity curve is in a downtrend, your system may be at
fault, or your risk management poor, or your discipline lacking—whatever it is, you
must track it down and solve that problem.
Still, a combined equity curve for all your trades and accounts is a pretty crude
tool. The Trade Journal allows you to zoom in and trace your equity curves for specific markets, strategies, and exit tactics. For example, I can run separate equity
curves for longs and shorts, for different strategies and exits, and even for sources of
my trade ideas. Believe me: once you see an equity curve for exits marked “Couldn’t
stand the pain,” you’ll never trade without stops!

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

C O NP A
C LRU
T S4I O N

A Journey without
an End: How to
Continue Learning
A

s we near the end of this book, I compliment you on your persistence and
commitment. We have worked through the essential trading topics: psychology,
tactics, risk management, and record-keeping. Still, becoming a successful trader
will take more than reading a single book.
How long do you think it might take?
You may have seen this huge number—10,000. â•›According to some authors, that’s
the number of hours it takes to become an expert in major pursuits, such as professions or sports. If that is true and you spend 40 hours per week, 50 weeks a year, it’ll
take five years to become a pro. If you can invest only 20 hours per week, it’ll take
ten years. That’s a scary thought.
If you, like so many people, came to trading after a successful career in another
field, be it engineering, farming, or business, you may well have invested that many
hours in it. Do you really want to spend another 10,000 hours on a new project at
this stage of your life?
Before you shudder at this prospect, let me share a very different number with
you—20 hours. It comes from a book, The First 20 Hours: How to Learn Anything...
Fast! Its author, Josh Kaufman, makes a sensible point that while becoming a worldclass expert will take years, you can achieve a basic level of competence in most
fields in a much shorter time.
“The early hours of practicing something new are always the most frustrating.
That’s why it’s difficult to learn how to speak a new language, play an instrument, hit
a golf ball, or shoot great photos. It’s so much easier to watch TV or surf the web...”
he writes. To learn a new skill, you need to find the experts and get their materials,
249

250

CONCLUSION

create an action plan, and make an absolute commitment to studying and practicing
without any distractions.
By completing just 20 hours of focused, deliberate practice, you can go from
near zero to performing reasonably well in many fields. Kaufman describes how he
took 20 hours to learn several new skills, including windsurfing and programming
a website. Even if you take up a more complex activity, such as flying, 20 hours
will get you through the ground school and the first few lessons with an instructor.
This won’t make you a pilot, but 50 hours of flight time should earn you a private
pilot’s license.
The number of hours for mastering basic trading skills is even higher, but much
closer to flying than to 10,000 hours.
The intellectual demands of trading aren’t high. After all, we deal with only five
numbers—open, high, low, and closing prices, plus volume. The main difficulty
comes from our emotions. Trading stirs up powerful feelings, the strongest of which
are greed and fear.
New traders focus on money, dream about what their profits will buy, and throw
caution to the wind. They buy as many shares as they can afford and double up on
margin. Filled with joyful anticipation, they write down no trade plans.When a trade
turns against them, their emotions swing from greed to fear.That’s when they freeze,
while the market grinds down their accounts.
Technically, trading isn’t very hard. Psychologically, it’s the hardest game on
the planet.
To reduce the stress of trading, keep in mind several essential points.Your trading
life depends on following these rules:
■■

Trade small sizes while learning.

■■

Do not count money while in a trade.

■■

Use risk management rules, primarily the 2% Rule.

■■

Write down your plans, especially these three numbers: entry, stop, and target.

■■

Keep a trading diary and review it at least once a month.

Most traders are terribly isolated and never get to see how others practice their
craft. This isolation contributes to impulsive trading. A private trader who violates
every rule in the book and makes gross errors remains invisible to others. Nobody
will warn him to stay out of trouble or praise him for a good trade.
In the old days, our brokers knew what we were doing, but now we place orders
online. The only human who may contact you about your trades is the margin clerk
at a brokerage firm. Getting a call or an e-mail from him is never good news. I hope
that you never meet a margin call, sending good money after bad.
To break out of your isolation, to see what good traders are doing, and to be
rewarded for your performance, I suggest you look into SpikeTrade.com—a website
I run with my friend Kerry Lovvorn. That’s where traders share ideas and advice,
