
Always keep in mind that it doesn’t matter what a stock has done since
you bought it. There’s nothing you can do to change the past, and the market

cares not one whit whether youve made or lost money on the stock. Other


KNOW WHEN TO SELL

market participants—the folks setting the price of the stock—are looking to
the future, and that’s exactly what you should do when you're deciding
whether to sell a stock.

The Stock Has Skyrocketed
Again, it matters little how those stocks have done in the past—what’s impor-
tant is how you expect the company to do in the future. There’s not @ priori
reason for stocks that are up substantially to drop, just as there’s no reason for
stocks that have tanked to “have to come back eventually.” Most of us would
be better investors if we could just block out all those graphs of past stock per-
formance because they convey no useful information about the future.

So when should you sell? Run through these five questions whenever you

think about selling a stock, and you'll be in good shape.

Did You Make a Mistake?

Did you miss something when you first evaluated the company? Perhaps you
thought management would be able to pull off a turnaround, but the task
turned out to be bigger than you (and they) thought. Or maybe you under-
estimated the strength of a company’s competition or overestimated its abil-
ity to find new growth opportunities. No matter what the flub, it’s rarely
worth holding on to a stock that you bought for a reason that’s no longer
valid. If your initial analysis was wrong, cut your losses, take the tax break,
and move on.

Have the Fundamentals Deteriorated?

After several years of success, that raging growth company you bought has
started to slow down. Cash is piling up as the company has a tougher time
finding profitable, new investment opportunities, and competition is eating
away at the company’s margins. Sounds like it’s time to reassess the com-
pany’s future prospects. If they're substantially worse than they used to be, it’s

time to sell.

Has the Stock Risen Too Far above Its Intrinsic Value?
Let's face it: The market sometimes wakes up in an awfully good mood and

offers to pay you price far in excess of what your investment is really worth.


10

THE FIVE RULES FOR SUCCESSFUL STOCK INVESTING

There's no reason not to take advantage of other investors’ good nature. Ask
yourself how much more the market is willing to pay you than your estimate
of the value of the stock and how likely it is that your estimate of its value
could go up over time. You don’t want to sell wonderful companies just be-
cause they get a little pricey—youd incur capital gains and wouldn't be tak-
ing advantage of compounding. But even the greatest companies should be

sold when their shares sell at egregious values.

Is There Something Better You Can Do with the Money?

As an investor, you should always be seeking to allocate your money to the
assets that are likely to generate the highest return relative to their risk. There’s
no shame in selling a somewhat undervalued investment—even one on which
you've lost money—to free up funds to buy a stock with better prospects.

I did this myself in early 2003 when I noticed that Home Depot was
looking awfully cheap. The stock had been sliding for almost three years, and
I thought it was worth about 50 percent more than the market price at the
time. I didn’t have much cash in my account, so I had to sell something if I
wanted to buy Home Depot. After reviewing the stocks I owned, I sold some
shares of Citigroup, even though they were trading for about 15 percent less
than what I paid for them. Why? Because my initial assessment of Citigroup's
value had been too optimistic, and I didn’t think the shares were much of a
bargain any more. So, I sold a fairly valued stock to purchase one that I
thought was very undervalued.
bridge and couldn't be changed. What mattered was that I had the opportu-
nity to move funds from an investment with a very modest expected return

to one with a fairly high expected return—and that was a solid reason to sell.

Do You Have Too Much Money in One Stock?

This is the best reason of all to sell because it means you did something right
and picked a winner. The key is to not let greed get in the way of smart port-
folio management. If an investment is more than 10 percent to 15 percent of
your portfolio, it’s time to think long and hard about trimming it down no
matter how solid the company’s prospects may be. (These percentages are a

rough guide—you might be comfortable with more money ina single stock,


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

or you might want to be more diversified.) It simply doesn’t make sense to

have too Many of your cges in one basket.

Investor's Checklist: The Five Rules for Successful Stock Investing

»

Successful investing depends on personal discipline, not on whether the
crowd agrees or disagrees with you. That’s why it’s crucial to have a solid,
well-grounded investment philosophy.

Don't buy a stock unless you understand the business inside and out.
Taking the time to investigate a company before you buy the shares will
help you avoid the biggest mistakes.

Focus on companies with wide economic moats that can help them fend
off competitors. If you can identify why a company keeps competitors at
bay and consistently generates above-average profits, you've identified the
source of its economic moat.

Don't buy a stock without a margin of safety. Sticking to a strict valua-
tion discipline will help you avoid blowups and improve your invest-
ment performance.

The costs of frequent trading can be a huge drag on performance over
time. Treat your stock buys like major purchases, and hold on to them for
the long term.

Know when to sell. Don't sell just because the price has gone up or down,
but give it some serious thought if one of the following things has hap-
pened: You made a mistake buying it in the first place, the fundamentals
have deteriorated, the stock has risen well above its intrinsic value, you can

find better opportunities, or it takes up too much space in your portfolio.

IL




Seven Mistakes to Avoid

IN A LOT of ways investing is like tennis. In tennis, having a killer serve and
a great backhand will win you a lot of points, but any advantage that these
skills confer can be quickly wiped out with a string of double faults or un-
forced errors. At the end of a five-set match, it’s often the player with the least
mistakes who wins. Just being able to consistently get the ball back over the
net—no matter what your opponent throws at you—counts for a great deal.

Investing is pretty similar. Unless you know how to avoid the most com-
mon mistakes of investing, your portfolio’s returns won't be anything to get
excited about. You'll find that it takes many great stock picks to make up for
just a few big errors.

So, before we dive into the company analysis process, I want to introduce
you to seven easily avoidable mistakes that many investors frequently make.

Resisting these temptations is the first step to reaching your financial goals:

Swinging for the fences
Believing that it’s different this time
Falling in love with products

Pyepsr

Panicking when the market is down


14

SEVEN MISTAKES TO AVOID

5. Trying to time the market
6. Ignoring valuation
7. Relying on earnings for the whole story

Swinging for the Fences

This ties back to the importance of buying great companies with strong eco-
nomic moats. Loading up your portfolio with risky, all-or-nothing stocks—
in other words, swinging for the fences on every pitch—is a sure route to
investment disaster. For one thing, the insidious math of investing means
that making up large losses is a very difficult proposition—a stock that drops
50 percent needs to double just to break even.

For another, finding the next Microsoft when it’s still a tiny start-up is re-
ally, really difficult. You're much more likely to wind up with a company that
fizzles than a truly world-changing company, because it’s extremely difficult
to discern which is which when the firm is just starting out.

In fact, small growth stocks are the worst-returning equity category over
the long haul. Why? First, the numbers: According to Professor Kenneth
French at Dartmouth,’ small growth stocks have posted an average annual re-
turn of 9.3 percent since 1927, which is a good deal lower than the 10.7 per-
cent return of the S&P 500 over the same time period. Lest you sneeze at that
1.4 percent difference between the two returns, let me point out that it has an
absolutely enormous effect on long-run asset returns—over 30 years, a 9.3 per-
cent return on $1,000 would yield about $14,000, but a 10.7 percent return
would yield more than $21,000.

Moreover, many smaller firms never do anything but muddle along as
small firms—assuming they don’t go belly up, which many do. For example,
between 1997 and 2002, 8 percent of the firms on the Nasdaq were delisted
each year. That’s about 2,200 firms whose shareholders likely suffered huge
losses before the stocks were kicked off the Nasdaq.

Believing that It's Different This Time
The four most expensive words on Wall Street are “It’s different this time.”
History does repeat itself, bubbles do burst, and not knowing market history

is a major handicap.

"Kenneth French, http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.


PANICKING WHEN THE MARKET IS DOWN

In the spring of 2000, for example, the financial press started writing that
semiconductor stocks were no longer cyclical. That turned out to be pretty
close to the top in chip shares. A year later, energy stocks were all the rage,
and many analysts were projecting their earnings to grow at 20 percent for
the next several years. Then, the economy slowed, hurting the demand for
power, and new plants came online, driving up the supply. Asa result, energy
stocks such as Mirant and Calpine tanked 50 percent to 60 percent even be-
fore the Enron debacle sealed their fate.

The point here is very simple: You have to be a student of the market's

history to understand its future. Any time you hear someone say, “It really is

different this time,” turn off the TV and go for a walk.

Falling in Love with Products

This is one of the easiest investment traps to fall into. Who wouldn't have
thought that Palm was a great investment after buying a Palm Pilot when
they were first introduced a few years ago? It seems entirely logical, but the
reality is that great products do not necessarily translate into great profits. For
example, Palm was the first company to invent a handheld organizer that was
relatively easy to use and affordable, but consumer electronics is simply not
an attractive business. Margins are thin, competition is intense, and it’s very
tough to make a consistent profit.

Although great products and innovative technologies do matter when
you're assessing companies, neither matters nearly as much as economics.
Sure, Palm made a great device that millions of people purchased, and
the firm even acquired one of its chief competitors, but the industry's dismal
economics still caught up with the firm in the end—Palm lost hundreds of
millions of dollars in 2001 and 2002, and as of mid-2003, the firm’s shares
had plunged more than 98 percent since they started trading in early 2000.

When you look at a stock, ask yourself, “Is this an attractive business?
Would I buy the whole company if I could?” If the answer is no, give the

stock a pass—no matter how much you might like the firm’s products.

Panicking When the Market Is Down
Stocks are generally more attractive when no one else wants to buy them, not
when barbers are giving stock tips. It’s very tempting to look for validation—

or other people doing the same thing—when youre investing, but history has

1s


16

SEVEN MISTAKES TO AVOID

shown repeatedly that assets are cheap when everyone else is avoiding them.
(In the words of Sir John Templeton, one of the first investors to systemati-
cally scour foreign markets for bargains, “The time of maximum pessimism is
the best time to buy.”)

The most famous example of this is a Business Week cover story from the
1979 that asked the question, “The Death of Equities?” not long before
the start of an 18-year bull market in stocks.? More recently, Barron's featured
Warren Buffett on its cover in late 1999, asking, “What’s Wrong, Warren?”
and bemoaning Buffett's aversion to technology stocks.} Over the next three
years, the Nasdaq tanked more than 60 percent, and Berkshire Hathaway
shares appreciated 40 percent.

We also see empirical—rather than anecdotal—evidence of this in a
study that Morningstar has conducted every year for the past several years, in
which we look at the performance of unpopular funds. After looking at
which fund categories attracted the most money and which categories experi-
enced the strongest outflows, we found something very interesting. The asset
classes that everyone hated outperformed the ones that everyone loved in all
but one rolling three-year period over the past dozen years.

The difference can be striking. For example, investors who went where
others feared to tread and bought the three least-popular fund categories at
the beginning of 2000 would have had roughly flat investment returns over
the subsequent three years. That was much better than the market's average
annual loss of about 15 percent over the same time period and miles ahead of
the performance of the popular fund categories, which declined an average
of 26 percent per year during the three-year period.

Going against the grain takes courage, but that courage pays off. You'll do
better as an investor if you think for yourself and seek out bargains in parts of
the market that everyone else has forsaken, rather than buying the flavor
of the month in the financial press.

>“For better or for worse, then, the U.S. economy probably has to regard the death of equities
as near-permanent condition—reversible some day, but not soon” from “The Death of Equi-
ties,” Business Week, p. 54 (August 13, 1979).
3 Andrew Bary, “What's Wrong, Warren? Berkshire’s Down for the Year, but Don't Count It
Out,” Barron’, p. 16 (December 27, 1999).


TRYING TO TIME THE MARKET

Trying to Time the Market

Market timing is one of the all-time great myths of investing. There is no
strategy that consistently tells you when to be in the market and when to be
out of it, and anyone who says otherwise usually has a market-timing service
to sell you.

Consider an interesting study in the February 2001 issue of Financial An-
alysts Journal, which looked at the difference between buy-and-hold and mar-
ket-timing strategies from 1926 through 1999 using a very elegant method.
The authors essentially mapped all of the possible market-timing variations
between 1926 and 1999 with different switching frequencies.*

They assumed that for any given month, an investor could be either in
T-bills or in stocks and then calculated the returns that would have resulted
from all of the possible combinations of those switches. (For the curious,
there are 2%—or 4,096—possible combinations between two assets over
12 months.) Then they compared the results of a buy-and-hold strategy
with all of the possible market-timing strategies to see what percentage
of the timing combinations produced a return greater than simply buying
and holding.

The answer? About one-third of the possible monthly market-timing
combinations beat the buy-and-hold strategy. You may be thinking, “I have a
33 percent chance of beating the market if I try to time it. I'll take those
odds!” But before you run out and subscribe to some timing service, consider
three issues:

1. The results in the paper cited previously overstate the benefits of timing
because they looked at each year as a discrete period—which means they
ignore the benefits of compounding (as long as you assume that the mar-
ket will generally rise over long periods of time, that is).

2. Stock market returns are highly skewed—that is, the bulk of the returns
(positive and negative) from any given year comes from relatively few
days in that year. This means that the risk of vot being in the market is
high for anyone looking to build wealth over a long period of time.

4 Richard J. Bauer Jr. and Julie R. Dahlquist, “Market Timing and Roulette Wheels,” Financial
Analysts Journal, 57(1), pp. 28-40.

Le


18

SEVEN MISTAKES TO AVOID

3. Nota single one of the thousands of funds Morningstar has tracked over
the past two decades has been able to consistently time the market. Sure,
some funds have made the occasional great call, but none have posted any
kind of superior track record by jumping frequently in and out of the
market based on the signals generated by a quantitative model.

That’s pretty powerful evidence that market timing is not a viable strategy
because running a mutual fund is a very profitable business—if someone had
figured out a way to reliably time the market, you can bet your life theyd

have started a fund to do so.

Ignoring Valuation

This one came back to haunt many people over the past few years. Although
it’s certainly possible that another investor will pay you 50 times earnings
down the road for the company you just bought for 30 times earnings, that’s
a very risky bet to make. Sure, you could have made a ton of money in
CMGI or Yahoo! during the Internet bubble, but only if you had gotten out
in time. Can you honestly say to yourself that you would have?

The only reason you should ever buy a stock is that you think the business
is worth more than it’s selling for—not because you think a greater fool will
pay more for the shares a few months down the road.

We'll talk a lot more about the concept of intrinsic value and valuation
more in Chapters 9 and 10. For now, just remember that the best way to mit-
ket’s expectations are low, there’s a much greater chance that the company
you purchase will exceed them. Buying a stock on the expectation of positive

news flow or strong relative strength is asking for trouble.

Relying on Earnings for the Whole Story

At the end of the day, cash flow is what matters, not earnings. For a host of
reasons, accounting-based earnings per share can be made to say just about
whatever a company’s management wants them to, but cash flow is much
harder to fiddle with. The statement of cash flows can yield a ton of insight
into the true health of a business, and you can spot a lot of blowups before

they happen by simply watching the trend of operating cash flow relative to


INVESTOR’S CHECKLIST

earnings. One hint: If operating cash flows stagnate or shrink even as carn-
ings grow, it’s likely that something is rotten.

We'll talk more about the importance of analyzing cash flow in Chapters 5
and 6 and P’ll show you how to use it to detect potential accounting problems
in Chapter 8.

If you can avoid these common mistakes, you'll be miles ahead of the ay-
erage investor. Now, let’s move from what you shouldn't do to what you
should do. In the next chapter, I'll show you how to separate great companies

from average ones by analyzing economic moats.

Investor's Checklist: Seven Mistakes to Avoid

> Don’t try to shoot for big gains by finding the next Microsoft. Instead,
focus on finding solid companies with shares selling at low valuations.

> Understanding the market's history can help you avoid repeated pitfalls.
If people try to convince you that “it really is different this time,” ignore
them.

> Don’t fall into the all-too-frequent trap of assuming that a great product
translates into a high-quality company. Before you get swept away by ex-
citing new technology or a nifty product, make sure you've checked out
the company’s business model.

> Don't be afraid to use fear to your advantage. The best time to buy is
when everyone else is running away from a given asset class.

> Attempting to time the market is a fool’s game. There’s ample evidence
that the market can’t be timed.

> The best way to reduce your investment risk is to pay careful attention to
valuation. Don’t make the mistake of hoping that other investors will keep
paying higher prices, even if you're buying shares in a great company.

> Cash flow is the true measure of a company’s financial performance, not

reported earnings per share.

19




Economic Moats

INVESTORS OFTEN JUDGE companies by looking at which ones have in-
creased profits the most and assuming the trend will persist in the future. But
more often than not, the firms that look great in the rearview mirror wind up
performing poorly in the future, simply because success attracts competition
as surely as night follows day. And the bigger the profits, the stronger the
competition. That's the basic nature of any (reasonably) free market—capital
always seeks the areas of highest expected return. Therefore, most highly
profitable firms tend to become less profitable over time as competitors chip
away at their franchises.

You can see this every day in the headlines. Why do generic drug firms em-
ploy armies of lawyers to look for patent loopholes? Because large pharmaceu-
tical firms such as Pfizer and Merck are immensely profitable, and even one
successful patent challenge will pay off in spades. Why were venture capitalists
throwing money at every start-up firm in the networking industry during the
late 1990s? Because Cisco was growing at 40 percent per year with operating
margins of 25 percent. If a firm is generating big profits, it will surely attract

competition.


22

ECONOMIC MOATS

The concept of economic moats is crucial to the way Morningstar ana-
lyzes stocks because a moat is the characteristic that helps great-performing
companies to stay that way.

We've learned much about the subject by studying investment great
Warren Buffett and Harvard professor Michael Porter, who first set down
many of the main principles for analyzing competitive strategy and eco-
nomic moats.

To analyze a company’s economic moat, follow these four steps:

1. Evaluate the firm’s historical profitability. Has the firm been able to gener-
