was trading around forty dollars and therefore the whole company was selling for about seven million. I
figured the company would be worth as much as the premium volume, roughly, because they would get the
investment income on ‘float’ that was pretty close to dollar-for-dollar, maybe with the premium income.
Plus, they’d have the book value. So I figured it would always be worth at least as much as the premium.
Now, all I had to do was get to a billion dollars of premium income and I was going to be a millionaire.”
3. This company later became ConAgra. Buffett-Falk had apparently managed a $100,000 preferred-stock
offering for it as an investment banker—at the time not a trivial transaction.
4. Interview with Margaret Landon, the secretary at Buffett-Falk.
5. According to Walter Schloss in an interview, the Norman family, who were heirs of Julius Rosenwald of
Sears, Roebuck, “received GEICO stock because they were big investors in Graham-Newman. When the

Normans wanted to put more money with Graham-Newman, they gave Ben Graham the GEICO stock he had
distributed to them instead of putting cash in. Warren is out in Omaha, and he’s buying GEICO. But Graham
didn’t know he was selling to Warren, and Warren couldn’t figure out why Graham-Newman was selling it.”
The distribution of GEICO stock by Graham-Newman is also described in Janet Lowe’s Benjamin Graham
on Value Investing: Lessons from the Dean of Wall Street. Chicago: Dearborn Financial Publishing, 1994.
6. Interview with Bob Soener, who called him “Buffie” in those days.
7. As seen in a photograph taken in the classroom.
8. Interview with Lee Seeman.
9. People attended the class partly to get stock ideas. This was the only time he resembled Ben Graham in
giving out ideas. He did so mainly because he had more ideas than money.
10. Interview with Margaret Landon. Her memory of him is in this posture, reading.
11. Office Memorandum, Cleveland Worsted Mills Company, Buffett-Falk Company, September 19, 1952.
12. Interview with Fred Stanback.
13. Buffett traded two stocks personally, Carpenter Paper and Fairmont Foods. While astute enough to set
the firm up as a market maker and trade the stocks, he was immature (albeit witty) enough to refer to the
CEO of Fairmont Foods, D. K. Howe, as “Don’t Know Howe.”
14. Bill Rosenwald later founded the United Jewish Appeal of New York.
15. Interviews with Doris Buffett, Roberta Buffett Bialek.
16. Interview with Fred Stanback.
17. Interview with Chuck Peterson.
18. Brig. Gen. Warren Wood of the 34th National Guard Division.
19. Interview with Byron Swanson.
20. Interview with Fred Stanback.
21. Susie told Sue Brownlee (Sue James Stewart) this the week after she returned from her honeymoon.
Interview with Sue James Stewart.
22. Wahoo is best known as the birthplace of movie mogul Darryl F. Zanuck.
23. “Love Only Thing That Stops Guard,” Omaha World-Herald, April 20, 1952.
24. Interview with Buffett. Also, Brian James Beerman, “Where in the Hell Is Omaha?” Americanmafia.com,
March 21, 2004.
Chapter 20
1. General Douglas MacArthur made a halfhearted run for the nomination but was eclipsed by Taft. He and
his former aide Eisenhower were bitter enemies.
2. Interview with Roberta Buffett Bialek.

3. David L. Dodd, Associate Dean, Columbia University, letter to Warren Buffett, May 20, 1952.
4. This was the same Robert Taft who had cosponsored the Taft-Hartley Act, much favored among
businessmen but despised by broad swaths of Americans. In short, Taft represented the extreme end of the
party, which made him less likely to capture moderate voters.
5. Ironically, many in this faction promoted tariffs, government farm supports, and tough labor laws desired
by their small-business and farm constituents, even though this may have seemed inconsistent with their other
views on government. Another famous member of this group was popular Nebraska Senator Ken Wherry, the
“merry mortician,” famous for malapropisms such as calling Indochina “Indigo China,” addressing the
chairman as “Mr. Paragraph,” and offering his “unanimous opinion.” Time, June 25, 1951. Wherry died
shortly before the election.
6. The leaders of this wing of the party were Henry Cabot Lodge and Nelson Rockefeller, despised by
Howard Buffett and like-minded Republicans as rich East Coast Ivy League elitists who abandoned core
Republican principles to join forces with Democrats whenever it furthered their own pragmatic interests and
those of “big business.”
7. “Top GOP Rift Closed But Not the Democrats’,” New York Times, September 14, 1952; Elie Abel, “Taft
Rallies Aid for GOP Ticket,” New York Times, October 5, 1952.
8. Howard Buffett wrote to former president Hoover, October 23, 1952: “I have no enthusiasm for
Eisenhower, but your decision to support his election is good enough for me.” He apparently changed his
mind after this letter was written.
9. Interview with Roberta Buffett Bialek.
10. Interview with Katie Buffett, who recalled this conversation and found it amusing. “Warren’s probably
forgotten he told me that one,” she said.
11. Susan Goodwillie Stedman, recalling personal interview with Susan Thompson Buffett conducted
November 2001, courtesy of Susan Goodwillie Stedman and Elizabeth Wheeler.
12. Interview with Susan T. Buffett.
13. Interviews with Mary and Dick Holland, Warren Buffett.
14. Interviews with Racquel Newman, Astrid Buffett.
15. The IQ story is a family tale, but since Dr. Thompson was in charge of IQ testing for the whole school
system, it has at least some credence. Within the family, Dr. Thompson often tested his daughters and
grandchildren while he was creating new psychology and intelligence tests. Whatever her IQ, Dottie was
considered no dummy.
16. This story is related in Leila Buffett’s diary. Also, Gabe Parks, “Court Has Nomination Vote Vacancy,”
Omaha World-Herald, July 4, 1954.
17. “Buffett May Join Faculty at UNO,” Omaha World-Herald, April 30, 1952; Buffett-Falk and Company
announcement, Omaha-World Herald, January 9, 1953; “Talks on Government Scheduled at Midland,”
Omaha World-Herald, February 6, 1955; “Buffett Midland Lecturer in 1956,” Omaha World-Herald,
February 15, 1955.
18. Warren Buffett letter to “Pop” Howard Buffett, dated “Wednesday,” presumed August 4, 1954.
“Scarsdale G.I. Suicide, Army Reports the Death of Pvt. Newton Graham in France,” New York Times,
August 3, 1954. The entire text of the item read: “Frankfurt, Germany, Aug. 2 (Reuters)—Pvt. Newton
Graham of Scarsdale, N.Y., committed suicide at La Rochelle, France, the United States Army announced

today.” Newton—named after Sir Isaac Newton—was the second of Graham’s sons to be named Isaac
Newton; the first had died of meningitis at age nine. Noting Newton’s increasing mental instability, which he
labeled “highly neurotic, even probably schizophrenic,” Graham had written letters trying to get him
discharged from the army, but failed. (Benjamin Graham, The Memoirs of the Dean of Wall Street. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.)
19. Susie Buffett Jr. says she had a crib.
20. Using the term “pay” loosely, since all of the earnings are not actually paid out as a dividend. This
distinction was once the subject of heavy academic debate as to the discount that should be imputed to a
stock’s valuation for earnings that were not paid out. The premium assigned to companies that pay dividends
has waned for a number of reasons. See also the reference to “The Frozen Corporation” in Chapter 46,
“Rubicon.”
21. Interview with Fred Stanback.
22. His personal investment return that year was 144.8%, compared to 50.1% for the DJIA.
23. Union Underwear was the predecessor to Fruit of the Loom.
24. Buffett recalled this classic story in an interview.
25. Interview with Sue James Stewart.
26. Interview with Elizabeth Trumble.
27. Interview with Roxanne Brandt.
28. I Love Lucy, Season 1, Episode 6, November 11, 1951.
29. Buffett’s exact quote was “I can see her pulsing and moaning as she said, ‘Tell me more…’”
Chapter 21
1. Berkshire Hathaway chairman’s letter, 1988.
2. The tax code exemption applied to LIFO inventory liquidations. For tax purposes Rockwood used LIFO
accounting, which let it calculate profits using the most recent cocoa-bean prices, which minimized taxes.
Correspondingly, cocoa beans were carried in inventory at old prices. A large taxable profit would therefore
occur if it sold the inventory.
3. Pritzker created a business conglomerate through his investing activities, but is best known as founder of
the Hyatt hotel chain.
4. At the onset of the exchange period, Accra cocoa beans, which made up half of Rockwood’s
13-million-pound pile, were trading at $0.52 a pound. The price dropped to $0.44 per pound by the
conclusion of the exchange period. The price of these beans had hit a high of $0.73 per pound in August
1954, causing candy companies to shrink the size of their 5¢ candy bars. George Auerbach, “Nickel Candy
Bar Wins a Reprieve,” New York Times, March 26, 1955; “Commodity Cash Prices,” New York Times,
October 4 and 20, 1954.
5. Letter to Stockholders of Rockwood & Co., September 28, 1954.
6. From the 1988 chairman’s letter in the Berkshire annual report to shareholders, which contains a brief
description of the Rockwood transaction.

7. The speculator’s return on the contract also reflects his funding cost. For example, if the speculator broke
even on a three-month contract—net of his fee—the contract would actually be unprofitable, considering the
speculator’s funding cost.
8. In the futures market, the difference between a speculator and a hedger (or “insured”) is essentially
whether an underlying position in the commodity exists to be hedged.
9. Interviews with Tom Knapp and Walter Schloss, as well as Buffett.
10. Warren Buffett letter to David Elliott, February 5, 1955.
11. Based on its profile in Moody’s Industrial Manual, Rockwood traded between $14.75 and $85 in 1954
and between $76 and $105 in 1955. Buffett held on to the shares through 1956. Profit on the trade is
estimated. Rockwood traded above $80 a share during early 1956, based on the Graham-Newman annual
report.
12. In the letter to David Elliott noted above (February 5, 1955), Buffett explains that Rockwood is his
second-largest position (after Philadelphia & Reading, which he did not disclose) and writes that Pritzker
“has operated quite fast in the past. He bought the Colson Corp. a couple years ago and after selling the
bicycle division to Evans Products sold the balance to F. L. Jacobs. He bought Hiller & Hart about a year ago
and immediately discontinued the pork-slaughtering business and changed it into a more or less real estate
company.” Pritzker, he writes, “has about half the stock of Rockwood, which represents about $3 million in
cocoa value. I am quite sure he is not happy about sitting with this kind of money in inventory of this type
and will be looking for a merger of some sort promptly.” He had studied not just the numbers but Jay
Pritzker.
13. Initially he had bought the stock from Graham-Newman when he was a stockbroker, after a minor
mistake on an order from them caused them to DK (“don’t know,” or repudiate) the order. Warren kept the
stock.
14. Before 2000, investors and analysts routinely sought and received nonpublic information that would be
an advantage to them in trading stocks. This gradual flow of information, which benefited some investors at
the expense of others, was considered part of the efficient workings of the capital markets and a reward for
diligent research. Warren Buffett and his network of investor friends profited significantly from the old state
of affairs. Ben Graham was questioned extensively about this practice before Congress in 1955. He
commented that “a good deal of information from day to day and month to month naturally comes to the
attention of directors and officers. It is not at all feasible to publish every day a report on the progress of the
company…on the other hand, as a practical matter, there is no oath of secrecy imposed upon the officers or
directors so that they cannot say anything about information that may come to their attention from week to
week. The basic point involved is that where there is a matter of major importance it is generally felt that
prompt disclosure should be made to all the stockholders so that nobody would get a substantial advantage in
knowing that. But there are all degrees of importance, and it is very difficult to determine exactly what kind
of information should or must be published and what kind should just go the usual grapevine route.” He
added that all investors may not be aware of the grapevine, but, “I think that the average experienced person
would assume that some people are bound to know more about the company [whose stock they are trading]
than he would, and possibly trade on the additional knowledge.” Until 2000 that was, in effect, the state of
the law.
While a full discussion of insider trading is beyond the scope of this book, the theory of insider trading was
promulgated with SEC Rule 10b-5 in 1942, but “so firmly entrenched was the Wall Street tradition of taking
advantage of the investing public,” as John Brooks puts it in The Go-Go Years, that the rule was not enforced
until 1959, and it was not until the 1980s that anyone seriously questioned the duties of people other than
insiders under insider-trading laws. Even then, the Supreme Court affirmed, in Dirks v. SEC, 463 U.S. 646
(1983), analysts could legitimately tell their clients this type of information, and the Supreme Court also
noted in Chiarella v. United States, 445 U.S. 222 (1980), that “informational disparity is inevitable in the
securities markets.” To some extent, there was understood to be some benefit to the market of a gradual

leakage of inside information; in fact, how else was the information to get out? The practice of business
public relations and conference calls had not developed.
In these 1980s cases, however, the Supreme Court defined a new “misappropriation” theory of insider
trading, in which inside information that was misappropriated by a fiduciary could lead to liability if acted
upon. Then, largely in response to the Bubble-era proliferation of “meeting and beating consensus” earnings
and the “whisper numbers” that companies began to suggest to favored analysts that they were going to earn,
in 2000, through Regulation FD (Fair Disclosure), the SEC broadened the misappropriation theory to include
analysts who selectively receive and disseminate material nonpublic information from a company’s
management. With the advent of Reg. FD, the “grapevine” largely ended, and a new era of carefully
orchestrated disclosure practices began.
15. At the end of 1956, after the dividend was paid, Warren owned 576 shares trading at $20, worth $11,520.
16. He registered the securities in his own name, rather than his brokers’, so the checks came straight to his
home.
17. Interviews with George Gillespie, Elizabeth Trumble, who heard this story from Madeline. Warren heard
it for the first time at his fiftieth birthday party, from Gillespie. Apparently Susie had never mentioned it to
him.
18. More than five decades later, Howie recalls this as his first memory. While that may seem improbable, in
“Origins of Autobiographical Memory,” Harley and Reese (University of Chicago, Developmental
Psychology, Vol. 35, No. 5, 1999) study theories of how childhood memories are recalled from the earliest
months of life and conclude that this phenomenon does occur. One of the explanations is parents who repeat
stories to their children. A gift from Ben Graham—probably significant to Warren—might plausibly be
recalled by Howie from infancy because at least one parent helped him imprint it solidly in memory by
discussing it so much.
19. Interview with Bernie and Rhoda Sarnat.
20. This story also is cited in Janet Lowe’s Benjamin Graham on Value Investing: Lessons from the Dean of
Wall Street. Chicago: Dearborn Financial Publishing, 1994.
21. Interview with Walter Schloss.
22. Warren Buffett letter to the Hilton Head Group, February 3, 1976.
23. Schloss was starting the partnership with $5,000 of his own capital, a risky arrangement that left him
nothing on which to live. Buffett got him help with housing from Dan Cowin. Ben Graham put in $10,000
and had some of his friends do so too; eight of Schloss’s friends put in $5,000 each. Schloss charged 25% of
profits, “but that’s it. If the market went down, we would have to make up the loss until my partners were
whole.”
24. Knapp was a security analyst at Van Cleef, Jordan & Wood, an investment adviser.
25. Interview with Tom Knapp.
26. Interview with Ed Anderson.
27. Ibid.
28. Graham was born May 9, 1894. He decided to shut down Graham-Newman when he was sixty-one, but
the last Graham-Newman shareholder meeting was held on August 20, 1956.
29. Jason Zweig says in a July 2003 Money article, “Lessons from the Greatest Investor Ever,” that “From

1936 to 1956, at his Graham-Newman mutual fund, he produced an average annual gain of more than 14.7%
vs. 12.2% for the overall market—one of the longest and widest margins of outperformance in Wall Street
history.” This record does not reflect the impressive performance of GEICO, which was distributed to the
shareholders in 1948.
Chapter 22
1. At times he had said he wanted to be a millionaire by age thirty.
2. Interview with Ed Anderson.
3. “Newman and Graham predated A. W. Jones, which everybody thinks is the first hedge fund,” Buffett
says. A.W. Jones is best known as the first promoter of the concept of hedging the risk in stocks with short
sales. However, its fee structure, partnership arrangement, and flexible investing approach—that is, the
classic hedge fund as the term is technically defined—were pioneered much earlier, by Graham if not others
as well.
4. Interview with Chuck Peterson.
5. The first partnership agreement provided: “Each limited partner shall be paid interest at the rate of 4% per
annum on the balance of his capital account as of December 31 of the immediately preceding year as shown
by the Federal Income Tax Return filed by the partnership applicable to said year’s business, said interest
payments to be charged as expenses of the partnership business. In lieu of a separate computation of interest
for the period ending December 31, 1956, each limited partner shall be paid 2% of his original capital
contribution, said payments to be charged as expense of the partnership business for said period. In addition
each of the limited partners shall share in the overall net profits of the partnership, that is, the net profits of
the partnership from the date of its formation to any given point of time in the proportions set opposite their
respective names.” The total interest of the partners added up to 21/42 or 50% of the total interest in the
earnings (Certificate of Limited Partnership, Buffett Associates, Ltd., May 1,1956). The agreement to share
in the losses was an amendment to the partnership agreement on April 1, 1958.
6. According to Joyce Cowin, both Buffett and her own husband, Dan Cowin, who had been introduced to
Buffett by Fred Kuhlken, ran money separately for Gottschaldt and Elberfeld.
7. Interview with Chuck Peterson.
8. Some of these remarks were made at the 2003 speech to Georgia Tech students, the rest in interviews with
the author.
9. Hartman L. Butler Jr., “An Hour with Mr. Graham,” March 6, 1976, interview included in Irving Kahn and
Robert Milne, Benjamin Graham: The Father of Financial Analysis. Occasional Paper No. 5, The Financial
Analysts Research Foundation, 1977.
10. Interview with Tom Knapp.
11. “Tourist Killed Abroad, Portugal-Spain Highway Crash Fatal to Long Island Man,” New York Times, June
23, 1956. Kuhlken had been on a yearlong trip. The other passenger, Paul Kelting, was listed in critical
condition.
12. Sloan Wilson, The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1955.
13. Interview with Susie Buffett Jr.
14. From Headliners & Legends, MSNBC, February 10, 2001.
15. Interview with Charlie Munger.

16. Or thereabouts.
17. Interview with Ed Anderson.
18. According to Tom Knapp, one thing Dodge and Buffett had in common was their tightfistedness. Even
when he later became one of Buffett’s richest partners, Homer Dodge would angle for a free canoe from a
canoe maker. He knew every route into New York City from both La Guardia and JFK airports, and took
convoluted trips by bus and subway and on foot rather than hire a cab.
19. The Dodges chose a slightly different deal. Buffett’s share of the profits would be only 25%, but the
amount he could lose was limited to his capital, initially only $100. Certificate of Limited Partnership, Buffett
Fund, Ltd., September 1, 1956.
20. Cleary split profits over 4%, while Buffett was exposed to the extent of any arrears. Certificate of
Limited Partnership, B-C Ltd., October 1, 1956. In 1961, B-C Ltd. was folded into Underwood Partnership,
Ltd.
21. Buffett Partnership files, “Miscellaneous Expense” and “Postage and Insurance Expense,” 1956 and
1957.
22. Warren Buffett’s first letter to partners, December 27, 1956.
23. During the war, people bought Liberty Bonds, which paid low interest rates, as a patriotic duty. When
rates subsequently rose, the bonds traded “below par”—face value. Stock promoters offered shares to
Liberty Bond owners in exchange for the par value of the bonds. Thus bondholders thought they were getting
$100 worth of stock for a bond selling in the market for, say, $85, when in fact the stock was worth little if
anything. Salesmen also promised some buyers board seats, according to Hayden Ahmanson, who told
Buffett this.
24. From 1928 to 1954, the manual was published in five volumes annually as Moody’s Manual of
Investments, one volume each for government securities; banks, insurance companies, investment trusts, real
estate, finance and credit companies; industrial securities; railroad securities; and public-utility securities. In
1955, Moody’s began publishing Moody’s Bank and Finance Manual separately.
25. Buffett says Hayden Ahmanson gave him this version of events.
26. Buffett: “He was my partner in National American insurance. Dan didn’t have a lot of money, so he was
using his money that he had originally planned to put in the partnership, and borrowed some money too.”
27. Under the Williams Act, passed in 1968, you could not do this today, nor could Howard Ahmanson buy
