
426 Chapter 17

RELATIVE STRENGTH AND
INDIVIDUAL STOCKS

Investors have two ways to go at that point. They can simply
rotate their funds out of one market group into another and stop
there. Or, if they wish, they can continue on to choose individual
stocks within those groups. Relative strength analysis plays a role
here as well. Once the desired index has been chosen, the next
step is to divide each of the individual stocks within the index by
the index itself. In that way, you can easily spot the individual
stocks that are showing the greatest relative strength. (See Figure
17.10.) You can purchase the stocks showing the strongest ratio
lines, or you can buy a cheaper stock whose ratio line may just be
turning up. The idea, however, is to avoid stocks whose relative
strength (ratio) lines are still falling.

9/0/97 (DELL) Dell Computer Corp 03/16/98

i
hi Hn

telnet”
atte Hastie *y 4 va +

ayul iy tt f
itt Al L Hy!
ag il ia" i

Dell / PSE High Tech Ratio

Figure 17.10 A ratio analysis of Dell Computer versus the PSE High
Tech Index at the end of 1997 showed Dell to be one of the better stock picks
in the tech sector.


The Link Between Stocks and Futures: Intermarket Analysis 427

TOP-DOWN MARKET APPROACH

What we've described here is a top down market approach. You
begin by studying the major market averages to determine the
trend of the overall market. Then you select those market sectors
or industry groups that are showing the best relative strength.
Then you select individual stocks within those groups that are
also showing the best relative strength. By incorporating inter-
market principles into your decision making process, you can
also determine whether the current market climate favors
bonds, commodities, or stocks which can play a role in your
asset allocation decisions. The same principles can also be
applied to international investing by simply comparing the rel-
ative strength of the various global stock markets. And, finally,
all of these technical tools described herein can be applied to
charts of mutual funds as a final check on your analysis. All of
this work is easily done with price charts and a computer.
Imagine trying to apply fundamental analysis to so many mar-
kets at the same time.

DEFLATION SCENARIO

The intermarket principles described herein are based on market
trends since 1970. The 1970s saw runaway inflation which
favored commodity assets. The decades of the 1980s and 1990s
have been characterized by falling commodities (disinflation)
and strong bull markets in bonds and stocks. During the second
half of 1997, a severe downturn in Asian currency and stock mar-
kets was especially damaging to markets like copper, gold, and
oil. For the first time in decades, some market observers
expressed concern that a beneficial disinflation (prices rising at a
slower level) might turn into a harmful deflation (falling prices).
To add to the concerns, producer prices fell on an annual basis
for the first time in more than a decade. As a result, the bond and
stock markets began to decouple. For the first time in four years,
investors were switching out of stocks and putting more money
into bonds and rate-sensitive stock groups like utilities. The rea-


428 Chapter 17

son for that asset allocation adjustment is that deflation changes
the intermarket scenario. The inverse relationship between bond
prices and commodities is maintained. Commodities fall while
bond prices rise. The difference is that the stock market can react
negatively in that environment. We point this out because it’s
been a long time since the financial markets had to deal with the
problem of price deflation. If and when deflation does occur,
intermarket relationships will still be present but in a different
way. Disinflation is bad for commodities, but good for bonds and
stocks. Deflation is good for bonds and bad for commodities, but
may also be bad for stocks.

The deflationary trend that started in Asia in mid-1997
spread to Russia and Latin America by mid-1998 and began to
hurt all global equity markets. A plunge in commodity prices had
an especially damaging impact on commodity exporters like
Australia, Canada, Mexico, and Russia. The deflationary impact of
falling commodity and stock prices had a positive impact on
Treasury bond prices, which hit record highs. Market events of
1998 were a dramatic example of the existence of global inter-
market linkages and demonstrated how bonds and stocks can
decouple in a deflationary world.

INTERMARKET CORRELATION

Two markets that normally trend in the same direction, such as
bonds and stocks, are positively correlated. Markets that trend in
opposite directions, like bonds and commodities, are negatively
correlated. Charting software allows you to measure the degree of
correlation between different markets. A high positive reading sug-
gests a strong positive correlation. A high negative reading suggests
a strong negative correlation. A reading near zero suggests little or
no correlation between two markets. By measuring the degree of
correlation, the trader is able to establish how much emphasis to
place on a particular intermarket relationship. More weight should
be placed on those with higher correlations, and less weight on
those closer to zero. (See Figure 17.11.) :


The Link Between Stocks and Futures: Intermarket Analysis 429

10/29/93 (TR1600) Treasury Bonds 1600 03/20/98
121428
T-Bonds s184

11542

112416

10012

10808

1039704

S&P 500 Index 100

Bond / Stock Correlation

ee bs e. yy bs
“SAT ip Pia a TRG rg oS Fe WT

Figure 17.11 The line along the bottom shows the positive correlation
between T-bond prices and the S&PSO0. During the second half of 1997,
the Asian crisis caused an unusual decoupling. Investors bought bonds and
sold stocks.

In his book, Cybernetic Trading Strategies, Murray Ruggiero,
Jr. presents creative work on the subject of intermarket correla-
tions. He also shows how to use intermarket filters on trading sys-
tems. He demonstrates, for example, how a moving-average
crossover system in the bond market can be used as a filter for
stock index trading. Ruggiero explores the application of state-of-
the-art artificial intelligence methods like chaos theory, fuzzy
logic, and neural networks to the development of technical trad-
ing systems. He also explores the application of neural networks
to the field of intermarket analysis.

INTERMARKET NEURAL
NETWORK SOFTWARE

One major problem with the study of intermarket relationships is
that there are so many of them—and they’re all interacting at the


430 Chapter 17

same time. That’s where neural networks come into play. Neural
networks provide a more quantitative framework for identifying
and tracking the complex relationships that exist among the
financial markets. Louis Mendelsohn, president of Market Tech-
nologies Corporation (25941 Apple Blossom Lane, Wesley Chapel,
FL 33544; e-mail address: 45141@ProfitTaker.com; website URL:
www.ProfitTaker.com/45141), was the first person to develop
intermarket analysis software in the financial industry during the
1980s. Mendelsohn is the leading pioneer in the application of
microcomputer software and neural networks to intermarket
analysis. His VantagePoint software, first introduced in 1991, uses
intermarket principles to trade interest rate markets, stock index-
es, currency markets, and energy futures. VantagePoint uses neur-
al network technology to detect the hidden patterns and correla-
tions that exist between related markets.

CONCLUSION

This chapter summarizes the main points included in my book,
Intermarket Technical Analysis. It discusses the ripple effect that
flows from the dollar to commodities to bonds to stocks.
Intermarket work also recognizes the existence of global linkages.
What happens in Asia, Europe, and Latin America has an impact
on U.S. markets and vice versa. Intermarket analysis sheds light on
sector rotation within the stock market. Relative strength analysis
is helpful for seeking out asset classes, market sectors, or individ-
ual stocks that are likely to outperform the general market. In his
book, Leading Indicators for the 1990s, Dr. Geoffrey Moore shows
how the interaction between commodity prices, bond prices, and
stock prices follows a sequential pattern that tracks the business
cycle. Dr. Moore substantiates the intermarket rotation within the
three asset classes, and argues for their use in economic forecast-
ing. In doing so, Dr. Moore elevates intermarket work and techni-
cal analysis in general into the realm of economic forecasting.
Finally, technical analysis can be applied to mutual funds like any
other market (with some minor modifications). That being the
case, all of the techniques discussed in this book can be applied


The Link Between Stocks and Futures: Intermarket Analysis 431

right on the mutual fund charts themselves. Even better, the lower
degree of volatility in mutual fund charts make them excellent
vehicles for chart analysis. My latest book, The Visual Investor,
deals more extensively with the subject of sector analysis and trad-
ing, and shows how mutual funds can be charted and then used
to implement various trading strategies. (See Figure 17.12.)

03/31/94 (FSEAX) Fidelity Invt T Southeast A 03/13/98
ABS
45
A483
AG
4M
Hane
147
11"2
105
40

aut ani lal ll a A

Figure 17.12 Chart analysis can be done on mutual fund charts. You
didn’t have to be a chart expert to see that Asia was headed for trouble by
tracking this mutual fund.




idicators

MEASURING MARKET BREADTH

In the previous chapter, we described the top-down approach that
is most commonly employed in stock market analysis. With that
approach, you begin your analysis with a study of the health of
the overall market. Then you work down to market sectors and
industry groups. The final step is the study of individual stocks.
Your goal is to pick the best stocks in the best groups in an envi-
ronment when the stock market is technically healthy. The study
of market sectors and individual stocks can be accomplished with
the technical tools employed throughout this book—including
chart patterns, volume analysis, trendlines, moving averages,
oscillators, etc. Those same indicators can also be applied to the
major market averages. But there’s another class of market indica-
tors widely employed in stock market analysis whose purpose is to
determine the health of the overall stock market by measuring
market breadth. The data used in their construction are advanc-
ing versus declining issues, new highs versus new lows, and up
volume versus down volume.

433


434 Chapter 18

SAMPLE DATA

If you check the Stock Market Data Bank section of The Wall Street
Journal (Section C, page 2) each day, you’ll find the following data
for the previous trading day. The numbers shown are based on an
actual day’s trading results.

Diaries

NYSE Monday
Issues Traded 3,432
Advances 1,327
Declines 1,559
Unchanged 546
New highs 78
New lows 43
Adv vol (000) 248,215
Decl vol (000) 279,557
Total vol (000) 553,914
Closing tick -135
Closing Arms (trin) 96

The above figures are derived from New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE) data. A similar breakdown is also shown for the
NASDAQ and the American Stock Exchange. We’ll concentrate
on the NYSE in this discussion. It just so happens that on that
particular day the Dow Jones Industrial Average had gained 12.20
points. So the market was up as measured by the Dow. However,
there were more declining stocks (1,559) than advancing stocks
(1,327), suggesting that the broader market didn’t fare as well as
the Dow. There was also more declining volume than advancing
volume. Those two sets of figures suggest that market breadth
was actually negative for that particular day—even though the
Dow itself closed higher. The other figures present a more mixed
picture. The number of stocks hitting new 52 week highs (78)
was greater than those hitting new lows (43) suggesting a posi-
tive market environment. However, the closing tick (the number
of stocks that closed on an uptick versus a downtick) was a neg-


Stock Market Indicators 435

ative, -135. That meant that 135 more stocks closed on a
downtick than an uptick, a short term negative factor. The nega-
tive closing tick, however, is offset by a closing Arms (Trin) read-
ing of .96 which is mildly positive. We'll explain why that is later
in the chapter. All of these internal market readings have one
intended purpose—to give us a more accurate reading on the
health of the overall market that isn’t always reflected in the
movement of the Dow itself.

COMPARING MARKET AVERAGES

Another way to study the breadth of the market is to compare the
performance of the stock averages themselves. Using the same
day’s trading as an example, the following data lists the relative
performance of the major stock averages:

Dow Industrials +12.20 (+.16%)
S&P 500 -.64 (-.07%)
Nasdaq Composite -14.47 (-.92%)
Russell 2000 -3.80 (-.89%)

The first thing that is clear is that the Dow Industrials was
the only market average to gain on the day. On all the TV news
programs that night, investors were told that the market (repre-
sented by the Dow) was up for the day. Yet all the other measures
were actually down. Notice also that the broader the average (the
more stocks included) the worse it did. Compare the percentage
changes. The 30 stock Dow gained .16%. The S&P 500 lost .07%.
The Nasdaq Composite, which includes more than 5,000 stocks,
was the day’s worst performer and lost .92%. Almost as bad as the
Nasdaq was the Russell 2000 (-.89%), which is a measure of 2000
small cap stocks. The message in this brief comparison is that
even though the Dow gained on the day, the overall market lost
ground as measured by the more broader based stock averages.
We'll revisit the idea of comparing market averages again. But
first, let’s show the different ways market technicians can analyze
the market’s breadth numbers.


436 Chapter 18

THE ADVANCE-DECLINE LINE

This is the best known of the breadth indicators. The construction
of the advance decline line is extremely simple. Each day’s trading
on the New York Stock Exchange produces a certain number of
stocks that advanced, a number that declined, and a number that
remained unchanged. These figures are reported each day in The
Wall Street Journal and Investor's Business Daily, and are used to con-
struct a daily advance-decline (AD) line. The most common way to
calculate the AD line is to take the difference between the number
of advancing issues and the number of declining issues. If there are
more advances than declines, the AD number for that day is posi-
tive. If there are more declines than advances, the AD line for that
day is negative. That positive or negative daily number is then
added to the cumulative AD line. The AD line displays a trend of
its own. The idea is to make sure the AD line and the market aver-
ages are trending in the same direction. (See Figure 18.1.)

bow inden, | : : _ E soo
| /
| Frese
| | 1
! : 7800)
| |
i i f° 8800)
Advances : E 8000
' E sooo)
i F 38000}
wy =
; \ i ox
‘hea Tare” yoda’ Beer Dore Hee” Rebun _Wase

Figure 18.1 |The NYSE advance-decline line versus the Dow Industrials.
In a healthy market, both lines should be trending upward together as they
are here.


436 Chapter 18

THE ADVANCE-DECLINE LINE

This is the best known of the breadth indicators. The construction
of the advance decline line is extremely simple. Each day’s trading
on the New York Stock Exchange produces a certain number of
stocks that advanced, a number that declined, and a number that
remained unchanged. These figures are reported each day in The
Wall Street Journal and Investor’s Business Daily, and are used to con-
struct a daily advance-decline (AD) line. The most common way to
calculate the AD line is to take the difference between the number
of advancing issues and the number of declining issues. If there are
more advances than declines, the AD number for that day is posi-
tive. If there are more declines than advances, the AD line for that
day is negative. That positive or negative daily number is then
added to the cumulative AD line. The AD line displays a trend of
its own. The idea is to make sure the AD line and the market aver-
ages are trending in the same direction. (See Figure 18.1.)

Advance-Deeline Line

Ww

"hea The "iy" "Taba" Btatb Bae faa Falay Taal

Figure 18.1. The NYSE advance-decline line versus the Dow Industrials.
In a healthy market, both lines should be trending upward together as they
are here.


436 Chapter 18

THE ADVANCE-DECLINE LINE

This is the best known of the breadth indicators. The construction
of the advance decline line is extremely simple. Each day’s trading
on the New York Stock Exchange produces a certain number of
stocks that advanced, a number that declined, and a number that
remained unchanged. These figures are reported each day in The
Wall Street Journal and Investor’s Business Daily, and are used to con-
struct a daily advance-decline (AD) line. The most common way to
calculate the AD line is to take the difference between the number
of advancing issues and the number of declining issues. If there are
more advances than declines, the AD number for that day is posi-
tive. If there are more declines than advances, the AD line for that
day is negative. That positive or negative daily number is then
added to the cumulative AD line. The AD line displays a trend of
its own. The idea is to make sure the AD line and the market aver-
ages are trending in the same direction. (See Figure 18.1.)

|

Advance-Deciine Line

i

meee,

bey bathe" eae Bae aaa

Figure 18.1 The NYSE advance-decline line versus the Dow Industrials.
In a healthy market, both lines should be trending upward together as they
are here.


Stock Market Indicators 437

AD DIVERGENCE

What does the advance-decline line measure? The advance-
decline line tells us whether or not the broader universe of 3500
NYSE stocks is advancing in line with the most widely followed
stock averages, which include only the 30 Dow Industrials or
the 500 stocks in the S&P 500. To paraphrase a Wall Street
maxim: the advance-decline line tells us if the “troops” are
keeping up with the “generals.” As long as the AD line is
advancing with the Dow Industrials, for example, the breadth
or health of the market is good. The danger appears when the
AD line begins to diverge from the Dow. In other words, when
you have a situation where the Dow Industrials are hitting new
highs while the broader market (measured by the AD line) isn’t
following, technicians begin to worry about “pad market
breadth” or an AD divergence. Historically, the AD line peaks
out well ahead of the market averages, which is why it’s
watched so closely.

DAILY VERSUS WEEKLY AD LINES

The daily AD line, which we have described herein, is better used
for short to intermediate comparisons with the major stock aver-
ages. It is less useful for comparisons going back several years. A
weekly advance-decline line measures the number of advancing
versus declining stocks for the entire week. Those figures are pub-
lished in Barron’s each weekend. A weekly advance-decline line is
considered more useful for trend comparisons spanning several
years. While a negative divergence in the daily AD line may warn
of short to intermediate problems in the market, it’s necessary to
also show a similar divergence in the weekly AD line to confirm
that a more serious problem is developing.

VARIATIONS IN AD LINE

Since the number of stocks traded on the NYSE has grown over
the years, some market analysts believe the method of subtract-


438 Chapter 18

ing the number of declining issues from the number of advanc-
ing issues gives greater weight to the more recent data. To com-
bat that problem, many technicians prefer to use an
advance/decline ratio which divides the number of advancing
issues by the number of declining issues. Some also believe that
there’s value in including the number of unchanged issues in the
calculation. Whichever way the AD line is calculated, its use is
always the same—that is, to measure the direction of the broad-
er market and to ensure it’s moving in the same direction as the
more narrowly constructed, but popular market averages.
Advance decline lines can also be constructed for the American
Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Market. Market technicians like
to construct overbought/oversold oscillators on the AD lines to
help measure short to intermediate term market extremes in the
breadth figures themselves. One of the better known examples is
the McClellan Oscillator.

McCLELLAN OSCILLATOR

Developed by Sherman McClellan, this oscillator is construct-
ed by taking the difference between two exponential moving
averages of the daily NYSE advance-decline figures. The
McClelian Oscillator is the difference between the 19 day (10%
trend) and the 39 day (5% trend) exponential moving averages
of the daily net advance decline figures. The oscillator fluctu-
ates around a zero line with its upper and lower extremes rang-
ing from +100 and —-100. A McClellan Oscillator reading above
+100 is a signal of an overbought stock market. A reading
below -100 is considered an oversold stock market. Crossings
above and below the zero line are also interpreted as short to
intermediate term buying and selling signals respectively. (See
Figure 18.2.)


Stock Market Indicators 439

McClellan Oscillator ' |

7
|
|
i
|
i
\
|
|
|
\

i F 10

100

my HA 1 hi

}————___+f--

beat a a) wow“ b october’ (o08” Febrvary_Dearch

Figure 18.2 | The McClellan oscillator shown as a histogram. Crossings
above the zero line are positive signals. Readings above +100 are overbought,
while readings below -100 are oversold. Notice the extreme oversold reading
during October of 1997.

McCLELLAN SUMMATION INDEX

The Summation Index is simply a longer range version of the
McClellan Oscillator. The McClellan Summation Index is a cumu-
lative sum of each day’s positive or negative readings in the
McClellan Oscillator. Whereas the McClellan Oscillator is used for
short to intermediate trading purposes, the Summation Index
provides a longer range view of market breadth and is used to spot
major market turning points. (See Figure 18.3.)


440 Chapter 18

McClollan Summation index

Seseshehs sueseeseeseleseeaggeasyes

Bessaeseee

gaeeienee

TEP TTT TTT TPP P TTP T TTT TE ET ET TE TTT TP PET TT TTT TTT

"best Wy’ Le Thay rae? Tctaber” "Wovember Detember Fotraary

Figure 18.3 The McClellan Summation Index is simply a longer range
version of the McClellan Oscillator. The Summation Index is used for major
trend analysis. Crossings below zero are negative. The February 1998 signal
was positive.
