TRADING FOR
A LIVING

WILEY FINANCE EDITIONS
FINANCIAL STATEMENT ANALYSIS
Martin S. Fridson
DYNAMIC ASSET ALLOCATION
David A. Hammer
INTERMARKET TECHNICAL ANALYSIS
John J. Murphy
INVESTING IN INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Russell L. Parr
FORECASTING FINANCIAL MARKETS
Tony Plummer
PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT FORMULAS
Ralph Vince
TRADING AND INVESTING IN BOND OPTIONS
M. Anthony Wong
THE COMPLETE GUIDE TO CONVERTIBLE SECURITIES WORLDWIDE
Laura A. Zubulake
MANAGED FUTURES IN THE INSTITUTIONAL PORTFOLIO
Charles B. Epstein, Editor
ANALYZING AND FORECASTING FUTURES PRICES
Anthony F. Herbst
CHAOS AND ORDER IN THE CAPITAL MARKETS
Edgar E. Peters
INSIDE THE FINANCIAL FUTURES MARKETS, 3RD EDITION
Mark J. Powers and Mark G. Castelino
RELATIVE DIVIDEND YIELD
Anthony E. Spare
SELLING SHORT
Joseph A. Walker
TREASURY OPERATIONS AND THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE CHALLENGE
Dirnitris N. Chorafas
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND MONEY MARKETS GUIDE
Julian Walmsley
CORPORATE FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Diane B. Wunnicke, David R. Wilson, Brooke Wunnicke
MONEY MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES FOR FUTURES TRADERS
Nauzer J. Balsara
THE MATHEMATICS OF MONEY MANAGEMENT
Ralph Vince
THE NEW TECHNOLOGY OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Dimitris N. Chorafas
THE DAY TRADER'S MANUAL
William F. Eng
OPTION MARKET MAKING
Allen J. Baird
TRADER VIC 11: PRINCIPLES OF MARKET ANALYSIS AND FORECASTING
Victor Sperandeo with T. Sullivan Brown
TRADING FOR A LIVING
Dr. Alexander Elder
STUDY GUIDE FOR TRADING FOR A LIVING
Dr. Alexander Elder

TRADING FOR
A LIVING
Psychology
TradingTactics
Money Management
Dr. Alexander Elder
Director
Financial Trading Seminars, Inc.

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
New York Chichester

Brisbane

Toronto

Singapore

CompuTracm is a trademark of CompuTrac Software Inc.
PageMakera is a registered trademark of Aldus Corporation.
In recognition of the importance of preserving what has been written, it is a policy
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc., to have books of enduring value printed on acid-free
paper, and we exert our best efforts to that end.
Copyright O 1993 by Dr. Alexander Elder
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. Published simultaneously in Canada.
Reproduction or translation of any part of this work beyond that permitted by
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act without the permission
of the copyright owner is unlawful. Requests for permission or further information
should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If
legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. From a Declaration of Principles jointly
adopted by a Committee of the American Bar Association and a Committee of
Publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Elder, Alexander
Trading for a living : psychology, trading tactics, money
management / Alexander Elder.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-471-59224-2
1. Stocks. 2. Futures. 3. Options (Futures)
I. Title.
HG4661.E43 1992
92-35165
32.64'5 - dc20
Printed in the United States of America
10 9

To Lou Taylor a trader; a wise man, a true friend

Contents

Introduction
1. Trading -The Last Frontier
2. Psychology Is the Key
3. The Odds Against You

I Individual Psychology
4. Why Trade?
5. Fantasy versus Reality
6. Market Gurus
7. Self-Destructiveness
8. Trading Psychology
9. Trading Lessons from AA
10. Losers Anonymous
11. Winners and Losers

I1 Mass Psychology
12. What Is Price?
13. What Is the Market?
14. The Trading Scene
15. The Market Crowd and You
16. Psychology of Trends
17. Managing versus Forecasting

CONTENTS

I11 Classical Chart Analysis
18. Charting
19. Support and Resistance
20. Trend and Trading Range
21. Trendlines
22. Gaps
23. Chart Patterns
IV Computerized Technical Analysis
24. Computers in Trading
25. Moving Averages
26. Moving Average Convergence-Divergence(MACD) and MACDHistogram
27. The Directional System
28. Momentum, Rate of Change, and Smoothed Rate of Change
29. Williams %R
30. Stochastic
31. Relative Strength Index
-/V
,

The Neglected Essentials
32. Volume
33. Volume-Based Indicators
34. Open Interest
35. Herrick Payoff Index
36. Time
VI Stock Market Indicators
37. New High-New Low Index
38. Traders' Index and Other Stock Market Indicators
VII Psychological Indicators
39. Consensus Indicators
40. Commitment Indicators

CONTENTS

VIII New Indicators
41. Elder-ray
42. Force Index

IX Trading Systems
43. Triple Screen Trading s y s t e r n e
44. Parabolic Trading System
45. Channel Trading Systems

X Risk Management
46. Emotions and Probabilities
47. Money Management
48. Exiting Trades

Afterword
Acknowledgments
Sources
Index

TRADING FOR
A LIVING

1. TRADING-THE LAST FRONTIER
You can be free. You can live and work anywhere in the world. You can be
independent from routine and not answer to anybody.
This is the life of a successful trader.
Many aspire to this but few succeed. An amateur looks at a quote screen
and sees millions of dollars sparkle in front of his face. He reaches for the
money -and loses. He reaches again -and loses more. Traders lose because
the game is hard, or out of ignorance, or lack of discipline. If any of these ail
you, I wrote this book for you.

How I Began to Trade

In the summer of 1976,I drove from New York to California. I threw a few
books on psychiatry (I was a first-year psychiatric resident), several histories, and a paperback copy of Engel's How to Buy Stocks into the trunk of
my old Dodge. Little did I know that a dog-eared paperback, borrowed from
a lawyer friend, would in due time change the course of my life. That friend,
incidentally, had a perfect reverse golden touch -any investment he touched
went under water. But that's another story.
I gulped down the Engel book in campgrounds across America, finishing
it on a Pacific beach in La Jolla. I had known nothing about the stock market, and the idea of making money by thinking gripped me.
I had grown up in the Soviet Union in the days when it was, in the words
of a former U.S. president, "an evil empire." I hated the Soviet system and
wanted to get out, but emigration was forbidden. I entered college at 16,
graduated medical school at 22, completed my residency, and then took a job

INTRODUCTION

2

as a ship's doctor. Now I could break free! I jumped the Soviet ship in
Abidjan, Ivory Coast.
I ran to the U.S. Embassy through the clogged dusty streets of an African
port city, chased by my ex-crewmates. The bureaucrats at the embassy fumbled and almost handed me back to the Soviets. I resisted, and they put me in
a "safe house" and then on a plane to New York. I landed at Kennedy
Airport in February 1974, arriving from Africa with summer clothes on my
back and $25 in my pocket. I spoke some English, but did not know a soul in
this country.
I had no idea what stocks, bonds, futures, or options were and sometimes
got a queasy feeling just from looking at the American dollar bills in my
wallet. In the old country, a handful of them could buy you three years in
Siberia.
Reading How to Buy Stocks opened a whole new world for me. Returning
to New York, I bought my first stock- it was Kindercare. Ever since then, I
have avidly studied the markets and invested and traded stocks, options, and
now mostly futures.
My professional career proceeded on a separate track. I completed a residency in psychiatry at a major university hospital, studied at the New York
Psychoanalytic Institute, and sewed as book editor for the largest psychiatric
newspaper in the United States. These days, I am busy trading and go to my
psychiatric office, across the street from Carnegie Hall, only a few afternoons a week, after the markets close. I love practicing psychiatry, but I
spend most of my time in the markets.
Learning to trade has been a long journey with soaring highs and aching
lows. In moving forward - or in circles - I repeatedly knocked my face
against the wall and ran my trading account into the ground. Each time I
returned to a hospital job, put a stake together, read, thought, did more testing, and then started trading again.
My trading slowly improved, but the breakthrough came when I realized
that the key to winning was inside my head and not inside a computer.
Psychiatry gave me the insight into trading that I will share with you.

-

Do You Really Want to Succeed?

For the past 17 years I've had a friend whose wife is fat. She is an elegant
dresser, and she has been on a diet for as long as I have known her. She says
she wants to lose weight and she does not eat cake or potatoes in front of

2. PSYCHOLOGY IS THE KEY

3

people- but when I come into her kitchen, I often see her go at it with a big
fork. She says she wants to be slim, but remains as fat today as the day we
met. Why?
The short-term pleasure of eating is stronger for her than the delayed pleasure and health benefits of weight loss. My friend's wife reminds me of a
great many traders who say they want to be successful but keep making
impulsive trades -going for the short-term thrills of gambling in the markets.
People deceive themselves and play games with themselves. Lying to others is bad enough, but lying to yourself is hopeless. Bookstores are full of
good books on dieting, but the world is full of overweight people.
This book will teach you how to analyze and trade the markets and how to
deal with your own mind. I can give you the knowledge. Only you can s u p
ply the motivation.

2. PSYCHOLOGY I S THE KEY
You may base your trades on fundamental or technical analysis. You may
trade because of hunches about economic and political trends, use "inside
information," or simply hope.
Remember how you felt the last time you placed an order? Were you anxious to jump in or afraid of losing? Did you procrastinate before picking up
the phone? When you closed out a trade, did you feel elated or humiliated?
The feelings of thousands of traders merge into huge psychological tides that
move the markets.

Getting Off the Roller Coaster
The majority of traders spend most of their time looking for good trades.
Once they enter a trade, they lose control and either squirm from pain or grin
from pleasure. They ride an emotional roller coaster and miss the essential
element of winning-the management of their emotions. Their inability to
manage themselves leads to poor money management of their accounts.
If your mind is not in gear with the markets, or if you ignore changes in
mass psychology of crowds, then you have no chance of making money
trading. All winning professionals know the enormous importance of psychology in trading. All losing amateurs ignore it.
Friends and clients who know that I am a psychiatrist often ask me

4

INTRODUCTION

whether this helps me as a trader. Good psychiatry and good trading have
one important principle in common. Both focus on reality, on seeing the
world the way it is. To live a healthy life, you have to live with your eyes
open. To be a good trader, you need to trade with your eyes open, recognize
real trends and turns, and not waste time or energy on regrets and wishful
thinking.

A Man's Came?

Brokerage house records show that most traders are male. The files of my
educational firm, Financial Trading Seminars, Inc., confirm that approximately 95 percent of traders are men. For this reason, you'll find that I commonly use the masculine pronoun (he) in the anecdotes and cases throughout
this book. Of course, no disrespect is intended to the many successful
women traders.
The percentage of women is higher among institutional traders- employees of banks, trading firms, and the like. In my experience, however, the few
women who get involved in trading succeed more often than men. A woman
needs exceptional drive to plunge into this male preserve.
Trading is similar to such thrilling and dangerous sports as sky-diving,
rock-climbing, and scuba-diving. They also attract mostly men - fewer than
1 percent of hang gliders are female.
Men are drawn to risky sports in our increasingly regulated society. Dr.
David Klein, a sociologist at the University of Michigan, was quoted in the
New York Times as saying, "as work becomes more and more routinized . . .
we turn to recreation for a sense of accomplishment. The safer and more routine we make work, the more we will push people into recreations where
individual distinction and discretion, adventure and excitement play a part."
These sports provide intense pleasure but have a stigma of danger because
many participants ignore the risks and take thoughtless chances. Dr. John
Tongue, an orthopedic surgeon in Oregon who studied accidents among hang
gliders, found that the chance of death rises among more experienced pilots
because they take greater risks. An athlete who wants to enjoy risky sports
has to follow safety rules. When you reduce risks, you gain an added sense
of accomplishment and control. The same goes for trading.
You can succeed in trading only if you handle it as a serious intellectual
pursuit. Emotional trading is lethal. To help ensure success, practice defensive money management. A good trader watches his capital as carefully as a
professional scuba diver watches his air supply.

2. PSYCHOLOGY IS THE KEY

How This Book Is Organized

,\

Successful trading stands on three pillars: psychology, market analysis and'\\
trading systems, and money management. This book will help you explore
all three.
The first chapter of this book shows you a new approach to managing
your emotions as a trader. I discovered this method while practicing psychiatry. It has greatly improved my trading, and it can help you, too.
The second chapter describes the crowd psychology of markets. Mass
behavior is more primitive than individual behavior. If you understand how
crowds behave, then you can profit from their mood swings and avoid being
swept up in their emotions.
The third chapter of the book shows how chart patterns reveal crowd
behavior. Classical technical analysis is applied social psychology, like polltaking. Trendlines, gaps, and other chart patterns actually reflect crowd
behavior.
The fourth chapter teaches modern methods of computerized technical
analysis. Indicators provide a deeper insight into mass psychology than classical technical analysis. Trend-following indicators help identify market
trends, while oscillators show when trends are ready to reverse.
Volume and open interest also reflect crowd behavior. The fifth chapter
focuses on them as well as on the passage of time in the markets. Crowds
have a very short attention span, and a trader who relates price changes to
time gains a competitive advantage.
The sixth chapter focuses on the best techniques of stock market analysts.
They can be especially helpful for stock index futures and options traders.
Sentiment indicators measuring the opinions of investors and traders are
profiled in the seventh chapter. Crowds follow trends, and it often pays to
join them when prices are moving. Sentiment indicators show when it is time
to abandon the crowd - before it misses an important reversal.
The eighth chapter reveals two proprietary indicators. Elder-ray is a pricebased indicator that measures the power of bulls and bears below the surface
of the markets. Force Index measures prices and volume. It shows whether
the dominant market group is becoming stronger or weaker.
The ninth chapter presents several trading systems. The Triple Screen
trading system is my own method. I have used it for years. This and other
systems show you how to select trades and find entry and exit points.
The tenth chapter focuses on money management. This essential aspect of
successful trading is neglected by most amateurs. You can have a brilliant
trading system, but if your money management is bad, then a short string of

6

INTRODUCTION

losses will destroy your account. Trading without proper money management is like trying to cross a desert barefoot.
You are about to spend many hours with this book. When you find ideas
that seem valuable to you, test them in the one crucible that matters-your
own experience. You can make this knowledge your own only by questioning it.

3. THE ODDS AGAINST YOU
Why do most traders lose and wash out of the markets? Emotional and
thoughtless trading are two reasons, but there is another. Markets are actually
set up so that most traders must lose money.
The trading industry kills traders with commissions and slippage. Most
amateurs cannot believe this, just as medieval peasants could not believe that
tiny invisible germs could kill them. If you ignore slippage and deal with a
broker who charges high commissions, you are acting like a peasant who
drinks from a communal pool during a cholera epidemic.
You pay commissions for entering and exiting trades. Slippage is the difference between the price at which you place your order and the price at
which it gets filled. When you place a limit order, it is filled at your price or
not at all. When you feel eager to enter or exit the market and give a market
order, it is often filled at a worse price than prevailed when you placed it.
The trading industry keeps draining huge amounts of money from the
markets. Exchanges, regulators, brokers, and advisors live off the markets
while generations of traders keep washing out. Markets need a fresh supply
of losers just as builders of the ancient pyramids of Egypt needed a fresh
supply of slaves. Losers bring money into the markets, which is necessary
for the prosperity of the trading industry.

A Minus-Sum Came

Brokers, exchanges, and advisors run marketing campaigns to attract more
losers to the markets. Some mention that futures trading is a zero-sum game.
They count on the fact that most people feel smarter than average and expect
to win in a zero-sum game.
Winners in a zero-sum game make as much as losers lose. If you and I bet

3. THE ODDS AGAINST YOU

7

$10 on the direction of the next 100-point move in the Dow, one of us will
collect $10 and the other will lose $10. The person who is smarter should
win this game over a period of time.
People buy the trading industry's propaganda about the zero-sum game,
take the bait and open trading accounts. They do not realize that trading is a
minus-sum game. Winners receive less than what losers lose because the
industry drains money from the market.
For example, roulette in a casino is a minus-sum game because the casino
sweeps away 3 percent to 6 percent of all bets. This makes roulette
unwinnable in the long run. You and I can get into in a minus-sum game if
we make the same $10 bet on the next 100-point move in the Dow but deal
through brokers. When we settle, the loser is out $13 and the winner collects
only $7, while two brokers smile all the way to the bank.
Commissions and slippage are to traders what death and taxes are to all of
us. They take some fun out of life and ultimately bring it to an end. A trader
must support his broker and the machinery of exchanges before he collects a
dime. Being simply "better than average" is not good enough. You have to
be head and shoulders above the crowd to win a minus-sum game.

Commissions

You can expect to pay a round-trip commission of anywhere from $12 to
$100 for every futures contract you trade. Big traders who deal with discount
houses pay less; small traders who deal with full-service brokers pay more.
Amateurs ignore commissions while dreaming of fat profits. Brokers argue
that commissions are tiny relative to the value of underlying contracts.
To understand the role of commissions, you need to compare them to your
margin, not to the value of the contract. For example, you may pay $30 to
trade a single contract of corn (5,000 bushels, worth approximately
$10,000). A broker will say that the $30 commission is less than 1 percent of
contract value. In reality, you have to deposit about $600 to trade a contract
of corn. A $30 commission represents 5 percent of margin. This means you
have to make 5 percent on the capital committed to the trade, simply to break
even. If you trade corn four times a year, you will have to make a 20 percent
annual profit to avoid losing money! Very few people can do this. Many
money managers would give their eyeteeth for 20 percent annual returns. A
"small commission" is not a nuisance-it is a major barrier to success!

8

INTRODUCTION

Many amateurs generate 50 percent and more of their account size in commissions per year-if they last that long. Even discounted commissions raise
a tall barrier to successful trading. I have heard brokers chuckle as they gossiped about clients who beat their brains out just to stay even with the game.
Shop for the lowest possible commissions. Do not be shy about bargaining
for lower rates. I have heard many brokers complain about a shortage of
customers - but not many customers complain about the shortage of brokers.
Tell your broker it is in his best interest to charge you low commissions
because you will survive and remain a client for a long time. Design a trading system that will trade less often.

Slippage
Slippage takes either piranha-sized or shark-sized bites out of your account
whenever you enter and exit the markets. Slippage means having your orders
filled at a different price than that which existed when you placed an order. It
is like paying 30 cents for an apple in a grocery store even though the posted
price is 29 cents.
There are three kinds of slippage: common, volatility-based, and criminal.
Common slippage is due to a spread between buying and selling prices.
Floor traders maintain two prices in the market - the bid and the ask.
For example, your broker may quote you 390.45 for June S&P 500. If you
want to buy a contract at the market, you'll have to pay at least 390.50. If
you want to sell at the market, you will receive 390.40 or less. Since each
point is worth $5, the 10-point spread between bid and ask transfers $50
from your pocket to floor traders. They charge you for the privilege of entering or exiting a trade.
The spread between bid and ask is legal. It tends to be narrow in big, liquid markets such as the S&P 500 and bonds, and much wider in thinly traded
markets such as orange juice and cocoa. The exchanges claim that the spread
is the price you pay for liquidity-being able to trade whenever you wish.
Electronic trading promises to cut slippage.
Slippage rises with market volatility. Floor traders can get away with
more in fast-moving markets. When the market begins to run, slippage goes
through the roof. When the S&P 500 rallies or drops, you can get hit with a
20 to 30 point slippage, and sometimes 100 points or more.
