COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM
A Complete Guide to Trading

Dr. Alexander Elder
www.elder.com

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
New York • Chichester • Weinheim • Brisbane • Singapore • Toronto

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM
A Complete Guide to Trading

BOOKS BY DR. ALEXANDER ELDER
Trading for a Living
Study Guide for Trading for a Living
Rubles to Dollars:
Making Money on Russia’s Exploding Financial Frontier

COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM
A Complete Guide to Trading

Dr. Alexander Elder
www.elder.com

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
New York • Chichester • Weinheim • Brisbane • Singapore • Toronto

To my campers

Copyright © 2002 by Dr. Alexander Elder. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976
United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 750-4744. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to
the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York,
NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-6011, fax (212) 850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard
to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
This title is also available in print as ISBN 0-471-22534-7. Some content that appears in
the print version of this book may not be available in this electronic edition.
For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.Wiley.com.

CONTENTS

Dedication

iv

Introduction

1

HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
MALE OR FEMALE?

2
4

PART ONE FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS
1 Invest? Trade? Gamble?
AN INTELLIGENT INVESTOR
AN INTELLIGENT TRADER
AN INTELLIGENT GAMBLER?
2 What Markets to Trade?
STOCKS
FUTURES
OPTIONS
3 The First Steps
THE EXTERNAL BARRIERS TO SUCCESS
GETTING YOUR GEAR
ANALYSIS AND TRADING

5
7
7
8
12
15
16
18
20
25
25
32
39

PART TWO THE THREE M’S OF SUCCESSFUL TRADING
4 Mind—The Disciplined Trader
SLEEPWALKING THROUGH THE MARKET
A REMEDY FOR SELF-DESTRUCTIVENESS
THE MATURE TRADER
5 Method—Technical Analysis
BASIC CHARTING
INDICATORS—FIVE BULLETS TO A CLIP

45
47
49
54
61
67
68
84
v

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

6

7

Trading
SYSTEM TESTING
TRIPLE SCREEN UPDATE
DAY-TRADING
THE IMPULSE SYSTEM
MARKET THERMOMETER
EXITING TRADES
CHOOSING WHAT TO TRADE
Money Management Formulas
NO MATH ILLITERATES
BUSINESSMAN’S RISK VS. LOSS.
THE 2% SOLUTION—PROTECTION FROM SHARKS
THE 6% RULE—PROTECTION FROM PIRANHAS
POSITION SIZING
MONEY MANAGEMENT STEPS

123
125
128
138
157
162
165
183
215
217
218
220
223
227
230

PART THREE COME INTO MY TRADING ROOM
8 The Organized Trader
TRADER’S SPREADSHEET
THE EQUITY CURVE
TRADING DIARY
ACTION PLAN
9 Trading for a Living
DISCIPLINE AND HUMILITY
HAVE YOU GOT THE TIME?
THE DECISION-MAKING TREE
BEGINNER, SEMIPRO, PRO
GOING PRO
10 Come Into My Trading Room
EXCERPTS FROM THE DIARY
YOUR NEXT TRADE

233
235
236
238
240
242
245
247
251
257
264
267
271
273
298

Acknowledgments

301

Sources

303

Index

307

About the Author

313

INTRODUCTION

“Y

ou can be free. You can live and work anywhere in the world,
be independent from the routine and not answer to anybody.”
With those words I began my first book, Trading for a Living. One of
my great pleasures in the years since its publication has been meeting
and becoming friends with people who became free thanks to successful trading.
Several times a year I run a Traders’ Camp, a week of intensive
classes at remote resorts. I enjoy my campers’ successes. A stockbroker
became a full-time trader, closed his business, and moved to Rio to
pursue a life-long interest in Latin women. A psychologist became
such a successful options writer that she paid for an early retirement
for her husband and moved with him to the Virgin Islands to become
an expert in what she calls synchronous hammocking. A man bought
a mountain in Vermont and trades from the house he built on its top.
I wish all students could succeed, but it’s not that simple.
How many psychiatrists does it take to change a lightbulb? Only
one—but the bulb has to want to change.
To succeed in trading you need several innate traits without which
you shouldn’t even start. They include discipline, risk tolerance, and
facility with numbers. A big fat guy who is often drunk and can’t kick
a cigarette habit is unlikely to make a good trader—he lacks discipline.
A nitpicker who obsesses over each dime is too tense to live with market risks. A daydreamer who cannot do simple arithmetic on the run
becomes lost when prices change rapidly.
In addition to discipline, risk tolerance, and ease with numbers, successful trading requires 3 M’s—Mind, Method, and Money. Mind means
developing psychological rules that will keep you calm amidst the
1

2

INTRODUCTION

noise of the markets. Method is a system of analyzing prices and
developing a decision-making tree. Money refers to money management, which means risking only a small part of your trading capital on
any trade; think of the way a submarine is divided into many compartments so that it won’t sink if one section becomes flooded—you
have to structure your account this way. Psychology, trading tactics,
money management—you can learn these skills.
How long will it take you to become a competent trader and how
much will it cost? What rules do you set, what methods do you use,
and how do you split your trading capital? What should you study first,
second, and third? What markets should you trade, and how much
money can you expect to make? If these questions interest you, you
picked the right book.
You can succeed in trading. It has been done before, and it’s being
done right now, today, by people who started from scratch, learned to
trade and are making a good living at it. The best ones make fortunes.
Others fail, out of ignorance or lack of discipline. If you work through
this book, ignorance will not be a problem, and you will hear me yell
at you again and again, pointing you towards disciplined, responsible,
professional trading.
Trading is a journey of self-discovery. If you enjoy learning, if you
are not scared of risk, if the rewards appeal to you, if you are prepared
to put in the work, you have a great project ahead of you. You will
work hard and enjoy the discoveries you’ll make along the way.
I wish you success. Now let us begin.

HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
Books written from the heart acquire their own direction. They develop
and change in the process of being written. You start with a plan, but
the book takes over, and before you know it, you’re going much farther than planned.
I began writing this book three years ago on a flight to New York,
returning from a Traders’ Camp in Mexico. We had more beginners
than usual, many of them women. They kept asking for a book that
they jokingly called Trading for Dummies. There were no dummies in
our group. Those campers were smart, sharp, and motivated—but they
needed to learn the rules and the tools. I figured I would write a brief

INTRODUCTION

3

practical introduction, call it Financial Trading for Babes in the Woods,
and be done by Christmas.
Three Christmases passed before I completed my project. The beginner
part was easy, but I kept tunneling into the depths of trading, sharing
what I learned in the nine years since Trading for a Living was published. I developed new indicators and systems. My money management
became crisper, and I designed a new approach to record keeping. My
work with hundreds of traders showed me how to teach people to turn
their trading lives around and move from haphazard jumping in and
out to a calm professional style. Take a few minutes to read how this
book is organized, so that you may get full value out of it.
Part One, Financial Trading for Babes in the Woods, is written primarily for those who are just becoming interested in trading. It lays
out topics whose mastery is essential for success and puts up danger
signs around the main pitfalls. Even experienced traders would do well
to review this chapter, especially the concept of external barriers to
success, which has never before been spelled out in trading literature,
and the critique of the efficient market theory.
Part Two, The Three M’s of Successful Trading, teaches you the
three key aspects of trading—Mind, Method, and Money. Mind is
your trading psychology. Method is how you go about finding trades
and making entry and exit decisions. Money is how you manage your
trading capital for long-term survival and success. Once we review
the psychological rules, I’ll share with you my favorite analytic tools,
some of which I have never before revealed. We will cover system
testing, day-trading, and a new method for placing stops. The stepby-step money management strategy has never before appeared in
trading literature.
Part Three, Come into My Trading Room, delivers another first—a set
of exact instructions for organizing your time and effort, as well as
keeping good records. Proper record keeping is a hallmark of successful trading. Good records help you learn from your mistakes as
well as victories. You know you should keep records, but now you’ll
see exactly how to do it. By the time you work through this section,
nobody can call you “a babe in the woods.”
Take your time as you read this book, mark it up, return to the sections that interest you most. This volume distills 20 years of trading and
teaching experience. It took three years to write, and it will probably

4

INTRODUCTION

take more than one reading to get its full value. Open your charting
software, pull out your trading records, test all the concepts on your
own data. Only testing will make these ideas your own.
By the time you leave my trading room, you’ll be in a position to take
your trading to a higher, more intelligent, and successful level.

MALE OR FEMALE?
Almost every nonfiction writer faces the dilemma—which pronoun to
use. He? She? He or she?
Male traders outnumber women by about twenty to one, although
this ratio is rapidly becoming more balanced as more and more women
come into the markets. In our Traders’ Camps, which attract the more
sophisticated segment of traders, we have already moved from a great
preponderance of men to a near parity with women.
I find that the percentage of successful traders is higher among
women. They tend to be less arrogant, and arrogance is a deadly sin
in trading. The male ego—that wonderful trait that has been bringing
us wars, riots, and bloodshed since time immemorial—tends to get
heavily caught up in trading. A guy studies his charts, decides to buy,
and now his self-esteem is involved—he has to be right! If the market
goes his way, he waits to be proven even more right—bigger is better.
If the market goes against him, he is tough enough to stand the pain
and waits for the market to reverse and prove him right—while it
grinds down his account.
Women traders, on the other hand, are much more likely to ask a simple question—where’s the money? They like to take profits and focus on
avoiding losses instead of trying to prove themselves right. Women are
more likely to bend with the wind and go with the flow, catch trends
and hop off a little earlier, booking profits. When I tell traders that keeping records is a hugely important aspect of success, women are more
likely to keep them than men. If you are looking to hire a trader, all other
factors being equal, I’d recommend looking for a woman.
Still, there are many more male than female traders. The English language being what it is, “he” flows better than “he or she” or even jumping between the two pronouns. To make reading easier, I’ll use the
masculine pronoun throughout this book. I trust you understand that no
disrespect is intended toward women traders. I want to make this book
easier to read for everybody, of any gender, anywhere in the world.

P A R T
O N E

FINANCIAL
TRADING
FOR BABES
IN THE WOODS
A

re traders born or made? There is no simple answer. Both aptitude
and learning are important, but in different proportions for different people. At one extreme are born geniuses who require very little
learning. At the other are gamblers and dunces, whom no classes are
likely to help. The rest of us are in the middle of the curve, with some
aptitude but in need of education.
A genius has little need for a book because he has a fantastic feel
for the market. A gambler is too busy getting high on adrenaline. This
book is written for the trader in the middle.

C H A P T E R
O N E

INVEST?
TRADE?
GAMBLE?

A

newcomer to the market faces three paths that lead into a forest
full of treasures and dangers. The first path, for investors, goes
through the sunniest areas. Most of those who take it come out alive,
if not much richer. Another path, for traders, leads into the heart of the
forest. Many travelers disappear, but those who come out look rich.
The third is a shortcut that takes gamblers into the swamp.
How can you tell which path is which? You must choose your way
carefully because if you don’t, you’ll end up on the gamblers’ path,
especially since it crosses both investors’ and traders’ trails. We’ll return
to this question in the chapters on trading psychology.

AN INTELLIGENT INVESTOR
Investors profit by recognizing new trends in the economy and buying
into them before the majority wakes up to opportunities. A knowledgeable investor can earn huge percentage gains by holding his position without being terribly active.
Back in the 1970s, I bought stock in a company called KinderCare,
which ran a chain of child care centers. It tried to make them as uniform and reliable as McDonalds’ hamburgers. KinderCare catered to baby
boomers who were having babies right, left, and center. Half of my
friends were pregnant at that time. A major social shift was taking place
in the United States, with women going to work in record numbers.
Someone had to mind the babies of all those two-income families, and
the stock of KinderCare soared on the crest of a new social trend.
AT&T used to have a monopoly on long-distance phone calls. Then
in the late 1970s a tiny brash upstart called MCI won a legal dogfight,
7

8

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

allowing it to compete with AT&T. The age of deregulation was upon
us, and the stock of MCI—the first company into the breach—sold for
$3 presenting another great opportunity to hop aboard a new trend.
A few years ago I flew into New York from the Caribbean with my
friend George. He became a millionaire by buying $30,000 worth of Dell
stock before most people had heard of the company—and unloading it
at the top three years later with the help of technical analysis. Sprawled
in his first-class seat, George was perusing several investment advisories,
trying to lock in on the next trend in Internet technology. How right he
was! Within a year Internet stocks were flying, defying gravity.
That’s the lure of investing. If you can buy a chunk of Dell at $4 a
share and cash out at $80 a few years later, it is easy to fly down to a resort for a week rather than sit in front of a monitor watching every tick.
What are the disadvantages? Investing requires a great deal of patience
and an immense supply of self-confidence. To buy Chrysler after it was
rescued from the brink of bankruptcy or Internet search engines before
anyone knew what those words meant, you had to have a huge level of
confidence in your ability to read the trends in society and the economy.
All of us are smart after the fact; very few are smart early in the game, and
only the tiniest percentage has the emotional strength to make a large bet
on their vision and hold on to it. Those who can do this consistently,
like Warren Buffett or Peter Lynch, are hailed as superstars.

AN INTELLIGENT TRADER
Traders make money by betting on short-term price swings. The idea
is to buy when our reading of the market tells us prices are rising and
sell when the uptrend runs out of steam. Alternatively, we can bet on
a decline and sell short when our analysis points to a downtrend, covering when the downtrend starts bottoming out. The concept is simple,
but implementing it is difficult.
It is hard to become a good analyst, but harder to become a good trader.
Beginners often assume they can make money because they’re smart,
computer-literate and have a record of success in business. You can get a
fast computer and even buy a backtested system from a vendor, but putting money on it is like trying to sit on a three-legged stool with two legs
missing. The two other factors are psychology and money management.
Balancing your mind is just as important as analyzing markets. Your
personality influences your perceptions, making it a key aspect of your
success or failure. Managing money in your trading account is essential

INVEST? TRADE? GAMBLE?

9

for surviving the inevitable drawdowns and prospering in the long run.
Psychology, market analysis, and money management—you have to master all three to become a success.
There are two main approaches to profiting from crowd behavior. The
first is momentum trading—buy when a ripple starts running through the
crowd, sending the market higher, and sell when that ripple starts losing
speed. It is a challenge to identify a new trend while it’s still young. As
the trend speeds up and the crowd becomes exuberant, amateurs fall in
love with their positions. Professionals remain calm and monitor the
trend’s speed. As soon as they find that the crowd is returning to its normal sleepiness, they take profits without waiting for a reversal.
The other method is the countertrend strategy. It involves betting
against the deviations and for a return to normalcy. Countertrend
traders sell short when an upside breakout starts running out of speed
and cover when a downtrend starts petering out. Beginners love to
trade against trends (“let’s buy, this market can’t go any lower!”), but
most get impaled on a price spike that fails to reverse. A man who likes
peeing against the wind has no right to complain about his cleaning
bills. Professionals can trade against trends only because they are ready
to run at the first sign of trouble. Before you bet on a reversal, be sure
your exit strategy and money management are fine-tuned.
Momentum traders and countertrend traders capitalize on two opposite aspects of crowd behavior. Before you put on a trade, be sure to
know whether you’re investing, momentum trading, or countertrend
trading. Once you’ve entered a trade, manage it as planned! Don’t
change your tactics in the midst of a trade because then you’ll contribute to the winners’ welfare fund.
Amateurs keep thinking what trades to get into, while professionals
spend just as much time figuring out their exits. They also focus on
money management, calculating what size positions they can afford
under current market conditions, whether to pyramid, when to take
partial profits, and so on. They also spend a great deal of time keeping good records of their trades.

The Efficient Market Theory
A trader strains his mind, his soul, his entire being trying to take profits out of the market when an unsettling piece of news comes down
the pike—the efficient market theory. Its main adherents are academics, who are fond of pointing out that prices reflect all available mar-

10

FINANCIAL TRADING FOR BABES IN THE WOODS

ket information. People buy and sell on the basis of their knowledge,
and the latest price represents everything known about that market.
This is a valid observation, from which the efficient market gang draws
the curious conclusion that no one can beat the market. Markets know
everything, they say, and trading is like playing chess against someone
who knows more than you. Don’t waste your time and money—simply
index your portfolio and select stocks based on volatility.
What about traders who make money? The efficient market theorists
say that winners are plain lucky. Most people make money at some
point, before bleeding it back into the markets. What about those
who keep outperforming markets year after year? Warren Buffett, one
of the twentieth century’s great investors, says that investing in a market in which people believe in efficiency is like playing poker against
those who believe it does not pay to look at cards.
I think that the efficient market theory offers one of the truest views of
the markets. I also believe it is one of the largest pieces of theoretical
garbage. The theory correctly observes that markets reflect the intelligence of all crowd members; it is fatally flawed in assuming that investors
and traders are rational human beings who always strive to maximize
gains and minimize losses. That is a very idealized view of human nature.
Most traders can be rational on a fine weekend when the markets
are closed. They calmly study their charts and decide what to buy and
sell, where to take profits, and when to cut losses. When the markets
open on Monday, the best laid plans of mice and men get ripped up
in the sweaty palms of traders.
Trading and investing are partly rational and partly emotional. People
often act on an impulse even if they harm themselves in the process of
doing so. A winning gambler brags about his positions and misses sell
signals. A fearful trader beaten up by the market becomes cautious
beyond measure. As soon as his stock ticks down a bit, he sells, violating his own rules. When that stock rises, overshooting his original profit
target, he can no longer stand the pain of missing the rally and buys
way above his planned entry point. The stock stalls and slides, and he
watches, first with hope and later frozen in horror, as it sinks like a rock.
In the end, he can’t take any more pain and sells out at a loss—right near
the bottom. What’s so rational about this process? The original plan to buy
may have been rational, but implementing it created an emotional storm.
Emotional traders do not pursue their best long-term interests. They
are too busy savoring the adrenaline rush or too twisted in fear, des-
