
r If the price is above an upward-sloping trend line that connects higher
lows, the trend is bullish. Traders should use that trend line as a buying
opportunity when the price is tested on dips.
r Conversely, if the price is below a downward sloping trend line that
connects lower highs, then the trend is bearish and traders should use
that trend line as a selling opportunity when tested.
In Figure 6.5 the EURUSD has higher lows signaling a bullish trend
line formation. Connecting points 1 to 2 originally sets the upward-sloping
trend line. In the chart, buyers entered the market on dips that approached
or tested the trend line at points 3 through 7. Each time the market bounced
off the line. Each test provided a low risk trading opportunity for traders.
In Figure 6.6 the USDJPY is in a downward trend as lower highs create
the trend line. This is a bearish trend line formation. The main trend line
was tested no fewer than 12 times in this move lower. Each test of the line
provided a low-risk opportunity for a trader to sell and stay on the trend.
The trend is thought to end when the price moves below a trend line if
it is a bullish trend. On a downward-sloping bearish trend line, the trend is
over when the price moves above the trend line.
The basic bullish or bearish trend line is just one way to draw and
interpret trend lines. There are other trend line formations that I will use

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

138

FIGURE 6.5 Bullish Trend Line

FIGURE 6.6 Bearish Trend Line

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Trader’s Toolbox

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

139

to look for clues for trends and nontrends. Chapter 8 will go through the
ones that I find useful in following and staying on the trend and others that
will help anticipate a trend (and attack currency trends!). If a trader can
anticipate a trend, he or she is more apt to stay on a trend and reap the
rewards of a directional, fast-moving market move.
Remembered Lines: Lines without a Slope Earlier I explained
how to draw a trend line by connecting higher lows for an uptrend and
connecting lower lows to create a downtrend. This creates a sloping line.
For a bullish trend, the slope is positive or moving higher. For a bearish
trend, the slope of the line is negative and moving down. There is another
type of line that I draw on charts that does not have a slope like a normal
trend line. I call these “remembered lines.” A remembered line is a horizontal line (or narrow area) that connects highs to highs, lows to lows, or
highs to lows.
I find that the market will “remember” certain prices and use those levels as a point of deflection when approached again. They can form during
consolidation periods when the market is not sure of the directional move
it wants to make. They can also be old lows or highs from years gone past
that are remembered, especially by those traders who search for low-risk
trading clues from the past chart history.
When the market consolidates in a nontrending range, it will often consolidate around a remembered price or area. The price usually is started
after a high or low is made and a correction ensues. Subsequently, when
the market returns to the area, traders will look to initiate a new trade or
take profits against the level. If the level holds, a remembered line can be
drawn connecting the two points.
Typically, although the market may return to the price or area a number of times, the market tends to not trade in the area for long. Instead,
it moves either higher or lower away from the remembered line (or contained area). Since the market is often consolidating (nontrending) during
this time, and not sure of the trend direction it wants to go, the market
price tends to move away from the remembered line, find support or resistance, and return back to the remembered line. Eventually, the market will
break away from the area and trend either up or down.
In Figure 6.7, a high for the EURUSD was initially made at points 1
and 2. When the market rebounded at point 3, it found low-risk sellers
against the borderline level. We know that successful traders will look to
sell against borderline levels as risk is defined and limited. A remembered
line can be drawn connecting the tops.
Then during the period between 4 and 12, the market goes through a
number of instances where the price moves up to the remembered line and
comes off. It tries the upside but also runs out of momentum. Finally, after

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

140

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

FIGURE 6.7 Remembered Price Area between 1.2660 and 1.2666

a move back down where the market decline stalls at the remembered line
at points 13 and 14, the price pushes through and a momentum move to the
downside ensues.
The breaks away from remembered lines (at 3, 12, and 14) are quick
bursts that act like a springboard (a sharp quick move). At 3, the market
was coming off a pretty quick but volatile leg up from the lows. When the
“remembered price” area was reached, sellers emerged. At 12, the price
was at the end of an up-and-down range where the market tested the downside, then the upside. When support held at 12, the buyers emerged and the
price bounced sharply higher.
Finally, at 13 and 14, the market tried going higher off the remembered
line, but failed to gather upside momentum after similar 20-pip moves.
When the market failed on the second move up, the conditions were ready
for a smart and quick move lower. Smart traders watch these ebbs and
flows closely while the market is consolidating and will use the remembered price or area as the bullish or bearish bias borderline. When it breaks
through, they expect a sharp move and react.
Figure 6.8 shows the price action after the fall below the 1.2660 level.
The trend move led to a 110-pip move lower from 1.2660 to 1.2550. Remembered lines give valuable trading clues.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

The Trader’s Toolbox

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

141

FIGURE 6.8 Break of Remembered Line at 1.2660

How They Fit in the Toolbox Do trend lines define trends? Yes. An upward sloping trend line defines a bullish uptrend, while a downward sloping trend line defines a bearish trend. Do trend lines define risk? Yes. If the
price moves below a trend line, the bias turns from positive or bullish to
negative or bearish. Traders should look to exit positions when the bias is
reversed. Therefore, trend lines define risk. Are trend lines an unambiguous trading tool? Yes. Price above trend line = bullish. Price below trend
line = bearish. There is nothing ambiguous about the trader’s bias using
trend lines.
Remembered lines are an important tool because they do not necessarily define an uptrend or a downtrend. In fact, they tend to define a nontrend. However, knowing a market is nontrending is often more important
than knowing a market is in a trending phase. I will explain this more in
Chapter 8 when I look more closely at the use of trend lines and remembered lines.

Fibonacci Retracements
In recent decades, we have had one-word-named celebrities including
Prince, Madonna, Sting, and even Pele. In the end of the twelfth and beginning of the thirteenth centuries there was an Italian mathematician who

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

142

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

is known to all traders as simply Fibonacci. Fibonacci (also known as
Leonardo Pisano Bogolio, Leonardo of Pisa, Leonardo Pisano, Leonardo
Bonacci, and Leonardo Fibonaci) devised a sequence of numbers used to
estimate how a population of rabbits multiplied. The sequence, which has
also been applied in other scientific disciplines, has been adopted for use
by the financial markets.
In Chapter 9, I will discuss in more detail the sequence of numbers
and the importance, but for now I will simply say that by following the
Fibonacci sequence of numbers, financial market technicians calculate retracement percentages. The use and acceptance of these percentages by
traders helped make Fibonacci retracements an important tool for measuring market corrections.
The percentages used most by the market are 38.2, 50, and 61.8. These
percentages are applied to any significant trend that extends from a low
to high or high to low. For example, if a low-to-high range extends 100
pips and then tops out, the 38.2 percent retracement would round to 38
pips from the high. The 50 percent Fibonacci retracement would be 50 pips
from the high and the 61.8 pips would be rounded to 62 pips from the high.
Traders measure those levels from the extreme and anticipate corrections
that should pause or stop at those levels.
If you trade, even for a short period of time, or take a look at any chart,
what you will immediately notice is the market’s movements are a series
of ups and downs. Sometimes the ups and downs are more or less equal
to each other. That is, the market makes its way from one level to a higher
level via a series of smaller intermediate steps higher, and then makes its
way back down to the low level, through a series of smaller intermediate
steps lower. This is a sideways nontrending market. A range-bound market.
A trending market will also have a series of steps, but the steps will be
directional with larger steps followed by smaller corrective steps. Within
the larger steps will tend to be the same pattern for what is an intermediate
trend.
What They Do Fibonacci retracements are ways for traders to anticipate and measure a correction in a trending market. Since they are also
static lines on a graph, they also are very helpful in giving traders borderline levels where they can execute low-risk trades. Traders can get on a
trend by trading against a Fibonacci correction level. They can also do it
with a defined risk.
Fibonacci retracements can also be used to trade the corrections or
counter trends. To do this, another tool, like a moving average or trend
line in conjunction with the Fibonacci, is often used. I will outline this
idea in more detail later in the book. I like to think of Fibonacci retracements as a tool that allows traders to stay in rhythm with the market, and in

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

The Trader’s Toolbox

143

FIGURE 6.9 Fibonacci Retracements Give Corrective Targets for Traders

particular, with a trending market. They help traders to attack trends with
added confidence. However, they also give a definable bullish or bearish
bias and define risk, and as a result are also an unambiguous trading tool.
Chapter 9 will take a closer look at the use of the Fibonacci retracements. For now, I will provide an example of the use of this important
trading tool and discuss why it qualifies as one of my three trading tools.
An Example In Figure 6.9, the market starts a trend move higher. The
trend is characterized by a number of up candles or bars, interspersed with
a smaller number of down candles or bars. The direction is clearly higher
and the price move takes the price from 1.2045 to 1.2298, or 253 pips.
After the high is reached, a correction begins. There are three down
bars that start the correction, giving the trader a clue that a top is in place.
At this point, a trader can use the tools available in most charting software to draw the Fibonacci retracement levels. Since the trend is bullish,
applying a Fibonacci retracement off the move from the low at 1.2045 to
the high at 1.2298 is in order. The three horizontal lines that cross through
the middle of the chart represent the 38.2, 50, and 61.8 percent Fibonacci
retracement levels. They are the shaded areas in the chart and come in at
1.2201, 1.2172, and 1.2142 respectively.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

144

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

On the corrective move to the downside in the chart, the price stalls
at the 38.2 percent retracement level at 1.2201. This level, like a moving
average or trend line, is a borderline. Traders who sold near the top will
take profits on shorts against the level. New longs are also likely to be established at the price. Remember the major trend is bullish; buying should
be a priority. The risk for buyers is if the price were to move below the
Fibonacci level. On a breach, traders will exit long positions and will anticipate the next down move to target the 50 percent retracement level.
In the example, the price consolidated at the 38.2 percent Fibonacci
level at 1.2201, but then broke through the level. This led to a quick fall
to the 50 percent Fibonacci area at the 1.2172 area (1.2166 was the actual low). When downward momentum slowed at the 50 percent borderline level, it gave traders the signal to reenter the market from the long or
bullish side with a defined risk (a fall below the 1.2166 level). Support holds
and the trend higher resumes with five successive up candles in the chart.
Figure 6.10 is a continuation of the example’s trend move higher. The
bullish price momentum led to a trend move to 1.2353. This move is represented by the shaded area in the chart during which the price surged 181
pips from 1.2172 to 1.2353.

FIGURE 6.10 EURUSD Corrects to 38.2 Percent Fibonacci Retracement Level

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

The Trader’s Toolbox

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

145

At the high, the market consolidates, and a double top is formed. This
is often a clue a top is in place. Traders can close long positions against the
tops, or even sell against the level, anticipating a corrective move lower.
Risk is a new high above 1.2353. The Fibonacci retracement lines can be
extended up to the new high as shown in the chart (from the low at 1.2045
to the high at 1.2353). The three new Fibonacci lines that dissect the chart
now come in at 1.2235, 1.2199, and 1.2163 respectively. These levels become targets for the corrective move lower. The market corrects down
and finds buyers against the 38.2 percent retracement level at 1.2235. The
borderline level holds and allows the trend following bulls to reenter the
market once again. The trend higher is reestablished.
How They Fit in the Toolbox What the example illustrates is the use
of Fibonacci Retracement levels as another borderline that can be used
to target or to trade against. On a trend-type move, if a top or bottom is
formed, I will immediately apply a Fibonacci to the bullish or bearish move
and will target corrective moves. If I am confident in the extreme (i.e., a
double top), I can even trade against the trend, with defined risk being
the extreme. When the Fibonacci level is reached like the 38.2 percent retracement line, I use the level as a borderline to trade against much in the
same way I would use a moving average or a trend line. On one side of a
Fibonacci line the bias is bullish; on the other it is bearish.
This borderline characteristic of Fibonacci lines also defines risk for
traders—another requirement for our trading tools. For example, if a trader
buys against the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement level, the stop would
be if the price fell below the calculated level. If the trader sells against the
Fibonacci level, the stop would be if the price moved above the level. Risk
is defined. With risk defined, fear is lessened.
Do Fibonacci levels help define trends? Better question: How can retracements help define trends if they typically run counter to a trend?
What I like to tell traders is that retracements are actually an integral
part of a trend. The reason is that markets do not trend in a straight line.
Successful traders are aware of the corrections and can use Fibonacci retracements for clues as to the strength of a trend. They also use them
to enter a trend or add to a position on a trend. Some even use them to
trade countertrends for even more profit potential. Countertrends can run
hundreds of pips and there are ways to anticipate them just like trends.
Chapter 9 will show what to look for and when.
For example, if a market reaches an extreme and reverses the trend,
traders assume the correction will at the least reach the 38.2 percent
Fibonacci retracement level. If the correction stops or falls short of
the 38.2 percent Fibonacci retracement level, it represents a shallow

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c06

JWBT439-Michalowski

146

January 18, 2011

19:13

Printer: Yet to come

THE FOUNDATION FOR SUCCESS

correction and is a clue that the major trend is likely to resume. Traders
can be aggressive on a move through the old extreme and anticipate a new
trend move.
Moreover, traders who may have missed the start of the trend will look
at the Fibonacci retracements as an opportunity to get on the trend during
these corrective phases. Using the retracement levels allows them to define
their risk and as a result, be more comfortable and less fearful of their trade
location. Successful traders will be patient and wait for the corrections to
enter a trend rather than force the position without a clearly defined risk.
What is important for a retail trader to realize is that retracements
are often where inexperienced traders start to trade against the trend
and where losses start to mount. Remember, most money is lost by retail
traders trading against the trend. Retracements often kick-start that process.
As a result, be aware that retracements are indeed an integral part of
a trend. They need to be recognized, defined, and measured, and if this is
done they provide additional insight needed to attack currency trends.
In Chapter 9, I will take a closer look at the Fibonacci retracements
and outline in greater detail the ways traders can use this most important
trading tool.

IF I HAD A HAMMER
Price alone is like an old hammer with a dry wooden handle. It is not an
ideal trading tool, but perhaps a way to get your account injured. Successful traders need to take that price and use a trading tool—and an effective
tool—that will define trends, define risk, and give an unambiguous trading
decision that keeps fear to a minimum. I have narrowed the list down to
three: moving averages, trend lines (or remembered lines), and Fibonacci
retracements. There is no need for more or any other. In fact, more are
likely to add a layer of uncertainty, and with it fear, to your trading. Master these three simple tools and understand the clues they give each and
every day, and you will have a hammer that can be used to build whatever
structure is in your dreams.

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

P A R T II

Tools and
Strategies

he foundation for trading trends needs to be developed and understood in order to trade a trend. In Part I, I laid the foundation for success for a trader who is focused on attacking trends. This all needs to
happen before a trader can properly analyze or execute a trade. Develop
the foundation and you will be a better trader.
Part II of the book will show how to attack currency trends that allow
traders to make the most money with the least amount of risk. It will introduce in detail the tools needed to trade trends effectively. The tools will
be used to help anticipate trends, define risk, get on trends, stay on trends,
control fear, and exit trends. You will continue to connect the dots that allow for trading success. All strategies outlined in Part II will focus on the
foundation developed in Part I. There will be no stray concepts or ideas. It
is all about trends, risk, and fear.
Chapter 7 focuses on the moving averages. I explain which moving averages I use, why, and the special clues that they give to help traders anticipate the currency trends. I also introduce the chart time periods I use
in my analysis. In Chapter 8, I delve further into trend lines and remembered lines and give examples of the key patterns I look for and what those
patterns imply with regard to anticipating and trading trends with more
success. In Chapter 9, the focus is on Fibonacci retracements. I go through
the derivation, how the levels are set and how the retracements are used

T

147

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

148

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

TOOLS AND STRATEGIES

within a trend trade or trend correction. Traders need to realize that trends
that go one way can reverse and go the other way. Fibonacci retracements
allow traders to follow and even trade the countertrend moves (that may
transition into a trend).
In Chapters 10 and 11, I look at a specific trend move in the EURUSD
that will act as the book’s benchmark example on how to attack currency
trends. All trend moves have certain similarities that traders can follow
as the trend gets started and transitions from leg to leg to the eventual
exit. Throughout the example, I apply the clues from three trading tools
together along with the three chart time periods (five-minute, hourly, and
daily). I show with clearly defined charts how a trader can anticipate a
trend, define risk, enter a trade, and then manage the trend trade from start
to exit.
Success in trading, as in any business, is about having a mission, having
a game plan, following rules, and executing when the risk is controlled,
understood, and accepted. It is also about using the proper tools of the
trade that will show you how to trade a trend effectively and successfully.
In Part II, you’ll learn exactly how to attack the currency trends. Are
you ready?

P1: OTA
JWBT439-c07

JWBT439-Michalowski

January 18, 2011

19:20

Printer: Yet to come

CHAPTER 7

Moving Averages

An object continues in a state of rest, or in a state
of motion at a constant speed along a straight line,
unless compelled to change that state by a net force.
—Sir Isaac Newton

ewton’s law of inertia is something that most people should know.
I absolutely was not a science guy in high school or college (I was
more of a jock), but Newton’s First Law was something that stuck
with me. The law made sense to me. It could be demonstrated. A ball on a
table was not going to move unless I pushed it, blew on it, swatted at it—did
something to it. You exert a force on it, and it moves. The “state of motion”
part was a bit more difficult to get my arms around. After all, if I put a
ball in motion, it would eventually stop rolling. Of course, the stopping was
because of friction. However, since I could not see friction, I had a more
difficult time comprehending what that meant. I learned that just because
you do not see something does not mean you cannot imagine what it should
do. When I think of the movement—or lack of movement—of the currency
market, I think of Newton’s law. Maybe Physics class in high school had
some relevance in my life after all.
I have a trading law, which is my cornerstone for anticipating a currency trend. That law states: “There are two types of markets: trending
and nontrending. A nontrending market transitions into trending market.
A trending market transitions into nontrending market.”
That sounds a little like Newton’s First Law. In financial market terms,
the law could be rewritten as: “A nontrending market will continue to
not trend until it is acted upon by an unbalanced net force.” Conversely,
