lowest close in the move. On day one, the lowest close will be the close of
the entry day. Every time the market makes a new lower close, you would
change the stop.
In addition, you would also change the stop as the ATR changes. We
started with an ATR of 240 pips but it eventually gets up to about 350 pips
in November. That means that we would start by adding 480 pips to the
lowest close but could be about 700 pips wide in November!

62

FIGURE 4.2 British Pound with ATR Added

The Conqueror

63

I like this because it widens out the stop when the market is more
volatile. That is perfect.
The day after the entry bar, which is marked with the third arrow,
closes slightly up. We would keep the ATR stop at the same level. However, the next day shows a drop and a lower close. We would lower the
stop to 480 above the new lower close. And so on.
Conqueror II uses the same idea except the stop is 12 times the ATR,
or about 2,880 pips above the lowest close. That is a significant distance
from the market so few traders will be able to trade it. I mention it here
because it is a profitable method but challenging for anyone but the most
highly capitalized to trade. I won’t mention it again in this chapter. From
now on, I’ll only speak of the Conqueror as being Conqueror I.

ADJUSTING THE STOP
So far we have discussed two different stop loss techniques: the initial
$2,000 money management stop and the two times ATR stop. Now comes
the really interesting part.
We are going to adjust the ATR stop by how many conditions are in
play. Remember that we went short when all three conditions were negative. Every time a factor changes sign (positive or negative), we will reduce
the size of the ATR stop by a third. Let’s work through an example.
We originally put on the trade in Figure 4.2 with a 480-pip stop. (I’m
going to ignore subsequent changes in the ATR in our calculations but you
shouldn’t in the real world.) Note that all three conditions remain negative until the downward-pointing arrow in Figure 4.3. At that point, the
price closes just barely above the 10-day MA, which turns that condition
positive.
We take our 480-pip stop and deduct one-third of 480. One-third of 480
is 158 pips. We subtract 158 from 480, giving us a new trailing stop of 322.
The lowest close occurs a couple of days before that at 1.7029. We place
our new protective stop loss 322 pips above that at 1.7351. The price on
that day does not stop us out but there is a spike higher two days after the
down arrow and we are stopped out for a 24-pip loss.
We would not have been stopped out if we had continued with the
original stop loss. It was wide enough to protect us from getting stopped
out. Here, we got stopped out with a microscopic loss.
But the market turns down the next day and the market closes below
the 10-day MA so all three conditions are negative again. We get short again
on the close of that day at 1.7282. The ATR is exactly 250 on that day so
our first stop is 500 pips above the close at 1.7282. So we now have a stop

64

FIGURE 4.3 British Pound with Stop Adjustment Added

The Conqueror

65

500 pips above the lowest close going forward until one or more of the
conditions turn positive.
The market trades down to a low close four-fifths of the way through
October at 1.5537. On that day, we lower the protective stop to 1.603 < 7,
or 500 pips above the lowest close. We get stopped out the next day when
the market moves up above 1.6057. We take a profit of over 1,200 pips.
At this point, all three conditions are still negative. That means that
we could actually go short right away. However, I prefer to get a confirmation signal before reentering the short position. The best is that one of
the conditions turns positive, then negative before we reenter the market.
That occurs two days later when the market closes just above the 10-day
MA, turning that condition positive. The market closes back below the
10-day MA the next day, turning this condition back to negative and all
three conditions negative. Time to short the market again.
I won’t carry the example along any further but you can see that the
next trade was also profitable. One of the keys is that the Conqueror doesn’t
get involved in sideways markets. It sits patiently on the sidelines before
getting involved. Also note that it moves the stop aggressively toward the
current market price. Any significant retracement will stop out the Conqueror. It’s a nervous system in that it leaps out of positions quickly when
they go against the trade. It’s hard to get into a Conqueror position but easy
to get out.
It is also clear that the Conqueror loves a strong trend. It may get out
quickly on a retracement but gets right back in if the three conditions reassert themselves. And they won’t reassert themselves unless the three
time frames are pointing in the same direction.

THE BOTTOM LINE
The Conqueror is a great technique that is being released to the general
public in this book. This technique is based on systems designed by two of
finest minds in this field, Bruce Babcock and Nelson Freeberg. That pedigree alone should make you want to try this method out.
This one-of-a-kind technique requires that a number of factors come
to fruition before a long or short position is entered. At the same time, the
Conqueror exits if the market hesitates just slightly. This means that the
reward-to-risk ratio is superb.

CHAPTER 5

Stochastics

tochastics are one of the most popular indicators. They are found
on all the available chart services and software packages. They are
a standard indicator in forex trading. But nearly everyone uses them
incorrectly. I’ll be focusing on bullish trades but everything also applies to
the bearish trades.

S

WHAT ARE STOCHASTICS?
Stochastics are a form of oscillator. An oscillator measures the rate of
change of prices. The simplest oscillator takes the current price and subtracts the price some number of days ago. For example, suppose EUR/USD
closed today at 1.2050 and closed 10 days ago at 1.2000. The oscillator value
would be 0.0050. This process would be repeated each day and plotted on
a graph. The common wisdom is that oscillators will signal the turn in a
market ahead of the actual turn in price because changes in momentum
lead changes in the actual price. This idea follows the analogy of physics.
The rate of change of an object will show decreasing momentum until the
object actually changes direction.
The big criticism of oscillators is that they sometimes give a trading
signal but the market is in such a strong trending mode that the signal is
false. The common wisdom is that oscillators do well in nontrending markets and poorly in trending markets.
The simpler the oscillator, the more sensitive it is to current market
price action. For example, a simple oscillator based on the 10-day rate of
67

68

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

change will be more sensitive to current price action than an oscillator
based on the 30-day rate of change.
Many analysts got beat up badly using the simple oscillators so they
tried to find ways to improve them. Welles Wilder’s relative strength index
(RSI) and stochastics are the two most popular and famous improvements
on the basic oscillator. Larry Williams’s %R is actually the same as stochastics except not smoothed and the scale is turned upside down.
Stochastics are reasonably easy to calculate. There is a three-step process to calculate the two components of stochastics: %K and %D.
First calculate the raw stochastic number:
K = (C − L)/(H − L) ∗ 100
Where C is the close of the last x number of days, H is the high for
the last x number of days, and L is the low for the last x number of days.
Typically, x is the last 14 days, though 9 days is also very popular.
%K is a three-day MA of K, and %D is a three-day MA of %K
Fortunately, you won’t need to know the math unless you want to fiddle with it to see if you can improve it. Virtually all chart services, quote
systems, and software packages have stochastics built in. However, they
sometimes fiddle with the parameters. I suggest using the parameters I
just outlined. The software packages and quote systems often allow you
to change the parameters.
The one important question that must be addressed is the term of the
stochastics. How many days will you use in your calculation? The classic
answer is 14 days, which many people claim is about half of the normal
cycle of forex prices. Other people use nine days, though I have never heard
a justification for this number except that it is more sensitive than the usual
14 days. I have never seen any proof of the claim that the average price
cycle is 28 days. Further, I have never seen any argument that you should,
therefore, use a half cycle as your length in using stochastics. Nonetheless,
fewer days in your calculations will lead to a more sensitive stochastic.
Could the length of stochastics be optimized? (By this I mean testing
different parameters to find the most profitable one over a given test over
past data.) Yes, but first you have to determine how you are going to use
them. Are you going to use them as an overbought/oversold indicator? Are
you going to use them as a trend indicator? Each use of stochastics will
likely lead to a different optimization.
I won’t get into the pros and cons of optimization here, so I suggest
you read Bob Pardo’s book on trading systems. See the Appendix for more
information.

Stochastics

69

Unless otherwise stated, I will use 14 days as the length of the stochastics. Why? Well, I came up with all these profitable techniques when everything had to be done by hand and 14-day stochastics were all we had to
use when testing. In the meantime, I have seen that these techniques work
so I am loath to change them. I leave it to my superintelligent readers to
optimize them!
A second reason to use 14 days for the length is that readers can easily
use the indicators because they are the most common in available software
packages. There is no need to fiddle with your software package to figure
out how to change the parameters.
The techniques outlined in this chapter work similarly on both 9- and
14-day time frames. This is an important suggestion that stochastics are a
robust indicator. However, the main difference between the 9- and 14-day
stochastics is that the 9-day is more sensitive and gives more indications
or signals. A key consideration in determining which length to use is your
particular trading style. A longer length will give fewer signals and later
signals but will filter out some whipsaws. A shorter length will give more
signals and earlier signals but will be whipsawed more often.
Stochastics are essentially a measure of the close as related to the high
and low. The stochastic measures the percent distance of the close to the
range. Thus, a reading of 50 percent means that the close is halfway between the high and low. A reading of 75 percent means that the close was
at the 75 percent level between the high and low. In other words, it was at
the 75 percent level of the day’s range or nearer to the high than the low.
This means that you can only see a stochastic reading of 100 percent if a
market closes on its high every day in the study. The underlying concept
is that it is bullish if the market is tending to close in the upper half of the
day’s range and bearish if the converse is true.
Stochastics are used to trade all time frames, including day trading.
Obviously, the most popular time frame is daily, using daily bars. However,
I know a number of people who use them on shorter-term bars, such as
five-minute and 60-minute bars. George Lane, the inventor of stochastics,
used to use stochastics on three-minute bars in the S&P 500 futures.

HOW TO USE STOCHASTICS
AS AN OVERBOUGHT AND
OVERSOLD INDICATOR
Stochastics can be used as an overbought and oversold indicator. This is
the most common use. The underlying idea is that a market will not normally move in one direction or the other for very long without running out

70

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

of buyers, in a bull move, or sellers, in a bear move. If the market shoots up
sharply, without a retracement, then the market is considered overbought.
Conversely, a sharp drop in price, without a retracement, will lead to an
oversold market.
The basic theory is that prices cannot go too far too fast. If they do,
then they are ripe for a retracement. The retracement is necessary to
“correct the overbought situation.” A market that has shot up quickly has
moved the price of the pair away from the underlying value too quickly. As
a result, the market will set back slightly to induce more buying into the
market.
The concept of overbought and oversold is mainly used to try to predict
short-term price movements against the trend. It is also used to help dissuade traders from buying the market after the market has moved strongly.
It is used to encourage traders to wait for a setback before buying.
In general, the concept of overbought and oversold works. Typically,
when the stochastics get above 80 percent, the market is overbought; when
stochastics get below 20 percent, the market is oversold. You should normally expect a correction to ensue relatively soon. This is the way that
most people use stochastics. However, just because it generally works and
calls corrections accurately doesn’t mean that it is profitable. In fact, selling when stochastics get above 80 percent and buying when stochastics get
below 20 percent is a money-losing strategy.
Some people modify the method and sell when the stochastics get
above 80 percent and the %K crosses down below the %D and buy when
the stochastics get below 20 percent and the %K crosses above the %D.
This works better but is still a money-losing strategy.
The problem is strongly trending markets. Using stochastics as an overbought/oversold indicator falls completely apart. In other words, the concepts of overbought and oversold work during mild trends and sideways
markets but do terribly during trending markets. In fact, some people have
suggested that you are better off buying when the %K crosses above the
80 percent line and selling when the %K crosses down below the 20 percent line. This is actually better than what we have been talking about, but
it also loses money.
First, you must determine what kind of trader you are before using
stochastics as an overbought or oversold indicator. You should consider
using stochastics if you are the type of trader who wants to buy dips and
sell rallies in trendless markets, and is willing to lose when the market
finally starts to trend. If you are a trend follower, then you should ignore
the stochastic overbought and oversold reading. Stochastics will register
an overbought reading for weeks during a major explosive bull market.
The more explosive, the more the indicator will falsely be considered
overbought.

Stochastics

71

Figure 5.1 is a good example of what I have been talking about. The
market became overbought in mid-December and the market continued to
skyrocket. On the other hand, the oversold conditions in February showed
some promise as profitable trades.
The bottom line is that it is dangerous to trade just because the stochastics have moved to overbought or oversold. There needs to be some trigger
to tell you when the buying has actually begun to dissipate. Otherwise, you
will often be selling into a strong market with strong momentum. You know
you are selling into a strong market when you sell an overbought market
but you want to have a sign that the momentum is waning and the retracement is now going to occur. The crossover is that signal.
Let me show you how to really drill down on using crossovers as signals. I told you that this is not a profitable method to use mechanically, so
be careful. However, there are times when you can use it to your advantage. I’m going to drill down to show you some nuances when you’re using
this technique. But don’t make this a primary technique—it’s dangerous!

TRADING SIGNALS FROM CROSSOVERS
Perhaps the most common use of stochastics is to give trading signals derived from the crossover of the slower moving line, the %D, by the faster
moving line, the %K. The idea is that you sell the market when the %K
crosses below the %D and buy when the %K crossed above the %D.
It is usually considered that the best signals come when the stochastic crossover occurs when the stochastics are above 80 percent or below
20 percent. These two levels give the most room for the signals to make
money since the signal occurred when the market was overbought or oversold. Once again, I am not sure that this is so since selling into overbought
bull markets is a dangerous game. Still, those are the usual rules.
Sometimes the %K will cross the %D when the %D is still climbing. This
is called a left-handed crossover because the %K crosses over the %D on
the left-hand side of the “hump” created by the %D. This will occur when
the price changes sharply in the other direction. A right-handed crossover
comes when the %K crosses over the %D on the right side of the “hump” of
the %D. Figure 5.2 shows examples of both types of crossovers.
Most analysts prefer the right-handed crossover because they believe
that it is a more stable market and that they are entering the market just
after the turn in prices. A right-handed crossover will only occur when the
market stabilizes first and then starts to drop. A right-handed crossover will
also have the benefit of usually having both the %K and %D moving in the
same direction when the crossover occurs. It is for this reason that many

72

FIGURE 5.1 Euro with Stochastics

73

FIGURE 5.2 Euro with Stochastic Crossovers

74

HOW TO MAKE A LIVING TRADING FOREIGN EXCHANGE

investors prefer right-handed crossovers. It means that the momentum has
changed significantly and that a trend has likely started.
However, the inventor of stochastics, George Lane, has suggested that
it is acceptable to trade a left-handed crossover if it represents a resumption of the main trend. In particular, he suggests using it when a classic divergence (to be discussed next) has occurred and the left-handed
crossover represents a resumption of the trend.
Stochastics can also cross over in the middle of the range between 20
and 80. They don’t have to cross over only in the extremes of the stochastic
range. Crossover will usually occur in the middle of a major trending market, that is, the market moves strongly in one direction, reverses, and then
takes off again. Stochastics can give a sell signal during that retracement
only to reverse back to the direction of the trend immediately after.
Generally, the idea is to buy or sell on the crossover and liquidate the
trade on a crossover in the other direction. Obviously, this doesn’t give
much protection against sudden and strong moves in the wrong direction.
As a result, many traders put in some protective stop based on recent price
action, such as support and resistance, as disaster insurance against such
a powerful move against the position.
Let me go back to the concept of trading crossovers in the middle of
the range rather than at the extremes. I like this method because we are
no longer using the concept of overbought and oversold, which I believe
is very dangerous to our equity. But let’s get back to the concept of using
stochastics to tell us the momentum of the market.
We see that there is a strong trend in the market and that there has
been a retracement. Now we want to use a crossover in the %K and %D only
in the direction of the trend to enter a position. We have essentially used
the stochastics to time the end of countertrend move and then get back in
tune with the strong underlying trend. This way of using stochastics is very
profitable. Please note that you need to find another way to set a protective
stop. Typically, you will use the low of the countertrend move as the stop.

PROFITABILITY OF STOCHASTICS
There have been few studies of the profitability of using crossovers for
trading signals. One study was done by Robert Colby and Thomas Meyers
in their excellent book The Encyclopedia of Technical Market Indicators
(McGraw-Hill, 1988). They focus on the stock market so they use the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE) Composite Index for their study, pulling
monthly data. They tested period lengths of one through 24 over the period 1968 to 1986. My only criticism of the study is that they used monthly
data rather than daily or even weekly data.

Stochastics

75

The results were very interesting.
The first rule they tested was a simple crossing of %K above or below
%D. They optimized the results and found that every time period was a
loser except at 21 months. Clearly, this method should be discarded.
The authors then tested a more robust rule of requiring that both the
%K and %D had to be rising for a buy signal and dropping for a sell signal.
This tends to mean that trades will be in the direction of the longer-term
trend. What they found was that every period length was profitable except
for the shortest lengths below six. Adding this new filter significantly improved the value of stochastics.
Obviously, many investors will not want to trade in a market using
a monthly signal but even these people will want to consider using this
as a powerful trend indicator to filter short-term trades. In other words,
take short-term trades only in the direction of the long-term trend as identified by the long-term stochastic crossover. Note, too, that this monthly
method can be used to time longer-term trades such as forex hedges for
corporations.
They then tested the signals on weekly data over two different time
periods. In this case, only signals around 50 weeks were profitable. Longer
and shorter lengths were unprofitable. I think we can safely conclude that
we should ignore this method.
Just because these tests were with stocks doesn’t mean that they aren’t
important for us forex traders. But markets are markets. They are all traded
by humans. Techniques in one financial arena very often work in other
financial arenas.
Colby and Meyers also tested the concept of selling overbought markets and buying oversold markets and found that it was a huge loser. Let’s
just stick with following the trend.

WARNINGS
Because it is an oscillator, many traders look at the slope of the stochastics
for an idea of the momentum of the market. They want to, say, buy when
the stochastics are trending down but the momentum of that trend is waning. In effect, they don’t want to wait for the crossover to get long. They
want to get a jump on the stochastic crossover.
In other words, they will start to sell a market as the stochastics start
to slow their advance. Take a close look at Figure 5.2. Notice that the %K
will start to slow down its advance or decline while the %D is still moving
at the same rate. Selling or buying when this happens will certainly give
you a jump on the market change.
