
182

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

Tracking multiple sector performance over days or weeks will reveal
these complex strategies, which can then be piggybacked or utilized as
a filtering mechanism for your cycle-aligned positions. If you haven’t
figured it out yet, this tape reading technique gives the survivalist trader
a powerful tool for coexisting with program algorithms that have become
the 400-pound gorillas of the financial markets in recent years. This is especially useful when volatility and volume are tracking higher, in unison,
because it points to heightened institutional participation.
Watch for changing patterns in weekly rotational activity as well.
These subtle shifts can expose emerging trends well before the underlying
charts hit breakout or breakdown levels. To start, look for alignment
between sectors that are leading or lagging the intraday list three to four
times a week. Then pull up a long-term relative strength indicator, like
the smoothed 14-day Wilder’s RSI, and see if those targeted groups are
shifting direction from an overbought or oversold level. With a little effort,
you can uncover these secular shifts early in the rotational process and
utilize the knowledge as a trading edge, entering the market before the
reactionary crowd starts to pile in on the long side or pile out on the short
side.
A well-maintained sector list also signals the arrival of trend days,
which are great times when you’re on the right side of the market and total
disasters when you’re positioned incorrectly. Trend days mark one-sided
sessions that go directional right after the opening bell and continue in
that direction right up to the closing bell. Traders can expect just two or
three trend days in a typical month. Sector lists show lopsided behavior
early on trend days, with nearly all categories flashing green during rallies
and red during selloffs. The few exceptions may be in the countermarkets,
like gold and bonds during a big selloff day.
Watch real-time up-down volume indicators in the main exchanges
to confirm the onset of a trend day. Look for a lopsided tape in which
80% or more of total volume comes in on the buy side during a rally and
sell side during a selloff. These extremes should be matched by lopsided
market breadth, which exceeds plus or minus 1,800 to 2,000 on the NYSE
and Nasdaq exchanges. While 80:20 days can occur regularly, the 90:10
volume day holds a special place in market lore. Traditionally, this asymmetrical event pointed to a major turning point in long-term cycles, like
a secular bull or bear market. However, the explosion of program trading
has changed all that, with as many as a dozen 90:10 days now popping up
during the course of a typical trading year. The all-too-frequent occurrence
illustrates the overriding dominance of lockstep price behavior, driven by

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

183

automated strategies and the legion of piggybackers following the gargantuan hedge funds.

Sizing, Scaling, and Exposure
The number of trades you take simultaneously, and their relative dollar
value, has as much to do with organizational ability and skill level as pure
capitalization. The challenge for the well-capitalized survivalist trader is
simple—can you track and manage all of your open positions at the same
time, or do you get overwhelmed? Diversification is also important when
you carry multiple positions. For example, if you buy five chip stocks and
the sector rolls over, you’re now stuck with five losing positions. So the
trading basket, whatever its total dollar value, needs to mix it up with
diversification or, in reality, you’ve just taken one big position that can go
bad in a hurry.
Few trading issues generate as much confusion as position sizing
and scaling. We see a great-looking pattern and want desperately to get on
board, so instead of planning a strategy that manages risk, we just throw
money at the trade and hope for the best. A far better plan is to take a deep
breath and consider the three size and scale variables that will impact
reward:risk:
• How many total shares to trade
• Whether to take risk all at once, or in pieces
• Whether to unwind risk all at once, or in pieces
Transaction costs also impact position sizing and scaling. Does your
broker charge per ticket, or per unit share? Unit share fees let you pay for
what you buy, rather than a flat price for each entry or exit. How large
or small is your trading account? Small accounts have little choice but to
execute trades in single blocks, because ticket fees will add up quickly.
On the flip side, large accounts can execute all kinds of scaling strategies
and still not break the bank. As an added benefit, large positions in large
accounts overcome ticket pricing because the fees represent a negligible
chunk of the total trade cost.
Time management and position scaling go hand in hand. When you
have the luxury of time, use it to build positions at the most advantageous
prices. For example, you want to own Applied Materials for a two- or

184

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

three-week trade at an average price of 23. You can buy pieces of the stock
all over the vicinity of your intended average and use intraday volatility
to seek fills that lower the price even further. The same strategy applies to
trade exits. Let’s say your position is moving higher, and you want to take
pieces off the table in order to lock in profits. Once again, you apply time
management to take advantage of natural market fluctuations. You sell
part of the position into a morning rally, another piece into a topping formation, and a final unit into an afternoon buying spike.
Traders overlook the importance of sizing in managing risk. There’s
a huge difference between trading 1,000 shares of a sleepy soap company
and 1,000 shares of a chat room rocket. Unfortunately, many of us will
play both types of market vehicles in exactly the same manner, although
the two risk profiles are completely different. Simply stated, it’s a good idea
to reduce position size when trading small caps or other highly volatile
stocks because this containment will keep you from getting stopped out
during routine intraday oscillations. Conversely, trade larger size with
slower-moving stocks, and draw out your holding period. You’re less
likely to get stopped out due to lower volatility and will also improve
opportunity-cost by giving the position more time to move away from
your entry.
At what point should you think seriously about increasing average
share size across all instruments? Ironically, it’s a two-edged sword
because, as you trade larger size, you’ll get more gun-shy, which will
make it even harder to stick to your trading plan. For this reason, it’s best
to move slowly and develop a set of workflows for growing your risk
and monitoring its impact on day-to-day performance. Since the value of
a price swing is greater when you carry a larger position, average profit
and loss size will increase as well. So, if you find that overall profitability
doesn’t rise in proportion with your increased risk, reverse gears and go
back to small lots for a few more weeks or months.
Finally, overcome a common mistake and ignore margin completely
when computing total size. Many traders believe they need to buy or sell
as many shares as their margin accounts will allow. But each opportunity
carries an optimum position size that exists independently of the account
size. This elusive figure is a combination of risk, volatility, and the odds
the trade will work out in your favor. To figure out each element of this
jigsaw puzzle, apply the swing analysis workflow outlined in Part Three
to measure your reward:risk at each point of entry. Then role-play different
sizing scenarios and the potential dollar impact if things should go to hell.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

185

Averaging down and up attracts its fair share of detractors because
the strategy goes against the market wisdom that we should never add
to a losing position or turn a winner into a loser. Despite this admonition, dollar cost averaging works extremely well with certain trading
strategies. However, it’s a highly selective process requiring strong discipline because the entry method is a ticket to disaster when applied for
the wrong reasons. For example, adding to a losing position can end your
career if you’re doing it in desperation, trying to work your way out of a
black hole.
Swing traders are market opportunists who don’t buy or sell for the
long haul. Our small window of opportunity forces us to predict what
the market is going to do over very short time frames. For this reason,
most averaging techniques work best in congested markets and trading
ranges, where price swings reflect high noise levels rather than the onset
of a trend higher or lower. However, the well-managed pullback play is
a major exception to this rule. These classic opportunities make it tough
to find perfect entry prices, but they do allow us to work into profitable
positions by taking smaller pieces of the trade as price moves against us.
Of course, this is better known as “buying the dip.”
In Figure 8.1, Nordstrom rallies off the March low, setting up a series
of pullback trades. One effective entry strategy is to weigh shares toward
the lower end of support, keeping the average price well under the midpoint of three partial positions taken at equal distances. For example,
you want to buy 1,200 shares of Nordstrom as it pulls back following a
strong rally wave. Put up a Fibonacci grid, buying 300 shares at the 38%
retracement, 300 shares at the 50% retracement, and 600 shares at the
62% retracement. This tiered approach yields an average price under the
50% retracement. In trade A, partial buys at 16.32, 15.89, and 15.45 yield an
average cost of 15.77, or just 32 cents above the final entry price. Enter the
stop loss immediately after buying the third position, placing it around the
70% level to avoid whipsaws but taking you out of the trade if the stock
falls into the 78% retracement. You’ll recall from an earlier discussion how
a selloff into that level can set up a failure of a failure buy signal when price
rallies back above the 62% retracement. Getting out and waiting for that
trade to set up is a better option than holding onto the loser and praying for
a reversal.
The three trades (A, B, C) show that this strategy can go wrong in
many ways but still yield decent profits. For starters, trade A hits the 62%
retracement perfectly, trade B overshoots it, and trade C never reaches it.

PART FOUR

186

F I G U R E

Managing Opportunity

8.1

Three Nordstrom trades.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

So the final results vary, depending on the level where the falling stock
finally bounces:
• Trade A: We get 1,200 shares and a strong bounce, letting us take
profits at the swing inception point at 17.73.
• Trade B: We get 1,200 shares but might get taken out for a 75- to
80-cent loss if the stop is placed too close to the final entry. Or
the position barely survives and surges into a healthy profit the
next day.
• Trade C: We get just 600 shares, with an average entry price at 20.01
([20.34+19.68]/2), but that position moves into a profit quickly.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

187

The pullback dynamics tell us we may never get all the shares we
originally planned to trade. But that’s a good thing because it also means
the market has turned in our favor, ahead of expectations. In essence, this
averaging strategy gets us a smaller piece of a profitable trade rather than
a whole measure of an unprofitable one. But what happens if the stock,
futures contract, or currency keeps selling off and drops through our
lowest entry? Well, in truth, averaging down or up works only when we
apply tight stop loss criteria.
In addition, the reward target must be great enough to justify the
increased risk of taking entries at lower and lower prices. It’s simple enough
to calculate this important equation using swing analysis. Compute your
average entry price if all your shares get filled. The distance from this
number up to the next resistance level (profit target/reward) should be
at least three times the distance down to your stop loss (failure target/
risk). Simply stated, if these numbers don’t work out in your favor, don’t
average into the position.
Many times you don’t have obvious charting features, like Fibonacci retracements, to localize your dip entries. This is especially true
with pullbacks after parabolic rallies or selloffs, in which the countertrends are unlikely to reach the 38% retracement. If reward:risk “looks”
favorable, find small ledge or consolidation patterns within the parabolic rally, and place orders at those levels that add up, in total, to just
half your normal exposure, with a tight stop loss just under (or above
with a short sale) the final entry. Your last entry needs to scrape up
against whatever support level you can find. If the stop gets hit, reboot
the setup and look for new entries, risking the other half of your normal
position size. If this trade fails, it’s time to cry uncle and move on to a new
opportunity.
It should be clear by now that we’re talking about dollar cost
averaging in a pullback strategy, rather than ignoring your discipline and
trying to trade out of a loser. What’s the key difference between these two
strategies? In dollar cost averaging, we follow our original plan and prechosen escape route. In its evil twin, our plan has already failed and we
have no escape route. Just make sure you know which strategy you’re
actually applying before you hit the enter button.
Let’s summarize what we’ve learned about position sizing and
scaling:
1. Ignore margin when computing position size. Each opportunity
carries an optimum size that’s independent of the account size.
Find it and trade it.

PART FOUR

188

Managing Opportunity

2. Think small if you have a small account. Take smaller positions
and increase your holding period to weeks or months, rather
than minutes or hours.
3. Trade like a winner but think like a loser. Visualize the worstcase scenario for the size you want to trade and never exceed
your plan.
4. Take big positions for short time periods and small positions for
long time periods. Courage is inversely proportional to position
size.
5. Use time to your advantage. Spend hours or days building
positions at the most advantageous prices.
6. Compute your transaction costs in advance. Change brokers if
you’re trading small and paying flat-rate fees, or trading large
and paying per-share fees.
7. Scale slowly into pullbacks and quickly into congestion. Even a
small piece can yield a big profit when a pullback bounces ahead
of expectations.
8. Align size with the risk profile of the market you’re trading. Drop
down to a smaller position when trading a volatile stock.
9. Trade bigger with slow-movers and then get out of the way.
You’re less likely to get stopped out.
10. Move slowly when increasing position size, and take a giant step
back if results don’t support the added risk.

Baskets
Why trade just a handful of stocks when you can play 20 or more and
never skip a beat? In fact, it’s possible to manage dozens of equities simultaneously in a way that reduces overall risk to your trading account. Here’s
how it works. Institutions and funds use basket trading to focus capital
on targeted movement or to spread risk across many instruments. These
baskets might look like investment portfolios, but they’re actually trading
vehicles. In other words, they need to pay off over shorter time periods.
But isn’t it easier to just buy or sell liquid exchange-traded funds? No, in
fact it’s harder to make money because ETFs force you to play all the components rather than cherry-picking the issues you expect to outperform on
the upside or underperform on the downside.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

189

Professionals create baskets through a variety of techniques. Many
sophisticated strategies apply rules-based analysis, better known as algorithms, to capture opportunities through extensive back testing. These
methods identify groupings of stocks and other instruments that capitalize
on market inefficiencies with a high degree of correlation. Of course, many
things can go wrong with this approach. For example, fund managers often
ruin perfectly good baskets by over-tweaking the many components or
trading signals. A bigger problem comes from the historical data. At any
given time, the performance of a specific market phenomenon can deviate
greatly from its long-term mean. We saw this happen in the summer of
2007 when quant funds got decimated because they forgot to calculate the
impact of volatility into their performance projections.
Sector and index tracking offer the most convenient venues for traders
to integrate custom baskets into their own strategies. These homegrown
techniques will often outperform their larger cousins due to our intimate
knowledge of specific equities and market groups. It’s a simple process
as long as your broker supports unit or per-share pricing. Most direct
access brokers now charge by the share instead of a flat rate, like $9.95 per
trade. A typical fee schedule may cost one-half cent per share with a onedollar minimum per order, which translates into five bucks per thousand
shares. More advanced brokers also support entry methods that gather
the entire basket into a single file that can be bought or sold with a single
mouse click.
Putting together a well-correlated basket requires a good deal of
legwork, but it isn’t that hard to accomplish. First, sort a group of index or
sector components into a relative strength list. Do this by examining price
change over a specified period or the percentage distance above or below
the 200-day moving average. Drop down to a shorter-term moving average
for baskets that contemplate shorter-term holding periods, keeping in
mind that the strategy is too labor-intensive to work as a day trade or
for an overnight flip. Then, build your basket to (a) favor the strongest
or weakest stocks, or (b) create a spread strategy that favors subgroups
within the sector or index. For example, you can compile an interesting
semiconductor spread by buying the equipment companies and selling
short the fabricators, or vice versa. This bilateral approach has an added
benefit: it reduces the influence of lockstep behavior when macro forces
are moving the sector or broad market.
How many shares of each stock should you buy or sell short? Equal
weighting works best when you’re trying to outperform a sector or index

190

PART FOUR

Managing Opportunity

with a basic directional strategy. Keep it simple. Pick up an equal number
of shares when they’re priced close to each other. Double or triple the
shares when the stock trades at a much lower price than the rest of the
basket. Just make sure the entire value of the basket doesn’t expose your
account to more risk than you’re willing to take.

Three Ways to Manage Basket Risk
• Pull up a related sector/index chart using breakouts and breakdowns on those patterns to make buy and sell decisions for the
entire basket.
• Create a single chart of the combined components using a technical
analysis program, and use that pattern to make buy and sell
decisions.
• Apply a flat dollar or percentage stop loss to the entire group.

Say you want to build a basket of Dow Industrial components. Of
course, you can buy the entire index through the Dow Diamonds Trust
ETF or the Dow futures, but in a directional strategy, you’ll do better
removing the weakest components and then creating a basket with the
remaining issues. A simple filtering process utilizes a subgroup of issues
that are at least 10% above the 200-day EMA. Once you’ve settled on the
components and size of each position, wait for the Dow chart to trigger an
entry signal through a typical breakout, narrow range, or pullback pattern.
You’re free to exclude any issues you don’t want in the basket, but don’t
make individual changes after the stocks have been bought or sold short.
In other words, it’s absolutely vital that the entire basket be traded as a
single instrument in order to maintain its risk characteristics.
This hands-off approach requires considerable discipline and a strong
stomach. In the real world, a few basket components will go the wrong
way while another subgroup does absolutely nothing. Keep in mind that
you’re trying to profit from the average performance of the basket, with
your edge defined by the filtering process rather than subsequent price
movement. How do you know if your basket is working or failing? That’s
easy. Just compare its performance over time to the underlying sector or
index. In a nutshell, there’s really no point in basket trading if you’re not
beating those numbers by a wide margin.

CHAPTER 8

Positions, Markets, and Trading Styles

191

Survivalist Holding Periods
How long should you hold onto swing trading positions? That decision
depends on your lifestyle, capitalization level, and how much time you
can devote to the financial markets. It’s easy to trade in and out of positions
by the hour if you’re watching every tick, but folks with real lives
away from the markets need to hold positions longer and use passive
management tools, like mechanical stop losses, to protect themselves
from catastrophic losses. Don’t let a holding period be a noose around your
neck, but it’s important to understand that the market is a giant chessboard
on which opportunities in one time frame are matched with ugly traps
in another time frame. Here’s an example that’s hardwired into every
trader’s DNA. You buy a strong stock around the noon hour. It responds
immediately and lifts the position into a substantial profit. The issue shows
no signs of weakness as it heads into the closing bell, so you hold it
overnight with the intention of taking profits at the next day’s open.
However, the index futures are flashing bright red when you awake, and
your stock gaps down, instantly transforming that pleasant profit into a
depressing loss.
The stock in this example generates a great opportunity in the
intraday market but a nasty bull trap as an overnight swing trade. To complicate matters, the uptrend can easily recover after the gap shakes you
out of the trade and even run to new highs by the close of that session.
However, you have no choice but to deal with the infinite variables in real
time and pick the best strategy for your risk exposure in that particular
environment. No matter how you cut it, the most logical decision is going
to be dead wrong a good percentage of the time.
Simply stated, it’s best to adjust your holding period to the specific
opportunity being offered at the time. Admittedly, this advice conflicts
with my point of view in The Master Swing Trader, which recommends that
traders pick a single holding period and learn to play it well before moving
on to another. This strategic shift comes in adaptation to a survivalist
trading mentality. Program algorithms set innumerable traps through different time frames, depending on the changing flow of market behavior.
The survivalist trader responds best to this unpleasant reality by stepping
out of the way as soon as the trap is recognized. Which brings us back to
the profit-lost-to-the-gap scenario. In the 1990s, a strong close triggered a
generally reliable signal for even higher prices in the next session. Funds
have deconstructed this well-known bias in the last decade, making
follow-through strategies a total crapshoot except in very strong trends.
