
sail for Palestine, and arrived in safety at Acre. The Christians were torn, as usual, by
mutual jealousies and animosities. The two great military orders were as virulent and as
intractable as ever; opposed to each other, and to all the world. The arrival of Edward had
the effect of causing them to lay aside their unworthy contention, and of uniting heart to
heart, in one last effort for the deliverance of their adopted country. A force of six
thousand effective warriors was soon formed to join those of the English prince, and
preparations were made for the renewal of hostilities. The Sultan, Bibars or Bendocdar,
[Mills, in his history, gives the name of this chief as Al Malek al Dhaker Rokneddin
Abulfeth Bibars al Ali al Bundokdari al Salehi."] a fierce Mamluke, who had been placed
on the throne by a bloody revolution, was at war with all his neighbours, and unable, for
that reason, to concentrate his whole strength against them. Edward took advantage of
this; and marching boldly forward to Nazareth, defeated the Turks and gained possession
of that city. This was the whole amount of his successes. The hot weather engendered
disease among his troops, and he himself, the life and soul of the expedition, fell sick
among the first. He had been ill for some time, and was slowly recovering, when a
messenger desired to speak with him on important matters, and to deliver some
despatches into his own hand. While the Prince was occupied in examining them, the
traitorous messenger drew a dagger from his belt, and stabbed him in the breast. The
wound fortunately was not deep, and Edward had gained a portion of his strength. He
struggled with the assassin, and put him to death with his own dagger, at the same time
calling loudly for assistance. [The reader will recognise the incident which Sir Walter
Scott has introduced into his beautiful romance, "The Talisman," and which, with the
licence claimed by poets and romancers, he represents as having befallen King Richard
I.] His attendants came at his call, and found him bleeding profusely, and ascertained on
inspection that the dagger was poisoned. Means were instantly taken to purify the wound;
and an antidote was sent by the Grand Master of the Templars which removed all danger
from the effects of the poison. Camden, in his history, has adopted the more popular, and
certainly more beautiful, version of this story, which says that the Princess Eleonora, in
her love for her gallant husband, sucked the poison from his wound at the risk of her own
life: to use the words of old Fuller, "It is a pity so pretty a story should not be true; and
that so sovereign a remedy as a woman's tongue, anointed with the virtue of loving
affection," should not have performed the good deed.
Edward suspected, and doubtless not without reason, that the assassin was employed by
the Sultan of Egypt. But it amounted to suspicion only; and by the sudden death of the
assassin, the principal clue to the discovery of the truth was lost for ever. Edward, on his
recovery, prepared to resume the offensive; but the Sultan, embarrassed by the defence of
interests which, for the time being, he considered of more importance, made offers of
peace to the crusaders. This proof of weakness on the part of the enemy was calculated to
render a man of Edward's temperament more anxious to prosecute the war; but he had
also other interests to defend. News arrived in Palestine of the death of his father, King
Henry III; and his presence being necessary in England, he agreed to the terms of the
Sultan. These were, that the Christians should be allowed to retain their possessions in the
Holy Land, and that a truce of ten years should be proclaimed. Edward then set sail for
England; and thus ended the last Crusade.

The after-fate of the Holy Land may be told in a few words. The Christians, unmindful of
their past sufferings and of the jealous neighbours they had to deal with, first broke the
truce by plundering some Egyptian traders near Margat. The Sultan immediately
revenged the outrage by taking possession of Margat, and war once more raged between
the nations. Margat made a gallant defence, but no reinforcements arrived from Europe to
prevent its fall. Tripoli was the next, and other cities in succession, until at last Acre was
the only city of Palestine that remained in possession of the Christians.
The Grand Master of the Templars collected together his small and devoted band; and
with the trifling aid afforded by the King of Cyprus, prepared to defend to the death the
last possession of his order. Europe was deaf to his cry for aid, the numbers of the foe
were overwhelming, and devoted bravery was of no avail. In that disastrous siege the
Christians were all but exterminated. The King of Cyprus fled when he saw that
resistance was vain, and the Grand Master fell at the head of his knights, pierced with a
hundred wounds. Seven Templars, and as many Hospitallets, alone escaped from the
dreadful carnage. The victorious Moslems then set fire to the city, and the rule of the
Christians in Palestine was brought to a close for ever.
This intelligence spread alarm and sorrow among the clergy of Europe, who endeavoured
to rouse once more the energy and enthusiasm of the nations, in the cause of the Holy
Land: but the popular mania had run its career; the spark of zeal had burned its appointed
time, and was never again to be re-illumined. Here and there a solitary knight announced
his determination to take up arms, and now and then a king gave cold encouragement to
the scheme; but it dropped almost as soon as spoken of, to be renewed again, still more
feebly, at some longer interval.
Now what was the grand result of all these struggles? Europe expended millions of her
treasures, and the blood of two millions of her children; and a handful of quarrelsome
knights retained possession of Palestine for about one hundred years! Even had
Christendom retained it to this day, the advantage, if confined to that, would have been
too dearly purchased. But notwithstanding the fanaticism that originated, and the folly
that conducted them, the Crusades were not productive of unmitigated evil. The feudal
chiefs became better members of society, by coming in contact, in Asia, with a
civilization superior to their own; the people secured some small instalments of their
rights; kings, no longer at war with their nobility, had time to pass some good laws; the
human mind learned some little wisdom from hard experience, and, casting off the slough
of superstition in which the Roman clergy had so long enveloped it, became prepared to
receive the seeds of the approaching Reformation. Thus did the all-wise Disposer of
events bring good out of evil, and advance the civilization and ultimate happiness of the
nations of the West, by means of the very fanaticism that had led them against the East.
But the whole subject is one of absorbing interest; and if carried fully out in all its
bearings, would consume more space than the plan of this work will allow. The
philosophic student will draw his own conclusions; and he can have no better field for the
exercise of his powers than this European madness; its advantages and disadvantages; its
causes and results.

THE WITCH MANIA.
What wrath of gods, or wicked influence
Of tears, conspiring wretched men t' afflict,
Hath pour'd on earth this noyous pestilence,
That mortal minds doth inwardly infect
With love of blindness and of ignorance? -- Spencer's Tears of the Muses.
Countrymen: "Hang her! -- beat her! -- kill her!"
Justice: "How now? Forbear this violence!"
Mother Sawyer: "A crew of villains -- a knot of bloody hangmen! set to torment me! -- I
know not why."
Justice: "Alas! neighbour Banks, are you a ringleader in mischief? Fie I to abuse an aged
woman!"
Banks: "Woman! -- a she hell-cat, a witch! To prove her one, we no sooner set fire on the
thatch of her house, but in she came running, as if the Devil had sent her in a barrel of
gunpowder."
-- Ford's Witch of Edmonton.
The belief that disembodied spirits may be permitted to revisit this world, has its
foundation upon that sublime hope of immortality, which is at once the chief solace and
greatest triumph of our reason. Even if revelation did not teach us, we feel that we have
that within us which shall never die; and all our experience of this life but makes us cling
the more fondly to that one repaying hope. But in the early days of "little knowledge,"
this grand belief became the source of a whole train of superstitions, which, in their turn,
became the fount from whence flowed a deluge of blood and horror. Europe, for a period
of two centuries and a half, brooded upon the idea, not only that parted spirits walked the
earth to meddle in the affairs of men, but that men had power to summon evil spirits to
their aid to work woe upon their fellows. An epidemic terror seized upon the nations; no
man thought himself secure, either in his person or possessions, from the machinations of
the devil and his agents. Every calamity that befell him, he attributed to a witch. If a
storm arose and blew down his barn, it was witchcraft; if his cattle died of a murrain-if
disease fastened upon his limbs, or death entered suddenly, and snatched a beloved face
from his hearth -- they were not visitations of Providence, but the works of some
neighbouring hag, whose wretchedness or insanity caused the ignorant to raise their
finger, and point at her as a witch. The word was upon everybody's tongue -- France,
ItaLy, Germany, England, Scotland, and the far North, successively ran mad upon this
subject, and for a long series of years, furnished their tribunals with so many trials for
witchcraft that other crimes were seldom or never spoken of. Thousands upon thousands
of unhappy persons fell victims to this cruel and absurd delusion. In many cities of
Germany, as will be shown more fully in its due place hereafter, the average number of
executions for this pretended crime, was six hundred annually, or two every day, if we

leave out the Sundays, when, it is to be supposed, that even this madness refrained from
its work.
A misunderstanding of the famous text of the Mosaic law, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch
to live," no doubt led many conscientious men astray, whose superstition, warm enough
before, wanted but a little corroboration to blaze out with desolating fury. In all ages of
the world men have tried to hold converse with superior beings; and to pierce, by their
means, the secrets of futurity. In the time of Moses, it is evident that there were
impostors, who trafficked upon the credulity of mankind, and insulted the supreme
majesty of the true God by pretending to the power of divination. Hence the law which
Moses, by Divine command, promulgated against these criminals; but it did not follow,
as the superstitious monomaniacs of the middle ages imagined, that the Bible established
the existence of the power of divination by its edicts against those who pretended to it.
From the best authorities, it appears that the Hebrew word, which has been rendered,
venefica, and witch, means a poisoner and divineress -- a dabbler in spells, or fortuneteller. The modern witch was a very different character, and joined to her pretended
power of foretelling future events that of working evil upon the life, limbs, and
possessions of mankind. This power was only to be acquired by an express compact,
signed in blood, with the devil himself, by which the wizard or witch renounced baptism,
and sold his or her immortal soul to the evil one, without any saving clause of
redemption.
There are so many wondrous appearances in nature, for which science and philosophy
cannot, even now, account, that it is not surprising that, when natural laws were still less
understood, men should have attributed to supernatural agency every appearance which
they could not otherwise explain. The merest tyro now understands various phenomena
which the wisest of old could not fathom. The schoolboy knows why, upon high
mountains, there should, on certain occasions, appear three or four suns in the firmament
at once; and why the figure of a traveller upon one eminence should be reproduced,
inverted, and of a gigantic stature, upon another. We all know the strange pranks which
imagination can play in certain diseases -- that the hypochondriac can see visions and
spectres, and that there have been cases in which men were perfectly persuaded that they
were teapots. Science has lifted up the veil, and rolled away all the fantastic horrors in
which our forefathers shrouded these and similar cases. The man who now imagines
himself a wolf, is sent to the hospital, instead of to the stake, as in the days of the witch
mania; and earth, air, and sea are unpeopled of the grotesque spirits that were once
believed to haunt them.
Before entering further into the history of Witchcraft, it may be as well if we consider the
absurd impersonation of the evil principle formed by the monks in their legends. We
must make acquaintance with the primum mobile, and understand what sort of a
personage it was, who gave the witches, in exchange for their souls, the power to torment
their fellow-creatures. The popular notion of the devil was, that he was a large, illformed, hairy sprite, with horns, a long tail, cloven feet, and dragon's wings. In this shape
he was constantly brought on the stage by the monks in their early "miracles" and
"mysteries." In these representations he was an important personage, and answered the

purpose of the clown in the modern pantomime. The great fun for the people was to see
him well belaboured by the saints with clubs or cudgels, and to hear him howl with pain
as he limped off, maimed by the blow of some vigorous anchorite. St. Dunstan generally
served him the glorious trick for which he is renowned -- catching hold of his nose with a
pair of red-hot pincers, till
"Rocks and distant dells resounded with his cries."
Some of the saints spat in his face, to his very great annoyance; and others chopped
pieces off his tail, which, however, always grew on again. This was paying him in his
own coin, and amused the populace mightily; for they all remembered the scurvy tricks
he had played them and their forefathers. It was believed that he endeavoured to trip
people up, by laying his long invisible tail in their way, and giving it a sudden whisk
when their legs were over it; -- that he used to get drunk, and swear like a trooper, and be
so mischievous in his cups as to raise tempests and earthquakes, to destroy the fruits of
the earth and the barns and homesteads of true believers; -- that he used to run invisible
spits into people by way of amusing himself in the long winter evenings, and to proceed
to taverns and regale himself with the best, offering in payment pieces of gold which, on
the dawn of the following morning, invariably turned into slates. Sometimes, disguised as
a large drake, he used to lurk among the bulrushes, and frighten the weary traveller out of
his wits by his awful quack. The reader will remember the lines of Burns in his address to
the "De'il," which so well express the popular notion on this point -"Ae dreary, windy, winter night,
The stars shot down wi' sklentin light,
Wi' you, mysel, I got a fright
Ayont the lough;
Ye, like a rash-bush, stood in sight
Wi' waving sough.
"The cudgel in my nieve did shake,
Each bristled hair stood like a stake,
When wi' an eldritch stour, 'quaick! quaick!'
Among the springs
Awa ye squatter'd, like a drake,
On whistling wings."
In all the stories circulated and believed about him, he was represented as an ugly, petty,
mischievous spirit, who rejoiced in playing off all manner of fantastic tricks upon poor
humanity. Milton seems to have been the first who succeeded in giving any but a
ludicrous description of him. The sublime pride which is the quintessence of evil, was
unconceived before his time. All other limners made him merely grotesque, but Milton
made him awful. In this the monks showed themselves but miserable romancers; for their
object undoubtedly was to represent the fiend as terrible as possible: but there was
nothing grand about their Satan; on the contrary, he was a low mean devil, whom it was
easy to circumvent and fine fun to play tricks with. But, as is well and eloquently
remarked by a modern writer, [See article on Demonology, in the sixth volume of the
"Foreign Quarterly Review."] the subject has also its serious side. An Indian deity, with

its wild distorted shape and grotesque attitude, appears merely ridiculous when separated
from its accessories and viewed by daylight in a museum; but restore it to the darkness of
its own hideous temple, bring back to our recollection the victims that have bled upon its
altar, or been crushed beneath its ear, and our sense of the ridiculous subsides into
aversion and horror. So, while the superstitious dreams of former times are regarded as
mere speculative insanities, we may be for a moment amused with the wild incoherences
of the patients; but, when we reflect, that out of these hideous misconceptions of the
principle of evil arose the belief in witchcraft -- that this was no dead faith, but one
operating on the whole being of society, urging on the wisest and the mildest to deeds of
murder, or cruelties scarcely less than murder -- that the learned and the beautiful, young
and old, male and female, were devoted by its influence to the stake and the scaffold -every feeling disappears, except that of astonishment that such things could be, and
humiliation at the thought that the delusion was as lasting as it was universal.
Besides this chief personage, there was an infinite number of inferior demons, who
played conspicuous parts in the creed of witchcraft. The pages of Bekker, Leloyer, Bodin,
Delrio, and De Lancre abound with descriptions of the qualities of these imps and the
functions which were assigned them. From these authors, three of whom were
commissioners for the trial of witches, and who wrote from the confessions made by the
supposed criminals and the evidence delivered against them, and from the more recent
work of M. Jules Garinet, the following summary of the creed has been, with great pains,
extracted. The student who is desirous of knowing more, is referred to the works in
question; he will find enough in every leaf to make his blood curdle with shame and
horror: but the purity of these pages shall not be soiled by anything so ineffably
humiliating and disgusting as a complete exposition of them; what is here culled will be a
sufficient sample of the popular belief, and the reader would but lose time who should
seek in the writings of the Demonologists for more ample details. He will gain nothing by
lifting the veil which covers their unutterable obscenities, unless, like Sterne, he wishes to
gather fresh evidence of "what a beast man is." In that case, he will find plenty there to
convince him that the beast would be libelled by the comparison.
It was thought that the earth swarmed with millions of demons of both sexes, many of
whom, like the human race, traced their lineage up to Adam, who, after the fall, was led
astray by devils, assuming the forms of beautiful women to deceive him. These demons
"increased and multiplied," among themselves, with the most extraordinary rapidity.
Their bodies were of the thin air, and they could pass though the hardest substances with
the greatest ease. They had no fixed residence or abiding place, but were tossed to and fro
in the immensity of space. When thrown together in great multitudes, they excited
whirlwinds in the air and tempests in the waters, and took delight in destroying the beauty
of nature and the monuments of the industry of man. Although they increased among
themselves like ordinary creatures, their numbers were daily augmented by the souls of
wicked men -- of children still-born -- of women who died in childbed, and of persons
killed in duels. The whole air was supposed to be full of them, and many unfortunate men
and women drew them by thousands into their mouths and nostrils at every inspiration;
and the demons, lodging in their bowels or other parts of their bodies, tormented them
with pains and diseases of every kind, and sent them frightful dreams. St. Gregory of

Nice relates a story of a nun who forgot to say her benedicite, and make the sign of the
cross, before she sat down to supper, and who, in consequence, swallowed a demon
concealed among the leaves of a lettuce. Most persons said the number of these demons
was so great that they could not be counted, but Wierus asserted that they amounted to no
more than seven millions, four hundred and five thousand, nine hundred, and twenty-six;
and that they were divided into seventy-two companies or battalions, to each of which
there was a prince or captain. They could assume any shape they pleased. When they
were male, they were called incubi; and when female, succubi. They sometimes made
themselves hideous; and at other times, they assumed shapes of such transcendant
loveliness, that mortal eyes never saw beauty to compete with theirs.
Although the devil and his legions could appear to mankind at any time, it was generally
understood that he preferred the night between Friday and Saturday. If Satan himself
appeared in human shape, he was never perfectly, and in all respects, like a man. He was
either too black or too white -- too large or too small, or some of his limbs were out of
proportion to the rest of his body. Most commonly his feet were deformed; and he was
obliged to curl up and conceal his tall in some part of his habiliments; for, take what
shape he would, he could not get rid of that encumbrance. He sometimes changed himself
into a tree or a river; and upon one occasion he transformed himself into a barrister, as we
learn from Wierus, book iv, chapter ix. In the reign of Philippe le Bel, he appeared to a
monk in the shape of a dark man, riding a tall black horse -- then as a friar -- afterwards
as an ass, and finally as a coach-wheel. Instances are not rare in which both he and his
inferior demons have taken the form of handsome young men; and, successfully
concealing their tails, have married beautiful young women, who have had children by
them. Such children were easily recognizable by their continual shrieking -- by their
requiring five nurses to suckle them, and by their never growing fat.
All these demons were at the command of any individual, who would give up his
immortal soul to the prince of evil for the privilege of enjoying their services for a stated
period. The wizard or witch could send them to execute the most difficult missions:
whatever the witch commanded was performed, except it was a good action, in which
case the order was disobeyed, and evil worked upon herself instead.
At intervals, according to the pleasure of Satan, there was a general meeting of the
demons and all the witches. This meeting was called the Sabbath, from its taking place on
the Saturday or immediately after midnight on Fridays. These Sabbaths were sometimes
held for one district, sometimes for another, and once at least, every year, it was held on
the Brocken, or among other high mountains, as a general sabbath of the fiends for the
whole of Christendom.
The devil generally chose a place where four roads met, as the scene of this assembly, or
if that was not convenient, the neighbourhood of a lake. Upon this spot nothing would
ever afterwards grow, as the hot feet of the demons and witches burnt the principle of
fecundity from the earth, and rendered it barren for ever. When orders had been once
issued for the meeting of the Sabbath, all the wizards and witches who failed to attend it
