
coin collection and his collection of stamps.
School for the most part bored him. In Miss Thickstun’s fourth-grade class with Bob Russell and his other
friend Stu Erickson, to pass the time, he played math games and counted in his head. He liked geography,
however, and found spelling exciting, especially the “spell-downs,” in which six students from the first grade
competed with six from the second. Whoever won advanced and competed with the third graders, and so on.
Theoretically, a first grader could win six times and eventually beat a sixth grader. “I wanted to pass Doris
on the spell-downs, and Bertie wanted to pass me.” Alas, all three Buffetts were very smart kids, and neither
happened. “Still, there was nothing like that for capturing our attention.”
Warren enjoyed spell-downs, but nothing motivated him like blackboard arithmetic. From the second grade
on, students raced to the board, two at a time. First they competed at sums against the clock, then
subtraction, finally multiplication and division, tallying their numbers down the board. Warren, Stu, and Russ
were the brightest in the class. At first they scored about the same, but over time Warren pulled ahead a little.
And then, with practice, a little more.9
Finally one day Miss Thickstun asked Warren and Stu to stay after school. Warren’s heart pounded in his
chest. “We wondered what the hell we had done,” Stu says. Instead of a scolding, Miss Thickstun told
Warren and Stu to move their books from the 4A section on one side of the room to the 4B section on the
other.10 They were skipping half a grade. Bob Russell was left behind, even though Mr. Russell got upset and
complained.
Warren stayed friends with both, but kept his relationships with them separate: As before, although each was
a friend of his, they were never really friends with each other.
Warren’s fondness for minutiae continued to develop. His parents and their friends—who called him
“Warreny”—got a kick out of his party trick of naming state capitals. By fifth grade he had immersed himself
in the 1939 World Almanac, which quickly became his favorite book. He memorized the population of every
city. He got a contest going with Stu over who could name the most world cities with populations over a
million.11
One evening, however, Warren was distracted from his Almanac and his bottle caps by a terrible pain in his
belly. The doctor made a house call, then went home to bed. But he couldn’t get the house call out of his
mind, so he returned and sent Warren to the hospital. Later that night, Warren underwent surgery for a
ruptured appendix.
The doctor had almost been too late. Warren lay gravely ill in the Catholic-run hospital for several weeks.
But cared for by the nursing sisters, he soon found the hospital was a comforting haven. As he began to
recover, other pleasures came his way. The World Almanac was brought for him to study. His teacher made
all the girls in his class write him get-well letters.12 His aunt Edie, who understood her nephew well, brought
him a toy fingerprinting kit. He knew exactly what to do with it. He coaxed each of the sisters into stopping
by his room. He inked all of their fingers, got a set of prints, and filed this collection away carefully upon
returning home. His family found this behavior entertaining. Who would want a set of nuns’ fingerprints? But
Warren theorized that one of the sisters might eventually commit a crime. And if that happened, then only he,
Warren Buffett, would own the clues to the culprit’s identity.13
Not long after his hospitalization, on an exceptionally cold and windy day in May 1939, his parents told him
to get dressed. Then his grandfather appeared. Clad in a dignified single-breasted suit, a handkerchief tucked
neatly in his breast pocket, Ernest Peabody Buffett looked the picture of respectability, like the president of
the Rotary that he was.
Ernest had a way with children, despite his stern air, and he liked to entertain his grandchildren. Bertie
worshipped him. “We’re going to Chicago today, Warren,” he announced. They boarded a train and went to
see the Cubs play the Brooklyn Dodgers in what turned out to be a marathon baseball game that went
scoreless for ten extra innings, tied nine to nine, and was finally called on account of darkness. It had lasted

for four hours and forty-one minutes.14 After this exciting introduction to major-league baseball, Warren was
thrilled when Ernest bought him a twenty-five-cent book about the 1938 baseball season. Warren memorized
it. “That was the most precious book to me,” he says. “I knew every player’s history from every team and
could have told you clearly every word in that book. I knew it in my sleep.”
His aunt Alice introduced him to another new interest when she gave him a book about bridge—probably
Culbertson’s Contract Bridge Complete: The New Gold Book of Bidding and Play.15 Contract bridge—a
social, psychological game in which figuring out the problem is as important as solving it—was sweeping the
country at the time, and Warren found it suited him more than chess.16
Yet another of his many interests was music. For several years, he had been learning to play the cornet;
among his heroes were the trumpet players Bunny Berigan and Harry James. Although music practice meant
spending time at home with his mother, trying to please someone who could never be pleased, he persisted,
and there came a time, after many painful hours of practice peppered with Leila’s criticism, that he was
rewarded by being chosen to participate in his school’s Armistice Day ceremony.
Each year on November 11, the anniversary of the treaty that ended World War I, the entire Rosehill student
body went down to the gym for a ceremony honoring the war’s dead heroes. In what had become a school
tradition, trumpet players stationed at doors on either side of the gym would alternate playing “Taps,” one
blowing the first dum da dum notes, and the other echoing dum da DUM, and so on.
That year, Warren’s cornet skills had advanced enough for him to be given the part of the echo. He woke up
the morning of the event, exhilarated at the prospect of performing in front of the entire school. When the big
moment came, he was ready.
As Warren stood in the doorway with his cornet, the first trumpet player sounded, Dum da DUM.
But on the second dum, he hit a wrong note.
“My whole life flashed before my eyes, because I didn’t know what to do with the echo. They hadn’t
prepared me for this. Paralyzed—my big moment.”
Should he copy the other trumpet player’s mistake or embarrass him by contradicting what he’d played?
Warren was undone. The scene scalded itself permanently into his memory—except for what he did next.
Years later, which course he followed—assuming he played any note at all—had become a blank.
He had learned a lesson: It might seem easier to go through life as the echo—but only until the other guy
plays a wrong note.

8
A Thousand Ways
Omaha • 1939–1942

The first few cents Warren Buffett ever earned came from selling packs of chewing gum. And from the day
he started selling—at six years of age—he showed an unyielding attitude toward his customers that revealed
much about his later style.
“I had this little green tray, which had five different areas in it. I’m pretty sure my aunt Edie gave me that.

It had containers for five different brands of gum, Juicy Fruit, Spearmint, Doublemint, and so on. I would
buy packs of gum from my grandfather and go around door to door in the neighborhood selling this stuff. I
used to do that in the evening, largely.1
“I remember a woman named Virginia Macoubrie saying, ‘I’ll take one stick of Juicy Fruit.’ I said, ‘We
don’t break up packs of gum’—I mean, I’ve got my principles. I still, to this day, remember Mrs. Macoubrie
saying she wanted one stick. No, they were sold only in five-stick packs. They were a nickel, and she wanted
to spend a penny with me.”
Making a sale was tempting, but not tempting enough to change his mind. If he sold one stick to Virginia
Macoubrie, he would have four sticks left to sell to somebody else, not worth the work or the risk. From each
whole pack, he made two cents profit. He could hold those pennies, weighty and solid, in his palm. They
became the first few snowflakes in a snowball of money to come.
What Warren was willing to break up were red cartons of Coca-Cola, which he sold door to door on summer
nights. He carried on selling them during family vacations, approaching sunbathers around the shores of Lake
Okoboji in Iowa. Soda pop was more profitable than chewing gum: He netted a nickel for every six bottles,
and stuffed these coins proudly into the ball-park-style nickel-plated money changer on his belt. He also wore
it when he went door to door selling copies of the Saturday Evening Post and Liberty magazines.
The money changer made him feel professional. It emblemized the part of selling that Warren most enjoyed:
collecting. Although he now collected bottle caps, coins, and stamps, mainly, he collected cash. He kept his
coins at home in a drawer, sometimes adding to the $20 his father had given him when he turned six, all
recorded in a little maroon passbook—his first bank account.
By the time he was nine or ten, he and Stu Erickson were selling used golf balls at Elmwood Park golf course
—until somebody reported them and they got kicked out by the cops. When the police talked to Warren’s
parents, however, Howard and Leila weren’t concerned. They just considered their son ambitious. As the
Buffetts’ only—and precocious—son, Warren had a sort of “halo,” according to his sisters, and got away
with a hell of a lot.2
At age ten, he got a job selling peanuts and popcorn at the University of Omaha football games. He walked
through the stands yelling, “Peanuts, popcorn, five cents, a nickel, half dime, fifth of a quarter, get your
peanuts and popcorn here!” The 1940 presidential election campaign was under way, and he had collected
dozens of different Willkie–McNary buttons, which he wore on his shirt. His favorite read: “Washington
Wouldn’t, Cleveland Couldn’t, Roosevelt Shouldn’t,” which referred to FDR’s outrageous—to the Buffetts
—decision to run for a third term. While the U.S. had no constitutional term limit, the country had—so
far—rebuffed the idea of an “imperial President.”3 Howard felt that FDR was a despot who had
grandstanded his way to popularity. The idea of four more years of FDR nearly choked him.
Though he found Wendell Willkie too liberal for his personal tastes, Howard felt, Anyone to get rid of
Roosevelt. Warren, who followed along with his father’s political views, enjoyed showing off his Willkie–
McNary buttons at the stadium. Then his manager called him into the office and said, “Take those off. You’ll
get a reaction from the Roosevelt people.”
Warren put the buttons in his apron, where some of the dimes and nickels got wedged inside the backs of the
pins. When he reported in after the game, his manager told him to dump out the contents of the pocket, pins
and all. Then he swept them off the counter and took them away. “That was my introduction to Business
101,” Buffett says. “I was pretty sad.” And when Roosevelt won an unprecedented third term, the Buffetts
were sadder still.
But while politics was Howard’s main interest and money a sideline, for his son, those interests were
reversed. Warren hung around his father’s office at the grand old Omaha National Bank building every
chance he got, reading “The Trader” column in Barron’s and the books on his father’s bookshelf. He planted
himself in the customers’ room of Harris Upham & Co. At this regional stockbroking firm, down two flights

of stairs from Howard’s office, he found it the height of glamour to be allowed to “mark the board,” chalking
stock prices on a slow Depression-era Saturday morning. The market still traded for a two-hour session on
weekends. Root-bound men with nothing better to do filled the semi-circle of chairs in the customers’ room,
listlessly watching numbers crawl by on the Trans-Lux, an electronic display of prices of major stocks.4
Occasionally somebody would jump up and rip a handful of tape off the lazily clicking ticker machine.
Warren arrived with his paternal great-uncle Frank Buffett—the family misanthrope who had been
brokenhearted over losing Henrietta, now long dead, to his brother Ernest—and his maternal great-uncle
John Barber.5 Each man was enslaved by his long-standing habit of thinking in only one direction.
“Uncle Frank was a total bear on the world, and Uncle John was a total bull. I would sit between the two of
them, and they’d sort of vie for my attention and try to sell me that they were right. They didn’t like each
other, so they wouldn’t talk to each other, but they would talk to me in between. My great-uncle Frank
thought everything in the world was going to go broke.
“And when somebody’d go up there to the counter behind the chairs and say, ‘I want to buy a hundred
shares of U.S. Steel at twenty-three,’ my uncle Frank would always boom out and say, ‘U.S. STEEL? IT’S
GOING TO ZERO!’” That was not good for business. “They couldn’t throw him out, but they hated him
around this place. It was not an office designed for short-sellers.”
Snug between his two great-uncles, Warren stared at the numbers, which were fuzzy. His trouble reading the
Trans-Lux led to his family’s discovery that he was nearsighted. After being fitted for glasses, Warren
noticed that the numbers seemed to change according to some immutable law of their own. Although his
great-uncles were both eager to sway him to their respective—and extreme—points of view, Warren noticed
that their opinions appeared to have no connection whatsoever to the numbers passing overhead on the
Trans-Lux. He was determined to figure out the pattern, but as yet did not know how.
“My uncle Frank and my uncle John would vie for who would take me to lunch, because that was sort of
beating the other guy. With my uncle Frank, we’d go down to the old Paxton Hotel, where we could buy
day-old food for a quarter.”
Warren, who enjoyed spending time with adults, relished being vied over by his uncles. Actually, he enjoyed
being vied over by anyone. He craved attention from his other relatives and his parents’ friends, but
especially from his father.
Howard gave each of his children an East Coast trip at age ten, an important event in their lives. Warren
knew exactly what he wanted to do: “I told my dad I wanted to see three things. I wanted to see the Scott
Stamp and Coin Company. I wanted to see the Lionel Train Company. I wanted to see the New York Stock
Exchange. Scott Stamp and Coin was at Forty-seventh Street, Lionel was down around Twenty-seventh, and
the Stock Exchange was all the way downtown.”
Wall Street in 1940 had begun to revive from the crash, yet remained a chastened place. The men of Wall
Street were like a band of hardy mercenaries fighting on after most of their comrades had been felled in war.
The way they made a living seemed vaguely disreputable with memories of the 1929 Crash so fresh in
people’s minds. Yet even though they did not brag about it outside the bunker walls, some of these
mercenaries were doing very well indeed. Howard Buffett took his son down to lower Manhattan and
dropped in on the top man at one of the largest brokerage firms. Little Warren Buffett was getting a peek
inside the bunker’s gold-plated doors.
“That’s when I met Sidney Weinberg, who was the most famous man on Wall Street. My dad had never met
him. He had this little tiny firm out here in Omaha. But Mr. Weinberg let us in, maybe because a little kid
was along or something. We talked for about thirty minutes.”
As the senior partner of the investment bank Goldman Sachs, Weinberg had spent a decade painstakingly
repairing the firm’s reputation after its disgrace for misleading investors with a notorious pyramid scheme in
the market crash of 1929.6 Warren knew nothing about that, nor that Weinberg grew up an immigrant’s child

and had started as a porter’s assistant at Goldman, emptying cuspidors and brushing the partners’ silk hats.7
But he certainly understood that he was in the presence of a big shot once he found himself in Sidney
Weinberg’s walnut-paneled office, its walls hung with original letters, documents, and portraits of Abraham
Lincoln. And what Weinberg did at the end of their visit made a huge impression on him. “As I went out, he
put his arm around me and he said, ‘What stock do you like, Warren?’
“He’d forgotten it all the next day, but I remembered it forever.”
Buffett would never forget that Weinberg, a big shot on Wall Street, had paid such attention to him and
seemed to care about his opinion.8
From Goldman Sachs, Howard took Warren over to Broad Street and through a set of enormous Corinthian
columns into the New York Stock Exchange. Here, in the temple of money, men in brightly colored jackets
shouted and scribbled standing around wrought-iron trading posts while clerks darted back and forth,
strewing the floor with paper scraps. Yet it was a scene from the Stock Exchange dining room that captured
Warren’s imagination.
“We had lunch at the Exchange with a fellow named At Mol, a Dutchman, a member of the Stock Exchange
and a very impressive-looking man. After lunch, a guy came along with a tray that had all these different
kinds of tobacco leaves on it. He made up a cigar for Mr. Mol, who picked out the leaves that he wanted.
And I thought, This is it. It doesn’t get any better than this. A custom-made cigar.”
A custom-made cigar. The visions that cigar evoked in Warren’s mathematical mind! He had exactly zero
interest in smoking a cigar. But working backward, he saw what hiring a man for such a frivolous purpose
implied. To justify the expense must mean that, even while most of the country was still mired in the
Depression, the cigar man’s employer was making a great deal of money. He grasped it right away. The Stock
Exchange must pour forth streams of money: rivers, fountains, cascades, torrents of money, enough to hire a
man for the pure frippery of rolling cigars—handmade, custom-made cigars—for the Stock Exchange
members’ own particular pleasure.
That day, as he beheld the cigar man, a vision of his future was planted.
He kept that vision when he went back to Omaha, old enough now to organize his quest and pursue it all the
more systematically. Even as he followed the pastimes of an ordinary boy, playing basketball and Ping-Pong
and collecting coins and stamps; even as his family mourned his small, sweet grandfather, John Stahl, who
died that year at age seventy-three—the first loss in his life—he worked with a passion for the future he saw
ahead of him, right there in sight. He wanted money.
“It could make me independent. Then I could do what I wanted to do with my life. And the biggest thing I
wanted to do was work for myself. I didn’t want other people directing me. The idea of doing what I wanted
to do every day was important to me.”
A tool that would help him soon fell into his hands. One day, down at the Benson Library, a book beckoned
from the shelves. Its shiny silver cover gleamed like a heap of coins, hinting at the value of its contents.
Captivated by the title, he opened it and was immediately hooked. One Thousand Ways to Make $1,000, it
was called. A million dollars, in other words!
Inside the cover, in a photograph, a tiny man gazed up at an enormous pile of coins.
“Opportunity Knocks,” read the first page of the text. “Never in the history of the United States has the time
been so favorable for a man with small capital to start his own business as it is today.”
What a message! “We have all heard a great deal about the opportunities of bygone years…. Why, the
opportunities of yesterday are as nothing compared with the opportunities that await the courageous,
resourceful man of today! There are fortunes to be made that will make those of Astor and Rockefeller seem
picayune.” These words rose like sweet visions of heaven to Warren Buffett’s eyes. He turned the pages

faster.
“But,” the book cautioned, “you cannot possibly succeed until you start. The way to begin making money is
to begin…. Hundreds of thousands of people in this country who would like to make a lot of money are not
making it because they are waiting for this, that, or the other to happen.” Begin it! the book admonished, and
explained how. Crammed with practical business advice and ideas for making money, One Thousand Ways to
Make $1,000 started with “the story of money” and was written in a straightforward, friendly style, like
someone sitting on the front stoop talking to a friend. Some of its ideas were limited—goat-dairying and
running doll hospitals—but many were more practical. The idea that captivated Warren was pennyweight
scales. If he had a weighing machine, he would weigh himself fifty times a day. He was sure that other people
would pay money to do that too.
“The weighing machine was easy to understand. I’d buy a weighing machine and use the profits to buy more
weighing machines. Pretty soon I’d have twenty weighing machines, and everybody would weigh themselves
fifty times a day. I thought—that’s where the money is.9 The compounding of it—what could be better than
that?”
This concept—compounding—struck him as critically important. The book said he could make a thousand
dollars. If he started with a thousand dollars and grew it ten percent a year:
In five years, $1,000 became more than $1,600.
In ten years, it became almost $2,600.
In twenty-five years, it became more than $10,800.
The way that numbers exploded as they grew at a constant rate over time was how a small sum could turn
into a fortune. He could picture the numbers compounding as vividly as the way a snowball grew when he
rolled it across the lawn. Warren began to think about time in a different way. Compounding married the
present to the future. If a dollar today was going to be worth ten some years from now, then in his mind the
two were the same.
Sitting on the stoop at his friend Stu Erickson’s, Warren announced that he would be a millionaire by the time
he reached age thirty-five.10 That was an audacious, almost silly-sounding statement for a child to make in
the depressed world of 1941. But his calculations—and the book—said it was possible. He had twenty-five
years, and he needed more money. Still, he was sure he could do it. The more money he collected early on,
the longer the money could compound, and the better his chances of achieving his goal.
***
A year later, he brought forth the kernel of his reality. To his family’s amusement and surprise, by the spring
of 1942, his hoard totaled $120.
Enlisting his sister Doris as a partner, he bought three shares of a stock for each of them, costing him $114.75
for his three shares of Cities Service Preferred.11
“I didn’t understand that stock very well when I bought it,” he says; he knew only that it was a favorite
stock that Howard had sold to his customers for years.12
The market hit a low that June, and Cities Service Preferred plunged from $38.25 to $27 a share. Doris, he
says, “reminded” him every day on the way to school that her stock was going down. Warren says he felt
terribly responsible. So when the stock finally recovered, he sold at $40, netting a $5 profit for the two of
them. “That’s when I knew that he knew what he was doing,” Doris recalls. But Cities Service quickly soared
to $202 a share. Warren learned three lessons and would call this episode one of the most important of his
life. One lesson was not to overly fixate on what he had paid for a stock. The second was not to rush
