
05 506455-ch01.indd 13

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

14

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
No matter how you choose investments currently, you can likely apply fundamental analysis. Even if you’re the kind of investor who likes to buy diversified
mutual funds and hold onto them forever, called a passive investor, it can be
helpful to understand basic financial characteristics of the companies.

Knowing what fundamentals to look for
Knowing what makes a company tick isn’t as convoluted as it may sound.
Companies are so regulated and scrutinized, all the things you need to pay
attention to are usually listed and published for all to see. Generally, when
you hear about a company’s fundamentals, the key elements to be concerned
with fall into several categories including:
✓ Financial performance: Here you’re looking at how much a company
collects from customers who buy its products or services, and how
much it keeps in profit. Terms you probably hear quite a bit about, such
as earnings and revenue, are examples of ways fundamental analysts
evaluate a company’s financial performance.
✓ Financial resources: It’s not enough for a company to sell goods and
services. It’s not even enough to turn a profit. Companies must also have
the resources to invest themselves and keep their businesses going and
growing. Aspects of a business, such as its assets and liabilities, are
ways to measure a company’s resources.
✓ Management team: When you invest in a company, you’re entrusting
your money with the CEO and other managers to put your cash to work.
Fundamental analysis helps you separate the good managers from the bad.
✓ Valuation: It’s not enough to identify which companies are the best.
What’s a “good” company anyway? Definitions of “good” can run the
gamut. You also need to consider how much you’re paying to own a
piece of a company. If you overpay for the best company on the planet,
it’s still likely you’ll end up losing money on the investment. You’ll read
more about this in Chapter 10 and Chapter 11.
✓ Macro trends: No company operates in a vacuum. A company’s performance is highly influenced by actions of competitors or the condition of
the economy. These broad factors need to be incorporated into fundamental analysis, as you’ll discover in Chapter 15 and Chapter 16.

05 506455-ch01.indd 14

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

Chapter 1: Understanding Fundamental Analysis

15

Knowing what you need
One of the great things about running as a hobby is all you need is a pair
of decent shoes. And basketball? Just grab a ball and find a hoop. No fancy
equipment is required. The same goes with fundamental analysis. Much of
the data you need is provided free by companies and can be accessed in seconds from any computer connected to the Internet.
Fundamental analysis can get pretty involved. But at its most basic form,
there are just a few basic ideas behind fundamental analysis, including:
✓ Awareness of the benefits of fundamental analysis: Since fundamental
analysis takes some know-how and time spent learning a bit, you’ll want
to know ahead of time why you’re going to the trouble. Chapter 2 and
Chapter 3 highlight the payoff of fundamental analysis. Even if you’re a
passive investor, or one who simply buys a basket of stocks and holds
on, there are reasons why fundamental analysis might be worth your
while.
✓ Retrieval of financial data: Getting all the key data you need to apply
fundamental analysis is easy, if you know where to look. Chapter 4 gives
you quick tips on how to round up all the data you’ll need.
✓ Basic math: There it is: The M word. There’s no way around the fact
there will be some number crunching involved in some aspects of fundamental analysis. Don’t worry, I’ll guide you to help keep the math as
painless as possible. One of the key tools you’ll need is for trend analysis, which you will read about in Chapter 4.

Knowing the Tools of the Fundamental
Analysis Trade
You can read all sorts of books on home repair and even take a trip to your
hardware store and buy lots of screws, nails and glue. But none of that effort
will benefit you unless you have a tool-belt of hammers and the knowledge of
how to get started and put your plan into reality.
The same importance of execution is part of fundamental analysis. You may
appreciate the importance of fundamental analysis and may even be able
to download fundamental data from Web sites or from a company’s annual
report. But you need to have the tools to analyze the fundamentals to get any
real value from them.

05 506455-ch01.indd 15

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

16

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

Staying focused on the bottom line
If there’s one thing investors may agree is of upmost importance, it’s the
company’s profitability. When it comes down to it, when you invest in a stock
you’re buying a piece of the company’s profitability. Knowing how to read
and understand how much profit a company is making is very important
when it comes to knowing whether or not to invest.
The income statement, described in full detail in Chapter 5, will be your guide
when you’re trying to determine how profitable a company is. What might
also surprise you is that the income statement can tell you a great deal about
a company, in addition to just how much income it brings in.

Sizing up what a company has to its name
During times of intense financial stress, investors often make a very important mental shift. They’re not so concerned about making money as they are
about just getting their money back. Similarly, when things get tough in the
economy, investors are less interested in how profitable a company is and are
more mindful of whether a company will survive.
When you’re trying to understand the lasting power of a company, fundamental analysis is of great value. By reading the company’s balance sheet, you can
get a rundown of what a company has — its assets — and what is owes — its
liabilities. Monitoring these items give you a very good picture of how much
dry powder a company has to endure a tough period. Chapter 6 explores the
balance sheet in more detail.

Burn baby burn: Cash burn
One of the biggest killers of companies, especially smaller firms just starting
out, is cash flow. While a company might have a great product concept, excellent management, and even dedicated financial backers, timing is everything.
If a company is using up cash to pay its bills and employees but not bringing
in enough cold hard cash from customers, it can run into a giant financial
headache very quickly.
If there’s one thing I hope you pick up from this book, it’s how fundamental
analysis helps you keep a close eye on how much cash is coming into and out
of a company. Monitoring cash flow is critical to know if a company is running
perilously empty on cash, which you’ll dig into in more detail in Chapter 7. But
cash flow is also a very important way fundamental analysis helps you put a
price tag on a company, as you will find out about in Chapter 11.

05 506455-ch01.indd 16

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

Chapter 1: Understanding Fundamental Analysis

17

Financial ratios: Your friend in
making sense of a company
As you flip through the book and jump around to different topics that interest
you, you might be a bit bewildered by just how many pieces of data fundamental analysts must deal with. You’ve got the financial statements that measure just about every aspect of the company. It can be intimidating to decide
what numbers matter most and which ones can be ignored.
Financial ratios will be a great help here, as you’ll see in Chapter 8. These
ratios draw all sorts of fundamental data from different sources and put them
into perspective.
Financial ratios are also important because they form the vocabulary of fundamental analysts. If you’re ever at a cocktail party where analysts are talking
about gross margins and accounts receivable turnover, I want you to be prepared. By the way, that sounds like a pretty boring party.
I’ll show you a whole host of financial ratios in Chapter 8 that are the favorites used by many fundamental analysts. You’ll soon be using seemingly unrelated pieces of financial data about a company to glean some very important
conclusions about the company.

Making Fundamental Analysis
Work For You
Imagine a young child who memorized an entire dictionary, but can’t use
a single word in a sentence. That’s a basic analogy of some investors’ fundamental analysis knowledge. You might, too, know some things about the
income statement and balance sheet and have a great knowledge of what’s
contained in the statements. But when it comes to applying your know-how,
that can be a bit trickier.
Putting fundamental analysis in action requires taking everything you know
about a company and mixing in some estimates and best guesses about the
future to arrive at a decent expectation of whether or not to invest in a company.

05 506455-ch01.indd 17

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

18

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

Using fundamentals as
signals to buy or sell
Buying a stock at the right time is very difficult. But knowing when to sell it
is even tougher. And while fundamental analysis won’t tell you the exact best
time and day to buy or sell, it can at least give you a better understanding of
things to look out for when it comes to making decisions.
If you’re a passive investor and buy large diversified baskets of dozens of
stocks, you can afford to buy and hold stocks. Even if one company runs into
big-time trouble, it’s just one holding in a large basket of stocks. However, if
you choose to invest in individual stocks, monitoring the fundamentals is critical. If you start noticing a company’s trend deteriorating, you don’t want to be
the last investor to get out.

The perils of ignoring the fundamentals
Blindly following a company and investing in its stock can be very dangerous.
Table 1-1 shows a list of a few major U.S. stocks that were worth $100 a share
or more at the beginning of 2000, but saw their share prices fall to below $10
a share by the start of 2009. Ouch!

Table 1-1

Watch Out! A Falling Knife!

Stock

Stock price 12/31/1999

Stock price 1/1/2009

JDS Uniphase

$645.25

$3.65

InfoSpace

$535.00

$7.55

Blue Coat Systems

$326.72

$8.40

Ciena

$201.25

$6.70

Sun Microsystems

$154.88

$3.82

*Source: Standard & Poor’s Capital IQ

If there’s a primary goal of fundamental analysis, it’s avoiding stock disasters
like the ones listed above. Losses that large are nearly impossible to recover
from in a single person’s lifetime. You can read more about why avoiding
investment disasters is so critical in Chapter 18.

05 506455-ch01.indd 18

9/24/09 10:05:27 PM

Chapter 1: Understanding Fundamental Analysis

19

Using fundamental analysis as your guide
As Table 1-1 shows, investing in individual stocks is very risky. Losses can be
sizeable. That’s why you want to invest with your eyes wide open. Just as you
probably wouldn’t dare fire a loaded weapon or jump out of an airplane without proper training, the same goes with investing in individual stocks.
Luckily, fundamental analysis provides investors with a host of very specific
tools to help them protect themselves. And while the tools of fundamental
analysts aren’t foolproof, as you will see in Chapter 22, they give investors
guidance of when a stock might be getting a little dangerous or the underlying trends might be changing.
You’ll find complete explanations of some of the most powerful tools used by
fundamental analysts in this book. Chapter 11, for instance, will be very valuable to you since it shows you how to use a company’s cash flow as a way
to measure its value. And in Chapter 12, you’ll discover how the pros spin
through the annual reports they receive from companies.

05 506455-ch01.indd 19

9/24/09 10:05:28 PM

20

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

05 506455-ch01.indd 20

9/24/09 10:05:28 PM

Chapter 2

Getting up to Speed with
Fundamental Analysis
In This Chapter
▶ Comprehending what fundamental analysis is and how it can help your portfolio
▶ Finding out what’s involved in using fundamental analysis
▶ Comparing fundamental analysis with other ways of selecting investments
▶ Getting an understanding of what tools are needed to analyze an investment

T

ry to remember what it was like being a beginner at something you’re
good at now. Whether it was karate, ballet, or basketball, as a beginner,
you may have been tempted to bypass all the basics and go straight for the
advanced techniques. For instance, it’s natural to want to try breaking boards
with your bare hands or doing pirouettes or slam-dunks on your first day of
trying something new.
Good coaches, though, encourage you to slow down and start from the
very beginning. It’s almost always best to start working on the basic karate
stances, ballet poses, and basketball dribbling before even thinking about
moving to the showy and advanced aspects of each sport.
Beginning investors often experience a similar overconfidence at first. Many
hope they can skip mundane things — like reading accounting statements,
understanding basic financial ratios, and calculating discounted cash-flow
models — and get right to the exotic rapid-fire trading. It’s tempting to think
you can trade complex securities, dabble in highly volatile stocks, and dart in
and out of investments with ease right away. Sadly, though, investors usually
lose money when they try to get too advanced too soon. And unfortunately,
there’s no coach to cool off investors who are just starting out.
So, consider this book to be your coach as you begin. Starting with this chapter, this book will introduce you to the basic skills that make up fundamental
analysis. The basics explained in this chapter will set you up for taking fundamental analysis to the next level in chapters deeper in the book.

06 506455-ch02.indd 21

9/24/09 10:06:01 PM

22

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

What Is Fundamental Analysis?
Ask 20 people how they choose their investments, and you’ll probably hear
20 different methods. Some like to buy stocks recommended by a friend or
broker. Others think it’s wise to invest in companies making products they
personally enjoy and use. A few even consult with astrologers (seriously).
What most people, though, have in common is that they feel they’re always
paying too much for stocks and selling them when they’re too cheap.
Perhaps you swing between different investment strategies like some folks
switch diets to lose weight. Experimenting with different ways of picking stocks
may have worked fine as stocks made breathtaking advances in the 1990s. But
the crash of 2008 changed everything, making 2008 a harsh reminder that it’s
possible to overpay for stocks. Not realizing that ahead of time can be hazardous to your portfolio, and perhaps after losing money a few too many times,
you’re looking for a method with a little more science behind it.
That’s where fundamental analysis comes in. Fundamental analysis is one of
the most sound and primary ways to evaluate investments. As a fundamental analyst, you carefully and thoroughly study every aspect of a company’s
operations. Much of your analysis will be focused on financial statements
companies provide, as described briefly in this chapter and in more detail
later in this book.

Going beyond betting
If you’re like most investors, even the words fundamental analysis may turn
you off a bit. Fundamental analysis sounds somewhat stuffy and academic. And
it’s true that fundamental analysis finds much of its roots in academia. But you
might be surprised to find you probably are using some basic forms of fundamental analysis in your life, perhaps even in places you wouldn’t expect.
One of my favorite examples of where a type of fundamental analysis is used
is at the horse races. Before a race, you’ll notice groups of bettors doing
some serious work trying to pick the day’s winning horses. Some may pore
over the life histories of horses in the race, getting to know the jockeys and
their techniques, and even studying how wet or dry the track is.
While investing isn’t exactly like horse racing, the analogy is a helpful way to
understand fundamental analysis. For instance, some fundamental analysts will
study a company like a bettor will study a horse. How successful has the company been recently, and is it healthy and well-cared for? Next, in fundamental
analysis you might study a company’s management like a bettor would consider

06 506455-ch02.indd 22

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

Chapter 2: Getting up to Speed with Fundamental Analysis

23

the jockey. Is the management experienced, and has it competed against experienced players? Lastly, you must evaluate the broad economic climate, just
like a bettor will consider the weather and condition of the track.
But here’s where things get even trickier. It’s not good enough to find the
best company, or horse, to take the metaphor a little further. After all, if all
the other bettors at the track did the same work and picked the same horse
that you selected, you have a problem. The odds would be adjusted so that
the payout on the favorite horse will fall. Bettors know that picking a favorite
horse to win doesn’t pay off much. And you’re also taking a chance that the
favorite will lose and cost you money. Similarly, if you invest in a company
that’s widely considered to be a darling with other investors, your payoff is
reduced for reasons you can discover in Chapter 3.
Now that you see what fundamental analysis is, broadly speaking, consider
how it can be applied to investing. Fundamental analysis is used to size up
investments in several key ways:
✓ Analyzing the financial statements: Fundamental analysts pore over
public documents companies provide to understand how the business is
performing. Many fundamental analysts’ starting point is digging into a
company’s financial statements to see how profitable a company is, how
rapidly it is growing, what kind of financial health it’s in, and whether it
has the ability to withstand tough economic times.
✓ Getting an idea of how solid a company is: Many fundamental analysts are fixed-income investors. These investors have loaned money to
companies, usually by buying bonds. Bond investors give money to a
company in exchange for an agreed-upon payment each month, quarter,
or year. Since bond investors get a fixed amount pay, they don’t care if
a company is wildly successful. Bond investors, unlike stock investors,
don’t get a share of future earnings and growth. Bond investors just
want to know the company is healthy enough so it can keep paying interest and return the money it borrowed.
✓ Understanding the value of a company: Stock investors use fundamental analysis to gauge whether a company’s stock is a good deal or not.
By studying financial statements, financial analysts determine whether a
stock’s price undervalues or overvalues the company.
✓ Going beyond the financials: Fundamental analysis goes beyond where
accounting stops. While accountants wish to precisely measure business
activity, fundamental analysts want to analyze it in a way to help make
decisions. Using fundamental analysis, you will evaluate other factors
that affect a company’s prospects. Common factors you might consider
include sizing up a company against its rivals, determining how skilled
a company’s management team is in navigating through boom and bust
times, and understanding the broad economic climate.

06 506455-ch02.indd 23

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

24

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
Fundamental analysts take all the intelligence they gather to arrive at an
investment decision and to take action. The most common question fundamental analysts ask themselves is whether a stock, at its current price, is
cheap or expensive. The answer to that question will determine whether you
choose to invest or not.

Understanding how fundamental
analysis works
Fundamental analysts often dig well beyond a company’s financial statements
and try to unearth things. Sometimes fundamental analysts might spot a trend
forming before a company’s management acknowledges it. A fundamental analyst, for instance, might visit a retailer’s stores and see how crowded they are
to get an idea of what earnings might be in the future. Similarly, the fundamental analyst may try to get an idea of future demand by considering how busy a
company’s suppliers are. The goal of fundamental analysis is to measure how
much a company is worth by using any shred of information possible.
The way you use fundamental analysis to understand what a company is
worth gets down to the core essence of what a business is. With fundamental
analysis, your goal is to monitor a company to see how it brings in money
by selling goods and services to generate revenue. Next, you’ll determine
how much of revenue a company manages to keep after paying its expenses.
What’s left after paying all the bills is profit, or earnings.
The fact that fundamental analysts take action on their research is what separates them from accountants. Fundamental analysts compare what they think
a company is worth with what other investors think. If the stock is undervalued, the fundamental analyst will buy the stock. Accountants, on the other
hand, have the job of recording sales and revenue, but not trying to profit off
their findings.

Investing with the stars
Since there’s so much money to be made — or
lost — with investing, it’s not surprising just
about method to pick stocks has been tried . . . even
astrology. In fact, during 2008, the best stock
picker was Crawford Perspectives, up nearly
43% by monitoring the movement of planets to

06 506455-ch02.indd 24

make investment calls. Unfortunately, though,
you’ll need more than just a clear telescope to
make money on stocks. Crawford’s stock picks
lost 1% a year between 1998 and 2008, showing
that even the heavens can be wrong.

9/24/09 10:06:02 PM

Chapter 2: Getting up to Speed with Fundamental Analysis

25

Fundamental analysis isn’t perfect. But as you’ll discover in this chapter, fundamental analysis is rigorous and rooted in understanding the most basic elements
of business. So even if you have no plans to be a fundamental analyst, knowing
how fundamental analysis works can only boost your investment success.
