
Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 18 Confirmation

431

instances, buy signals are generated from an overbought oscillator accompanied by other indicators (as we will see with the popsteckle later in this chapter).
A word of warning about using oscillators, however, is warranted. Traders often incorrectly use oscillators to generate signals without respect for the underlying trend direction. This
will result in many false signals. Remember, profits are made from anticipating and riding the
trend. Indicators and oscillators should only be used as secondary evidence to confirm the trend;
otherwise, the analyst is likely in for trouble.
To combat the tendency to focus on overbought/oversold signals while ignoring the underlying trend, analysts have developed a number of adjustments and filters to account for trend
more mechanically. Adjustments include altering the oscillator parameters, such as the period
over which the oscillator is calculated and the signal levels. Other adjustments are even more
sophisticated, using digital filters or other mathematical means of filtering and smoothing. The
bottom line, however, is that by and large the results are the same. In fact, some analysts argue
that increasing the complexity of the calculations only produces a false confidence. They also
argue that complexity breeds an increase in the possibility for error when one of the parameters
changes and does not allow the analyst the opportunity to gain practical experience. The indicator or oscillator becomes too mechanical. Whatever the arguments, however, even in their simplest forms, indicators and oscillators are useful as confirmation of price behavior, once the
quirks are understood and the dependence upon them is secondary.

How Successful Are Momentum Indicators?
Momentum indicators are based on price information. Most academic studies of technical indicators attempt to demonstrate whether price action is random and, if not, whether this apparent
nonrandomness violates some of the principles of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis. As such,
these studies are usually of little use to practicing technical analysts who introduce many more
variables into trading or investment decisions.
It is difficult for academics to construct tests that take into account all of the intricacies of
real trading. When studying moving averages, for example, how would the requirement for protective stops around support and resistance be integrated? What kind of exit strategy should be
used?
The trader must account for risk, as well as return, when considering the usefulness of an
indicator. The academic concept of risk is considerably different from that which the practical
investor must consider. Therefore, as we will see in Chapter 22, “System Design and Testing,”
when we look at testing methods, the measurements of risk provided in academic studies are not
the same measures that a practitioner would use.
Finally, we will note that any method tested by academia has very likely already been discarded by the technical analysis world as outdated. By its nature, academia will always be behind
the advances made in the more practical world. Nevertheless, academic studies are useful in
determining the direction in which to look for means of profiting from technical analysis. For
example, if a particular indicator shows no advantage over the random hypothesis, it should be
treated with considerably more skepticism than one that does show some statistically relevant
results.

Download at www.wowebook.com

432

Part V Trend Confirmation

Most academic studies of price indicators, so far, have focused exclusively on moving
averages. Interestingly, there have been very few studies of standard technical indicators. The
two most recent studies of indicators are Bauer and Dahlquist (1999a, 1999b) and Thomas
(2003). The Bauer and Dahlquist study covered 60 technical signals, including popular oscillators, for 878 stocks over the period from 1985 through 1996, a period of generally rising stock
prices. The Thomas study included price and volume oscillators for 1,750 stocks over the fiveyear period from 1995 through July 2001, a time during which the stock market had a significant
advance and decline.

Specific Indexes and Oscillators
Remember that because momentum indexes and oscillators are based on price data, they do not
add new information to the analysis. They are simply manipulations of the same data. This
means that they are less informative than other indicators, such as volume, that provide new and
different information. The analyst, therefore, must be careful when using price indicators, as
confirmation may be more redundant than informative. This is not to say that a different manipulation of the data cannot be helpful, only that the base data itself is the same. For example,
watching several different price oscillators calculated over the same period is silly because by
their nature, they will be providing roughly the same results. Watching several price oscillators
over different periods or including volume or some other different information would be more
productive.
We describe the most common price momentum oscillators next. There are many ways of
calculating momentum, but because all of them arrive at essentially the same result, we describe
only the most common and most popular.
Moving Average Convergence-Divergence (MACD)
Gerald Appel, publisher of Systems and Forecasts, developed the Moving Average ConvergenceDivergence (MACD) oscillator. A variation of the moving average crossover, the MACD is calculated using the difference between two exponential moving averages. Traditionally, a
26-period EMA is subtracted from a 12-period EMA, but these times are adjustable for shorter
and longer period analysis. This calculation results in a value that oscillates above and below
zero. A positive MACD indicates that the average price during the past 12 periods exceeds the
average price over the past 26 periods.
The MACD line is plotted at the bottom of a price chart along with another line—the signal line. The signal line is an exponential moving average of the MACD; a nine-period EMA is
the most common. A histogram of the difference between the MACD and the signal line often
appears at the bottom of the chart. You can see this type of plot in Figure 18.13. The chart displays the MACD (thin black line), the signal line (thick gray line), and the histogram of the difference between the MACD and its signal line for Apple Computer over the same period as the
other charts in this chapter.
The MACD is useful in a trending market because it is unbounded. When the MACD is
above zero, it signals that the faster (shorter-term) moving average is above the slower (longerterm) moving average. The converse is true when the MACD is below the zero line. Crude signals occur when the MACD crosses the zero line, but these are just the same signals as would be
generated from a moving average crossover.

Download at www.wowebook.com

433

Chapter 18 Confirmation

Other information can be gleaned from the MACD, however. For example, when the
MACD is above zero, suggesting an upward trend, buy signals occur when the MACD crosses
from below to above the signal line. Downward crossings are not at all reliable while the trend is
upward. Through experimentation to determine overbought and oversold levels, analysts can use
these levels as places to generate signals for price reversion to the central trend. These extremes
showed good performance results in the Thomas study of oscillators.
Additionally, some analysts compare the peaks and valleys in the MACD with the price
line in a divergence analysis. Bauer and Dahlquist suggest that divergences can be useful, especially in a downward trending market. The peaks and valleys in the histogram provide two useful
sets of information. They can be used for divergence analysis, and because they are sensitive to
price directional change over short periods, they can also be used to signal shorter price trend
changes within the longer trend.
Let us look a little more closely at Figure 18.13. A significant negative divergence developed in January when the MACD failed to confirm the new price high. A downward crossover
from above the midpoint in November and January gave sell signals. The usual way to handle
these is to place an entry stop just below the low of the signal bar to be executed if the price continues downward. As a protective stop, the previous high is the safest. This method would have
worked well in both downward crossovers. There were also two upward crossovers from below
the midpoint line, one in December and one in February. Using the same method as in the short
selling on buying long instead, again both buy signals would have been profitable. Why did we not
sell at the slight crossover in April? We would have placed a short entry stop at the low of the bar
coinciding with the dip, but it never was triggered, leaving us still long from the buy in February.

26.00
25.00
24.00
23.00

AAPL-Apple Computer

22.00
21.00
20.00
19.00

8.00
5.00
2.00
-0.62
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar

Apr
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.13
23, 2010)

Moving Average Convergence-Divergence (AAPL daily: September 28, 2009–April

Download at www.wowebook.com

434

Part V Trend Confirmation

Rate of Change (ROC)
Rate of change (ROC) is likely the simplest oscillator. It is a measure of the amount a stock’s
price has changed over a given number (N) of past periods. The formula for calculating ROC is
as follows:
ROC = {(Ptoday – PN periods ago) / PN periods ago} × 100
With this calculation, ROC is zero if the price today is the same as it was N periods ago. It
shows on a continuous basis how the current price relates to the past price.
Even though it is very simple to calculate, the ROC has many problems as an indicator.
Although economists often calculate ROC using macroeconomic data, usually on an annual
basis to minimize seasonality, it suffers from the drop-off effect. Only two prices, Ptoday and
PN periods ago, appear in the calculation, and these two prices are equally weighted. Therefore, the
older price that occurred N periods ago has the same effect as the current, and probably more relevant, price on the oscillator. The ROC can, thus, have a current rise or fall based solely on what
number drops off in the past. Some analysts will smooth the ROC with a moving average to
dampen this effect.
Analysts use the ROC in the standard four ways. Its position relative to zero can indicate
the underlying trend; it can be a divergence oscillator showing when the momentum relative to
the past is changing; it can be an overbought/oversold indicator; and it can generate a signal
when it crosses over its zero line. In none of the instances is the signal reliable, however.
Figure 18.14 shows a graphical representation of a 14-day ROC for Apple Computer. At
marker 2, we see a classic negative divergence where the ROC failed to confirm the new high in
price. At marker 1, we see the variation of negative divergence called a negative reversal where
the price fails to confirm a new high in the ROC. Both patterns have negative consequences, as
the chart shows. We used the same trading signal method as we used in Figure 18.12 with the
MACD and marked with arrows on the chart where the initial entry stops should have been
placed. The only difference was that signals were generated using a filter around the midpoint
line to dampen the number of false signals when the price trend was flat. This method worked
equally as well with the ROC as with the MACD.
Relative Strength Index (RSI)
In June 1978, J. Welles Wilder introduced the relative strength index (RSI) in an article in Commodities (now known as Futures) magazine. The RSI measures the strength of an issue against
its history of price change by comparing “up” days to “down” days. Wilder based his index on
the assumption that overbought levels generally occur after the market has advanced for a disproportionate number of days, and that oversold levels generally follow a significant number of
declining days.
Be careful to understand that the RSI measures a security’s strength relative to its own
price history, not to that of the market in general. Because of its name, a common misconception
is that this indicator compares one security with other securities.

Download at www.wowebook.com

435

Chapter 18 Confirmation

AAPL-Apple Computer

260.00
250.00
240.00
230.00
220.00

2
1

210.00
200.00
190.00
2

1

12.00

rate of change (ROC)

6.00
1.08
-6.00
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar

Apr
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.14

Rate of change (AAPL daily: September 28, 2009–April 23, 2010)

To construct the RSI, several calculations must be made, as follows:
UPS = (Sum of gains over N periods) / N
DOWNS = (Sum of losses over N periods) / N
RS = UPS / DOWNS
RSI = 100 – [100 / (1 + RS)]
The RSI can range from a low of 0 (indicating no up days) to a high of 100.2 In his original
calculations, Wilder used 14 days as the relevant period. Although some analysts have attempted
to use a time-weighted period, these methods have not been well accepted, and the 14-day period
remains the most commonly used.

2. DOWNS is the sum of losses. In the calculation, the absolute values of the losses are added together. In other words,
if a stock closes at $36 one day and $34 the next day, the loss is $2 (not a –$2 loss).

Download at www.wowebook.com

436

Part V Trend Confirmation

After calculating the RSI for the first 14 days, Wilder used a smoothing method to calculate RSI for future days. This process dampens the oscillations. For day 15 and after
UPSday i = [(UPSday i–1 × 13) + Gainday i] / 14
DOWNSday i = [DOWNSday i–1 × 13) + Lossday i] / 14
These measures for UPS and DOWNS are used to calculate RS and RSI. This method of
smoothing the averages is now called the “Wilder exponential moving average” and is used in
many other indicator formulas. We saw, for example, in the section on volume oscillators earlier
in this chapter that the Money Flow oscillator uses the RSI formula.
The RSI has many characteristics that can generate signals. For example, when the RSI is
above 50, the midpoint of the bounded range, the underlying trend in prices is usually upward.
Conversely, it is downward when the RSI is below 50.
Overbought and oversold warnings are the same as with many other indicators. Wilder
considered, for example, an RSI above 70 to indicate an overbought situation and an RSI below
30 to indicate an oversold condition. Analysts will often adjust these levels based on the underlying trend. Chuck LeBeau, for example, uses 75 and 25 as the overbought and oversold extremes
and Brown (1999) uses 90 and 40 in an upward trend and 60 and 10 in a downward trend. She
calls these new levels trend ids. Because the trend in Figure 18.15 is upward, we have drawn, in
addition to the conventional overbought and oversold levels, the trend id of 90 and 40. This gives
us an oversold buy signal in December and in late January that would not have been available
using the conventional method.
Similar to other oscillators, RSI divergences with price often give warning of trend reversal. The RSI also appears to have patterns similar to price charts. Triangles, pennants, flags, and
even head-and-shoulders patterns occur, and support and resistance levels become signal levels.
The rules for breakouts from these formations are used for signals from the RSI.
Another method of signaling is failure swings. A failure swing occurs when the oscillator
exceeds an overbought or oversold level, corrects, reverses back toward the overbought or oversold, misses, and then turns back through the correction. Two examples exit in Figure 18.15 and
are marked as such. They occur at lows using the trend id method of determining the oversold
level. Another short-term trading method using the RSI is to place a buy stop above the daily
high when the RSI declines 10 points from a recent peak above 70. This should only be used
when the trend is upward and never when a downward swing failure develops. The buy stop can
be adjusted each day until either it is triggered for a day or two trade or the RSI continues to
decline, suggesting that the trend is reversing downward.
There is also the method called the “RSI is wrong.” In Figure 18.15, the RSI remains above
or near the overbought level for a substantial period from mid-March onward, during which the
AAPL price continued to rise. This method suggests that rather than looking for a top when the
overbought level is penetrated, buy the issue and use a sell stop. Active Trader Magazine (August
2004, p 64–65) tested an “RSI is wrong” system, not optimized, on 19 futures from 1994 through
2003 with the following rules: Buy when 14-day RSI penetrates above 75; sell when RSI penetrates 25 or after 20 days. The opposite rules apply for sells using a break below the RSI 25 level
as the initial short sale. The results showed a steady, straight equity curve especially for long
positions.

Download at www.wowebook.com

437

Chapter 18 Confirmation

Thomas (2003), in his testing of the RSI, found that none of the conventional signals had
value except the positioning opposite from the conventional overbought/oversold levels of 70
and 30. His testing showed promise for the “RSI is wrong” thesis. Bauer and Dahlquist found
that the conventional use, called a “crossover” system, of selling on a break below the overbought 70 and buying on a break above the oversold 30 had marginal returns during the period
tested. They also found that using peaks above 70 and below 30 had marginal returns, and that
the opposite buying at peaks outperformed all signals. Their testing method, however, judged
against the percentage of time in a position and did not account for the reduction in risk when in
cash. Nevertheless, the results were “disappointing.”

AAPL-Apple Computer

230.00

220.00

210.00

200.00

190.00
uptrend id

80.00

overbought

failure swing
uptrend id

failure swing

50.00

oversold

20.00
-0.62

14-day Relative Strength Index (RSI)
Nov

Dec

'10

Feb

Mar
Created using TradeStation

FIGURE 18.15

RSI (AAPL daily: October 6, 2009–March 30, 2010)

As the many warnings and signals that occur in Figure 18.15 suggest, the RSI cannot be
interpreted mechanically and is, perhaps, why it does not test well. However, the action is
informative and useful to many traders. In a survey of traders taken in 2005 (Earle), the most
popular indicator was the RSI. In short, traders have developed many methods. If you want to
use the RSI as a confirming indicator, you must learn these methods, experiment with them, and
always be sure of the underlying price trend.
Stochastic Oscillator
All oscillators use a specific time over which they are calculated. The traditional periods for the
MACD are 26 and 12 bars; the RSI traditionally uses 14 bars for its calculation. These oscillators

Download at www.wowebook.com

438

Part V Trend Confirmation

depend on smoothing techniques that tend to dampen the most recent price action. The stochastic takes another tack. It looks at the most recent close price as a percentage of the price range
(high to low) over a specified past “window” of time. This makes it very sensitive to recent
action. Analysts use the stochastic for trading or investing when the most recent close is the most
important price.
It is not absolutely clear who was the inventor of stochastics. George Lane is known for
promoting the concept since 1954 (Lane, 1985), and it is sometimes referred to as Lane’s Stochastic (Colby, 2003), but others apparently preceded him. Two names mentioned are Ralph
Dystant and a dentist friend of his and Richard Redmont. Dystant introduced the indicator as part
of an Elliott wave course through his Investment Educators, and Lane, who lectured for that firm,
took it over on Dystant’s death in 1978.
Not only is the inventor of stochastics unknown, the origin of the term “stochastics” is not
clear. The name of this oscillator has nothing to do with the scientific term “stochastic,” which
means random or nondeterministic. Of course, traders would hope that this indicator did not produce random results. So, how did the name stochastic become associated with this indicator?
According to Gibbons Burke (www.io.com/gibbonsb/trading/stochastic.html), Tim Slater,
founder and president of CompuTrac, Inc., included this indicator in the company’s software
analysis program in 1978. He needed a name to attach to the indicator other than the %K and %D
we will see in the indicator calculation. Slater saw a notation of “stochastic process” handwritten
on the original Investment Educators literature he was using. The name stuck. Regardless of who
the actual inventor might be or how it got its name, the stochastic oscillator is one of the most
popular, both for long- and short-term momentum signals.
The formula for the stochastic is as follows:
%K = [(C – L) / (H – L] × 100
fast %D = 3-bar SMA of %K
slow %D = 3-bar SMA of %D
Where: W is the time window (that is, 14 bars)
H is the high for the window period (w)
L is the low for the window period (w)
C is the most recent bar close (w)
The “fast” stochastic, as seen in most trading software, refers to the raw stochastic number
(%K) compared with a three-period simple moving average of that number (fast %D). This number is extremely sensitive to price changes. Because of the erratic volatility of the fast %D, many
false signals occur with rapidly fluctuating prices. To combat this problem, analysts have created

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 18 Confirmation

439

the “slow” stochastic. The slow stochastic is designed to smooth the original %D again with a
three-period simple moving average. In other words, the slow stochastic is a doubly smoothed
moving average, or a moving average of the moving average of %K.
Analysts often create their own variations of the stochastics formula. Lane, for example,
smoothed the numerator separately from the denominator in the %K formula, and then divided
each rather than smoothing the %K itself (Merrill, 1986). He also used only five days in the time
window.
The question of how many periods to use in the window is problematic. The volatility and
cyclical nature of the issue traded, as well as the tendency for these factors to vary, are integral to
choosing a window period. Larry Williams uses a composite of different time window periods
and the True Range rather than the high and low for his “Ultimate Oscillator.” Others adjust the
window period, as well as the number of bars used in smoothing the %K based on their interpretation of the dominant cycle in prices. Many analysts just test the results of signals over different
windows to see which works best.
As in most oscillators, the stochastic works better in a trading range market but can still
give valuable information in a trending market. In a trending market, divergences, trend line
breaks, and swing failures generate signals. During trading ranges, crossovers and swing failures
generate signals when the stochastic reaches overbought or oversold, traditionally 80 and 20.
Crossovers occur when the fast stochastic crosses over the slow stochastic. Following crossovers
without other confirming evidence, however, can cause whipsaws.
As in the RSI and many other oscillators, chart patterns, such as triangles and pennants,
can also evolve in the stochastic oscillator. Support and resistance levels, even without swing
failures, can be useful signals or warnings, and trend lines often appear to warn of potential
changes in momentum. All standard technical rules apply to oscillators. However, oscillators by
themselves should never be used strictly for signals. The analyst must confirm any oscillator signal with price action—a breakout or a pattern.
Academic testing of standard stochastic signals has had the same mediocre results as with
other oscillators. This is not surprising, of course, because the determination of trend or trading
range is rarely included in academic studies. Indeed, the fact that some positive results have
occurred is encouraging, considering the primitive definitions of signals and circumstances used.
Thomas (2003) found that extreme levels of overbought and oversold were somewhat predictive
of future price direction but that most standard overbought/oversold interpretations failed. Bauer
and Dahlquist (1999) found that acting at peaks and troughs above and below overbought and
oversold respectively had better results on the long side than the short side. Unfortunately, trend
was not a consideration in the testing, and the period tested (1985–1996) was one of a historically large upward trend when short signals would be expected to fail. Thus, the positive results
for long signals were encouraging, considering that the signals had to keep up with the values in
a generally rising market.
Figure 18.16 shows a 14-3-3 slow stochastic. This means that a 14-day time window was
used; %D was smoothed once using a 3-day SMA and again using another 3-day SMA.
