
23

24

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Options markets
An option is a contract that gives the buyer the right, but not the obligation,
either to buy or to sell the underlying asset upon which the option is based
at a specified price on or before a specified date. Sometime before the option
period expires, a purchaser of an option must decide whether to exercise
the option and buy (or sell) the asset (most commonly stocks) at the target
price. Options also are called derivatives. We talk more about this investment
alternative in Chapter 18.

Reviewing Stock Exchanges
Most of this book covers stock trading, so we obviously concentrate on how
the key exchanges — NYSE, NASDAQ, and Amex — operate and how these
operations impact your trading activity.

New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
The U.S. stock market actually dates back to May 17, 1792, when 24 brokers
signed an agreement under a buttonwood tree at what today is 58 Wall Street.
The 24 brokers specifically agreed to sell shares of companies among themselves, charging a commission or fee to buy and sell shares for others who
wanted to invest in a company. Yup, the first American stockbrokers were
born that day.
A formalized exchange didn’t come into existence until March 8, 1817, when
the brokers adopted a formal constitution and named their new entity the
New York Stock & Exchange Board. Brokers actually operated outdoors until
1860, when the operations finally were moved inside. The first stock ticker
was introduced in 1867, but it wasn’t until 1869 that the NYSE started requiring
the registration of securities for companies that wanted to have their stock
traded on the exchange. Registration began as a means of preventing the
over-issuance (selling too many shares) of a company’s stock.
From these meager beginnings, the NYSE built itself into the largest stock
exchange in the world with many of the largest companies listed on the
exchange. Trading occurs on the floor of the exchange, with specialists and
floor traders running the show. Today these specialists and floor traders work
electronically, which first became possible when the exchange introduced
electronic capabilities for trading in 2004. For traders, the new electronic

Chapter 2: Exploring the Markets and the Stock Exchanges
trading capabilities are a more popular tool than working with specialists and
floor traders. Electronic trading capabilities were enhanced when the NYSE
merged with Archipelago Holdings in 2006. The exchange expanded its global
trading capabilities after a merger with Euronext in 2007, which made trading
in European stocks much easier.
You may not realize just how much the concept of supply and demand
influences the trading price of a stock. Price swings of a stock frequently are
caused by shifts in the supply of shares available for sale and the demand
created by the number of buyers wanting to purchase available shares.

The specialist
Specialists — whose title may change to designated market makers soon —
buffer dramatic swings when news about a company breaks. If news that
has a major impact on a stock’s price breaks, specialists buy shares or sell
the ones they hold in a company to make the trend toward a higher or lower
stock price more orderly. For example, if good news breaks, creating more
demand for the stock and overwhelming existing supply, the specialist becomes
a seller of the stock to minimize the impact of a major price increase by
increasing supply. The same is true when bad news strikes, creating a
situation in which having more sellers than buyers drives the stock price
down. In that situation, the specialist becomes a buyer of the stock, easing
the impact of the drop in price.

The floor trader
The guys you see on the floor of the stock exchange, waving their hands
wildly to make trades, are the floor traders. They’re actually members of the
NYSE who trade exclusively for their own accounts. Floor traders also can act
as a floor broker for others and sell their services.

The specialist’s book
You may wonder how a specialist keeps track of all this information. That
one’s easy: The specialist records all trades and quotation changes in the
specialist’s order book. Any questions that arise about trading activities can
be researched using this book.

Open outcry
The NYSE still uses what is becoming an outdated method of trading called
open outcry, in which stocks are sold like a public auction with verbal bids
and offers shouted at the trading post. These trading posts are centered on
the specialist’s location for particular stocks. Other exchanges exclusively
use computer-based network systems for trading.

25

26

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
The NYSE is the last big stock exchange to use open outcry, but even here it
is taking a backseat to automated execution. Only a tiny fraction of trades are
handled through open outcry. Except for a small group of very high-priced
stocks, almost everything can be handled immediately by electronic execution.

NYSE Hybrid Market
The New York Stock Exchange uses the Hybrid Market program to integrate
the best aspects of the open outcry or auction market with electronic trading.
Most NYSE trades are now handled electronically, but brokers can still
choose to route customer orders to the floor for open-outcry trading.

NASDAQ
NASDAQ, which stands for the National Association of Securities Dealers
Automated Quotations, is the fastest-growing stock market today. The market
was formed after an SEC study in the early 1960s concluded that the sale
of over-the-counter (OTC) securities, in other words securities that aren’t
traded on the existing stock exchanges, was fragmented and obscure. The
report called for the automation of the OTC market and gave the responsibility
for implementing that system to the National Association of Securities
Dealers (NASD).
The NASD began construction of the NASDAQ system in 1968, and its first
trades were made beginning February 8, 1971, when NASDAQ became the
world’s first electronic stock market.

Market makers
Unlike the specialist structure of the NYSE, in which one specialist represents
a particular stock, NASDAQ market makers compete with each other to buy
and sell the stocks they choose to represent. More than 500 member firms
act as market makers for NASDAQ. All market makers are members of the
NASD. Each uses its own capital, research, and system resources to represent
a stock and compete with other market makers.
Market makers compete for customers’ orders by displaying buy and sell
quotations on an electronic exchange for a guaranteed number of shares
at a specific price. After market makers receive orders, they immediately
purchase or sell stock from their own inventories or seek out the other side
of the trades so they can be executed, usually in a matter of seconds. The
four types of market makers are

Chapter 2: Exploring the Markets and the Stock Exchanges
✓ Retail market makers: They serve institutional and individual investors
through brokerage networks that provide a continuous flow of orders
and sales opportunities.
✓ Wholesale market makers: They serve primarily institutional clients
and other brokers or dealers who aren’t registered market makers in
a particular company’s stock but who need to execute orders for their
customers.
✓ Institutional market makers: They execute large block orders for
institutional investors, such as pension funds, mutual funds, insurance
companies, and asset management companies.
✓ Regional market makers: They serve companies and individuals of a
particular region. By focusing regionally, these market makers offer their
customers more extensive coverage of the stocks and investors in a
particular area of the country.
NASDAQ continues to be the leader in electronic trading. Its system, called
the NASDAQ Crossing Network, enables fully anonymous trade execution to
minimize the market impact of trading.

Over-the-counter and bulletin-board stocks
Stocks that do not meet the minimum requirements to be listed on NASDAQ
are traded as over-the-counter or bulletin-board stocks (OTCBB). The OTCBB is
a regulated quotation service that displays real-time quotes, last-sale prices,
and volume information for the stocks traded OTCBB. These stocks generally
don’t meet the listing qualifications for NASDAQ or other national securities
exchanges, and fewer than two (and sometimes zero) market makers trade in
these stocks, making buying and selling them more difficult.

Amex
When the NYSE moved indoors, some stocks still weren’t good enough to be
sold on the exchange. Those stocks were called curb traders and ultimately
made up what became known as the American Stock Exchange (Amex),
which moved indoors in 1921. Amex lists stocks that are smaller in size than
those on the NYSE yet still have a national following. Many firms that first list
on Amex work to meet the listing requirements of the NYSE and then switch
over.
The Amex trading system was integrated into the NYSE trading system after
the merger with the NYSE was completed in 2008. It is now called the NYSE
Alternext US, and trades small-company stocks.

27

28

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Listing requirements
NASDAQ has the easiest minimum listing requirements of all the broad-market
exchanges, followed by the NYSE Alternext US
(formerly Amex). The New York Stock Exchange
(NYSE) has the toughest requirements to meet
for companies to be listed. In addition to listing

requirements, companies on the exchanges
must conform to certain rules, including publishing quarterly reports, soliciting proxies, and
publicly announcing developments that may
affect the value of the securities.

Electronic communications
networks (ECNs)
Many traders look for ways to get around dealing with a traditional broker.
Instead they access trades using a direct-access broker. We talk more about
the differences in Chapter 3. A new system of electronic trading that is developing is called the electronic communications network (ECN).
ECNs enable buyers and sellers to meet electronically to execute trades.
The trades are entered into the ECN systems by market makers at one of the
exchanges or by an OTC market maker. Transactions are completed without
a broker-dealer, saving users the cost of commissions normally charged for
more traditional forms of trading.
Subscribers to ECNs include retail investors, institutional investors, market
makers, and broker-dealers. ECNs are accessed through a custom terminal
or by direct Internet dial-up. Orders are posted by the ECN for subscribers to
view. The ECN then matches orders for execution. In most cases, buyers and
sellers maintain their anonymity and do not list identifiable information in
their buy or sell orders.
In the last few years ECNs have gone through consolidation, and there are
only two independent ECNs left. The two independent ECNs, Instinet and
Bloomberg Tradebook, primarily service the institutional marketplace. If you
want to trade through Instinet, you can do so as part of its partnership with
E*Trade. Archipelago now operates under the HYSE umbrella as HYSE Arca
Options.

Chapter 2: Exploring the Markets and the Stock Exchanges

Understanding Order Types
Buying a share of stock can be as easy as calling a broker and saying that you
want to buy such and such a stock — but you can place an order in a number
of other ways that give you better protections. Most orders are placed as day
orders, but you can choose to place them as good ’til canceled orders. The
four basic types of orders you can place are market orders, limit orders, stop
orders, and stop-limit orders.
Understanding the language and using it to protect your assets and the way
you trade are critical to your success as a trader. The next few sections
explain the nuances of placing orders so you don’t make a potentially costly
mistake by placing a market order when you intended to place a limit order.
Putting a stop-limit order in place may sound like the safest way to go;
however, doing so may not help you in a rapidly changing market.

Market order
When you place a market order, you’re essentially telling a broker to buy
or sell a stock at the current market price. A market order is the way your
broker normally places an order unless you give him or her different
instructions. The advantage of a market order is that you’re almost always
guaranteed that your order is executed as long as willing buyers and sellers
are in the marketplace. Generally speaking, buy orders are filled at the ask
price and sell orders are filled at the bid price. If, however, you’re working
with a broker who has a smart-order routing system, which looks for the best
bid/ask prices, you sometimes can get a better price on the NASDAQ or Amex
exchanges. Whenever the order involves the NYSE, you need a good floor
broker. In most brokerage houses, market orders are the cheapest to place
with the lowest commission level.
The disadvantage of a market order is that you’re stuck paying the price when
the order is executed — possibly not at the price you expected when you
placed the order. Brokers and real-time quote services quote you prices, but
because the markets move fast, with deals taking place in seconds, you’ll
probably find that the price you’re quoted rarely is the same as the execution
price. Whenever you place a market order, especially if you’re seeking a large
number of shares, the probability is even greater that you’ll receive different
prices for parts of the order — 100 shares at $25 and 100 shares at $25.05, for
example.

29

30

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools

Limit order
If you want to avoid buying or selling stock at a price higher or lower than
you intend, you must place a limit order instead of a market order. When
placing a limit order, you specify the price at which you’ll buy or sell. You
can place either a buy limit order or a sell limit order. Buy limit orders can
be executed only when a seller is willing to sell the stock you’re buying at the
limit price or lower. A sell limit order can be executed only when a buyer is
willing to pay your limit price or higher. In other words, you set the parameters
for the price that you’ll accept. You can’t do that with a market order.
The risk that you take when placing a limit order is that the order may never
be filled. For example, a hot stock piques your interest when it is selling for
$10, so you decide to place a limit order to buy the stock at $10.50. By the
time you call your broker or input the order into your trading system, the
price already has moved above $10.50 and never drops back to that level,
thus your order won’t be filled. On the good side, if the stock is so hot that
its price skyrockets to $75, you also won’t be stuck as the owner of the stock
after purchasing near the $75 high. That high will likely be a temporary top
that quickly drops back to reality, forcing you to sell the stock at a significant
loss at some point in the future.
Most firms charge more for executing a limit order than they do for a market
order. Be sure that you understand the fee and commission structures if you
intend to use limit orders.

Stop order
You may also consider placing your order as a stop order, which means
that whenever the stock reaches a price that you specify, it automatically
becomes a market order. Investors who buy using a stop order usually do
so to limit potential losses or protect a profit. Buy stop orders are always
entered at a stop price that is above the current market price.
When placing a sell stop order, you do so to avoid further losses or to
protect a profit that exists in case the stock continues on a downward trend.
The stop price is always placed below the current market price. For example,
when you have a stock that you bought for $10 that now is selling for $25,
you can decide to protect most of that profit by placing a sell stop order that
specifies that stock be sold when the market price falls to $20, thus cementing
a $10 gain.
You don’t have to watch the stock market every second; instead, when
the market price drops to $20, your stop order automatically switches to a
market order and is executed.

Chapter 2: Exploring the Markets and the Stock Exchanges
The big disadvantage of a stop order is that if for some reason the stock
market gets a shock during the news day that affects all stocks, it can
temporarily send prices lower, activating your stop price. If it turns out that
the downturn is actually merely a short-term fluctuation and not an indication
that the stock you hold is a bad choice or that you risk losing your profit,
your stock may sell before you ever have time to react.
The bottom can fall out of your stock’s pricing. After your stop price is
reached, a stop order automatically becomes a market order and the price
that you actually receive can differ greatly from your stop price, especially in a
rapidly fluctuating market. You can avoid this problem by placing a stop-limit
order, which we discuss in the next section.
Stop orders are not officially supported on the NASDAQ. However, most brokers
offer a service to simulate a stop order. If you want to enter a stop order for a
NASDAQ stock, your broker must watch the market and enter the market or
limit order you designate as a stop when the stock reaches your specified sale
price. Some broker-dealers won’t accept a stop order on some securities and
almost never accept a stop order for OTC stocks. If you intend to use stop
orders, make sure that you
✓ Check with the brokers you’re planning to use to ensure that they
accept stop orders.
✓ Find out what your brokers charge for stop orders.
✓ Review how your brokers’ stop orders work, so you don’t run into
surprises.
After all, you don’t want to execute a stop order and end up selling a stock
that you didn’t intend to sell or at a price you find unacceptable.

Stop-limit order
You can protect yourself from any buying or selling surprises by placing a
stop-limit order. This type of order combines the features of both a stop order
and a limit order. When your stop price is reached, the stop order becomes a
limit order rather than a market order.
A stop-limit order gives you the most control over the price at which you will
trade your stock. You can avoid a purchase or sale of your stock at a price
that differs significantly from what you intend. But you do risk the possibility
that the stop-limit order may never be executed, which can happen in fastmoving markets where prices fluctuate wildly.
For example, you may find that deploying stop-limit orders is particularly
dangerous to your portfolio, especially when bad news breaks about a stock
you’re holding and its price drops rapidly. Although you have a stop-limit

31

32

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
order in place, and the stop price is met, the movement in the market may
happen so rapidly that the price limit you set can be missed. In this case, the
limit side of the order actually prevents the sale of the stock and you risk
riding it all the way down until you change your order. For example, say you
purchased a stock at $8 near its peak. On the day the company’s CEO and
CFO were fired, the stock dropped to $4.05. You may have had a stop-limit
order in place to sell at $5, but on the day of the firing, the price dropped so
rapidly after the company announced the firing that your stop-limit order
could not be filled at your limit price.
Stop-limit orders, like stop orders, are more commonly used when trading on
an exchange than in an OTC market. Broker-dealers likewise can limit the
securities on which stop-limit orders can be placed. If you want to use stoplimit orders, be sure to review the rules with your broker before trying to
execute them.

Good ’til canceled orders
You can avoid having to replace an order time and again by using a good ’til
canceled (GTC) order. GTC orders are placed at a limit price and last until
the order actually is executed or you decide to cancel it. A GTC order won’t
be executed until the limit price is reached, regardless of how many days or
weeks it takes.
You can choose to use this type of order whenever you want to set a limit
price that differs significantly from the current market price. Many brokerage
firms limit how much time a GTC can remain in place, and most of them
charge more for executing this type of order.

Other order types
Less commonly used order methods include contingent, all-or-none, and
fill-or-kill orders. Contingent orders are placed on the contingency that
another one of your stock holdings is sold before the order is placed. An
all-or-none order specifies that all the shares of a stock be bought according
to the terms indicated or none of the stock should be purchased. A fill-or-kill
order must be filled immediately upon placement or killed.

Chapter 3

Going for Broke(r): Discovering
Your Brokerage Options
In This Chapter
▶ Discovering broker types and services
▶ Finding out about broker service options
▶ Sorting through different types of brokerage accounts
▶ Deciphering trading rules

A

s an individual, you can’t trade stocks — or bonds, or options, or
futures — unless you have a broker or are a broker yourself. That
doesn’t mean, however, that you have to work with a human being to trade
stocks. Online brokers and direct-access brokers enable you to make trades
electronically, so you never have to speak with a human being unless you’re
having a technical problem.
The differences between brokers are based on prices, services, and special
capabilities. High-volume swing traders and day traders typically require the
services of a direct-access broker, while position traders can and do trade
successfully with more traditional discount, online, and full-service brokers.
In this chapter, we help you understand the brokerage options that are
available, the types of accounts you can establish, and the basic trading rules
you must follow.

Why You Need a Broker
Unless you plan to get your brokerage license from the National Association
of Securities Dealers (NASD) and set up shop yourself (which is hard — and
expensive — to do), you need to work with a broker to be able to buy and sell
stocks. How you choose a broker is based on the level of individual services
you want. The more services you want, the more you pay for your ability to
trade.

34

Part I: So You Want to Be a Trader: Gathering Your Tools
As an individual, you open your account with a brokerage house, but if you
work with a human being, that person is considered a broker. Brokerage
houses or brokerage services are also usually referred to as brokers for
short. Actually there are many levels of brokers, which we cover in greater
detail in Chapter 20 when we talk about licensing.
On one side of the spectrum is the full-service broker who does a lot of
hand-holding and offers stock research and advice and other human-based
services. When using a full-service broker, you pay a significant commission
for each stock trade. In the middle are discount brokers that offer fewer
services, but charge less per trade. On the opposite side of the equation
are direct-access brokers, who offer few human-based services and instead
provide extensive trading platforms so you can trade electronically and
access the stock exchange systems directly on a real-time basis.
