are far from asserting that the ensuing decline to 36 was of no
importance to him. He would have been well advised to scrutinize
the picture with some care, to see whether he had made any miscalculations. But if the results of his study were reassuring—as
they should have been—he was entitled then to disregard the market decline as a temporary vagary of finance, unless he had the
funds and the courage to take advantage of it by buying more on
the bargain basis offered.
Sequel and Reflections
The following year, 1939, A. & P. shares advanced to 1171⁄2, or
three times the low price of 1938 and well above the average of
1937. Such a turnabout in the behavior of common stocks is by no
means uncommon, but in the case of A. & P. it was more striking
than most. In the years after 1949 the grocery chain’s shares rose

202

The Intelligent Investor

with the general market until in 1961 the split-up stock (10 for 1)
reached a high of 701⁄2 which was equivalent to 705 for the 1938
shares.
This price of 701⁄2 was remarkable for the fact it was 30 times the
earnings of 1961. Such a price/earnings ratio—which compares
with 23 times for the DJIA in that year—must have implied expectations of a brilliant growth in earnings. This optimism had no justification in the company’s earnings record in the preceding years,
and it proved completely wrong. Instead of advancing rapidly, the
course of earnings in the ensuing period was generally downward.
The year after the 701⁄2 high the price fell by more than half to 34.
But this time the shares did not have the bargain quality that they
showed at the low quotation in 1938. After varying sorts of fluctuations the price fell to another low of 211⁄2 in 1970 and 18 in 1972—
having reported the first quarterly deficit in its history.
We see in this history how wide can be the vicissitudes of a
major American enterprise in little more than a single generation,
and also with what miscalculations and excesses of optimism and
pessimism the public has valued its shares. In 1938 the business
was really being given away, with no takers; in 1961 the public was
clamoring for the shares at a ridiculously high price. After that
came a quick loss of half the market value, and some years later a
substantial further decline. In the meantime the company was to
turn from an outstanding to a mediocre earnings performer; its
profit in the boom-year 1968 was to be less than in 1958; it had paid
a series of confusing small stock dividends not warranted by the
current additions to surplus; and so forth. A. & P. was a larger company in 1961 and 1972 than in 1938, but not as well-run, not as
profitable, and not as attractive.*
There are two chief morals to this story. The first is that the stock
market often goes far wrong, and sometimes an alert and coura-

* The more recent history of A & P is no different. At year-end 1999, its
share price was $27.875; at year-end 2000, $7.00; a year later, $23.78; at
year-end 2002, $8.06. Although some accounting irregularities later came
to light at A & P, it defies all logic to believe that the value of a relatively stable business like groceries could fall by three-fourths in one year, triple the
next year, then drop by two-thirds the year after that.

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

203

geous investor can take advantage of its patent errors. The other is
that most businesses change in character and quality over the
years, sometimes for the better, perhaps more often for the worse.
The investor need not watch his companies’ performance like a
hawk; but he should give it a good, hard look from time to time.
Let us return to our comparison between the holder of marketable shares and the man with an interest in a private business.
We have said that the former has the option of considering himself
merely as the part owner of the various businesses he has invested
in, or as the holder of shares which are salable at any time he
wishes at their quoted market price.
But note this important fact: The true investor scarcely ever is
forced to sell his shares, and at all other times he is free to disregard
the current price quotation. He need pay attention to it and act
upon it only to the extent that it suits his book, and no more.* Thus
the investor who permits himself to be stampeded or unduly worried by unjustified market declines in his holdings is perversely
transforming his basic advantage into a basic disadvantage. That
man would be better off if his stocks had no market quotation at
all, for he would then be spared the mental anguish caused him by
other persons’ mistakes of judgment.†
Incidentally, a widespread situation of this kind actually existed
during the dark depression days of 1931–1933. There was then a
psychological advantage in owning business interests that had no
quoted market. For example, people who owned first mortgages
on real estate that continued to pay interest were able to tell themselves that their investments had kept their full value, there being
no market quotations to indicate otherwise. On the other hand,
many listed corporation bonds of even better quality and greater

* “Only to the extent that it suits his book” means “only to the extent that the
price is favorable enough to justify selling the stock.” In traditional brokerage
lingo, the “book” is an investor’s ledger of holdings and trades.
† This may well be the single most important paragraph in Graham’s entire
book. In these 113 words Graham sums up his lifetime of experience. You
cannot read these words too often; they are like Kryptonite for bear markets.
If you keep them close at hand and let them guide you throughout your
investing life, you will survive whatever the markets throw at you.

204

The Intelligent Investor

underlying strength suffered severe shrinkages in their market
quotations, thus making their owners believe they were growing
distinctly poorer. In reality the owners were better off with the
listed securities, despite the low prices of these. For if they had
wanted to, or were compelled to, they could at least have sold the
issues—possibly to exchange them for even better bargains. Or
they could just as logically have ignored the market’s action as
temporary and basically meaningless. But it is self-deception to tell
yourself that you have suffered no shrinkage in value merely
because your securities have no quoted market at all.
Returning to our A. & P. shareholder in 1938, we assert that as
long as he held on to his shares he suffered no loss in their price
decline, beyond what his own judgment may have told him was
occasioned by a shrinkage in their underlying or intrinsic value. If
no such shrinkage had occurred, he had a right to expect that in
due course the market quotation would return to the 1937 level or
better—as in fact it did the following year. In this respect his position was at least as good as if he had owned an interest in a private
business with no quoted market for its shares. For in that case, too,
he might or might not have been justified in mentally lopping off
part of the cost of his holdings because of the impact of the 1938
recession—depending on what had happened to his company.
Critics of the value approach to stock investment argue that
listed common stocks cannot properly be regarded or appraised in
the same way as an interest in a similar private enterprise, because
the presence of an organized security market “injects into equity
ownership the new and extremely important attribute of liquidity.”
But what this liquidity really means is, first, that the investor has
the benefit of the stock market’s daily and changing appraisal of
his holdings, for whatever that appraisal may be worth, and, second,
that the investor is able to increase or decrease his investment at
the market’s daily figure—if he chooses. Thus the existence of a
quoted market gives the investor certain options that he does not
have if his security is unquoted. But it does not impose the current
quotation on an investor who prefers to take his idea of value from
some other source.
Let us close this section with something in the nature of a parable. Imagine that in some private business you own a small share
that cost you $1,000. One of your partners, named Mr. Market, is

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

205

very obliging indeed. Every day he tells you what he thinks your
interest is worth and furthermore offers either to buy you out or to
sell you an additional interest on that basis. Sometimes his idea of
value appears plausible and justified by business developments
and prospects as you know them. Often, on the other hand, Mr.
Market lets his enthusiasm or his fears run away with him, and the
value he proposes seems to you a little short of silly.
If you are a prudent investor or a sensible businessman, will you
let Mr. Market’s daily communication determine your view of the
value of a $1,000 interest in the enterprise? Only in case you agree
with him, or in case you want to trade with him. You may be happy
to sell out to him when he quotes you a ridiculously high price,
and equally happy to buy from him when his price is low. But the
rest of the time you will be wiser to form your own ideas of the
value of your holdings, based on full reports from the company
about its operations and financial position.
The true investor is in that very position when he owns a listed
common stock. He can take advantage of the daily market price or
leave it alone, as dictated by his own judgment and inclination. He
must take cognizance of important price movements, for otherwise
his judgment will have nothing to work on. Conceivably they may
give him a warning signal which he will do well to heed—this in
plain English means that he is to sell his shares because the price has
gone down, foreboding worse things to come. In our view such signals are misleading at least as often as they are helpful. Basically,
price fluctuations have only one significant meaning for the true
investor. They provide him with an opportunity to buy wisely
when prices fall sharply and to sell wisely when they advance a
great deal. At other times he will do better if he forgets about the
stock market and pays attention to his dividend returns and to the
operating results of his companies.

Summary
The most realistic distinction between the investor and the speculator is found in their attitude toward stock-market movements.
The speculator’s primary interest lies in anticipating and profiting
from market fluctuations. The investor’s primary interest lies in
acquiring and holding suitable securities at suitable prices. Market

206

The Intelligent Investor

movements are important to him in a practical sense, because they
alternately create low price levels at which he would be wise to
buy and high price levels at which he certainly should refrain from
buying and probably would be wise to sell.
It is far from certain that the typical investor should regularly
hold off buying until low market levels appear, because this may
involve a long wait, very likely the loss of income, and the possible
missing of investment opportunities. On the whole it may be better
for the investor to do his stock buying whenever he has money to
put in stocks, except when the general market level is much higher
than can be justified by well-established standards of value. If he
wants to be shrewd he can look for the ever-present bargain opportunities in individual securities.
Aside from forecasting the movements of the general market,
much effort and ability are directed on Wall Street toward selecting
stocks or industrial groups that in matter of price will “do better”
than the rest over a fairly short period in the future. Logical as this
endeavor may seem, we do not believe it is suited to the needs or
temperament of the true investor—particularly since he would be
competing with a large number of stock-market traders and firstclass financial analysts who are trying to do the same thing. As
in all other activities that emphasize price movements first and
underlying values second, the work of many intelligent minds constantly engaged in this field tends to be self-neutralizing and selfdefeating over the years.
The investor with a portfolio of sound stocks should expect their
prices to fluctuate and should neither be concerned by sizable
declines nor become excited by sizable advances. He should
always remember that market quotations are there for his convenience, either to be taken advantage of or to be ignored. He should
never buy a stock because it has gone up or sell one because it has
gone down. He would not be far wrong if this motto read more
simply: “Never buy a stock immediately after a substantial rise or
sell one immediately after a substantial drop.”
An Added Consideration
Something should be said about the significance of average market prices as a measure of managerial competence. The shareholder

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

207

judges whether his own investment has been successful in terms
both of dividends received and of the long-range trend of the average market value. The same criteria should logically be applied in
testing the effectiveness of a company’s management and the
soundness of its attitude toward the owners of the business.
This statement may sound like a truism, but it needs to be
emphasized. For as yet there is no accepted technique or approach
by which management is brought to the bar of market opinion. On
the contrary, managements have always insisted that they have no
responsibility of any kind for what happens to the market value of
their shares. It is true, of course, that they are not accountable for
those fluctuations in price which, as we have been insisting, bear no
relationship to underlying conditions and values. But it is only the
lack of alertness and intelligence among the rank and file of shareholders that permits this immunity to extend to the entire realm of
market quotations, including the permanent establishment of a
depreciated and unsatisfactory price level. Good managements
produce a good average market price, and bad managements produce bad market prices.*

Fluctuations in Bond Prices
The investor should be aware that even though safety of its principal and interest may be unquestioned, a long-term bond could
vary widely in market price in response to changes in interest rates.
In Table 8-1 we give data for various years back to 1902 covering
yields for high-grade corporate and tax-free issues. As individual
illustrations we add the price fluctuations of two representative
railroad issues for a similar period. (These are the Atchison, Topeka
& Santa Fe general mortgage 4s, due 1995, for generations one of
our premier noncallable bond issues, and the Northern Pacific Ry.
3s, due 2047—originally a 150-year maturity!—long a typical Baarated bond.)
Because of their inverse relationship the low yields correspond
to the high prices and vice versa. The decline in the Northern

* Graham has much more to say on what is now known as “corporate governance.” See the commentary on Chapter 19.

208

The Intelligent Investor

Pacific 3s in 1940 represented mainly doubts as to the safety of the
issue. It is extraordinary that the price recovered to an all-time high
in the next few years, and then lost two-thirds of its price chiefly
because of the rise in general interest rates. There have been startling variations, as well, in the price of even the highest-grade
bonds in the past forty years.
Note that bond prices do not fluctuate in the same (inverse) proportion as the calculated yields, because their fixed maturity value
of 100% exerts a moderating influence. However, for very long
maturities, as in our Northern Pacific example, prices and yields
change at close to the same rate.
Since 1964 record movements in both directions have taken place
in the high-grade bond market. Taking “prime municipals” (taxfree) as an example, their yield more than doubled, from 3.2% in
January 1965 to 7% in June 1970. Their price index declined, correspondingly, from 110.8 to 67.5. In mid-1970 the yields on highgrade long-term bonds were higher than at any time in the nearly
200 years of this country’s economic history.* Twenty-five years earlier,
just before our protracted bull market began, bond yields were at
their lowest point in history; long-term municipals returned as little
as 1%, and industrials gave 2.40% compared with the 41⁄2 to 5% formerly considered “normal.” Those of us with a long experience on
Wall Street had seen Newton’s law of “action and reaction, equal
and opposite” work itself out repeatedly in the stock market—the
most noteworthy example being the rise in the DJIA from 64 in
1921 to 381 in 1929, followed by a record collapse to 41 in 1932. But
this time the widest pendulum swings took place in the usually
staid and slow-moving array of high-grade bond prices and yields.
Moral: Nothing important on Wall Street can be counted on to
occur exactly in the same way as it happened before. This repre-

* By what Graham called “the rule of opposites,” in 2002 the yields on longterm U.S. Treasury bonds hit their lowest levels since 1963. Since bond
yields move inversely to prices, those low yields meant that prices had
risen—making investors most eager to buy just as bonds were at their most
expensive and as their future returns were almost guaranteed to be low. This
provides another proof of Graham’s lesson that the intelligent investor must
refuse to make decisions based on market fluctuations.

4.31%

6.40

4.53

5.52

2.44

8.44

7.14

1902 low

1920 high

1928 low

1932 high

1946 low

1970 high

1971 close
5.35

7.06

1.45

5.27

3.90

5.28

3.11%

Bond Yields
S&P
AAA
S&P
Composite
Municipals

491⁄2
73
463⁄4
851⁄4
311⁄2
943⁄4
323⁄4
371⁄4

69
105
75
1171⁄4
991⁄2
141
51
64

1946 high
1970 low
1971 close

1939–40 low

1936 high

1932 low

1930 high

1920 low

79

Nor. Pac.
3s, 2047

1051⁄2

1905 high

A. T. & S. F.
4s, 1995

Bond Prices

TABLE 8-1 Fluctuations in Bond Yields, and in Prices of Two Representative Bond Issues, 1902–1970

210

The Intelligent Investor

sents the first half of our favorite dictum: “The more it changes, the
more it’s the same thing.”
If it is virtually impossible to make worthwhile predictions
about the price movements of stocks, it is completely impossible to
do so for bonds.* In the old days, at least, one could often find a
useful clue to the coming end of a bull or bear market by studying
the prior action of bonds, but no similar clues were given to a coming change in interest rates and bond prices. Hence the investor
must choose between long-term and short-term bond investments
on the basis chiefly of his personal preferences. If he wants to be
certain that the market values will not decrease, his best choices are
probably U.S. savings bonds, Series E or H, which were described
above, p. 93. Either issue will give him a 5% yield (after the first
year), the Series E for up to 55⁄6 years, the Series H for up to ten
years, with a guaranteed resale value of cost or better.
If the investor wants the 7.5% now available on good long-term
corporate bonds, or the 5.3% on tax-free municipals, he must be
prepared to see them fluctuate in price. Banks and insurance companies have the privilege of valuing high-rated bonds of this type
on the mathematical basis of “amortized cost,” which disregards
market prices; it would not be a bad idea for the individual
investor to do something similar.
The price fluctuations of convertible bonds and preferred stocks
are the resultant of three different factors: (1) variations in the
price of the related common stock, (2) variations in the credit
standing of the company, and (3) variations in general interest
rates. A good many of the convertible issues have been sold by
companies that have credit ratings well below the best.3 Some of
these were badly affected by the financial squeeze in 1970. As a
result, convertible issues as a whole have been subjected to triply
unsettling influences in recent years, and price variations have
been unusually wide. In the typical case, therefore, the investor
would delude himself if he expected to find in convertible issues
that ideal combination of the safety of a high-grade bond and price

* An updated analysis for today’s readers, explaining recent yields and the
wider variety of bonds and bond funds available today, can be found in the
commentary on Chapter 4.

The Investor and Market Fluctuations

211

protection plus a chance to benefit from an advance in the price of
the common.
This may be a good place to make a suggestion about the “longterm bond of the future.” Why should not the effects of changing
interest rates be divided on some practical and equitable basis
between the borrower and the lender? One possibility would be to
sell long-term bonds with interest payments that vary with an
appropriate index of the going rate. The main results of such an
arrangement would be: (1) the investor’s bond would always have
a principal value of about 100, if the company maintains its credit
rating, but the interest received will vary, say, with the rate offered
on conventional new issues; (2) the corporation would have the
advantages of long-term debt—being spared problems and costs of
frequent renewals of refinancing—but its interest costs would
change from year to year.4
Over the past decade the bond investor has been confronted by
an increasingly serious dilemma: Shall he choose complete stability
of principal value, but with varying and usually low (short-term)
interest rates? Or shall he choose a fixed-interest income, with
considerable variations (usually downward, it seems) in his principal value? It would be good for most investors if they could
compromise between these extremes, and be assured that neither
their interest return nor their principal value will fall below a
stated minimum over, say, a 20-year period. This could be
arranged, without great difficulty, in an appropriate bond contract
of a new form. Important note: In effect the U.S. government has
done a similar thing in its combination of the original savingsbonds contracts with their extensions at higher interest rates. The
suggestion we make here would cover a longer fixed investment
period than the savings bonds, and would introduce more flexibility in the interest-rate provisions.*
It is hardly worthwhile to talk about nonconvertible preferred
stocks, since their special tax status makes the safe ones much more
desirable holdings by corporations—e.g., insurance companies—
