
Since few market movements are all vertical or all horizontal, we use
Market Proﬁle to determine the ratio of one phase versus the other. As market
professionals, we are concerned with where the market spends time—or fails
to spend time—and Market Proﬁle is a superior tool to capture this twodimensional nature of markets in a statistically based, graphical format.
Market Proﬁle was developed by legendary CBOT trader Pete Steidlmayer
in 1984 and is a method for organizing data that expresses the vertical (trend)
versus horizontal (nontrend) relationship of market data. Market Proﬁle charts
illuminate where the auction of a security has taken place and uniquely
highlights where the crowd trades, where trading volume accumulates, where
trading volume is minimal or absent and, moreover, what the crowd tends to
do at the various price levels.
Unlike conventional bar charts (candlesticks, Western bar charts, etc.),
Market Proﬁle does not force data into ﬁxed time increments (e.g., ﬁveminute, 30-minute, or daily bars). Rather, it statistically aggregates, organizes,
and converts market-generated trading data into a free-ﬂowing, graphical
format called proﬁles. These proﬁles tabulate and display the relative frequency
of trading at various price levels that allow market professionals to assess
probabilities much the same way that a statistician would evaluate a bellcurve distribution of any data set.
In and of itself, Market Proﬁle is neither an indicator nor a trading
system—but it is the backbone of many successful trading indicators, systems,

232

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

trading tactics, and methods. Market Proﬁle charts allow market professionals
to organize market-generated data on the ﬂy to speed up analysis and accurately convert trading data into meaningful and actionable information. And
because proﬁle data is not constricted to ﬁxed time increment bars, Market
Proﬁle allows market professionals to organize the data and study a market
based on market structure and dynamics.
Classic Market Proﬁle organizes trading data using letters called TPOs
(Time Price Opportunities—or “That Price Occurred”) to mark each price
where a trade occurred. Each consecutive letter of the alphabet demarcates a
30-minute period of market activity. For example, the letter “B” marked the
ﬁrst half hour of trade, the letter “C” marked the second half hour of trade,
and so forth.∗ However, as a market is developing, unlike conventional bar
charts, Market Proﬁle collapses the data onto itself to the left as new price levels
are reached. This display method reveals the relative frequencies of traded
prices, which is key to determining probability.
Let’s examine this step-by-step process, as shown in Figure 5.12.
r A: Conventional high—low bars display 30-minute trading ranges.
r B: We can represent these same ranges by placing letters (TPOs) at each

price where trade(s) occurred: “B” marks the ﬁrst half hour of trade, “C”
marks the second half hour, and so forth.
r C: As a trade is occurring, Market Proﬁle collapses TPOs onto unused
columns or “bins” in the proﬁle graphic.
r D: Collapsing TPOs to the left reveals actual price (or volume) distribution
that is similar to a bell-curve distribution that graphically organizes relative
frequencies of occurrences of data—in this case, price—into “bins.”
Unlike conventional bar charts, this proﬁling format reveals the underlying structure of each proﬁle’s market activity. In bar-chart format (A), one
might conclude that the market has an upward bias. And while we would
agree with this bias, the completed proﬁle (D) reveals a different picture: a
balanced market state. As we will see soon, balance leads to imbalance, which
is an either/or state. From balance a market goes either higher or lower. In
Figure 5.12, the Market Proﬁle reveals a vital clue that the market is balanced
∗

Although TPOs were originally developed to demarcate 30-minute periods, any time increment may be used. I remember once asking Pete Steidlmayer, “How did you come up with
using 30-minute periods for TPOs?” I was expecting a very scientiﬁc answer and instead burst
out laughing when Pete told me, “Well, we had to come up with something, right?”

233

1077
1076
1075
1074
1073
1072
1071
1070
1069
1068
1067
1066
1065
1064
1063
1062
1061
1060

(B) TPO Prices

1077
J
1076
HJ
1075
GHJK M
1074
FGHJKLMN
1073
FGH KLMN
CDEFG
1072
KLMN
1071
CDEFG
LM
1070 B C D E F
1069 B C D E F
1068 B C D E
1067 B C D
1066 B C D
1065 B D
1064 B
1063 B
1062
1061
1060

The Evolution of a Market Proﬁle Graphic

(A) 30-min. Bars

FIGURE 5.12

(C) Collapsed TPOs

1077
J
1076
HJ
1075
GH J K M
1074
FGH J K LMN
1073
FGH K LMN
K L MN
1072 C D E F G
1071 C D E F G
LM
1070 B C D E F
1069 B C D E F
1068 B C D E
1067 B C D
1066 B C D
1065 B D
1064 B
1063 B
1062
1061
1060

(D) Completed Profile

1077 J
1076 H J
1075 G H J K M
1074 F G H J K L M N
1073 F G H K L M N
1072 C D E F G K L M N
1071 C D E F G L M
1070 B C D E F
1069 B C D E F
1068 B C D E
1067 B C D
1066 B C D
1065 B D
1064 B
1063 B

234

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

and “resting” and will either balance more—or is getting ready to make the
next directional move.
Each letter in proﬁles displays a price level where trade occurred and, in
the completed proﬁle, the “fat” (wide) left-to-right areas accumulated the most
trade volume at price while the skinnier (narrow) areas accumulated the least.
The widest line of TPOs is called the Point of Control, and it is around both
sides of this price level, especially in balanced markets, that all trade occurs.
A related Market Proﬁle maxim is stated: “Time at price equals volume.”
Market Proﬁle sheds light and gives market professionals insight on how
well a market is facilitating trade and rationing supply because it displays:
r Market structure.
r Market dynamics.
r Short- and long-term supply and demand and their effect on price.
r Areas where the market spends time versus where it doesn’t spend

time—which, in the latter case, has a high probability to move directionally
and fast.
r Whether a directional market is speeding up or slowing down.
r What a market is trying to do—and whether it is succeeding at
doing it.
r And most importantly, how other traders in aggregate are responding and reacting to price movement and key reference areas because it’s their collective
volume that moves the market.
These objective attributes of Market Proﬁle allow market professionals
to precisely manage risk in some unique ways because they can actually get
a feel for a market as if they were trading in a physical market—such as the
ﬂoor of a commodity trading pit—which in turn allows them to make timely
decisions on how a market is accepting or rejecting areas of price and/or how
the crowd is perceiving value in multiple timeframes.
Market Movement: The Four Steps of Market Activity

In the early 1990s, Pete Steidlmayer coined the concept of the Four Steps
of Market Activity. The Four Steps are an ongoing process that markets go
through to factor out inefﬁciencies. Inefﬁciencies are the market imbalance
phases where the market moves directionally higher or lower to seek out a
new fair price to trade, that is, where the market moves back to balance.
The Four Steps concept was based on Steidlmayer’s research of how
markets move in a sequence of steps as they seek out an efﬁcient price where

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.13

235

The Four Steps of Market Activity

the market can facilitate trade by accommodating both the longs and the
shorts. The concept applies to markets in any timeframe (5-minute, 30minute, daily, tick charts, etc.). According to Steidlmayer, the Four Steps
concept is one of the most valuable skills market professionals need to know
and apply.
Although markets tend to be more fragmented and less range-bound and
constrained by liquidity today than they were in the past, the concept is still
valid today and worth further study because:
r It helps orient market professionals to what a market is trying to do.
r When a market succeeds at what it is trying to do, it often helps traders get

ready for the next move.

r Moreover, when a market skips a step in the sequence, it often leaves better

clues as to where the market will make a vertical move.
Let’s examine the Four Steps in sequence. (See Figure 5.13.)
1. A vertical move (either up or down) is initiated by a market imbalance.
2. A price in the market stops the vertical move, indicating that the last of
the supply imbalance is in place as the dominant group responsible for the
directional move withdraws their participation.
3. The market balances in the area of the highs (lows) of the move where
two-sided trade occurs among buyers and sellers. This is where the market
forms a p-shaped proﬁle from vertical moves up or a b-shaped proﬁle from
a vertical move down.
4. The market either rebalances the inefﬁciency of the prior vertical move by
moving vertically in the opposite direction, or a new vertical move resumes
in the same direction.

236
FIGURE 5.14

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis
Determining Value Helps Us Know What Is Fairly and Unfairly Priced

We use the four-step model as a general guide to market structure at the
beginning of our analysis, looking in particular at whether a market follows
the four steps or skips a step. It is when the market skips a step that participants
are often caught off guard, and it is also when we look for new opportunities.

Market Structure

One of the basic tenets of Market Proﬁle is the concept of the Value Area,
which for each proﬁle is where approximately 68 percent of all trade occurred
in a proﬁle.∗ Figure 5.14 illustrates this concept.
Why do market professionals care about perceived value? Isn’t the concept
of value subjective? It is to a great degree, but Market Proﬁle helps us to
objectify value by displaying two mutually exclusive phases of market development: balance and imbalance. The market’s collective perception of value is
fairly certain in range-bound (balanced) markets but value is fairly uncertain in
trending markets. Once we know the market’s collective and interim perception of value or “fair” area to trade—especially in multiple timeframes—then,
by default, we know the following:
∗
The Value Area is calculated as one standard deviation of data above and below the Point of
Control, which is the fattest part of a proﬁle, meaning that this is the price level where the
most trade occurred.

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

237

r We know that price below value is collectively considered inexpensively

priced merchandise, which is fair to buyers—but unfair to sellers.

r We know that price above value is collectively considered expensively priced

merchandise, which is fair to sellers—but unfair to buyers.

In general, we want to buy what no one wants (at the right time) and sell
what everyone wants. For example, we want to become sellers of merchandise
that everyone wants and will pay a high price for (think Apple iPhone and
iPad), and also buyers of merchandise that no one wants and will sell cheaply
(think distressed properties, asset ﬁre sales, etc.). It is this concept that becomes
the basis for an objective trading plan that allows professionals to get on the
right side of a market movement. To wit, if you think something is cheap
and a buy, but the majority of the market thinks that it is expensive and it’s a
good time to sell it, then buying will most likely result in a loss and waiting
will most likely result in better (cheaper) prices. Therefore, when we clearly
understand the market’s collective perception of value we are in a position to
make good decisions from our analysis. Market Proﬁle is the tool that sheds
light on this process.
Summarizing our discussion on proﬁling, Figure 5.15 summarizes the two
phases of market activity from which all market moves are derived. Comparing
the two formations in Figure 5.15, we derive several market structure axioms.
Areas where volume accumulates in a relatively narrow range of prices—
the so-called “Value Area” or “fair” area of trade—accommodate both buyers’
and sellers’ needs for using a market by providing liquidity to both sides of
the trade. In this area, supply and demand are in relative balance and markets
churn slowly through time, horizontally in a chart. A key feature in bar charts of
horizontal development is that the bars overlap and become superior support
and resistance areas when revisited in the future.
And by default, once we know what is perceived as fair, then above that
area, prices start becoming less fair to buyers and favor sellers because price is
rising—and below the value area, prices start becoming less fair to sellers and
favor buyers because price is falling. These are the areas in the market where
either supply or demand exceeds the other on a relative basis and markets
move rapidly and vertically through price ranges to accommodate the needs
of buying or selling dominance. Price moves higher—faster—to grab the
limited supply available; price moves lower—faster—to ﬁnd limited buyers
who are willing to buy merchandise in a falling market. Where price is unfair
to buyers or sellers, the side that considers itself as disadvantaged will trade
less or simply not trade at that level.

238

FIGURE 5.15

• Price direction: Horizontal
• Profile shape: Fat
• Range of price movement: Narrow
• Movement through time: Slow
• Accommodates: Buyers and sellers

Balanced Market Mnemonics

1077
1076
1075
1074
1073
1072
1071
1070
1069
1068
1067
1066
1065
1064
1063

Imbalanced Market Mnemonics
• Price direction: Vertical
• Profile shape: Skinny
• Range of price movement: Wide
• Movement through price: Fast
• Accommodates: Buyers or sellers

1091
1090
1089
1088
1087
1086
1085
1084
1083
1082
1081
1080
1079
1078
1077
1076
1075
1074
1073
1072
1071
1070
1069
1068
1067
1066
1065
1064
1063

The Unmistakable Characteristics of Horizontal versus Vertical Markets

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

239

The Relative Speed of the Market’s
Building-Block Components

There are four basic guidelines for assembling and then observing these two
market components:
1. Fast vertical market movements follow slow horizontal market movements.
This is an either/or state. The market will either go higher in price following
a horizontal move—or it will go lower in price following a horizontal move.
2. Slow follows fast. After a vertical move, a market consolidates. When slow
becomes relatively slower, we are typically approaching the transition point
to fast.
3. When fast becomes faster—and more volatile—we are typically approaching the next slow phase in the market.
4. There is one notable but less frequently occurring exception to guidelines 1
and 2, and that is when a market goes from fast to fast; switching directions,
it skips horizontal development. These formations are known as V-pivots
or inverted V-pivots.
Note: Can a market actually skip the horizontal development phase? Yes,
it can—but it’s rare when considering that on a smaller timeframe; there is
most likely some form of transition from fast to slow—then slow to fast—then
faster.
Because one phase follows the other, we can illustrate this slow-to-fast,
then fast-to-slow market movement, as follows:
r A market is horizontal and trading slowly through time:

r A supply imbalance occurs in the market, which causes the market to move

relatively faster, either higher or lower in price:

r Supply and demand come back into balance after either of the prior vertical

price movements, and the market resumes a slow and horizontal trading
range:

240

New Frontiers in Technical Analysis

r A supply imbalance occurs in the market [again], which causes the market

to move relatively faster, either higher or lower in price:

This simple diagram ﬂow depicts the continuous ebb and ﬂow of the
two phases of market activity: horizontal leads to vertical (up or down) and
vertical leads to horizontal—with few exceptions.
Accurately identifying the two phases of the market is a valuable skill and,
once obtained, makes the practice of trading simple because it simpliﬁes and
provides clarity in two ways:
1. The two phases are mutually exclusive.
2. The two phases are traded differently.
Therefore, once you know which of the two states are being exhibited,
then you know how to adapt your trading to the current market conditions.
To paraphrase Pete Steidlmayer, stop predicting what the market might do.
Rather, trade what the market is actually doing. Align yourself and your
trading style with what is being presented to you.

Vertical Nondevelopment (“Minus Development”)

We’ve taken a look at horizontal development in detail. Let’s now examine what happens in the absence of horizontal development by referring to
Figure 5.16.
r A: Efﬁcient price development accommodates both sides of the trade over

time and produces a balanced proﬁle.

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle
FIGURE 5.16

241

Vertical Price Movements Leave a Hole in the Proﬁle Chart—a Key

Concept
(A)

(B)

(C)
Minus
Development
Hole

r B: Inefﬁcient price, or “nondevelopment,” moves rapidly higher (or lower),

accommodating only one side of the trade, and results in skipped development in the lower portion of the proﬁle.
r C: This leaves a hole in the proﬁle chart in the price range where horizontal
development did not actually occur—an important landmark in charts.
A key feature in proﬁles during vertical moves is the lack of horizontal
development—or “minus development,” a term coined by Pete Steidlmayer.
The faster the vertical move, the less time a proﬁle has to build out horizontally.
An extreme example of this condition is an opening gap where no trade occurs
in the gap area, and hence, no development occurs in the proﬁle for that gap.
These rapid vertical moves are caused by supply/demand imbalances and, in
proﬁle terms, this leaves a hole in the proﬁle that, when revisited, has a high
probability for fast price movement, as illustrated in Figure 5.17.
r Markets trade relatively fast through holes of minus development—and

between areas of horizontal development.

r Market Proﬁle illuminates these holes, which helps traders to prepare for

relatively fast vertical moves through the price areas demarcated by the holes.

r The most proﬁtable trades will occur in the quickest amount of time at

the lowest relative cost while trading into holes, when compared to trading

242

FIGURE 5.17

Markets Trade Fast through Holes between Areas of Horizontal Development

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

243

multiple up- and down-legs of horizontal development to achieve the same
point moves (e.g., one vertical move of ﬁve points might take ﬁve or more
individual long and/or short trades while under horizontal development).
r When compared to multiple trades during horizontal development, traders
must have a high degree of accuracy on entry, exit, and direction for each
trade to achieve the same relative point gain of a single vertical move.
r A single vertical move is an either/or proposition in the sense that we look
for a trade into a hole to prevail in the intended direction—or quickly stop
out. Notice that the bars marked “Probe” in Figure 5.17 quickly fail, which
allows traders to take decisive action with tight stops.
r Trading vertical moves into holes has higher reward-to-risk factors than
trading horizontal moves of the same security and timeframe—provided, of
course, that a trader is on the right side of the movement.
In proﬁle terms, proﬁles are either relatively fat, representing horizontal
development—or they’re relatively skinny, representing vertical movement.
Between the horizontally developed fat proﬁles, markets move fast vertically
and it’s in the vertical moves that market professionals will ﬁnd greater point
moves than in the horizontal. Therefore, where a market has a high probability of moving faster and the speed at which price has the potential to
traverse a range are critical distinctions for market professionals to take into
consideration.
Moreover, markets leave objective clues for traders: fast markets are either
getting faster—or slower. And slow markets are either getting slower or starting
to speed up. And proﬁles objectively reveal these conditions: in other words,
there are a ﬁnite number of choices in our trading guidelines:
r Fast to faster (skinnier and skinnier proﬁles)—stay with the trade.
r Fast to slower (skinny to fatter proﬁles)—stay with the trade but tighten

stops.

r Slow to faster (fat to skinnier proﬁles)—get ready for a directional move.
r Slow to slower (fat to fatter proﬁles)—stand aside (or trade the rotations),

mindful that multiple consecutively slower and slower proﬁles often lead to
very fast vertical moves.
Figure 5.18 shows good examples of how these guidelines play out. On
the far left of the chart the market starts out slow, then speeds up in the ﬁrst
four proﬁles, as follows:
r Decreasing horizontal development in proﬁles
r Increasing vertical range in proﬁles
r Little overlap between proﬁles

244

FIGURE 5.18

Slowing down
(fast-to-slow)

Speeding up
(slow-to-fast)

Markets Move Slow-to-Fast and Fast-to-Slow

(A)

Speeding up
higher, but then
slows down and fails

(B)

Rules-Based Trading and Market Analysis Using Simpliﬁed Market Proﬁle

245

We notice that the market then slows down (more horizontal, less vertical,
and more overlap in the proﬁles). But on the next market speed-up (proﬁle
A), the following proﬁle becomes very fat (proﬁle B), albeit with higher lows
and highs, indicating another slowdown. This is a valuable clue that selling
activity is increasing. So instead of getting faster and faster proﬁles that would
tell us to stay with the move higher or even add to a long position, we have
a clear indication to either tighten stops, get ready for an exit, or just watch
with increased caution how proﬁle B develops and closes.
Markets are either relatively fast—or relatively slow: but never both at the
same time. Furthermore, faster follows slow—and slower follows fast in an
endlessly repeating cycle. In fact, when we trademarked the phrase, “Know
What’s NextTM ,” we really meant it. With experience or the right immersive
training and trading tools, traders really can know what’s coming next with a
high degree of conﬁdence.
As a general rule, we prefer to trade the fast-to-slowdown versus the slowto-speeding-up because from slow, the next move is fast—but we have less
certainty which direction will prevail. On the other hand, if you want to ﬁnd
fast, don’t look for a fast market movement because you’re probably going
to be too late. Find the areas where a change from horizontal is starting to
take place—the end of slow—to be ready for the next fast move. And even if
you’re late entering a fast market movement, in most cases it’s hard to get hurt
because fast either (a) leads to faster (more proﬁt if you’re on the right side of
this movement); (b) leads to slow, in which case you have time on your side
to work an exit; or (c) immediately reverses, as is shown on the bars marked
“Probe” in Figure 5.17 (as in the case of a less common V-pivot low or high),
in which case you take the quick stop.
Simplifying Market Proﬁle
