
162

163
the rest of the day off. 1 ducked down as my horse
and I went through the trees. Meanwhile, I heard this
"thump" behind me. I pulled my horse around, and there was my friend lying on the ground, half a dozen
yards before the trees.
"Are you OK?" I asked.
He was kind of embarrassed and said, "Yeah, I'm alright."
"What happened?" I asked.
"The stupid horse was going to mn into a tree, so I had to jump off," he replied.
Now here is someone who has obviously mistaken horses for cars. The conscious mind is like the rider. It
evaluates the direction the horse is going. If the horse, or the unconscious, is not going where we want it to
go, it doesn't mean that it's bad, or not following instructions, or about to mn into a tree. It means that the
unconscious has its own programs and is mnning them the best it can based on all its history and habits-just
like that horse had the habit of knocking people off and going back to the stable.
With NLP, you can direct your conscious mind to notice when you're not where you want to be. What's
more important, you can use NLP techniques to effectively introduce new patterns into your unconscious
mind to bring about the changes you desire, instead of complaining or making up any one of a thousand
reasons why you aren't where you want to be in your life.
==== We talked earlier about taking the time to examine your goals-to make sure that they are indeed the
goals you want and if they're not, changing the direction of your efforts accordingly. Assuming a person has
done that, do you have any advice on how to best transform those goals into a reality? ====
I can best answer that question by relating the experience of Gary Faris, an NLP trainer and colleague.
Gary's study of this very question grew out of a compelling personal experience. Gary is an avid mnner. Several years ago, while running down a farm road in California, he was hit by a pick-up truck. His injuries were
so severe that the emergency room doctors weren't sure he would even live. When he survived after the first
two of the six operations he would eventually undergo, the doctors said that the only reason he had made it
was because he was in such good physical condition. They told him that he would never walk normally, and
certainly never run again.
Over the next two years, Gary was in sports rehabilitation. He rebuilt his body, overcoming the pain.
Today, he runs regularly and is the fittest trainer working for NLP Comprehensive [one of the first and
foremost NLP training organizations]. Needless to say, the doctors were astounded. However, they were
making their assessment based on the statistical evidence of similar cases. They didn't realize that Gary Faris
had made himself into an exceptional patient.
Right after his accident, Gary began studying sports injury rehabilitation. He searched for the core
characteristics of those athletes who had gone through successful rehabilitation. He examined their mental
attitudes. He found that six basic mental patterns characterized all these people.
First, these athletes used both motivating directions. In other words, they were both moving toward and
away from consequences. In this way, these athletes were utilizing their maximum motivation.
Second, these athletes were absolutely dedicated to regaining full strength and health. This. standard
became their guiding goal. Anything less was unacceptable. In fact, many of them not only wanted to regain
full strength and health, but they strived to get in even better shape than they were before their injuries.
They knew their capabilities and wouldn't accept anything less. These athletes knew they would succeed.
The third key element that these athletes had in common was that they approached their rehabilitation
one step at a time. If you contemplate achieving a major project, such as overcoming a terrible injury, it's
intimidating to think of the entire task all at once. However, if you can take it in chunks, or individual steps,
you'll complete it. Each step becomes a new goal. For Gary, he had to survive before he could walk;
he had to walk before he could mn. Gary and the other athletes he studied derived great satisfaction from
completing each step. Thus, they experienced succeeding at each of the milestones along the way to a major
goal of full strength and health.
The fourth key element related to the way in which these recovering athletes perceived time. They were in
the moment. In other words, they succeeded because they focused on the present. If, instead, they had
focused too far into the future, it would have been easier to fall into a negative orientation by questioning
whether they would achieve their ultimate objective.
The fifth element of their positive mental attitude was involvement. The more the athlete helped himselfeven doing something as simple as placing ice on an inflamed area-the more complete and faster the
recovery. When you participate, you feel you can influence what's going on, and that makes you more
determined and aggressive.
The sixth and final key element was related to how the athletes judged their individual performance and
progress. People have a natural tendency to compare themselves and their actions with others. This type of
thinking begins at an early age and becomes more ingrained as we become adults. It is critical that
recovering athletes not fall into this mental habit. Because of their injuries, they would compare poorly and
would likely become discouraged. The successful athletes looked solely at their own progress. They made
self-to-self comparisons. They asked themselves questions like, "How far have I progressed since last week,
or last month?"
Incidentally, teaching kids to make self-to-self comparisons is one of the greatest gifts parents can give
them. Let them know that in any endeavor they engage in, there will always be some people who are better
and others who are worse. What is important is our own progress. By adopting this mental attitude, it's
possible to look at other people's accomplishments as inspiration and models of excellence as opposed to
targets of envy.

163

164
When these six elements are combined, they
create a compulsion to succeed. In subsequent
research, I found that these six core characteristics provided the basis of any positive mental attitude.
Whether I looked at athletes, entrepreneurs, or executives, the more confident their mental attitude, the
more they used these same six elements.
==== You have become heavily involved in both NLP and trading. Do you see any similarities between these
two endeavors? ====
Trading and NLP are like mirrors of each other. Trading is concerned with market patterns, and NLP is
concerned with the patterns of the mind. Both deal with tangible, not theoretical, results. Traders are judged
by their results-the money in their trading accounts-not the beauty or intricacy of their market theories. NLP
practitioners are judged by their results-clients quickly achieving the changes they are seeking in their livesnot the originality or insights of NLP theories about how the brain works. NLP seeks to model human
excellence, and trading is an activity in which excellence is required for success, since only a small minority
can win. I have been drawn to NLP and trading because I like the emphasis they both place on real-world
results and excellence.
Does NLP work? My personal view on this question matters little because it would represent only a sample
of one. There is certainly a tremendous amount of anecdotal evidence supporting the efficacy of NLP
techniques. However, rigorous, double-blind scientific tests are in short supply. No doubt the paucity of hard
scientific experimental evidence is due to the extreme difficulty of measuring the results of NLP, which deal
largely with feelings and beliefs. However, one of the hallmarks of NLP is that it virtually guarantees quick
results. Therefore, if you try NLP in one of its forms (books, tapes, seminars, or one-on-one sessions), you
should be able to make a fairly quick determination of whether the approach has any validity for you.
The broader questions of NLP's merits aside, I did find certain aspects of Faulkner's message compelling.
First, I found the concept of mission a highly useful mental construct for focusing goals and intensifying
motivation. My listening to Faulkner's tapes coincided with a surge in my personal efforts to further a
commodity trading advisory venture and significant progress in that regard. I also think there is a great deal
of merit to Faulkner's list of the six key steps in achievement:
1. Use both Toward and Away From motivation.
2. Have a goal of full capability plus, with anything less being unacceptable.
3. Break down potentially overwhelming goals into chunks, with satisfaction garnered from the completion
of each individual step.
4. Fully concentrate on the present moment of time-that is, the single task at hand rather than the longterm goal.
5. Personally involve yourself in achieving goals (as opposed to depending on others).
6. Make self-to-self comparisons to measure progress.
The above elements have important implications and applications to trading. As one example, the stress
on self-involvement would imply that it is unlikely for people to succeed at trading by completely relying on
someone else's system. As another, the focus on self-to-self comparisons implies that traders should judge
their progress based on their own past performance, not the performance of other traders.
The image that Faulkner paints of a successful trader is in stark contrast to popular perceptions. Most
people probably think of great traders as the Evil Knievels of the financial world-individuals willing to take
great risks, drawn to their calling by the adrenalin-charged excitement. According to Faulkner, nothing could
be further from the truth. Successful traders have learned to avoid risk, not seek it. Moreover, very few of
them trade for excitement. On the contrary, based on Faulkner's observations, one of the hallmarks of
successful traders is their ability to maintain a calm, detached emotional state while trading. They may get
excitement in their lives, but it's not from trading.
Many of Faulkner's comments have relevance to more than just trading. Most people could probably
benefit from the advice given by Faulkner and NLP to explore what success means for them. The one
comment I found particularly striking concerned his conversations with hundreds of elderly patients: "Not one
of these people said they truly regretted anything they had actually done. What they regretted was what they
hadn't done."

164

165
Robert Krausz: The Role of the Subconscious
I first learned of Robert Krausz through a letter in Club 3000-a publication that consists largely of letters
written by subscribers who share an interest in trading. The trader who wrote the letter described how a set
of subliminal tapes he had purchased from Robert Krausz, a member of the British Hypnotist Examiners
Council, had improved his trading immensely. I was intrigued.
There is almost a Dickensian quality to Robert Krausz's life story. His early childhood years were spent in a
ghetto in Hungary during World War II. At the age of eight, he and a friend escaped from a forced march to a
death camp, bolting for the woods in opposite directions during a moment in which the guards were
distracted. Having no place else to go, he made his way back to the ghetto, where he stayed until the end of
the war. Krausz spent the years after the war in a succession of orphanages, finally ending up in an
orphanage in South Africa. There he met a diamond magnate who took a liking to him. The wealthy
industrialist began coming to the orphanage on Sundays to take Robert out on excursions-starting a
relationship that ended in adoption. In this way, the orphan who had survived the horrors of war found a new
life as a son of one of South Africa's wealthiest men. Krausz's wartime experience made him an avid
supporter of Israel.
As he grew older, he became more and more committed to Israel's survival. Troubled by the implied
hypocrisy of convincing other young South African Jews to emigrate and join the Israeli armed forces while
staying put himself, he eventually followed his own advice. Despite the protests of his father, whom he loved
and respected, he joined the Israeli armed forces, serving as a paratrooper during the 1956 war with Egypt.
The socialist undertone of the Israeli economy troubled Krausz, however, and he eventually emigrated to
Great Britain.
In London, Krausz's artistic inclinations led to a career as a dress designer. He eventually developed his
own line of clothes during the heyday of Camaby Street and the Beatles era. Krausz's business subsequently
expanded to include the design of fabric patterns and clothes for overseas manufacturers and the importation
of the finished products back into the United Kingdom. In connection with this business, Krausz traveled very
extensively throughout the Far Bast over a number of years. Although the business prospered, Krausz's
increasing fascination with trading led to another major career change. In early 1988, he gave up his
business and emigrated to the United States to begin a new endeavor as a full-time trader.
Krausz declined to comment on his specific results as a trader other than to say that he has done well
enough to "earn a very comfortable living." When he discusses trading as a career, Krausz becomes animated. "This is the best business in the world!" he emphatically proclaims. "There is no other profession that
is so black and white; you're either right or wrong." (As he says this, I am struck by what he is wearing-black
slacks and a white shirt.) "Trading also appeals to me because you're totally dependent on your own talents
and abilities."
I met Krausz at his Fort Lauderdale home. He is an openly friendly man. He insisted on personally picking
me up at the airport and enthusiastically invited me to spend the night at the guest cottage adjoining his
house.
My conversations with Krausz progressed through various stages throughout the day. Krausz speaks with
a distinct South African accent (which, to the untrained American ear, would commonly be mistaken for a
British accent), a factor that adds further color to his retelling of past experiences. We began our talks sitting
on the patio, looking out onto the waterway and tropical forest preserve that borders the rear of his propertya most extraordinary backyard. The chill of a seasonally cool Florida winter day eventually drove us inside,
and we continued the interview in Krausz's office. The office, which Krausz shares with his wife, a well-known
financial astrologer, runs the width of the house, with the windows on one side facing the ocean and the
windows on the other side overlooking the waterway and preserve; the Krauszes divide the office along the
lines of their preferred views.
One can see that Krausz is a serious chartist, as a drafting table in his office is covered with three-by-twofoot charts that Krausz manually maintains. Unlike conventional charts, which use vertical bars to represent
each day or time interval, Krausz's charts use price bars of varying widths as part of a methodology called
Symmetries, which is based on the assumed symmetry of price and time and was invented by Joe Rondinone,
one of W. D. Gann's first students.
The interview was temporarily halted for a lengthy dinner break. If Krausz is as good a trader as he is a
Hungarian cook, he will become a very wealthy man.
==== You have mentioned that you consider being a trader an essential qualification as a hypnotherapist
specializing in helping traders. Which came first* the trading or the training in hypnosis? ====
The trading was the catalyst that led me to hypnosis. My first exposure to trading came during the recordsetting 1979-80 bull market in gold. At the time, I thought that I was trading. Of course, it was not trading; it
was just childish nonsense.
==== How did you first get involved in trading? ====
During that 1979 bull market, every two or three days the Financial Times carried another article bearing
the banner "New Highs in Gold" or some other very similar headline. These repeated stories made an
impression on me. I also had a friend who was involved in the gold market and making a great deal of money
trading. We went out for dinner one evening, and he talked to me at length about the gold market. He
considered himself a great expert. Of course, I later found out that he knew absolutely nothing about trading.
He said to me, "Robert, you're a fool. You work from 7 A-M. to 7 P.M. every day, six days a week. I'm making

165

166
more money working only a few hours a day. Who's
better off?"
He gave me the name of his broker, and I opened up an account. Then the greatest tragedy happened:
My first trade was an absolute winner. My second trade was also a winner. My third trade was breakeven. My
fourth trade was another winner. On my fifth trade, I gave it all back. Then on my sixth trade, I lost more
money than I had made in all my previous winning trades put together. The market had turned, and I lost a
considerable amount of money-much more than the account-starting equity.
==== In other words, you were meeting margin calls along the way. ====
Exactly. I kept putting more and more money into the account. I kept on thinking, "The market is going to
turn. The market is going to turn." Of course, it never turned.
==== When did you finally give up the ship? ====
I had a specific cutoff point. I was a 50 percent shareholder in a garment business, and I wanted to be
absolutely certain that my losses would not endanger the business. When I reached my maximum loss point,
I got out. The experience proved to be a substantial financial loss, but even more important, it was a
tremendous infliction of pain to my ego. I was a reasonably successful businessman who up to that point had
never failed in any venture. I couldn't believe how stupid I had been.
==== While you were trading, were you making your own decisions, or was your broker giving you advice?
====
Oh, my broker was very "helpful" in advising me on the trades. I later found out that he knew less than I
did. But I've always taken responsibility for my actions, and this experience was no exception.
==== What ultimately happened to your friend who enticed you to trade the gold market? ====
He never gave up the belief. The man eventually went totally broke.
==== Did you continue to agonize over your mistake after you were out of the market? ====
I found out a long time ago that one of the most damaging things a person can do is to harp on past
mistakes. If you're constantly repeating to yourself, "I shouldn't have done that," it's like a cartwheel going
over the same tracks. Eventually, the negative message gets so embedded in your psyche that it becomes
very difficult to change your course of action.
At that point, I decided that either I was going to figure out what makes the market tick, or I was going to
wipe my mouth, smile, walk away, and never trade another contract for as long as I lived. Since I'm not the
type of person to walk away from a challenge, I chose the former course of action.
At the time, my business required me to travel extensively to remote regions in the Far East. Since there
were few diversions in these areas, I had lots of free time. I used this time to do a great deal of reading on
the markets. I also began to follow the gold market on a daily basis. I went so far as to have my partner
telex me the daily open, high, low, and close in gold. My library grew and grew, as I was wolfing down every
new book that came out on technical analysis. One of the books I read was alluringly titled How To Make
Money in the Commodity Markets-and Lots of It! by Charles Drummond. I found that Drum-mond traveled
down a different track from everyone else. The book espoused a unique methodology called point-and-line
charting. It made sense to me, and I purchased Drummond's second book, which delved more deeply into
the subject.
I then began trading again, using this point-and-line methodology. However, I found that I was hesitating
in taking trades. The fear of loss had arrived. By this time, I had started communicating with Drummond,
initially with questions regarding his techniques. He always graciously responded to my inquiries. In one of
my telexes to Drummond, I mentioned my dilemma of being unable to make trades. Drummond telexed
back, "You're experiencing what is known as the 'freeze,' which is purely a psychological problem."
Around this time, I had a chance meeting with an acquaintance who ran a large public company. He
seemed to be very depressed, and I asked him what was wrong. He told me that he was getting a divorce
and his business was doing very poorly. Three weeks later, I bumped into this same individual at a local
restaurant. He was talking, laughing, and altogether quite jovial. I was quite curious about his sudden transformation. The next day over lunch, he told me how he had gone to a hypnotherapist and his life was now
back on track. I got the number of this hypnotherapist and went to see him with the specific intent of seeking
help with my trading problem.
For my first session, I brought along a copy of Drummond's book. He flipped through it and exclaimed,
"My god, it's Japanese!" That was his idea of a joke. Of course, he had no concept of trading.
==== Did his lack of familiarity with trading act as an impediment, or did the hypnosis help anyway? ====
Yes, it helped. My trading quickly went to breakeven, which for me was quite an accomplishment. I was
still experiencing some slight hesitation in taking trades, but the "freeze" was gone. I was so impressed by
hypnotherapy that I sought out information on getting trained as a hypnotist myself. I found there was a
group called the British Hypnotist Examiners Council [BHEC] that offered courses, which taught the techniques. I took the beginner's course.
==== How long was this course? ====
It was given over two weekends.
==== And that's all it takes to become a qualified practitioner? ====
No, of course not. The course teaches you only the basic techniques, which are actually quite simple. Over
the next year, I spent about one day a week observing one of the instructors, John Cross, in his practice.
After a while, John allowed me to work with some of his clients under his observation. I then took an
advanced course, given by BHEC. At the end of all of this, I took the BHEC qualification exam.
