
herb cymbalaria. The Neapolitans called it Aqua Toffnina; and it became notorious all
over Europe under the name of Aqua Tophania.
Although this woman carried on her infamous traffic so extensively, it was extremely
difficult to meet with her. She lived in continual dread of discovery. She constantly
changed her name and residence; and pretending to be a person of great godliness,
resided in monasteries for months together. Whenever she was more than usually
apprehensive of detection, she sought ecclesiastical protection. She was soon apprised of
the search made for her by the Viceroy of Naples, and, according to her practice, took
refuge in a monastery. Either the search after her was not very rigid, or her measures
were exceedingly well taken; for she contrived to elude the vigilance of the authorities for
several years. What is still more extraordinary, as showing the ramifications of her
system, her trade was still carried on to as great an extent as before. Lebat informs us that
she had so great a sympathy for poor wives who hated their husbands and wanted to get
rid of them, but could not afford to buy her wonderful aqua, that she made them presents
of it.
She was not allowed, however, to play at this game for ever; she was at length discovered
in a nunnery, and her retreat cut off. The Viceroy made several representations to the
superior to deliver her up, but without effect. The abbess, supported by the archbishop of
the diocese, constantly refused. The public curiosity was in consequence so much excited
at the additional importance thus thrust upon the criminal, that thousands of persons
visited the nunnery in order to catch a glimpse of her.
The patience of the Viceroy appears to have been exhausted by these delays. Being a man
of sense, and not a very zealous Catholic, he determined that even the Church should not
shield a criminal so atrocious. Setting the privileges of the nunnery at defiance, he sent a
troop of soldiers, who broke over the walls and carried her away vi et armis. The
Archbishop, Cardinal Pignatelli, was highly indignant, and threatened to excommunicate
and lay the whole city under interdict. All the inferior clergy, animated by the esprit du
corps, took up the question, and so worked upon the superstitious and bigoted people,
that they were ready to rise in a mass to storm the palace of the Viceroy and rescue the
prisoner.
These were serious difficulties; but the Viceroy was not a man to be daunted. Indeed, he
seems to have acted throughout with a rare union of astuteness, coolness, and energy. To
avoid the evil consequences of the threatened excommunication, he placed a guard round
the palace of the Archbishop, judging that the latter would not be so foolish as to launch
out an anathema which would cause the city to be starved, and himself in it. The
marketpeople would not have dared to come to the city with provisions, so long as it
remained under the ban. There would have been too much inconvenience to himself and
his ghostly brethren in such a measure; and, as the Viceroy anticipated, the good Cardinal
reserved his thunders for some other occasion.
Still there was the populace. To quiet their clamour and avert the impending insurrection,
the agents of the government adroitly mingled with the people, and spread abroad a

report that Tophania had poisoned all the wells and fountains of the city. This was
enough. The popular feeling turned against her immediately. Those who, but a moment
before, had looked upon her as a saint, now reviled her as a devil, and were as eager for
her punishment as they had before been for her escape. Tophania was then put to the
torture. She confessed the long catalogue of her crimes, and named all the persons who
had employed her. She was shortly afterwards strangled, and her corpse thrown over the
wall into the garden of the convent, from whence she had been taken. This appears to
have been done to conciliate the clergy, by allowing them, at least, the burial of one who
had taken refuge within their precincts.
After her death the mania for poisoning seems to have abated; but we have yet to see
what hold it took upon the French people at a somewhat earlier period. So rooted had it
become in France between the years 1670 and 1680, that Madame de Sevigne, in one of
her letters, expresses her fear that Frenchman and poisoner would become synonymous
terms.
As in Italy, the first notice the government received of the prevalence of this crime was
given by the clergy, to whom females of high rank, and some among the middle and
lower classes, had avowed in the confessional that they had poisoned their husbands. In
consequence of these disclosures, two Italians, named Exili and Glaser, were arrested,
and thrown into the Bastille, on the charge of compounding and selling the drugs used for
these murders. Glaser died in prison, but Exili remained without trial for several months;
and there, shortly afterwards, he made the acquaintance of another prisoner, named
Sainte Croix, by whose example the crime was still further disseminated among the
French people.
The most notorious of the poisoners that derived their pernicious knowledge from this
man was Madame de Brinvilliers, a young woman connected both by birth and marriage
with some of the noblest families of France. She seems, from her very earliest years, to
have been heartless and depraved; and, if we may believe her own confession, was
steeped in wickedness ere she had well entered her teens. She was, however, beautiful
and accomplished; and, in the eye of the world, seemed exemplary and kind. Guyot de
Pitaval, in the "Causes Celebres," and Madame de Sevigne, in her Letters, represent her
as mild and agreeable in her manners, and offering no traces on her countenance of the
evil soul within. She was married in 1651 to the Marquis de Brinvilliers, with whom she
lived unhappily for some years. He was a loose dissipated character, and was the means
of introducing Sainte Croix to his wife, a man who cast a blight upon her life, and
dragged her on from crime to crime till her offences became so great that the mind
shudders to dwell upon them. For this man she conceived a guilty passion, to gratify
which she plunged at once into the gulf of sin. She was drawn to its most loathsome
depths ere retribution overtook her.
She had as yet shown a fair outside to the world, and found but little difficulty in
effecting a legal separation from her husband, who had not the art to conceal his vices.
The proceeding gave great offence to her family. She appears, after this, to have thrown
off the mask completely, and carried on her intrigues so openly with her lover, Sainte

Croix, that her father, M. D'Aubray, scandalised at her conduct, procured a lettre de
cachet, and had him imprisoned in the Bastille for a twelvemonth.
Sainte Croix, who had been in Italy, was a dabbler in poisons. He knew something of the
secrets of the detestable La Spara, and improved himself in them from the instructions of
Exili, with whom he speedily contracted a sort of friendship. By him he was shown how
to prepare, not only the liquid poisons employed in Italy, but that known as succession
powder, which afterwards became so celebrated in France. Like his mistress, he appeared
amiable, witty, and intelligent, and showed no signs to the world of the two fierce
passions, revenge and avarice, which were gnawing at his heart. Both these passions were
to be sated on the unfortunate family of D'Aubray; his revenge, because they had
imprisoned him; and his avarice, because they were rich. Reckless and extravagant, he
was always in want of money, and he had no one to supply him but Madame de
Brinvilliers, whose own portion was far from sufficient to satisfy his need. Groaning to
think that any impediment should stand between him and wealth, he conceived the horrid
idea of poisoning M. D'Aubray her father, and her two brothers, that she might inherit the
property. Three murders were nothing to such a villain. He communicated his plan to
Madame de Brinvilliers; and she, without the slightest scruple, agreed to aid him: he
undertook to compound the poisons, and she to administer them. The zeal and alacrity
with which she set to work seem hardly credible. Sainte Croix found her an apt scholar;
and she soon became as expert as himself in the manufacture of poisons. To try the
strength of the first doses, she used to administer them to dogs, rabbits, and pigeons.
Afterwards, wishing to be more certain of their effects, she went round to the hospitals,
and administered them to the sick poor in the soups which she brought in apparent
charity. [This is denied by Voltaire in his "Age of Louis XIV;" but he does not state for
what reason. His words are, "Il est faux qu'elle eut essaye ses poisons dans les hopitaux,
comme le disait le peuple et comme il est ecrit dans les 'Causes Celebres,' ouvrage d'un
avocat sans cause et fait pour le peuple."] None of the poisons were intended to kill at the
first dose; so that she could try them once upon an individual without fear of murder. She
tried the same atrocious experiment upon the guests at her father's table, by poisoning a
pigeon-pie! To be more certain still, she next poisoned herself! When convinced by this
desperate essay of the potency of the draught, she procured an antidote from Sainte
Croix, and all doubts being removed, commenced operations upon her grey-headed
father. She administered the first dose with her own hands, in his chocolate. The poison
worked well. The old man was taken ill, and his daughter, apparently full of tenderness
and anxiety, watched by his bedside. The next day she gave him some broth, which she
recommended as highly nourishing. This also was poisoned. In this manner she gradually
wore out his frame, and in less than ten days he was a corpse! His death seemed so much
the result of disease, that no suspicions were excited.
When the two brothers arrived from the provinces to render the last sad duties to their
sire, they found their sister as grieved, to all outward appearance, as even filial affection
could desire: but the young men only came to perish. They stood between Sainte Croix
and the already half-clutched go]d, and their doom was sealed. A man, named La
Chaussee, was hired by Sainte Croix to aid in administering the poisons; and, in less than
six weeks' time, they had both gone to their long home.

Suspicion was now excited; but so cautiously had all been done, that it found no one
upon whom to attach itself. The Marquise had a sister, and she was entitled, by the death
of her relatives, to half the property. Less than the whole would not satisfy Sainte Croix,
and he determined that she should die the same death as her father and brothers. She was
too distrustful, however; and, by quitting Paris, she escaped the destruction that was
lurking for her.
The Marquise had undertaken these murders to please her lover. She was now anxious to
perpetrate another on her own account. She wished to marry Sainte Croix; but, though
separated from her husband, she was not divorced. She thought it would be easier to
poison him than to apply to the tribunals for a divorce, which might, perhaps, be refused.
But Salute Croix had no longer any love for his guilty instrument. Bad men do not admire
others who are as bad as themselves. Though a villain himself, he had no desire to marry
one, and was not at all anxious for the death of the Marquis. He seemed, however, to
enter into the plot, and supplied her with poison for her husband: but he took care to
provide a remedy. La Brinvilliers poisoned him one day, and Sainte Croix gave him an
antidote the next. In this manner he was buffetted about between them for some time, and
finally escaped with a ruined constitution and a broken heart.
But the day of retribution was at hand, and a terrible mischance brought the murders to
light. The nature of the poisons compounded by Salute Croix was so deadly, that, when
working in his laboratory, he was obliged to wear a mask, to preserve himself from
suffocation. One day, the mask slipped off, and the miserable wretch perished in his
crimes. His corpse was found, on the following morning, in the obscure lodging where he
had fitted up his laboratory. As he appeared to be without friends or relatives, the police
took possession of his effects. Among other things was found a small box, to which was
affixed the following singular document:-"I humbly beg, that those into whose hands this box may fall, will do me the favour to
deliver it into the hands only of the Marchioness de Brinvilliers, who resides in the Rue
Neuve St. Paul, as everything it contains concerns her, and belongs to her alone; and as,
besides, there is nothing in it that can be of use to any person but her. In case she shall be
dead before me, it is my wish that it be burned, with everything it contains, without
opening or altering anything. In order that no one may plead ignorance, I swear by the
God that I adore, and by all that is held most sacred, that I assert nothing but the truth:
and if my intentions, just and reasonable as they are, be thwarted in this point by any
persons, I charge their consciences with it, both in this world and that which is to come,
in order that I may unload mine. I protest that this is my last will. Done at Paris, the 25th
of May, 1672.
"(Signed) Sainte Croix."
This earnest solicitation, instead of insuring respect as was intended, excited curiosity.
The box was opened, and found to contain some papers, and several vials and powders.
The latter were handed to a chemist for analysis, and the documents were retained by the

police, and opened. Among them was found a promissory note of the Marchioness de
Brinvilliers, for thirty thousand francs, to the order of Sainte Croix. The other papers
were of greater importance, as they implicated both her and her servant, La Chaussee, in
the recent murders. As soon as she was informed of the death of Sainte Croix, she made
an attempt to gain possession of his papers and the box; but, being refused, she saw that
there was no time to be lost, and immediately quitted. Next morning the police were on
her trail; but she succeeded in escaping to England. La Chaussee was not so fortunate.
Altogether ignorant of the fatal mischance which had brought his villanies to light, he did
not dream of danger. He was arrested and brought to trial: being put to the torture, he
confessed that he had administered poison to the Messieurs d'Aubray, and that he had
received a hundred pistoles, and the promise of an annuity for life, from Sainte Croix and
Madame de Brinvilliers, for the job. He was condemned to be broken alive on the wheel,
and the Marchioness was, by default, sentenced to be beheaded. He was executed
accordingly, in March 1673, on the Place de Greve, in Paris.
La Brinvilliers appears to have resided for nearly three years in England. Early in 1676,
thinking that the rigour of pursuit was over, and that she might venture to return to the
Continent, she proceeded secretly to Liege. Notwithstanding her care, the French
authorities were soon apprised of her return; and arrangements were promptly made with
the municipality of that city, to permit the agents of the French police to arrest her within
the limits of their jurisdiction. Desgrais, an officer of the marechaussee, accordingly left
Paris for that purpose. On his arrival in Liege, he found that she had sought shelter within
the walls of a convent. Here the arm of the law, long as it is said to be, could not reach
her: but Desgrais was not a man to be baffled, and he resorted to stratagem to accomplish
what force could not. Having disguised himself as a priest, he sought admission to the
convent, and obtained an interview with La Brinvilliers. He said, that being a Frenchman,
and passing through Liege, he could not leave that city without paying a visit to a lady
whose beauty and misfortunes were so celebrated. Her vanity was flattered by the
compliment. Desgrais saw, to use a vulgar but forcible expression, "that he had got on the
blind side of her;" and he adroitly continued to pour out the language of love and
admiration, till the deluded Marchioness was thrown completely off her guard. She
agreed, without much solicitation, to meet him outside the walls of the convent, where
their amorous intrigue might be carried on more conveniently than within. Faithful to her
appointment with her supposed new lover, she came, and found herself, not in the
embrace of a gallant, but in the custody of a policeman.
Her trial was not long delayed. The proofs against her were abundant. The dying
declaration of La Chaussee would have been alone enough to convict her; but besides
that, there were the mysterious document attached to the box of St. Croix; her flight from
France; and, stronger and more damning proof than all, a paper, in her own handwriting,
found among the effects of St. Croix, in which she detailed to him the misdeeds of her
life, and spoke of the murder of her father and brothers, in terms that left no doubt of her
guilt. During the trial, all Paris was in commotion. La Brinvilliers was the only subject of
conversation. All the details of her crimes were published, and greedily devoured; and the
idea of secret poisoning was first put into the heads of hundreds, who afterwards became
guilty of it.

On the 16th of July 1676, the Superior Criminal Court of Paris pronounced a verdict of
guilty against her, for the murder of her father and brothers, and the attempt upon the life
of her sister. She was condemned to be drawn on a hurdle, with her feet bare, a rope
about her neck, and a burning torch in her hand, to the great entrance of the cathedral of
Notre Dame; where she was to make the amende honorable, in sight of all the people; to
be taken from thence to the Place de Greve, and there to be beheaded. Her body was
afterwards to be burned, and her ashes scattered to the winds.
After her sentence, she made a full confession of her guilt. She seems to have looked
upon death without fear; but it was recklessness, not courage, that supported her.
Madame de Sevigne says, that when on the hurdle, on her way to the scaffold, she
entreated her confessor to exert his influence with the executioner to place himself next to
her, that his body might hide from her view "that scoundrel, Desgrais, who had entrapped
her." She also asked the ladies, who had been drawn to their windows to witness the
procession, what they were looking at? adding, "a pretty sight you have come to see,
truly!" She laughed when on the scaffold, dying as she had lived, impenitent and
heartless. On the morrow, the populace came in crowds to collect her ashes, to preserve
them as relics. She was regarded as a martyred saint, and her ashes were supposed to be
endowed, by Divine grace, with the power of curing all diseases. Popular folly has often
canonised persons whose pretensions to sanctity were extremely equivocal; but the
disgusting folly of the multitude, in this instance, has never been surpassed.
Before her death, proceedings were instituted against M. de Penautier, treasurer of the
province of Languedoc, and Receiver-general for the clergy, who was accused by a lady,
named St. Laurent, of having poisoned her husband, the late Receiver-general, in order to
obtain his appointment. The circumstances of this case were never divulged, and the
greatest influence was exerted to prevent it from going to trial. He was known to have
been intimate with Sainte Croix and Madame de Brinvilliers, and was thought to have
procured his poisons from them. The latter, however, refused to say anything which
might implicate him. The inquiry was eventually stifled, after Penautier had been several
months in the Bastille.
The Cardinal de Bonzy was accused by the gossips of the day of being an accomplice of
Penautier. The Cardinal's estates were burthened with the payment of several heavy
annuities; but, about the time that poisoning became so fashionable, all the annuitants
died off, one after the other. The Cardinal, in talking of these annuitants, afterwards used
to say, "Thanks to my star, I have outlived them all!" A wit, seeing him and Penautier
riding in the same carriage, cried out, in allusion to this expression, "There go the
Cardinal de Bonzy and his star!"
It was now that the mania for poisoning began to take hold of the popular mind. From
this time until the year 1682, the prisons of France teemed with persons accused of this
crime; and it is very singular, that other offences decreased in a similar proportion. We
have already seen the extent to which it was carried in Italy. It was, if possible, surpassed
in France. The diabolical ease with which these murders could be effected, by means of

these scentless and tasteless poisons, enticed the evil-minded. Jealousy, revenge, avarice,
even petty spite, alike resorted to them. Those who would have been deterred, by fear of
detection, from using the pistol or the dagger, or even strong doses of poison, which kill
at once, employed slow poisons without dread. The corrupt Government of the day,
although it could wink at the atrocities of a wealthy and influential courtier, like
Penautier, was scandalised to see the crime spreading among the people. Disgrace was, in
fact, entailed, in the eyes of Europe, upon the name of Frenchman. Louis XIV, to put a
stop to the evil, instituted what was called the Chambre Ardente, or Burning Chamber,
with extensive powers, for the trial and punishment of the prisoners.
Two women, especially, made themselves notorious at this time, and were instrumental
to the deaths of hundreds of individuals. They both resided in Paris, and were named
Lavoisin and Lavigoreux. Like Spars and Tophania, of whom they were imitators, they
chiefly sold their poisons to women who wanted to get rid of their husbands; and, in
some few instances, to husbands who wanted to get rid of their wives. Their ostensible
occupation was that of midwives. They also pretended to be fortune-tellers, and were
visited by persons of every class of society. The rich and poor thronged alike to their
mansardes, to learn the secrets of the future. Their prophecies were principally of death.
They foretold to women the approaching dissolution of husbands, and to needy heirs, the
end of rich relatives, who had made them, as Byron expresses it, "wait too, too long
already." They generally took care to be instrumental in fulfilling their own predictions.
They used to tell their wretched employers, that some sign of the approaching death
would take place in the house, such as the breaking of glass or china; and they paid
servants considerable fees to cause a breakage, as if by accident, exactly at the appointed
time. Their occupation as midwives made them acquainted with the secrets of many
families, which they afterwards turned to dreadful account.
It is not known how long they had carried on this awful trade before they were
discovered. Detection finally overtook them at the close of the year 1679. They were both
tried, found guilty, and burned alive on the Place de Greve, on the 22nd of February,
1680, after their hands had been bored through with a red-hot iron, and then cut off. Their
numerous accomplices in Paris and in the provinces were also discovered and brought to
trial. According to some authors, thirty, and to others, fifty of them, chiefly women, were
hanged in the principal cities.
Lavoisin kept a list of the visiters who came to her house to purchase poisons. This paper
was seized by the police on her arrest, and examined by the tribunals. Among the names
were found those of the Marshal de Luxembourg, the Countess de Soissons, and the
Duchess de Bouillon. The Marshal seems only to have been guilty of a piece of
discreditable folly in visiting a woman of this description, but the popular voice at the
time imputed to him something more than folly. The author of the "Memoirs of the
Affairs of Europe since the Peace of Utrecht," says, "The miserable gang who dealt in
poison and prophecy alleged that he had sold himself to the devil, and that a young girl of
the name of Dupin had been poisoned by his means. Among other stories, they said he
had made a contract with the devil, in order to marry his son to the daughter of the
Marquis of Louvois. To this atrocious and absurd accusation the Marshal, who had
