
07_178089 ch03.qxp

2/27/08

9:42 PM

Page 45

Chapter 3: Building a Base of Candlestick Chart Knowledge
If you own a stock the day before the ex-dividend date, then you receive
the dividend. If you buy it on the ex-dividend date, you don’t receive
the dividend. For trading purposes, focus on the day before the
ex-dividend date, because that’s when you want to own the stock to
receive the dividend.
 The record date, two trading days after the ex-dividend date, which is
the date on which the owners of a stock are identified as eligible to
receive a dividend
 The payable date, which is when you get your dividend check
For an example, look at the following dates for the second dividend paid
by IBM in 2007:
• Declared

4/24/2007

• Ex-Date

5/8/2007

• Record Date

5/10/2007

• Payable

6/9/2007

Earnings dates
During each quarter of the year, companies are required to release a summary
of their earnings for the previous quarter. These numbers are usually distributed via press releases, which are quickly picked up by news wires and the
financial press. Traders react to the resulting news. The press releases are
usually followed an hour or two later by conference calls that feature members of the companies’ management teams answering questions from industry
analysts regarding the recently released earnings. These calls are important,
because the outlook for the company is typically discussed in detail.
These earnings release dates are by far the most important four days of the
year for many companies, and their stocks are usually at their most volatile
just before and after the subsequent conference calls. At the very least, if
you’re interested in trading a particular stock, be aware of when the company
is scheduled to release its next earnings report.
In a charting capacity, seeing how the stock trades before and after earnings
dates can be useful for trading decisions. For example, if a company generally
trades higher going into its earnings release, buying a week before the earnings date and selling the day before may be a profitable strategy. Also, if a
company usually reacts strongly to its earnings announcements (either good
or bad), but seems to reverse this move a few days later, this can lead to a
good short-term trading strategy. Either way, it should be clear that having
earnings date info on the charts you use isn’t a bad thing, and it can set you
on the path to making a nice profit, if you can spot a usable pattern.

45

07_178089 ch03.qxp

46

2/27/08

9:42 PM

Page 46

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
You can find numerous sources for earnings dates or earnings calendars on
the Internet. The following are links to a few of the better (and free) ones:
 Earnings calendar at Yahoo! Finance:
http://biz.yahoo.com/research/earncal/today.html
 Marketwatch.com’s earnings calendar:
www.marketwatch.com/tools/calendars/earnings.asp
 Briefing.com’s earnings calendar:
www.briefing.com/Investor/Private/Calendars/Earnings
Calendar.htm
 Earnings.com’s calendar:
www.earnings.com

Stock splits
Sometimes when the price for a stock reaches a high level, a company
announces that it’s paying a stock dividend or splitting the shares in two.
The timeline for a stock split is very similar to that of a dividend, and split
information is sometimes included on charts. A company will announce
a split, which is usually considered a positive event for the stock. The
announcement indicates what type of split it is (2 for 1, 3 for 1, and so on)
and the date that the split will be effective.
That date is the day that shareholders own more shares at a lower price, and
it’s the date that’s noted on a chart, typically with a big letter S or a note about
the type of split.
So how does splitting work for you? If you own 10 shares of that stock, you
own 20 on the split date. The price of the stock is usually adjusted accordingly. For example, if a stock is trading at $100, and the stock splits so each
share held becomes two shares, that’s considered a 2 for 1 split, and the
price of each new share is then $50. The dollar amount is the same, but the
number of shares is increased.
Splitting shares allows for more broad ownership of a stock. Many people can
afford to buy 100 shares of a stock that trades for $15 a share ($1,500); few
people can afford 100 shares of a stock that trades for $200 a share ($20,000).
The idea is that the more broad the ownership, the better the performance of
shares.
Stock split information on a chart is useful when a company’s stock has had
recurring reactions to stock splits. Generally, a stock rallies after the news of
a split, although whether this fact is logical is debatable, because a stock
split doesn’t necessarily mean that something has fundamentally changed
within the company. Unfortunately, the announcement of a split isn’t common

07_178089 ch03.qxp

2/27/08

9:42 PM

Page 47

Chapter 3: Building a Base of Candlestick Chart Knowledge
on a chart. But since the date the split is effective is generally available, you
can easily focus on how the stock trades leading up to the split and afterward, and make appropriate trading decisions.

Insider trading: the legal kind
Legal insider trading — not the kind of insider trading that results in executives
wearing handcuffs on the evening news — is the trading activity of company
executives in their company’s stock. In this context, an insider is anyone officially associated with a company, or even an owner of 10 percent or more of a
company’s stock.
The option to buy stock can be a major part of the compensation package for
employees of public companies. From the company’s standpoint, it makes
sense to offer employees another incentive to work hard for the financial
well-being of the company and the strength of its stock. Employees of a company may also buy stock in the open market when they believe the company’s
prospects are bright.
Owners of 10 percent or more of stock may have access to some information
that you may not have. You can’t blame them if they make decisions on buying
or selling that stock based on their insider information. However, by law they
must report this trading activity within a few days of making such transactions, and the resultant data is public and sometimes ends up on charts!
On the flip side, at times, employees who own shares may choose to sell. It’s
a bit tricky, as the stock may be sold for personal reasons — a major
purchase like a home or child’s college education, for example — or it can be
a signal that an employee believes a stock’s price has reached a level where
it’s prudent to sell shares. In this case, following an insider’s lead and selling
that stock may prove profitable or help you avoid a loss.
To see what insider trading information looks like on a chart, take a gander at
Figure 3-8.
When insider trading information is included on candlestick charts, the indications of insider activity are usually very easy to read. In Figure 3-8, the B
indicates insider buying, and the S indicates insider selling. (Splits also use
the S. But splits normally have a 2 for 1 or some numbers along with the split.
It really varies from chart service to chart service.) Some other charts use up
arrows to indicate buying and down arrows to indicate selling. This chart
includes buying in September and selling in October. It appears the insiders
in this company do a very good job of trading their own stock!
Trying to trade along with insiders has such a following that not only does
insider trading information appear on some charts, but also services and
newsletters are devoted to disseminating the information. One service,
InsiderScore, even ranks individual insiders by how well they have bought
and sold shares in the past!

47

07_178089 ch03.qxp

9:42 PM

Page 48

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
86
S

S

84

82

80

78
B

9/ 05
12
/0
9/ 5
14
/0
9/ 5
16
/0
9/ 5
20
/0
9/ 5
22
/0
9/ 5
26
/0
9/ 5
28
/0
9/ 5
30
/0
10 5
/4
/0
10 5
/6
10 /05
/1
0
10 /05
/1
2
10 /05
/1
4
10 /05
/1
8
10 /05
/2
0
10 /05
/2
4
10 /05
/2
6
10 /05
/2
8/
05

8/

05

B

9/

6/

1/

9/

05

76

Figure 3-8:
Insider
trading 74
activity
included
on a candle- 72
stick chart.

9/

48

2/27/08

Do an Internet search for Insider Trading Newsletter, and you’ll get more results
than you’d know what to do with.

08_178089 ch04.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 49

Chapter 4

Using Electronic Resources
to Create Full Charts
In This Chapter
 Taking advantage of free online candlestick charting
 Using Microsoft Excel to create a candlestick chart
 Considering a few charting software packages

A

fter you’re armed with an understanding of why candlestick charts are
so useful and what it takes to create a candlestick, you’re ready to
spread your wings and do some charting. You can take the appropriate data
and build a chart in many different ways, and in this chapter I provide you
with some insight on the easiest and least expensive ways to do just that. I
begin the chapter with the easiest method, which is to let a candlestickfriendly Web site do the heavy lifting. And the sites I describe will do it all for
free, if you’re willing to put up with a few banner ads (a small price to pay for
some very handy services).
After taking a look at some free online options for candlestick charting, I present the basics of creating candlesticks using Microsoft Excel. Candlestick
charting has caught on so quickly that it’s now a standard feature in Excel’s
charting section. Finally, at the end of the chapter, I cover a few of the best
low-cost charting packages that are widely available and make sense for individual traders and, to a lesser extent, investors.
One quick note for those of you who are left-handed. I use right-click versus
left-click in some of the instructions in this chapter. Please keep in mind that
I’m right-handed, so I’m referring to the way I would be clicking a mouse. If
you happen to be left-handed and have the mouse set up specifically for a
left-handed user, remember that when I say to right-click, readers with
adjusted mouse settings need to left-click.

08_178089 ch04.qxp

50

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 50

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis

Turning to the Web for Candlestick
Charting Resources
Like so many other areas of life, trading and technical analysis have been
greatly impacted by the Internet over the past few years. You can visit multiple Web sites where you can get low-cost or even free financial information,
and, of course, candlestick charts are included. A quick Internet search on
candlestick charts produces more results than you’ll know what to do with.
In this section, I cover a handful of the best Web sites you can use to view
candlestick charts, showing you how to create charts on these sites and
pointing out other various features you can find there. Each of the sites mentioned are excellent for obtaining free charts but also have a plethora of
other information you can use to help you make better trading and investing
decisions.

Using Yahoo! Finance for charting,
trading, and investing
If you’re looking for a free, user-friendly Web site that’s packed with useful
information, steer your Internet browser to the finance section of Yahoo! This
dynamic site offers many features that greatly enhance your charting experience, including the ability to download free data that you can manipulate
however you want. And just like all good charting packages, Yahoo! makes
candlestick charting available to all users.
In addition to charts, Yahoo! Finance offers a variety of information on stocks
and markets that can provide you with enormous amounts of data, company
fundamentals, and even message boards full of both rumors and facts. It’s all
just a few clicks away.

Creating a candlestick chart on Yahoo! Finance
Using Yahoo! Finance to build a candlestick chart is a breeze. All you need is
a computer with an Internet connection. To generate a chart, work your way
through the following steps:
1. Get to Yahoo! Finance from the main Yahoo! page by clicking Finance
or by using the URL www.finance.yahoo.com.
2. Enter the symbol of the stock or index you want to chart in the bar to
the left of the Get Quotes button, and then click that button.
That click takes you to an information page for the stock or index you’ve
chosen.

08_178089 ch04.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 51

Chapter 4: Using Electronic Resources to Create Full Charts
If you don’t know the symbol of the stock or index, simply click Finance
Search to the right of the Get Quotes button.
3. After you’re on the information page, click Basic Chart in the blue
box on the left of the page (Technical Analysis is another possible
choice that you can visit later to explore more of Yahoo!’s charting
features).
A basic line chart appears, with clickable options for making changes to
the chart. The categories are for Range (time), Type, Size, and Scale.
The scale of a candlestick chart can be either linear or logarithmic in the
way its pricing data is displayed. A linear chart displays prices without
any adjustments. A logarithmic chart adjusts data in order to better
depict performance in an investment (long-term) scenario. Logarithmic
charts make sense for long-term investing, but aren’t very useful on, say,
a daily chart of stock prices that’s used for trading.
4. Select the Range (from one day to five years) you prefer, and then
click Cdl, for candlestick, as the Type.
It’s as simple as that! After you’ve completed these easy steps, you should
see a beautiful candlestick chart that looks very similar to Figure 4-1.

Figure 4-1:
A candlestick chart
created on
Yahoo!
Finance.

If on Step 3 you opted to click Technical Analysis instead of Basic Chart, you’d
have a number of other choices, including
 Moving Avg (various moving averages)
 EMA (various exponential moving averages)
 Indicators (various indicators)
 Overlays (indicators that show up on top of the price chart)
I encourage you to play around with these until your hand is cramped.
There’s no better way to master the ins and outs of charts than manipulating
them and looking at as many as you can. You can also flip to Chapter 11
of this book for more info on technical analysis and the ways you can
combine those methods with your candlestick charts.

51

08_178089 ch04.qxp

52

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 52

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
I like the Yahoo! Finance site for many things, but the flexibility of its charting
is somewhat limited. For example, my favorite time period is a three-month
daily chart, and Yahoo! currently doesn’t offer a three-month option. However,
a beta charting package is being tested, and I’m confident that the functionality of Yahoo!’s charts will be expanded in the near future.

Checking out Yahoo! Finance’s other useful features
If you want to take advantage of Yahoo! Finance’s other resources, spend
some time examining the information page for a specific stock:
1. Get to Yahoo! Finance from the main Yahoo! page by clicking Finance
or by using the URL www.finance.yahoo.com.
2. Enter the symbol of the stock or index you want to chart in the bar
next to the Get Quotes button, and then click that button.
That click takes you to an information page for the stock or index you’ve
chosen.
In the blue box on the left of the page, you can find many sources of data and
other handy functions. Among them is a unique feature that Yahoo! provides
for accessing historical daily opening, high, low, and closing price data, with
volume information that you can download into Microsoft Excel using the
Historical Price choice. (Skip ahead to “Creating Candlestick Charts Using
Microsoft Excel” later in this chapter for more info on how to work with
candlesticks in Excel.)
For another informative and sometimes fun area of Yahoo! Finance, check out
the Message Board section. This area includes discussions that focus on specific stocks. In the case of some controversial companies, the discussions can
be pretty heated, to the point of being amusing. But the boards aren’t just
good for lively conversation. They’re also a good place to turn for information and rumors if a stock’s price is moving without any apparent reason.
To top it all off, Yahoo! allows you to build your own portfolio, which you can
use to monitor news and prices for any stocks you specify. You can also access
real-time quotes — most quotes available on the Internet are delayed — for a
small fee, and take advantage of excellent financial calendars for upcoming
earnings and economic statistics.

Working with BigCharts.com
BigCharts.com is a charting site affiliated with MarketWatch.com, an excellent
financial site that offers a ton of free information. For charting purposes, I
suggest going directly to www.bigcharts.com.

08_178089 ch04.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 53

Chapter 4: Using Electronic Resources to Create Full Charts
Creating candlestick charts on BigCharts.com
BigCharts.com is easy to navigate, and with just a few clicks you can generate
terrific charts. To create a candlestick chart, take the following steps:
1. Go to www.bigcharts.com.
2. Enter a stock symbol in the bar at the top of the page and click
Advanced Chart.
That click takes you to a page that features a one-year bar chart for the
stock you entered.
3. Click Chart Style on the left side of the page.
A few drop-down menus appear.
4. Select Candlestick from the Price Display drop-down menu.
5. Select your preferred range from the Time drop-down menu.
6. Click the orange Draw Chart button, and a candlestick chart should
appear in seconds.
If you follow these steps, you should end up with a candlestick chart
similar to the one shown in Figure 4-2.
After you’ve mastered setting up a basic candlestick chart on BigCharts.com,
I suggest playing around with the various buttons and drop-down menus that
appear on the left side of the page. You can choose from several technical
indicators and a wide range of time frames, and you can increase or decrease
the size of your chart.

Figure 4-2:
A candlestick chart
created on
BigCharts.
com.

53

08_178089 ch04.qxp

54

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 54

Part I: Getting Familiar with Candlestick Charting and Technical Analysis
BigCharts.com offers interactive charts that can be fascinating and useful.
Interactive charts are a Java-based feature allowing you to scroll over your
chart to display additional data. You can also use them to draw your own
trendlines, which many traders find very useful.

Using a couple of other great (and free) features of BigCharts.com
In addition to its free services, BigCharts.com boasts a number of functions
and areas that require payment for access. Plenty of information about those
options is available on its site, but I want to highlight two more of its free
features, which won’t cost you any of your hard-earned trading profits.
On the page where you can view the candlestick charts you generate, look
just above the chart to find several choices for more information. One click
gives you access to news, other industry members or competitors, market
advisor commentary, analysts’ opinions, SEC filings, insider activity, as well
as recent annual reports and company profiles.
Also, if you’re willing to register (registration is free) then you can set up your
own portfolio, view message boards geared specifically toward your favorite
companies, and sign up for alerts, which e-mail you automatically to let you
know about price changes and news.

Charting on CNBC.com
In recent years, CNBC has become a primary source for market information
on television. The folks at CNBC have also put a lot of effort into their Web
site, which offers charting functionality in addition to the content that relates
to their TV programs.
The charting function on CNBC.com is easy to use, and the professional functions allow you to do things like compare securities and overlay technical
indicators. One downside is a lack of flexibility, but the site is being constantly
updated, and more flexibility can emerge in the future.

Generating candlestick charts on CNBC.com
Here’s how to take advantage of CNBC.com’s free candlestick charting
offerings:
1. Direct your Internet browser to www.cnbc.com.
Near the top of the page, you’ll see a box for entering a symbol, with the
links Quote and Chart directly above it.
2. Click Chart, enter your symbol, and click the Go button to the right of
the box.
You should see a line chart for the stock you entered.

08_178089 ch04.qxp

2/27/08

9:40 PM

Page 55

Chapter 4: Using Electronic Resources to Create Full Charts
3. On the Chart Style drop-down menu, select Candle.
The chart is refreshed, and a candlestick chart appears in place of the
line chart. After taking all these steps, you should end up with a candlestick chart like the one shown in Figure 4-3.

Figure 4-3:
A candlestick chart
created on
CNBC.com.

CNBC.com gets an A+ for its chart-making simplicity. You can also choose
from many time frames and indicators, and you can even add flags to the
chart for events like earnings releases, stock splits, and dividend pay dates.
Another attractive feature is the ability to add notes to your charts, such as,
“I should have bought this stock right here” before a big up day. Of course,
notes aren’t any good if you can’t save your charts, but CNBC.com has that
covered, too. Register at their site (basic registration is free), and you can
save your charts and your chart settings, so you don’t have to select every
last option each time you return to the site.
CNBC.com also offers additional information on the companies you select,
including news, profiles, earnings, recommendations, and competitors’ stats.
You can also click the Peers tab to see a graphical representation of some
peer companies. The Financials tab provides a quick overview of the company’s financials on both an annual and quarterly basis, and the Ownership
tab gives an overview of the company’s owners, some insider holding information, and a graphical breakdown of insider activity.

Tapping into CNBC.com’s other useful features
Since the Web site’s revamping in 2007, many CNBC anchors have blogs that
feature entries on their specific areas of expertise. You can also use the
Investing Tools link, which includes the ability to create a portfolio watch list
and perform some stock or mutual fund screening, all at no cost to you.
Because CNBC is a successful financial television franchise, CNBC.com is
loaded with video highlights and other ways to review the issues discussed
on CNBC during the trading day. Unless you’re a professional trader and you
have CNBC on all day, it may be of interest to you to catch up on their Web
site to see what professionals are focusing on.
