
T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

33

it. This psychic benefit is not the same as the rent one can charge on a home,
since renters are people in substantially different circumstances. Homeowners
can change their minds from one day to the next about these psychic benefits.
Moreover, these psychic dividends are not directly proportional to the amount
one invested in the home, as are the dividends on stocks; if one buys more
house than one needs, one may realize a negative psychic dividend from
maintaining too much property.
Thus, there is really no way that one can say authoritatively which has
been the better investment historically, homes or stocks. The answer differs
across individuals, and is ultimately a matter of taste and circumstance. But
individual homeowners have no clarity on this point and can change their
opinions from time to time about the advantages of investing in housing. We
will see evidence of such changes later in this book.

Irrational Exuberance Then and Now
My research assistants and I have seen some clues to the changing nature of
public thinking regarding real estate speculation over the years. Our reading
of contemporary English-language newspaper and magazine accounts of real
estate markets since the late nineteenth century has confirmed such changes.
We have found relatively little talk about anything that could be considered
national bubbles in home prices until the last decades of the twentieth century.
There seemed to be only occasional mentions of “irrational exuberance.” The
word boom was frequently used to describe situations in the housing market
throughout the twentieth century, but in earlier years it tended to refer to a
boom in the construction industry (as measured by the number of new homes
built). Accounts by economists of the situation in the national housing market
did not often mention bubbles or speculation. Instead there was a tendency
to stress that building costs were the ultimate determinant of home prices.
Articles often tended to talk about shortages of homes for sale rather than
price increases.
Before the last decades of the twentieth century, it is striking that there was
relatively little public discussion of home prices. As evidence for this, or as part
of the reason for this, note that there was no regularly published and regularly
cited price index for existing homes in the United States until 1968, when the
National Association of Real Estate Boards median price of existing homes
first began to be cited in major newspapers.19 There was no high-quality existing
home price index until Karl Case and I developed the weighted repeat sales
method, used it to estimate price indices for major U.S. cities, and published
these in a couple of articles in the late 1980s. The method was later adopted
by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and by the U.S. Office of Housing Enterprise
Oversight and its successor (after it was shut down in 2009 after the failures

34

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) the Federal Housing Finance Agency and
others. Data on the price-rental ratio (akin to the price-earnings ratio that is
used by investors to test for over- or underpricing in the stock market) did not
begin to be stressed in the news media until the Economist began publishing
them for various countries after 2000.
Therefore, good public information about prices, information that might
help generate irrational exuberance, was not really available until the close
of the twentieth century. Before then, newspaper accounts would sometimes
talk of price changes, but they usually cited either anecdotal evidence or the
opinions of real estate brokers about what was happening. Even those stories
were infrequent, apparently reflecting lack of public interest in national home
price trends.20
Before 1960 general public attention to the housing market often tended
to take the form of outrage at the exorbitant rents that landlords were able to
extract from their tenants, rather than concern about the course of prices of
single-family homes. People were living in a less avowedly capitalist economy,
and they were not primed to believe that their well-being depended in large
measure on their property.
Prior to the last decades of the twentieth century, public attention focused
instead on rent control and on a housing cooperative movement, whereby
groups of people would buy interest in an apartment building that they
controlled as a group. From these conspicuous examples of government and
collective intervention in markets, people might plausibly have imagined that
something would be done by authorities to prevent home prices from getting
out of control.
While rent control and housing cooperatives still exist, the idealistic ideology that created them is mostly gone. In recent decades, our increasing
public commitment to market solutions to economic problems, rather than
interventions and controls, has led people to worry more about the possible
instability in home prices and hence to make them more prone to the kind of
feedback that generates bubbles.
A Proquest search since 1740 and a Lexis-Nexis search since the 1970s for
the term housing bubble or home price bubble in English-language newspapers
around the world shows that these terms were hardly used at all until just after
the 1987 stock market crash (a time when people were already talking about
bubbles, and many countries were showing very rapid price increases), but
those terms died out soon after 1987. The terms reappeared in the late 1990s,
and their use took off dramatically after 2000.
Appearance in newspapers does not necessarily imply penetration into
public awareness. On paper questionnaires that Karl Case and I have been
distributing to recent U.S. homebuyers annually since 2003, we have a number of open-ended questions that asked for written sentence answers about

T HE R E A L E S TAT E MARKE T IN H IS TO RICAL P E RS PEC TIVE

35

interpretations of recent market phenomena. The printed questionnaires do not
mention bubbles, nor do they ask directly about them. In 2003 and 2004 there
was virtually no respondent who brought up the words “housing bubble.”
The respondents’ use of the words surged in 2005, stayed high for several
years surrounding the market peak, and then fell. News stories referring to
a housing bubble were especially frequent then. This then suggests that the
concept is not a natural one for most people, but that the idea had been planted
in their minds by circumstances, media attention, and public talk, for a while.
Life was simpler once; one saved and then bought a home when the time
was right. One expected to buy a home as part of normal living and didn’t
think to worry about what would happen to the price of homes. The increasingly large role of speculative markets for homes, as well as of other markets,
has fundamentally changed our lives. The price activity that was once very
local and confined to such events as the building of highways, canals, and
railroads has become national and even international, and it is now connected
to popular stories of new economic eras. The changing behavior of home prices
is a sign of changing public impressions of the value of property, a heightening of attention to speculative price movements.

The Role of Lending Institutions in Housing Bubbles
During a bubble, attentional anomalies tend to affect lenders as well as buyers.
They, too, focus their attention on the same investing opportunities. They, too,
are not attentive to—are complacent about—the risk of a collapse in the market.
The effects of the housing bubble in the early 2000s on lenders in the United
States are aptly described by Vermont Law School professor Jennifer Taub in
her 2014 book Other People’s Houses: How Decades of Bailouts, Captive Regulators,
and Toxic Bankers Made Home Mortgages a Thrilling Business.21 She describes the
atmosphere at major mortgage lenders during the housing boom just before
its peak around 2006 as one of excitement at their apparent new successes, in
an atmosphere of flagrant disregard of the risks they were creating.
One of these lenders was Washington Mutual, Inc. (WaMu), a savings
bank holding company whose origins go back to the Washington National
Building and Loan Investment Association in 1889, which was renamed in
the early twentieth century as the Washington Mutual Savings Bank. It was
a mutual (a sort of cooperative, not for profit), but dropped its mutual status
in 1983 during the Reagan years of deregulation and became for-profit. It was
unfortunately allowed to keep the word “mutual” in its name anyway, as if the
word “mutual” was a mere historical anachronism that no longer had meaning
for the public. It lost its ideological roots and became a go-go success story
by ignoring risks. It became the biggest savings and loan in the United States
by aggressively pursuing borrowers. In fact, under WaMu’s aggressive CEO

36

TH E RE AL E S TATE MARKET IN HIST OR IC AL PER SPEC TIVE

Kerry Killinger, it adopted and publicized the motto “The Power of Yes” to
trumpet to potential borrowers with poor credit histories that their mortgage
applications would not be turned down. After the crisis, it became the biggest
bank failure in U.S. history. But during the boom years, the mood in the firm
was that of tantalizing success and inattention to the possibility of a housing
crisis that had not happened since the Great Depression.
Countrywide Financial, under Angelo Mozilo, another mortgage lender
whose boom and collapse figured largely in the financial crisis, had a similar
corporate culture. They had the motto “Price Any Loan.”
Atif Mian of Princeton University and Amir Sufi of the University of
Chicago have shown that in regions where lending standards were more
relaxed, home prices rose more before the bubble and fell more after it burst.22
Part of this phenomenon is regulatory complacency, allowing the “successoriented” lenders to do their thing with little constraint.
Many people have complained to me after the post-2006 collapse: “why
aren’t more of these mortgage lenders in jail?” But it is hard to place such
punishment on them, because it is not easy to demonstrate to everyone’s
satisfaction that they have broken any laws. Kerry Killinger was in fact sued
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in 2011 for “reckless lending,”
but the suit ended with merely a financial settlement.23 Angelo Mozilo was
charged in 2009 by the Securities and Exchange Commission for insider trading and securities fraud, but again, this ended merely in a settlement, and
all criminal investigations were stopped in 2010 without any admission of
wrongdoing by Mozilo.24
Whatever the details of their actions, and whatever their culpability in
a court of law, from the standpoint of our trying to understand bubbles,
we should view their actions here as essentially a consequence of the same
broader sense of excitement about investing opportunities and complacency
about risks that infected the broader public.

The Path from Here
In the next part of the book, I develop carefully a theory of bubbles, a theory
that applies both to the stock market and to the housing market, and in fact
to any speculative market. The theory acknowledges multiple causes for these
phenomena; they have no simple, one-liner explanations. And yet the theory
also has a basic theoretical model, a model of feedback that is simple and
indispensable for understanding how prices move. In later parts of this book
I turn over and reexamine the theory of bubbles from a number of directions.

Part One

Structural Factors

Four

Precipitating Factors: The Internet,
the Capitalist Explosion, and Other Events

W

hat ultimately caused the values of the
stock markets in so many countries to
rise dramatically from 1982 to the remarkable peak around 2000? Why, after
two major corrections, are the values of these markets returning again at
the time of this writing to those elevated levels? What accounts for the long
downtrend in real long-term interest rates in many countries over the past
couple of decades? What ultimately caused the boom in real estate markets in
so many cities around the world to follow the stock market boom? To answer
these questions, and questions like them that will surely be generated in the
future, it is not enough to say that the markets in general are vulnerable to
bouts of irrational exuberance. We must specify what precipitating factors from
outside the markets themselves caused the markets to behave so dramatically.
Most historical events, from wars to revolutions, do not have simple causes.
When these events move in extreme directions, it is usually because of a
con­fluence of factors, none of which is by itself large enough to explain these
events.
Rome wasn’t built in a day, nor was it destroyed by one sudden bolt of bad
fortune. More likely, it owed its fall to a plurality of factors—some large and
some small, some remote and some immediate—that conspired together. This
ambiguity is unsatisfying to those of us seeking scientific certitude, especially
given that it is so hard to identify and isolate the precipitating factors to
begin with. But that is the nature of history, and such ambiguity justifies the
constant search for new and better information to expose at least the overall
contours of causation.
39

40

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

In Chapter 1, we saw some factors that have seemed, at certain times, to
“explain” movements in the stock market, notably, long-term interest rates;
these might help explain home prices as well. But one of the first lessons
of economics should be that there are many factors that seem sometimes to
“explain” speculative prices, too many for us to analyze them comfortably.
We have to resist the temptation to oversimplify by singling out only one.
Anyway, long-term interest rates are not really exogenous factors. They are
market phenomena determined by many of the same supply and demand factors that determine the level of prices in the stock market, and their behavior
is part of the same market psychology that drives the stock market. We have
to try to understand the origins of market psychology itself.
Understanding the factors that precipitate market moves is doubly difficult
because the timing of the major market events tends not to be lined up well
with the timing of the precipitating factors. The precipitating factors often
tend to be medium-term trends that catch the public’s attention only after they
have been in place for a long time. The timing of specific market events is,
as we shall discuss in the next chapter, directly determined by people’s reactions to the market and to one another, which impart to the market complex
internal dynamics. But we must look at the precipitating factors if we are to
understand why the market moves.
Those who predict avalanches look at snowfall patterns and temperature
patterns over long periods of time before an actual avalanche event, even
though they know that there may be no sudden change in these patterns at the
time of an avalanche. It may never be possible to say why an actual avalanche
occurred at the precise moment that it did. It is the same with the dramatic
movements of stock markets and other speculative markets.
Recognizing these limitations, let us look at a list of factors that might be
offered to help explain the increase in the value over the past twenty years of
worldwide stock prices—and in some cases, of bond and real estate prices as
well—as an exercise to help us understand what the future may hold.
These factors make up the skin of the bubble, if you will. I concentrate here
mostly on factors that have had an effect on the markets not warranted by rational
analysis of economic fundamentals. The list omits consideration of all the small
variations in fundamental factors (for example, the growth in earnings, the
change in real interest rates) that should rationally have an impact on financial markets. In more normal times or in markets for individual stocks, such
rational factors would assume relatively greater prominence in any discussion of changes in prices. Indeed it is thanks to a market’s ability to respond
appropriately to such factors, for a variety of investments, that well‑functioning
financial markets generally promote, rather than hinder, economic efficiency.1
The list of factors here was constructed specifically to help us understand
the extraordinary situations that have occurred recently (and, arguably, are

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

41

ongoing) in the stock markets and the housing markets, and so it concentrates
on less rational influences.
In detailing these factors, I describe the reaction of the general public, not
just of professional investment managers. Some observers believe that professional investment managers are more sensible and work to offset the irrational
exuberance of the nonprofessional investing public. Therefore, these observers
might argue that a sharp distinction should be drawn between the behavior
of the professionals and that of the nonprofessionals.2 Professional investors,
however, are not immune to the effects of the popular investing culture that
we observe in individual investors, and many of the factors described here
no doubt influence their thinking as well. There is in fact no clear distinction
between professional institutional investors and individual investors, since
the professionals routinely give advice to the individual investors.
Some of these factors exist in the background of the market, including
the advance of capitalism, the increased emphasis on business success, the
revolution in information technology, the demographics of the Baby Boom,
the decline of inflation and the economics of money illusion, and the rise of
gambling and pleasure in risk taking in general. Others operate in the foreground and shape the changing culture of investment. These include greatly
increased media coverage of business, the aggressively optimistic forecasts
of stock analysts, the rise of 401(k) plans, the mutual funds explosion, and the
expanding volume of trade in the stock market.

Twelve Precipitating Factors That Propelled
the Late Stages of the Millennium Boom, 1982–2000
In the first edition of this book, published in 2000—just before the stock market peak of that year—I listed twelve precipitating factors for the build-up
of bullish psychology and of stock prices to enormous levels by the beginning of the year. Here is the list as it was presented then, from the point of
view of the zeitgeist of that time; some of these factors are still operative
today, others less so.

The Arrival of the Internet at a Time of Solid Earnings Growth
The Internet and the World Wide Web invaded our homes during the second
half of the 1990s, making us intimately conscious of the pace of technological
change. The World Wide Web first appeared in the news in November 1993.
The Mosaic web browser first became available to the public in February 1994.
These dates mark the very beginning of the general public’s exposure to the
Internet, when only a few people had access to it. Significantly large numbers
of users did not discover the web until 1997 and later, marking the very years

42

ST R UC TUR AL FAC T OR S

when the NASDAQ stock price index (which was then even more heavily
weighted toward startup high-tech stocks than it is today) soared, tripling
to the end of 1999, and the price-earnings ratios took off into un­precedented
territory.
Internet technology is unusual in that it is a source of entertainment and
preoccupation for us all, indeed for the whole family. In this sense, it is comparable in importance to the personal computer or, before that, to television. In
fact, the impression it conveys of a changed future is even more vivid than that
produced when televisions or personal computers entered the home. Using the
Internet gives people a sense of mastery of the world. They can electronically
roam the world and accomplish tasks that would have been impossible before.
They can even put up a website and become a factor in the world economy
themselves. In contrast, the advent of television made them passive receivers
of entertainment, and personal computers were used by most people before
the Internet mainly as typewriters and high-tech pinball machines.
Because of the vivid and immediate personal impression the Internet makes,
people find it plausible to assume that it also has great economic importance.
It is much easier to imagine the consequences of advances in this technology
than the consequences of, say, improved shipbuilding technology or new
developments in materials science. Most of us simply do not hear much about
research in those areas.
Spectacular U.S. corporate earnings growth in 1994, up 36% in real terms
as measured by the S&P Composite real earnings, followed by real earnings
growth of 8% in 1995 and 10% in 1996, coincided roughly with the Internet’s
birth but in fact had little to do with the Internet. Instead the earnings growth
was attributed by analysts to a continuation of the slow recovery from the
1990–91 recession, coupled with a weak dollar and strong foreign demand for
U.S. capital and technology exports, as well as with cost-cutting initiatives by
U.S. companies. It could not have been the Internet that caused the growth
in profits: the fledgling Internet companies were not making much of a profit
yet. But the occurrence of profit growth coincident with the appearance of a
new technology as dramatic as the Internet created an impression among the
general public that the two events were somehow connected. Publicity linking
these twin factors, the Internet boom and the profit growth, was especially
strong because of the advent of the year 2000 and the new millennium, a time
of much optimistic discussion of the future.
The Internet is, of course, an important technological advance in its own
right, and it, as well as other developments in computer technology and robotics, does promise to have an unpredictable and powerful impact on our future.
But one should question what impact the Internet and the computer revolution
should have on the valuation of existing U.S. corporations. New technology
will always affect the market, but should it really raise the value of existing

PREC I P I TAT I N G FA C TO RS

43

companies, given that those existing companies do not have a monopoly on
the new technology?3 Should the advent of the Internet have raised the valuation of the Dow—which at the time contained no Internet stocks?4
The notion that existing companies would benefit from the Internet revolution was belied by the stories of E*Trade.com, Amazon.com, and other upstarts,
which did not even exist just a few years before 2000. People might well have
thought that still more new companies would appear in the future, in the United
States and abroad, and these would compete with the companies in which they
invested in the late 1990s. Simply put, the effect of new technology on existing
companies can go either way: it can boost or depress their profits.
What matters for a stock market boom is not, however, the reality of the
Internet revolution, which is hard to quantify, but rather the public impressions
that the revolution has created. Public reaction is influenced by the intuitive
plausibility of Internet lore, and this plausibility is ultimately influenced by
the ease with which examples or arguments come to mind. If we are regularly
spending time on the Internet, then these examples will come to mind very easily.
