
Download at www.wowebook.com

534

Part VIII System Testing and Management

but also a measure of risk. These ideas are partially correct, but as anyone who has operated in
the markets knows, the real definition of risk is: “How much money am I going to lose?” This is
how the technical analyst focuses on risk.
The amount of money lost, or potentially lost, is called drawdown. It is defined as that
amount by which the equity in an account declines from a peak. In other words, a drawdown is
how much investors would suffer if they became invested in an account at its peak value. In a
specific trade, the drawdown also can be defined as the amount that the trade value declines
between the entry and the exit, even if the exit is above the entry and produces a final profit.
Drawdown is sometimes referred to as the “pain” of holding a position. Although volatility can
contribute to drawdown, as we will see later in looking at the smoothness of equity curves, the
major concern for any investor or trader is the amount that can be lost.
Remember how we saw in Chapter 21, “Selection of Markets and Issues: Trading and
Investing,” that a 50% decline requires a 100% advance to return to even and that a 100% gain
can be wiped out with only a 50% loss. We can see a bit more of the mathematics of this phenomenon in Appendix A where we consider the geometric mean, which in this case would be 0%.
This law of percentages is against the investor. Thus, a profit and a loss are not equivalent. A
minor loss always requires a larger gain to offset it. The purpose in quantifiable systems is to
minimize that potential loss.
Risk to the investor or trader in the markets also includes many intangibles. Loss comes
not only from asset loss but also from emotional loss. Nothing is more disturbing to the psyche
than losing money and at the same time being proven wrong. Both these risks can be reduced by
systems. Losing money can be prevented through proper exit strategies, and the emotional loss
can be alleviated through the confidence that although one may make small mistakes, one’s
equity curve continues upward. A well-devised and well-understood system can produce that
confidence, making small losses just an inconvenience rather than a traumatic event.

Initial Decisions
Once you are committed to the mind-set and discipline of creating a system, you must make certain decisions about the characteristics of your system. The actual fundamental or technical
method used as the basis for the system is relatively unimportant. What is important is that whatever is used can be defined precisely. Most fundamental and technical methods, by themselves,
have a sketchy record of performance. Performance in the system will depend more on filters,
adjustments, and the entry and exit strategies than the method itself. This does not mean that any
old method will work. Pick one that is familiar, comfortable, sensible, and has a decent record;
then concentrate on the process.
Most systems designers argue that the simpler the system, the better. A system can become
bogged down with large numbers of conditions and statistically will lose degrees of freedom,
requiring more data and more signals to establish its significance. Some designers such as
Richard Dennis argue against simplicity (Collins, 2005), but they have enormous computer
power and knowledge behind them. Hill and others argue that even with modern technology and
mathematics, the success of systems now is no greater than the classic systems designed with a
hand or crank calculator.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

535

The first decision that must be made is that of trading philosophy and premises. In other
words, you must decide what kind of input and method is to be used to generate signals. Some
investors depend on fundamental information; most traders depend on technical methods. Others
use a combination. The important aspect is to have a clear understanding of the system’s premises and to know that the rules will be easily quantifiable and precise. Specificity is much easier
to use and to test than generality. You must also understand the logic of the system and be sure
that it suits your style of trading or investing.
Second, you must decide on which markets to focus. Is the market suitable for the intended
system? Are there opportunities for diversification between markets or instruments? How much
volatility and liquidity is required, and what specific instruments will be traded?
Third, you must establish the time horizon for the system. For example, most trend-following systems work better over longer periods, but most pattern systems work in hours and days.
Does the system intend to scalp trades, swing trade, or long-term invest? In addition, what is the
psychologically best-suited time not only for system logic but also for ease of use? Do you have
time to spend all day with the system, or can you monitor the system only daily, weekly, or
monthly?
Fourth, you must have a risk control plan; otherwise, you will not know what to do when
markets change. Understand that losses are inevitable, but be sure to keep them under control.
Admitting losses separates the professional from the amateur. Rationalizing or excusing losses
never helps. The market is never wrong—get out, the quicker the better. To do this, devise a stoploss strategy—“no clinging to the mast of the sinking ship.” This strategy should include protective and trailing stops, price targets, and adjustments for volatility, type of market, and any other
state that the market might be in. Otherwise, the account may suffer a larger loss. Emotions and
judgment become adversely affected, causing missed opportunities, selling profitable positions
to get even, and other mistakes. Stop-losses free up nonproductive capital and cause less stress
once accepted. A good rule of thumb for maximum risk per trade is 2% of capital. This 2% is the
difference between the entry price and the stop price.
Fifth, establish a time routine, which should include when to update the system and necessary charts, plan new trades, and update exit points for existing trades. As part of your system
administration, maintain a trader’s notebook, a trader’s diary, and a daily equity chart.

Types of Technical Systems
Technical analysts use a number of types of technical trading systems. Although there are numerous systems, they can be divided into four main categories: trend following, pattern recognition,
countertrend, and exogenous signals systems.
Trend Following
From our knowledge of technical systems, we understand that markets trend at times and trade in
a range at other times. The most profitable background is a trending background because the
moves are larger and generate fewer transaction costs. It is no wonder, then, that trend-following
nondiscretionary systems have been the most productive. Most large-scale mechanical system
hedge funds and commodity trading advisors use trend-following systems. Rather than attempting to catch the peaks and valleys, the trend-following system acts in the direction of the trend as

Download at www.wowebook.com

536

Part VIII System Testing and Management

soon after it has begun as can be reliably detected. Contrary to the buy low and sell high philosophy, the trend-following system will buy high and sell higher. Schwager believes that slower,
longer trend systems work better because the gains are larger, though less frequent, and the whipsaws are minimal. Most trend-following systems add a trend indicator such as the ADX to their
set of rules to be sure that a trend is in existence. However, as we know from earlier studies on
trends, the performance of a trend-following system can suffer during a trading range market.
Moving Average Systems
The classic trend-following system is composed of two moving averages that generate signals
when they cross over each other. In his book, The Definitive Guide to Futures Trading, Larry
Williams discusses how as early as the 1940s, Donchian demonstrated the validity of this method
and showed that it was more successful than the older system of using price versus a single moving average.
If two moving averages are better than one, would three be even better? No, studies have
shown that adding more moving averages weakens performance because of the increased number of rules required. Although practitioners frequently report success using moving averages,
we must mention that academic studies have shown that moving average crossover systems, even
with simple filters, are generally unprofitable. However, academics have not used any kind of
risk control in their experiments. Without the use of these important risk-control strategies, the
academic studies are not a true measure of the profitability of using a moving average crossover
system.
Breakout Systems
A variation of the trend-following system is the breakout system. These systems generate buy
and sell signals when price moves out of a channel or band. The most popular of these systems is
based on a variation of the Donchian channel breakout system or some kind of volatility breakout system using Bollinger Bands or other measures of range volatility. The breakout system can
be long term and use weekly figures, or short term, such as the open range breakout systems used
intraday.
Problems with Trend-Following Systems
Given their profitability, the moving average and breakout strategies are popular. Because many
of these trend-following systems are being traded, many others will receive the same signal at
roughly the same time and price you will. Liquidity can become strained, and slippage costs
from wider spreads and incomplete fills will increase the transaction costs over what may have
been anticipated. The solution to this problem is to devise an original system or to spread out or
scale entry orders.
Another problem with trend-following systems is that whipsaws are common, especially
during a trading range market, as the system attempts to identify the trend. In fact, trend-following systems often produce less than 50% wins because of the many whipsaws during ranging
markets. This problem can be reduced with the use of confirmations, such as special price
requirements (penetration requirement, time delay, and so on), once a signal has been given, or
through filters and diversification into uncorrelated markets.

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

537

Inevitably, to avoid whipsaws, a trend-following system will be late in the trend and will
thus miss profit potential at both ends of the trend. Unfortunately, this is the cost of a trend-following system. If an attempt is made to clip more profit at each end of the trend, the number of
losses will increase from the ranging nature of the trend at its terminal points. On the exit side of
a trend, specific trailing stops or such can be used to receive better prices, but again there is the
risk of missing another leg in the trend by exiting prematurely.
Losses occur primarily in the trading range preceding the establishment of a trend, as the
system tries to identify the next trend as closely as possible. One strategy to combat this is to use
a countertrend system at the same time, even if it is not as profitable as the trend-following system. The gains from the countertrend system will offset some of the losses of the trend-following
system, and the overall performance results will improve over the trend-following system alone.
Moving-average and breakout systems are usually limited to a one-directional signal only.
Part of the advantage in following a trend is to pyramid in the direction of the trend as evidence
of its viability becomes stronger. To accomplish this in a trend-following system, other indicators
must be used, thus increasing the complexity and decreasing the adaptability of the system.
The greatest fault with trend-following systems is the large percentage of consecutive
small losses that produce significant drawdowns. For example, let us say that the system suffers
ten small losses in a row while in a trading range. The drawdown to the equity of the account
accumulates during this period from the peak of the equity to the subsequent cumulative loss. A
series of losses that cause a large drawdown affect not only the pocketbook but also the confidence in the system and often lead to further complications. One strategy to lessen a sequence of
losses is the strategy mentioned previously of using a countertrend system. Another is to initiate
only small positions on a signal until the trend is well established. Yet another is to run another
trend-following system parallel that has a longer or shorter period.
Because a trend-following system often is characterized by clumps of large profits from
the trend and many small losses from the trading range, extreme volatility occurs in equity. We
will look at this later when we study equity curve smoothness, but the most-often-used countermeasure is to diversify into other markets or systems.
As with most mechanical systems, a trend-following system can work well during testing
and then bomb in practice. In most cases, this is due to improper testing and adjusting. Sometimes the improper testing is due to unrealistic assumption about transactions costs. Unrealistic
assumptions including spreads during fast markets, limit days in the futures market, and other
possible anomalies may have given false results during the testing stage of the system under consideration. Remember that the popularity of trend-following systems can affect slippage; this fact
often is erroneously ignored in the testing phase.
Occasionally, substantial parameter shifts will occur that the adaptive system will not be
able to recognize and accommodate. Again, by diversifying by using more than one system, or
using market character adjustments to volatility, such problems can be reduced.
Pattern Recognition Systems
“Every ship at the bottom of the sea had plenty of charts” is attributed to noted systems trader Jon
Najarian (Patel, 1997). Using patterns requires considerable testing and overcoming the problem

Download at www.wowebook.com

538

Part VIII System Testing and Management

of defining patterns. Larger patterns do not succumb to easy computer recognition because of
their variable nature. System traders such as Larry Williams, Larry Connor, and Linda Raschke
use short patterns, some of which we discussed in Chapter 17, “Short-Term Patterns,” and limit
their exposure with specific position stops and price or time targets. Generally, such systems are
partially discretionary because they require some interpretation during the trade entry.
Countertrend Systems
Countertrend systems are based on the buy-low-sell-high philosophy within a trading range. This
type of system requires a certain amount of volatility between the peaks and valleys of ranges;
otherwise, transaction costs, missing limits, and being stopped out on false moves chew up any
potential profits. Generally, these systems are discretionary. They profit from fading minimum
moves against a trend and using oscillator indicators such as the stochastic, RSI, the MACD, or
cycles. The largest potential problem in trading with one of these systems is the possibility of a
trend developing that creates the risk of unlimited losses. Protective stops are a necessity.
Generally, this type of system does not perform well. A number of publicly available tests,
for example, of buying and selling within Bollinger Bands have been conducted, and invariably
the best performance comes from buying and selling on breakouts from the bands rather than
trading within them. The major use of countertrend systems is to run coincident with trend-following systems to dampen the series of losses in the trend-following system during a trading
range.
Exogenous Signal Systems
Some systems generate signals from outside the market being traded. Intermarket systems, such
as gold prices for the bond market, would be an example of an exogenous signal system. Other
examples are sentiment such as the VIX for S&P futures, volume, or open interest warnings of
activity that trigger price systems or act as confirmation of price systems, or fundamental signals
such as monetary policy or consumer prices.
Which System Is Best?
Which type of system is the best? John R. Hill and George Pruitt, whose business is to test all
manner of trading systems (www.futurestruth.com), maintain that the best and most reliable systems are trend-following systems. Within trend-following systems, the breakout systems have
the best characteristics, specifically the Bollinger Band breakout systems, and the Donchian, or
channel, breakout systems. Closely behind are the moving-average crossover systems.

HOW DO I TEST A SYSTEM?
Not surprisingly, for an accurate evaluation of any system, the data must be impeccable. Without
the correct data, the system tests are useless. Data should always be the same as what will be
used when the system is running in real time. Not only the data but also the data vendor should
be the same source as what will be used in practice. Different vendors receive different data

Download at www.wowebook.com

Chapter 22 System Design and Testing

539

feeds. This is especially a problem in short-term systems, where the sequence of trades is important for execution and for pattern analysis.
The amount of data required depends on the period of the system. A general rule of thumb
is that the data must be sufficient to provide at least 30 to 50 signals and cover periods where the
market traveled up, down, and sideways. This will ensure that the test has enough history behind
it and enough exposure to different market circumstances.
The real-time trader has enough difficulty with “dirty” data on a live feed, and this
becomes just as crucial when testing back data. Cleanliness of data is another very necessary
requirement. Any anomalies or mispriced quotes will have an effect on the system test and will
skew the results in an unrealistic manner. Cleaning of data is not an easy task and often must be
relegated to the professional data providers.

Special Data Problems for Futures Systems
Although stock data has a few historical adjustments such as dividend payments, splits, offerings, and so on, the futures market has another more serious problem: which contract to test.
Most futures contracts have a limited life span that is short enough not to be useful in testing
most systems. The difficulty comes from the difference in price between the price at expiration
and the price of the nearest contract on that date. Those prices are rarely the same and are difficult to splice into something realistic that can be used for longer-term price analysis. To test a
daily system, for example, two years or more of daily data is required at the very least, but no
contract exists that runs back for two years. Of course, testing can be done on nearest contract
series, but it is limited to the contract length. This is satisfactory if the system trades minute by
minute but not for daily signals in a longer-term system.
To rectify this problem, two principal methods of splicing contract prices of different expirations together in a continuous stream have been used. These methods are known as perpetual
contracts and continuous contracts. Neither is perfect, but these methods are the ones most commonly used in longer-term price studies.
Perpetual contracts, also called constant forward contracts, are interpolations of the prices
of the nearest two contracts. Each is weighted based on the proximity to expiration of the nearest
contract to the forward date—say a constant 90 days. As an example, assume that today is early
December, only a few days from expiration of the December contract of a commodity future and
a little over three months from the expiration of the March contract, the next nearest. The 90-day
perpetual would be calculated by proportioning each contract’s current price by the distance each
is in time from the date 90 days from now. This weighting in early December favors the March
contract price, and each day as we approach the December expiration, the December contract
receives less weight until expiration when the perpetual is just the March contract price. The following day, however, the March contract price begins to lose weighting as the June contract price
begins to increase its weighting. This process gives a smooth but somewhat unrealistic contract
price; it eliminates the problem of huge price gaps at rollover points, but you cannot literally
trade a constant forward series. As Schwager points out, “the price pattern of a constant-forward
series can easily deviate substantially from the pattern exhibited by the actual traded contracts—
a highly undesirable feature” (1996, p. 664).

Download at www.wowebook.com

540

Part VIII System Testing and Management

The continuous, or spread adjusted, contract is more realistic, but it suffers from the fact
that at no time is the price of the continuous contract identical to the actual price because it has
been adjusted at each expiration or each rollover date. The continuous contract begins at some
time in the past with prices of a nearby contract. A rollover date is determined based on the
trader’s usual rollover date—say ten days before expiration. Finally, a cumulative adjustment
factor is determined. As time goes on and different contracts roll over to the next contract, this
spread between contracts is accumulated and the continuous contract price adjusted accordingly.
With this method, the continuous prices are exactly what would have been the cost to the trader
had the system signals been followed when they occurred. There is no distortion of prices. Price
trends and formations occur just as they would have at the time. The only difference is that the
actual prices are not those in the continuous contract. Percentage changes, for example, are not
accurate. Nevertheless, the method demonstrates exactly what would have happened to a system
during the period of the continuous contract, precisely what the systems designer wants to know.
As Schwager points out, “a linked futures price series can only accurately reflect either
price levels, as does the nearest futures, or price moves as does continuous futures, but not
both…” (1996, p. 669). Students interested in trading futures can refer to the book, Schwager on
Futures: Technical Analysis, to learn more about these techniques.
