
When you get out of a stock, do you sometimes buy it back at a
higher price?
Sure, all the time.
So you are at least able to bite the bullet and admit that you
made a mistake by getting out, and then get back in at a higher
price. You don't say, "I can't get buy it now; I sold it $10 lower."
I may have done that in earlier years, but now buying back a stock at
a higher price doesn't bother me at all. To me, the successful stock is
not one that I bought at 10 and held to a 100, but one where I picked
up 7 points here, 5 here, another 8 here, and caught a major part of
the move.
But it sounds as if it would be easier to just buy one of these
blessed stocks and hold it.
Sometimes, but it really depends on market conditions. For example,
right now valuations are so high that I don't have any core positions
that I intend to hold on to.
That brings me to a question I was going to ask: In this type of
market, where the leading stocks have already seen such extraordinary price run-ups, do you still use the same approach? If not,
how do you adjust your methodology?
To be honest, I'm having a hard time adjusting. My philosophy is to
float like a jellyfish and let the market push me where it wants to go. I
don't draw a line in the sand and say this is my strategy and I'm going
to wait for the market to come to me. I try to figure out what strategies are working in the market. One year it might be momentum,
another year it might be value.
So you adopt your strategy to match your perception of the market environment.
Exactly, I try to anticipate what the market is going to pay for.
How do you know when there is a sea change?
I'll look at everything and listen to as many people as I can, from cabdrivers to stock analysts. Then I sit back and try to see what idea rises
to the top. Sometimes the opportunities are so obvious that you
almost can't lose when they come around; the only problem is that
they don't corne around that often. The key is not to lose money in the
times in between.

STOUT W A L T D N

Give me an example of an opportunity that was that obvious.
Last year [1998] it was very clear to me—I don't like saying stuff like
this because it makes it sound as though I have a crystal ball—that
the market had a very good chance of rolling over in a serious way
during August.
What made you so sure?
I constantly evaluate market sentiment—Is the market hopeful? Is it
fearful?—and wait for the price action to confirm my assessment.
Throughout last winter and spring, the situation was very confounding. There were lots of reports about potential problems in Asia, but
the market ignored everything. Therefore, the only way to make
money was to be long, even in the face of this potential trouble.
So I decided to get really long in July. The leaders were performing
great, and the market was roaring. At one point, I was up 15 percent
for the month. Then all of a sudden, in a matter of days, I lost everything and actually found myself down 3 percent for the month. The
market took the money away so quickly that just by looking at my own
portfolio, which was filled with market leaders, not stocks with poor
fundamentals, I knew something had to be wrong.
What did you do at the time? You said you had started out the
month heavily long. Did you cover your entire position? Did you
go net short?
I was 130 percent long. What I typically do when I believe there's a
major bearish event occurring in the market is to sell everything and
then just watch. That's what I did then.
Did you go short?
Yes, about two weeks later. I thought that the Asian crisis that precipitated the break would have a second leg to it. Usually you don't just
hear about a problem and then have it end. We also started seeing
headlines about potential problems in Russia. Although we had seen
these types of news reports before, the difference this time around
was that prices were responding. I felt convinced that the situation

would continue. Russia was not going to get fixed the next day, neither would Thailand or Korea, and prices were reflecting these fears.
During the second week of August, I went 130 percent net short, and
the scenario played out. To me it was very obvious.

B A C K F R O M T H E flifS'S

When did you cover your short position?
I covered my shorts during the second week of October. I have a
number of rules taped to my quote machine. One of these is: Buy on
extreme weakness and sell on extreme strength. The only way to identify extremes is to get a feel for the sentiment, whether it is euphoria
or pessimism. Then you have to act on it quickly, because there are
often abrupt peaks and bottoms. By the second week of October, I
felt that I had to take advantage of the opportunity of the market's
extreme weakness to cover all my shorts. I covered the entire position
in one day and actually went net long 25 percent.
Was there anything significant about that day in particular that
prompted you to reverse your position?
That day, stocks like Dell went down from 50 to 40, and before the
end of the day they were going up 2 or 3 points at a clip.
So you were buying these stocks at much higher prices than they
were trading at earlier the same morning.
Absolutely. Actually one of the things I like to see when I'm trying to
buy stocks is that they become very difficult to buy. I put an order in

to buy Dell at 42, and I got a fill back at 45. I love that.
Do you just put your buy orders in at the market, or do you try to
get filled at a particular price?
I always buy and sell at the market. I never mess around trying to get
the best fill. I'm a broker's dream.
You said you went long about 25 percent. When did you increase
that long position?
Whenever I start to go back in on the long side, I like to wait and see
that the market rebound continues the next day and that there is no
further bearish news. If there is additional bearish news and the market doesn't go down, then 1 really go nuts.
Did that happen then?
It didn't happen the next day, but it happened later in the week.
There was more news about the collapse of Long Term Capital. [The
multibillion-dollar hedge fund was overleveraged in the bond market
and suffered enormous losses, leading to fears of repercussions to the
entire financial system. See David Shaw interview.] The market just
shrugged it off. That gave me greater confidence to just plow in on the

long side. I had a chance to buy all these market leaders while they
were down sharply from their peaks, which I love to do.
Did the all-or-nothing trade that recouped most of the money
you had lost from your home-equity loan mark the beginning of
your successful trading career? Did you stay true to your vow to
give up your trading transgressions?
For the most part. I immediately started trafficking in quality growth
names. I bought the stocks that went up more than the market when
the market was going up. I figured those were the horses to bet on. I
forced myself to buy these stocks on down days. I found these stocks
would often go up five points in a week, whereas I would have been
lucky to get five points in a year in the low-quality stocks I had previously been buying.
The only time I really got into trouble was when I fell prey to a
great sales pitch. The most dangerous thing on the Street is the ability to communicate. I worked with some great salesmen. They would
say, "Stuart, you have to look at this." And sometimes in a weak
moment, I would rationalize that I'd done well and had some extra
money to speculate with. Maybe this trade would work, and if it
didn't, I'd get out quickly. Before I knew it, I would be down 20 or 30
percent on the trade. It's a lesson that I continually have to learn.
Do you still find yourself vulnerable to listening to tips even now?
Absolutely. At some level, I have a gambling urge, which I decided a
long time ago I needed to satisfy, but in a small way. Therefore, I set
aside a small amount of money in the fund for doing these speculative
trades.
On balance, do you end up winning or losing on these trades?
About breakeven.
How did you go from being a stockbroker to a fund manager? For
that matter, did you ever make a sale?
Eventually I started to do okay as a stockbroker because I learned
how to sell.
How do you sell?
You need to find out what the customer wants and package your sales
pitch—not the product—accordingly.

What did the customer want?
Instant gratification, excitement, sizzle, the comfort of knowing that
lots of other people were buying the same stock, and a million reasons
why the stock would go up.
So you tried to make the stock sound as good as possible without
any qualifications?
Absolutely. That's what all stockbrokers do.
Weren't you troubled by making something uncertain sound
certain?
Sure, but it wasn't exactly lying, because I had no idea whether the
stock would go up or not. It was, however, a huge embellishment.
After a while, I just couldn't hack it anymore.
How did you get out of it?
After I started doing well in my own account, 1 began recommending
some of my own ideas, not just the stocks that were part of the company line. I was bailed out by one of my accounts who liked my style
and offered me a job to manage money for them. That was really what
I wanted to do. If I hadn't landed that job, I would have had to quit
because I was once again at the point of waking up in the morning
and feeling I can't do this anymore.
What kind of firm was it?
It was a registered investment advisory firm that managed about $300
million in institutional accounts, They had their own strategy on how
to invest.
Were you allowed to make your own trading decisions, or did you

have to follow their guidelines?
I could buy any stock I wanted, but it had to meet their investment
criteria.
What were those restrictions?
The price/earnings ratio had to be below 15. Earnings had to be growing by at least 20 percent per year. There were also some balance
sheet and liquidity conditions that had to be met.
Was that a help or a hindrance?
It was a huge impediment because it dramatically narrowed the universe of companies that I could invest in.

BACK FROM THE ABYSS

What stocks were you missing because of this policy?
For example, I couldn't buy a Microsoft or a Cisco; instead I had to
buy a Novell or a 3Com.
Because the price/earnings ratio was greater than fifteen?
Right.
Do you feel it is a flawed investment policy to try to buy stocks
that have low price/earnings ratios?
Not necessarily. I would never adopt that type of strategy myself, but
I feel that any sound strategy will work as long as you stick to it.
Were there any restrictions on the stocks you bought for your
own account?
I was allowed to buy any stocks I wanted to, as long as they were not
the same names I was buying for the company's clients.
What was the difference in performance between your own
account and the accounts you were managing for the company?
For the company accounts, I would only be up an average of 1 5 to 20
percent per year, while on my own account, I was averaging well over
100 percent per year.
Did you try going to management and saying, "Look, here's what
I've been doing for my own account without any restrictions. Let
me trade the company accounts the same way."
Sure, but they had geared the firm to follow their particular philosophy, and that's what the customers bought into. The last thing an
investor wants to see is a change in strategy.
My idea, however, was to try to adapt to any new strategies that
seemed to be working. Eventually I built up enough capital in my own
account so that I could go my own way. I started a fund with $1.3 million, about half of which was my own.
How did you get investors?
Strictly word of mouth. I didn't do any marketing.
I see that you're here completely on your own, which is amazing for a hedge fund managing $150 million. Don't you have
any help?
I have a secretary who comes in every other day.

That's it? Don't you need any additional assistance?
I hired someone last year—a great guy who is now off on his own—
but I knew immediately that it wasn't for me.
Why is that?
I found that having another opinion in the office was very destabilizing. My problem is that I am very impressionable. If I have someone
working for me every day, he may as well be running the money
because I'm no longer making my own decisions.
I like quiet. I talk all day on the phone, and that's enough for me. I
don't need committees, group meetings, and hand-holding to rationalize why a stock is going down. I even like the fact that my assistant
only comes in every other day, so that every alternate day I am completely on my own and can sit here and germinate.
I understand that completely, because I work in a home office. I
find that when you work on your own, you can get completely
engrossed in what you are doing.
Exactly. That's the main reason I like to be on my own. People come
in here and ask me, "How could you manage this much money on
your own? Don't you want to become a bigger firm?"
What do you tell them?
Well it's worked for me so far. The only thing that matters is how well
I do, not the amount of zeros I'm managing.
With your track record, you could easily raise a lot more money.
That would just kill everything. The only way I can possibly maintain
my track record is to make sure I don't overwhelm myself with
assets. Right now, if I have a good quarter, it ramps up the amount of
money I am managing. By growing through capital appreciation, I
can evolve my trading style to accommodate the increase in assets
managed.
I guess you would rather make 50 percent plus on a $150 million
than 20 percent on $ 1 billion.
Exactly. A lot of people who do well and decide to dramatically
increase their assets find that their first year is their best year. After
that, it's downhill. Of course, they still make huge sums of money.
But I want to feel good about coming in every day. I want to have

happy customers and see my assets steadily growing. I don't want to
be cranking out a great living on a business that is deteriorating. I
have almost no overhead, so I still make a great income. There is no
need to get greedy.
Do you think the experience of coming close to the edge of bankruptcy helped you become successful?
Definitely.
In what way?
The odd thing about this industry is that no matter how successful
you become, if you let your ego get involved, then one bad phone call
can put you out of business. My having seen the abyss might spare
me from malting that phone call. I know how quickly things can go
bad. Any stock can go to zero, and you need to realize that.
When I talk to potential new investors I focus on my mistakes.
Because if you are going to invest with someone, you want that person to have made mistakes on his own tab and not to make them on
yours. Someone who has never made a mistake is dangerous, because
mistakes will happen. If you've made mistakes, you realize they can
recur, and it makes you more careful.
We've talked about the mistakes you've made early in your
career. What mistakes have you made during your more recent
successful years?
This year I got very bearish without waiting for prices to confirm my
opinion.
What made you so blindly bearish?
I became very concerned about the rise in interest rates. In the past,
higher interest rates had always led to lower stock prices, and I
assumed the same pattern would repeat this year. The market, however, chose to look at other factors. 1 didn't wait for the market to confirm the fear of higher interest rates, and I lost money very quickly. I
was down 7 percent in March, which is a pretty big one-month drop
for me.
Any other mistakes come to mind?
In January 19981 invested in a bunch of small-cap initial public offerings (IPOs), which all performed incredibly poorly in the first quarter
they went public.

What was your mistake there?
My mistake was getting involved in illiquid securities without doing
sufficient research.
What prompted you to buy these stocks?
Market sentiment. The market was getting very excited about conceptual IPOs—stocks with a dream and a story but no earnings.
When stocks like these go sour, they can go down 70 percent or more
very quicldy. It was as if a tornado had swept through my portfolio. I
was down 12 percent for the month and decided to liquidate everything. One stock that I bought at 18, I sold at 2.
If these stocks were down that much, wouldn't you have been
better off holding them in case they bounced back? What happened to these stocks after you liquidated them?
They bounced, but not by much. As I liquidated these stocks, I used
the money to buy the types of stocks that I should've been buying—
good companies at much higher prices.
So you had deviated from your philosophy.
Yes, once again. It's like a junkie who is off drugs for three years and
then runs into some crack dealer who is able to convince him to start
again. I don't mean to blame other people for convincing me. It was my
own fault for allowing myself to be susceptible to these stories. I think
I've learned not to trade on those types of stories anymore. The good
news is that I quickly switched back to buying the types of companies
that I like. By the end of the quarter, I had recovered all my losses.
I guess the implication is that holding on to a losing stock can be
a mistake, even if it bounces back, if the money could have been
utilized more effectively elsewhere.
Absolutely. By cleaning out my portfolio and reinvesting in solid
stocks, I made back much more money than I would have if I had
kept the other stocks and waited for a dead cat bounce.
Do you talk to companies at all?
I used to visit companies all the time when I was working for the
investment advisory firm.
Did it help at all?
Hardly at all. I found that either they told me what they had previously told everyone else, and it was already factored into the price, or

else they lied to me. Once in a blue moon you would learn something
valuable, but there was a huge opportunity cost traveling from company to company to get that one piece of useful information.
Can you give me an example of a situation where management
lied to you.
The examples are almost too numerous to remember.
Pick out one that stands out as being particularly egregious.
I saw Autumn Software* make a presentation at a conference. I had
never heard such a great story. They produced software that was used
in computer backup systems all around the world. The management
team was very believable and articulate. The stock was high, but I felt
it was a big momentum horse. I bought half a million shares, and the
stock started to crumble almost immediately.
I called management and asked them what was happening. "We
have no idea," they said. "Business is actually better than last month."
One day I was out at Nantucket, and I received a phone call informing me that Autumn had just preannounced that they would have a
disappointing quarter. The stock, which had closed at 30 that day,
opened at 7 the next morning. It was funny because every time I had
talked to the company, "business had never been better." That proved
to me that as an outside investor you never know the truth.
Is this an example of a situation in which you ignored your own
rule of paying careful attention to how a stock responds to news,
or if it goes down for no apparent reason?
Unfortunately for my former employer, I was still learning that lesson
at the time.
Did that experience sour you completely on talking to management?
Not completely. I might call a company's management when its stock
is very low and no one is talking to them, because that is when they
are usually desperate enough to talk to anyone. My hope is that I
might learn about some catalyst that could cause the stock to turn
around.
What are the traits of a successful trader?
I think a lot of successful traders are unemotional, hardworking, and
^Pseudonym

disciplined. Ironically, I find myself lacking on each of those counts. I
get very•' emotional; I really don't work that hard; and I'm not as disciD
plined as I should be. I would attribute my own success to having
both conviction about my gut feelings and the ability to act on them
quickly. That is so critical.
So in your own case, you've been able to offset some other drawbacks simply by having the ability to pull the trigger?
Exactly, that's a very good point.
What is the biggest misconception people have about the stock
market?
Currently, the biggest misconception is the widespread belief that it
is easy to make a living trading in the stock market. People feel they
can give up their jobs and trade for a living; most of them are bound
to be disappointed.
What are the trading rules you have posted on your computer?
> Be patient—wait for the opportunity.
>» Trade on your own ideas and style.
*> Never trade impulsively, especially on other people's advice.
*• Don't risk too much on one event or company.
> Stay focused, especially when the markets are moving.
*• Anticipate, don't react.
>• Listen to the market, not outside opinions.
*• Think trades through, including profit/loss exit points, before you
put them on.
> If you are unsure about a position, just get out.
»» Force yourself to trade against the consensus.
*• Trade pattern recognition.
> Look past tomorrow; develop a six-month and one-year outlook.
> Prices move before fundamentals.
*• It is a warning flag if the market is not responding to data correctly.
* Be totally flexible; be able to admit when you are wrong.
*• You will be wrong often; recognize winners and losers fast.
^ Start each day from last night's close, not your original cost.
> Adding to losers is easy but usually wrong.
>• Force yourself to buy on extreme weakness and sell on extreme
strength.

STUTRT W A L T O N

*• Get rid of all distractions.

several occasions. Why, then, did he succeed, let alone succeed so

^ Remain confident — the opportunities never stop.

spectacularly?
There are five key elements:

I know you have no desire to be working with anyone, but let's
say five years from now you decided to pursue a new career making films. Could you train someone to take over for you and
invest in accordance with your guidelines?
I could teach someone the basic rules, but I couldn't teach another
person how to replicate what I do, because so much of that is
based on experience and gut feeling, which is different for each person.

After you reach a certain level of financial success, what is the
motivation to keep on going?
The challenge of performance and the tremendous satisfaction I get
from knowing that 1 contributed to people's financial security. It's fantastic. I have a lot of clients, some of whom are my own age, who I
have been able to lead to total financial independence.

How do you handle a losing streak?
I trade smaller. By doing that, I know I'm not going to make a lot, but
I also know I'm not going to lose a lot. It's like a pit stop. I need to
refresh myself. Then when the next big opportunity comes around —
and it always does — if I catch it right, it won't make any difference if
I've missed some trades in the interim.
