
Preface

xvii

Some things became clear quickly. Buffett’s level of activity in the
stock market has dropped off significantly in recent years; he has bought
entire companies more often than he has bought shares. He has on occasion moved more strongly into bonds—investment-grade corporate,
government, even high-yield—and then, when they became less attractive, moved out again.
Some of these newly acquired companies are profiled in the chapters
that follow, along with a discussion of how the characteristics of those
companies ref lect the tenets of the Warren Buffett Way. However, since
many of these companies were privately held before Buffett bought
them, the specifics of their financial data were not publicly available. I
cannot, therefore, discern with any confidence what Buffett might have
thought of those companies’ economic conditions, other than to say that
he clearly liked what he saw.
For this updated edition, I also took the opportunity to incorporate
some material that was not presented in the original book. I added a
chapter on Buffett’s style of portfolio management, a style he has labeled
“focus investing.” It is a cornerstone of his success, and I highly recommend it. I also included a chapter on the psychology of money, the many
ways that emotion plays havoc with good decisions. To invest wisely, it
is necessary to become aware of all the temptations to behave foolishly.
It is necessary for two reasons: If you know how to recognize the emotional potholes, you can avoid tripping into them. And you will be able
to recognize the missteps of others in time to profit from their mistakes.
Ten years is either a very long time, or not long at all, depending on
your circumstances and your personal view of the world. For investors,
what we can say is that during these ten years, context has changed but
the basics have not. That’s good, because in another ten years the context can change back again, or change in an entirely different direction.
Those who remain grounded in basic principles can survive those upheavals far better than those who do not.
In the ten years since I wrote The Warren Buf fett Way, the noise
level in the stock market has continued to rise, sometimes to a deafening
screech. Television commentators, financial writers, analysts, and market
strategists are all overtalking each other to get investors’ attention. At the
same time, many investors are immersed in Internet chat rooms and message boards exchanging questionable information and misleading tips.

xviii

P R E FA C E

Yet, despite all this available information, investors find it increasingly
difficult to earn a profit. Some are hard pressed even to continue. Stock
prices skyrocket with little reason, then plummet just as quickly. People
who have turned to investing for their children’s education and their
own retirement are constantly frightened. There appears to be neither
rhyme nor reason to the market, only folly.
Far above the market madness stand the wisdom and counsel of
Warren Buffett. In an environment that seems to favor the speculator
over the investor, Buffett’s investment advice has proven, time and
again, to be a safe harbor for millions of lost investors. Occasionally,
misaligned investors will yell out, “But it’s different this time”; and occasionally they will be right. Politics spring surprises, markets react,
then economics reverberate in a slightly different tone. New companies
are constantly born while others mature. Industries evolve and adapt.
Change is constant, but the investment principles outlined in this book
have remained the same.
Here is a succinct and powerful lesson from the 1996 annual report:
“Your goal as an investor should be simply to purchase, at a rational
price, a part interest in an easily understood business whose earnings are
virtually certain to be materially higher, five, ten, and twenty years from
now. Over time, you will find only a few companies that meet those
standards—so when you see one that qualifies, you should buy a meaningful amount of stock.”
Whatever level of funds you have available for investing, whatever
industry or company you are interested in, you cannot find a better
touchstone than that.
ROBERT G. HAGSTROM
Villanova, Pennsylvania
September 2004

Introduction

M

y father, Philip A. Fisher, looked with great pride on Warren
Buffett’s adoption of some of his views and their long and
friendly relationship. If my father had been alive to write this
introduction, he would have jumped at the chance to share some of the
good feelings he experienced over the decades from his acquaintance
with one of the very few men whose investment star burned so brightly
as to make his dim by comparison. My father genuinely liked Warren
Buffett and was honored that Buffett embraced some of his ideas. My
father died at 96—exactly three months before I received an unexpected letter asking if I would write about my father and Warren Buffett. This introduction has helped me to connect some dots and provide
some closure regarding my father and Mr. Buffett. For readers of The
Warren Buf fett Way, I hope I can provide a very personal look into an
important piece of investment history and some thoughts on how to
best use this wonderful book.
There is little I will say about Mr. Buffett since that is the subject of
this book and Robert Hagstrom covers that ground with grace and insight. It’s well known that my father was an important inf luence on
Warren Buffett and, as Mr. Hagstrom writes, my father’s inf luence figured more prominently in Buffett’s thinking in recent years. For his
part, as my father became acquainted with Warren Buffett, he grew to
admire qualities in him that he felt were essential to investing success
but are rare among investment managers.
xix

xx

INTRODUCTION

When he visited my father 40 years ago, in a world with relatively
primitive information tools by today’s standards, my father had his own
ways of gathering information. He slowly built a circle of acquaintances
over the decades—investment professionals he respected and who knew
him well enough to understand what he was and wasn’t interested in—
and who might share good ideas with him. Toward that end, he concluded that he would meet any young investment professional once. If he
was impressed, he might see him again and build a relationship. He
rarely saw anyone twice. Very high standards! In his mind, if you didn’t
get an “A” you got an “F.” And once he had judged against someone, he
simply excluded that person, forever. One shot at building a relationship.
Time was scarce.
Warren Buffett as a young man was among the very, very few who
impressed my father sufficiently in his first meeting to merit a second
meeting and many more meetings after that. My father was a shrewd
judge of character and skill. Unusually so! He based his career on judging people. It was one of his best qualities and a major reason why he put
so much emphasis on qualitative judgment of business management in
his stock analysis. He was always very proud he picked Warren Buffett as
an “A” before Buffett had won his much-deserved fame and acclaim.
The relationship between Warren Buffett and my father survived
my father’s occasional lapses when he would mistakenly call Mr. Buffett
“Howard.” This is an unusual story that has never been told and perhaps
says much about both my father and Warren Buffett.
My father was a small man with a big mind that raced intensely.
While kindly, he was nervous, often agitated, and personally insecure.
He was also very, very much a creature of habit. He followed daily catechisms rigorously because they made him more secure. And he loved to
sleep, because when he slept, he wasn’t nervous or insecure. So when he
couldn’t stop his mind from racing at night, which was often, he played
memory games instead of counting sheep. One sleep game he played was
memorizing the names and districts of all the members of Congress until
he drifted off.
Starting in 1942, he memorized the name of Howard Buffett and associated it with Omaha, over and over again, night after night, for
more than a decade. His brain mechanically linked the words “Omaha,”
“Buffett,” and “Howard” as a related series long before he met Warren
Buffett. Later, as Warren’s career began to build and his star rose, it was

Introduction

xxi

still fully two decades before my father could fully disentangle Buffett
and Omaha, from “Howard.” That annoyed my father because he
couldn’t control his mind and because he was fond of Warren Buffett
and valued their relationship. Father knew exactly who Warren Buffett
was but in casual conversation he often said something like, “That
bright young Howard Buffett from Omaha.” The more he said it, the
harder it became to eliminate it from his phraseology. A man of habit
habitually vexed.
Early one morning when they were to meet, my father was intent on
sorting out “Howard” from “Warren.” Still, at one point in the conversation, my father referred to Warren as “Howard.” If Warren noticed,
he gave no sign and certainly did not correct my father. This occurred
sporadically throughout the 1970s. By the 1980s, my father finally had
purged the word “Howard” from any sentence referencing Buffett. He
was actually proud when he left “Howard” behind for good. Years later,
I asked him if he ever explained this to Warren. He said he hadn’t because it embarrassed him so much.
Their relationship survived because it was built on much stronger
stuff. I think one of the kernels of their relationship was their shared
philosophy in associating with people of integrity and skill. When
Mr. Buffett says in regard to overseeing Berkshire Hathaway managers,
“We don’t tell .400 hitters how to swing,” that is almost straight from
Phil Fisher’s playbook. Associate with the best, don’t be wrong about
that, and then don’t tell them what to do.
Over the years, my father was very impressed with how Mr. Buffett
evolved as investor without compromising any of his core principles.
Every decade, Mr. Buffett has done things no one would have predicted
from reading about his past, and done them well. Within professional investing, most people learn in craft-like form some particular style of investing and then never change. They buy low P/E stocks or leading tech
names or whatever. They build that craft and then never change, or
change only marginally. In contrast, Warren Buffett consistently took
new approaches, decade-after-decade—so that it was impossible to predict what he might do next. You could not have predicted his 1970s franchise orientation from his original strict value bent. You could not have
predicted his 1980s consumer products orientation at above market average P/Es from his previous approaches. His ability to change—and do it
successfully—could be a book unto itself. When most people attempt to

xxii

INTRODUCTION

evolve as he has—they fail. Mr. Buffett didn’t fail, my father believed,
because he never lost sight of who he was. He always remained true to
himself.
My father was never physically far for very long from Rudyard
Kipling’s famous poem, “If.” In his desk, by his nightstand, in his den—
always close. He read it over and over and quoted it often to me. I keep
it by my desk as part of keeping him close to me. Being insecure but undaunted, he would tell you in Kipling-like fashion to be very serious
about your career and your investments, but do not take yourself too seriously. He would urge you to contemplate others’ criticisms of you, but
never consider them your judge. He would urge you to challenge yourself, but not judge yourself too extremely either way and when in your
eyes you’ve failed, force yourself to try again. And he would urge you to
do the next thing, yet unfathomed.
It is that part about Mr. Buffett, his knack for evolving consistent
with his values and past—doing the next thing unfathomed—that my
father most admired. Moving forward unfettered by the past restraints,
utterance, convention, or pride. Buffett, to my father’s way of thinking, embodied some of the qualities immortalized by Kipling.
Unfortunately, there will always be a small percent of society, but a
large absolute number, of small-minded envious miscreants who can’t
create a life of their own. Instead they love to throw mud. The purpose
of life for these misguided souls is to attempt to create pain where they
can’t otherwise create gain. By the time a successful career concludes,
mud will have been thrown at almost everyone of any accomplishment.
And if any can stick, it will. My insecure father always expected mud
to be thrown at everyone, himself included, but for those he admired,
he hoped it would not stick. And when mud was thrown, he would
expect those he admired, in Kipling-like fashion, to contemplate the
criticism or allegation without feeling judged by it. Always through
Kipling’s eyes!
Through a longer career than most, Warren Buffett has acquitted
himself remarkably—little mud has been thrown at him and none has
stuck. A testament indeed. Kipling would be pleased. As was my father.
It goes back to Mr. Buffett’s core values—he always knows exactly who
he is and what he is about. He isn’t tormented by conf licts of interest
that can undermine his principles and lead to less-than-admirable behaviors. There was no mud to throw so no mud stuck. And that is the

Introduction

xxiii

prime part of Warren Buffett you should try to emulate. Know who
you are.
I am writing this introduction in part to suggest to you how to use
this book. Throughout my career, people have asked me why I don’t
do things more like my father did or why I don’t do things more like
Mr. Buffett. The answer is simple. I am I, not them. I have to use my
own comparative advantages. I’m not as shrewd a judge of people as my
father and I’m not the genius Buffett is.
It is important to use this book to learn, but don’t use this book to
be like Warren Buffett. You can’t be Warren Buffett and, if you try, you
will suffer. Use this book to understand Buffett’s ideas and then take
those ideas and integrate them into your own approach to investing. It is
only from your own ideas that you create greatness. The insights in this
book are only useful when you ingest them into your own persona
rather than trying to twist your persona to fit the insights. (A twisted
persona is a lousy investor unless you’re twisted naturally.) Regardless, I
guarantee that you cannot be Warren Buffett no matter what you read
or how hard you try. You have to be yourself.
That is the greatest lesson I got from my father, a truly great teacher
at many levels—not to be him or anyone else, but to be the best I could
evolve into, never quitting the evolution. The greatest lesson you can
glean from Warren Buffett? To learn from him without desiring to be
like him. If you’re a young reader, the greatest investment lesson is to
find who you really are. If you’re an old reader, the greatest lesson is
that you really are much younger than you think you are and you
should act that way—a rare gift. Were that not possible, then Mr. Buffett wouldn’t still be ably evolving at what for most people is postretirement age. Think of Warren Buffett as a teacher, not a role model,
and think of this book as the single best explanation of his teachings,
well stated and easily learned. You can learn an enormous amount from
this book and that can be the foundation for developing your own successful investment philosophy.
KENNETH L. FISHER

1
The World’s
Greatest Investor

E

very year, Forbes magazine publishes a list of the 400 richest Americans, the elite Forbes 400. Individuals on the list come and go
from year to year, as their personal circumstances change and their
industries rise and fall, but some names are constant. Among those leading the list year in and year out are certain megabillionaires who trace
their wealth to a product (computer software or hardware), a service
(retailing), or lucky parentage (inheritance). Of those perennially in the
top five, only one made his fortune through investment savvy. That
one person is Warren Buffett.
In the early 1990s, he was number one. Then for a few years, he seesawed between number one and number two with a youngster named
Bill Gates. Even for the dot-com-crazed year 2000, when so much of
the wealth represented by the Forbes 400 came from the phenomenal
growth in technology, Buffett, who smilingly eschews high-tech anything, was firmly in fourth position. He was still the only person in the
top five for whom the “source of wealth” column read “stock market.”
In 2004, he was solidly back in the number two position.
In 1956, Buffett started his investment partnership with $100; after
thirteen years, he cashed out with $25 million. At the time of this writing (mid-2004), his personal net worth has increased to $42.9 billion,
the stock in his company is selling at $92,900 a share, and millions of
investors around the world hang on his every word.
1

2

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

To fully appreciate Warren Buffett, however, we have to go beyond
the dollars, the performance accolades, and the reputation.

INVESTMENT BEGINNINGS
Warren Edward Buffett was born August 30, 1930, in Omaha, Nebraska.
His grandfather owned a grocery store (and once employed a young
Charlie Munger); his father was a local stockbroker. As a boy, Warren
Buffett was always fascinated with numbers and could easily do complex
mathematical calculations in his head. At age eight, he began reading his
father’s books on the stock market; at age eleven, he marked the board at
the brokerage house where his father worked. His early years were enlivened with entrepreneurial ventures, and he was so successful that he
told his father he wanted to skip college and go directly into business. He
was overruled.
Buffett attended the business school at the University of Nebraska,
and while there, he read a new book on investing by a Columbia professor named Benjamin Graham. It was, of course, The Intelligent Investor.
Buffett was so taken with Graham’s ideas that he applied to Columbia
Business School so that he could study directly with Graham. Bill Ruane,
now chairman of the Sequoia Fund, was in the same class. He recalls that
there was an instantaneous mental chemistry between Graham and Buffett, and that the rest of the class was primarily an audience.1
Not long after Buffett graduated from Columbia with a master’s degree in economics, Graham invited his former student to join his company, the Graham-Newman Corporation. During his two-year tenure
there, Buffett became fully immersed in his mentor’s investment approach
(see Chapter 2 for a full discussion of Graham’s philosophy).
In 1956, Graham-Newman disbanded. Graham, then 61, decided to
retire, and Buffett returned to Omaha. Armed with the knowledge he
had acquired from Graham, the financial backing of family and friends,
and $100 of his own money, Buffett began a limited investment partnership. He was twenty-five years old.

T H E B U F F E T T PA RT N E R S H I P, LT D .
The partnership began with seven limited partners who together contributed $105,000. The limited partners received 6 percent annually on

T h e W o r l d ’s G r e a t e s t I n v e s t o r

3

their investment and 75 percent of the profits above this bogey; the remaining 25 percent went to Buffett, who as general partner had essentially free rein to invest the partnership’s funds.
Over the next thirteen years, Buffett compounded money at an annual rate of 29.5 percent.2 It was no easy task. Although the Dow Jones
Industrial Average declined in price five different years during that
thirteen-year period, Buffett’s partnership never had a down year. Buffett, in fact, had begun the partnership with the ambitious goal of outperforming the Dow by ten points every year. And he did it—not by
ten—but by twenty-two points!
As Buffett’s reputation grew, more people asked him to manage
their money. For the partnership, Buffett bought controlling interests
in several public and private companies, and in 1962 he began buying
shares in an ailing textile company called Berkshire Hathaway.
That same year, 1962, Buffett moved the partnership office from
his home to Kiewit Plaza in Omaha, where his office remains today.
The next year, he made a stunning purchase.
Tainted by a scandal involving one of its clients, American Express
saw its shares drop from $65 to $35 almost overnight. Buffett had
learned Ben Graham’s lesson well: When stocks of a strong company are
selling below their intrinsic value, act decisively. Buffett made the bold
decision to put 40 percent of the partnership’s total assets, $13 million,
into American Express stock. Over the next two years, the shares tripled
in price, and the partners netted a cool $20 million in profit. It was pure
Graham—and pure Buffett.
By 1965, the partnership’s assets had grown to $26 million. Four
years later, explaining that he found the market highly speculative and
worthwhile values increasingly scarce, Buffett decided to end the investment partnership.
When the partnership disbanded, investors received their proportional interests. Some of them, at Buffett’s recommendation, sought out
money manager Bill Ruane, his old classmate at Columbia. Ruane
agreed to manage their money, and thus was born the Sequoia Fund.
Others, including Buffett, invested their partnership revenues in Berkshire Hathaway. By that point, Buffett’s share of the partnership had
grown to $25 million, which was enough to give him control of Berkshire Hathaway.
What he did with it is well known in the investment world. Even
those with only a passing interest in the stock market recognize Buffett’s

4

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

name and know something of his stunning success. In the following
chapters, we trace the upward trajectory of Berkshire Hathaway in the
forty years that Buffett has been in control. Perhaps more important,
we also look beneath the surface to uncover the commonsense philosophy on which he founded his success.

T H E M A N A N D H I S C O M PA N Y
Warren Buffett is not easy to describe. Physically, he is unremarkable,
with looks often described as grandfatherly. Intellectually, he is considered a genius; yet his down-to-earth relationship with people is
truly uncomplicated. He is simple, straightforward, forthright, and
honest. He displays an engaging combination of sophisticated dry wit
and cornball humor. He has a profound reverence for all things logical
and a foul distaste for imbecility. He embraces the simple and avoids
the complicated.
When reading Berkshire’s annual reports, one is struck by how comfortable Buffett is quoting the Bible, John Maynard Keynes, or Mae
West. The operable word here is reading. Each report is sixty to seventy
pages of dense information: no pictures, no color graphics, no charts.
Those who are disciplined enough to start on page one and continue uninterrupted are rewarded with a healthy dose of financial acumen, folksy
humor, and unabashed honesty. Buffett is candid in his reporting. He
emphasizes both the pluses and the minuses of Berkshire’s businesses. He
believes that people who own stock in Berkshire Hathaway are owners
of the company, and he tells them as much as he would like to be told if
he were in their shoes.
When Buffett took control of Berkshire, the corporate net worth was
$22 million. Forty years later, it has grown to $69 billion. It has long
been Buffett’s goal to increase the book value of Berkshire Hathaway at
a 15 percent annual rate—well above the return achieved by the average
American company. Since he took control of Berkshire in 1964, the gain
has been much greater: Book value per share has grown from $19 to
$50,498, a rate of 22.2 percent compounded annually. This relative performance is all the more impressive when you consider that Berkshire is
penalized by both income and capital gains taxes and the Standard &
Poor’s 500 returns are pretax.
