
XIV

that strikes you most forcibly is how little either stock
speculation or stock speculators to-day differ from
yesterday. The game does not change and neither does
human nature.
I went along with the rise in 1916. I was as bullish as the
next man, but of course I kept my eyes open. I knew, as
everybody did, that there must be an end, and I was on the
watch for warning signals. I wasn't particularly interested
in guessing from which quarter the tip would come and so
I didn't stare at just one spot. I was not, and I never have
felt that I was, wedded indissolubly to one or the other side
of the market. That a bull market has added to my bank
account or a bear market has been particularly generous I
do not consider sufficient reason for sticking to the bull or
the bear side after I receive the get-out warning. A man
does not swear eternal allegiance to either the bull or the
bear side. His concern lies with being right.
And there is another thing to remember, and that is that
a market does not culminate in one grand blaze of glory.
Neither does it end with a sudden reversal of form. A
market can and does often cease to be a bull market long
before prices generally begin to break. My long expected
warning came to me when I noticed that, one after
another, those stocks which had been the leaders of the
market reacted several points from the top and for the first
time in many months—did not come back. Their race
evidently was run, and that clearly necessitated a change
in my trading tactics.
It was simple enough. In a bull market the trend of
prices, of course, is decidedly and definitely upward.
Therefore whenever a stock goes against the general trend
you are justified in assuming that there is something
wrong with that particular stock. It is enough for the
experienced trader to perceive that something is wrong.
He must not expect the tape to become a lecturer. His job
is to listen for it to say "Get out!" and not wait for it to
submit a legal brief for approval.
203

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

As I said before, I noticed that stocks which had been
the leaders of the wonderful advance had ceased to
advance. They dropped six or seven points and stayed
there. At the same time the rest of the market kept on
advancing under new standard bearers. Since nothing
wrong had developed with the companies themselves, the
reason had to be sought elsewhere. Those stocks had gone
with the current for months. When they ceased to do so,
though the bull tide was still running strong, it meant that
for those particular stocks the bull market was over. For
the rest of the list the tendency was still decidedly upward.
There was no need to be perplexed into inactivity, for
there were really no cross currents. I did not turn bearish
on the market then, because the tape didn't tell me to do
so. The end of the bull market had not come, though it was
within hailing distance. Pending its arrival there was still
bull money to be made. Such being the case, I merely
turned bearish on the stocks which had stopped advancing
and as the rest of the market had rising power behind it I
both bought and sold.
The leaders that had ceased to lead I sold. I put out a
short line of five thousand shares in each of them; and
then I went long of the new leaders. The stocks I was short
of didn't do much, but my long stocks kept on rising.
When finally these in turn ceased to advance I sold them
out and went short five thousand shares of each. By this
time I was more bearish than bullish, because obviously
the next big money was going to be made on the down
side. While I felt certain that the bear market had really
begun before the bull market had really ended, I knew the
time for being a rampant bear was not yet. There was no
sense in being more royalist than the king; especially in
being so too soon. The tape merely said that patrolling
parties from the main bear army had dashed by. Time to
get ready.

204

XIV

I kept on both buying and selling until after about a
month's trading I had out a short line of sixty thousand
shares—five thousand shares each in a dozen different
stocks which earlier in the year had been the public's
favourites because they had been the leaders of the great
bull market. It was not a very heavy line; but don't forget
that neither was the market definitely bearish.
Then one day the entire market became quite weak and
prices of all stocks began to fall. When I had a profit of at
least four points in each and every one of the twelve stocks
that I was short of, I knew that I was right. The tape told
me it was now safe to be bearish, so I promptly doubled
up.
I had my position. I was short of stocks in a market that
now was plainly a bear market. There wasn't any need for
me to push things along. The market was bound to go my
way, and, knowing that, I could afford to wait. After I
doubled up I didn't make another trade for a long tune.
About seven weeks after I put out my full line, we had the
famous "leak," and stocks broke badly. It was said that
somebody had advance news from Washington that
President Wilson was going to issue a message that would
bring back the dove of peace to Europe in a hurry. Of
course the war-bride boom was started and kept up by the
World War, and peace was a bear item. When one of the
cleverest traders on the floor was accused of profiting by
advance information he simply said he had sold stocks not
on any news but because he considered that the bull
market was overripe. I myself had doubled my line of
shorts seven weeks before.
On the news the market broke badly and I naturally
covered. It was the only play possible. When something
happens on which you did not count when you made your
plans it behooves you to utilise the opportunity that a
kindly fate offers you. For one thing, on a bad break like
that you have a big market, one that you can turn around
in, and that is the time to turn your paper profits into real
205

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

money. Even in a bear market a man cannot always cover
one hundred and twenty thousand shares of stock without
putting up the price on himself. He must wait for the
market that will allow him to buy that much at no damage
to his profit as it stands him on paper.
I should like to point out that I was not counting on that
particular break at that particular time for that particular
reason. But, as I have told you before, my experience of
thirty years as a trader is that such accidents are usually
along the line of least resistance on which I base my
position in the market. Another thing to bear in mind is
this: Never try to sell at the top. It isn't wise. Sell after a
reaction if there is no rally.
I cleared about three million dollars in 1916 by being
bullish as long as the bull market lasted and then by being
bearish when the bear market started. As I said before, a
man does not have to marry one side of the market till
death do them part.
That winter I went South, to Palm Beach, as I usually do
for a vacation, because I am very fond of saltwater fishing.
I was short of stocks and wheat, and both lines showed
me a handsome profit. There wasn't anything to annoy me
and I was having a good time. Of course unless I go to
Europe I cannot really be out of touch with the stock or
commodities markets. For instance, in the Adirondacks I
have a direct wire from my broker's office to my house.
In Palm Beach I used to go to my broker's branch office
regularly. I noticed that cotton, in which I had no interest,
was strong and rising. About that time this was in 1917—I
heard a great deal about the efforts that President Wilson
was making to bring about peace. The reports came from
Washington, both in the shape of press dispatches and
private advices to friends in Palm Beach. That is the
reason why one day I got the notion that the course of the
various markets reflected confidence in Mr. Wilson's
success. With peace supposedly close at hand, stocks and
206

XIV

wheat ought to go down and cotton up. I was all set as far
as stocks and wheat went, but I had not done anything in
cotton in some time.
At 2:20 that afternoon I did not own a single bale, but at
2:25 my belief that peace was impending made me buy
fifteen thousand bales as a starter. I proposed to follow my
old system of trading—that is, of buying my full line which
I have already described to you.
That very afternoon, after the market closed, we got the
Unrestricted Warfare note. There wasn't anything to do
except to wait for the market to open the next day. I recall
that at Gridley's that night one of the greatest captains of
industry in the country was offering to sell any amount of
United States Steel at five points below the closing price
that afternoon. There were several Pittsburgh millionaires
within hearing. Nobody took the big man's offer. They
knew there was bound to be a whopping big break at the
opening.
Sure enough, the next morning the stock and
commodity markets were in an uproar, as you can
imagine. Some stocks opened eight points below the
previous night's close. To me that meant a heaven-sent
opportunity to cover all my shorts profitably. As I said
before, in a bear market it is always wise to cover if
complete demoralisation suddenly develops.
That is the only way, if you swing a good-sized line, of
turning a big paper profit into real money both quickly and
without regrettable reductions. For instance, I was short
fifty thousand shares of United States Steel alone. Of
course I was short of other stocks, and when I saw I had
the market to cover in, I did. My profits amounted to about
one and a half million dollars. It was not a chance to
disregard.
Cotton, of which I was long fifteen thousand bales,
bought in the last half hour of the trading the previous
afternoon, opened down five hundred points. Some break!
It meant an overnight loss of three hundred and seventy207

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

five thousand dollars. While it was perfectly clear that the
only wise play in stocks and wheat was to cover on the
break I was not so clear as to what I ought to do in cotton.
There were various things to consider, and while I always
take my loss the moment I am convinced I am wrong, I did
not like to take that loss that morning. Then I reflected
that I had gone South to have a good time fishing instead
of perplexing myself over the course of the cotton market.
And, moreover, I had taken such big profits in my wheat
and in stocks that I decided to take my Joss in cotton. I
would figure that my profit had been a little more than one
million instead of over a million and a half. It was all a
matter of bookkeeping, as promoters are apt to tell you
when you ask too many questions.
If I hadn't bought that cotton just before the market
closed the day before, I would have saved that four
hundred thousand dollars. It shows you how quickly a
man may lose big money on a moderate line. My main
position was absolutely correct and I benefited by an
accident of a nature diametrically opposite to the
considerations that led me to take the position I did in
stocks and wheat. Observe, please, that the speculative line
of least resistance again demonstrated its value to a trader.
Prices went as I expected, notwithstanding the unexpected
market factor introduced by the German note. If things
had turned out as I had figured I would have been 100 per
cent right in all three of my lines, for with peace stocks and
wheat would have gone down and cotton would have gone
kiting up. I would have cleaned up in all three. Irrespective
of peace or war, I was right in my position on the stock
market and in wheat and that is why the unlooked-for
event helped. In cotton I based my play on something that
might happen outside of the market—that is, I bet on Mr.
Wilson's success in his peace negotiations. It was the
German military leaders who made me lose the cotton bet.

208

XIV

When I returned to New York early in 1917 I paid back
all the money I owed, which was over a million dollars. It
was a great pleasure to me to pay my debts. I might have
paid it back a few months earlier, but I didn't for a very
simple reason. I was trading actively and successfully and I
needed all the capital I had. I owed it to myself as well as
to the men I considered my creditors to take every
advantage of the wonderful markets we had in 1915 and
1916. I knew that I would make a great deal of money and I
wasn't worrying because I was letting them wait a few
months longer for money many of them never expected to
get back. I did not wish to pay off my obligations in
driblets or to one man at a time, but in full to all at once.
So as long as the market was doing all it could for me I just
kept on trading on as big a scale as my resources
permitted.
I wished to pay interest, but all those creditors who had
signed releases positively refused to accept it. The man I
paid off the last of all was the chap I owed the eight
hundred dollars to, who had made my life a burden and
had upset me until I couldn't trade. I let him wait until he
heard that I had paid off all the others. Then he got his
money. I wanted to teach him to be considerate the next
time somebody owed him a few hundreds.
And that is how I came back.
After I paid off my debts in full I put a pretty fair
amount into annuities. I made up my mind I wasn't going
to be strapped and uncomfortable and minus a stake ever
again. Of course, after I married I put some money in trust
for my wife. And after the boy came I put some in trust for
him.
The reason I did this was not alone the fear that the
stock market might, take it away from me, but because I
knew that a man will spend anything he can lay his hands
on. By doing what I did my wife and child are safe from
me.
209

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

More than one man I know has done the same thing,
but has coaxed his wife to sign off when he needed the
money, and he has lost it. But I have fixed it up so that no
matter what I want or what my wife wants, that trust
holds. It is absolutely safe from all attacks by either of us;
safe from my market needs; safe even from a devoted
wife's love. I'm taking no chances!

210

XV
Among the hazards of speculation the happening of the
unexpected I might even say of the unexpectable ranks
high. There are certain chances that the most prudent man
is justified in taking chances that he must take if he wishes
to be more than a mercantile mollusk. Normal business
hazards are no worse than the risks a man runs when he
goes out of his house into the street or sets out on a
railroad journey. When I lose money by reason of some
development which nobody could foresee I think no more
vindictively of it than I do of an inconveniently timed
storm. Life itself from the cradle to the grave is a gamble
and what happens to me because I do not possess the gift
of second sight I can bear undisturbed. But there have
been times in my career as a speculator when I have both
been right and played square and nevertheless I have been
cheated out of my earnings by the sordid unfairness of
unsportsmanlike opponents.
211

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Against misdeeds by crooks, cowards and crowds a
quick-thinking or far-sighted business man can protect
himself. I have never gone up against downright
dishonesty except in a bucket shop or two because even
there honesty was the best policy; the big money was in
being square and not in welshing. I have never thought it
good business to play any game in any place where it was
necessary to keep an eye on the dealer because he was
likely to cheat if unwatched. But against the whining
welsher the decent man is powerless. Fair play is fair play.
I could tell you a dozen instances where I have been the
victim of my own belief in the sacredness of the pledged
word or of the inviolability of a gentlemen's agreement. I
shall not do so because no useful purpose can be served
thereby.
Fiction writers, clergymen and women are fond of
alluding to the floor of the. Stock Exchange as a boodlers'
battlefield and to Wall Street's daily business as a fight. It
is quite dramatic but utterly misleading. I do not think
that my business is strife and contest. I never fight either
individuals or speculative cliques. I merely differ in
opinion—that is, in my reading of basic conditions. What
playwrights call battles of business are not fights between
human beings. They are merely tests of business vision. I
try to stick to facts and facts only, and govern my actions
accordingly. That is Bernard M. Baruch's recipe for success
in wealth-winning. Sometimes I do not see the facts all the
facts clearly enough or early enough; or else I do not
reason logically. Whenever any of these things happen I
lose. I am wrong. And it always costs me money to be
wrong.
No reasonable man objects to paying for his mistakes.
There are no preferred creditors in mistake-making and no
exceptions or exemptions. But I object to losing money
when I am right. I do not mean, either, those deals that
have cost me money because of sudden changes in the
rules of some particular exchange. I have in mind certain
212

XV

hazards of speculation that from time to time remind a
man that no profit should be counted safe until it is
deposited in your bank to your credit.
After the Great War broke out in Europe there began
the rise in the prices of commodities that was to be
expected. It was as easy to foresee that as to foresee war
inflation. Of course the general advance continued as the
war prolonged itself. As you may remember, I was busy
"coming back" in 1915. The boom in stocks was there and
it was my duty to utilise it. My safest, easiest and quickest
big play was in the stock market, and I was lucky, as you
know.
By July, 1917, I not only had been able to pay off all my
debts but was quite a little to the good besides. This meant
that I now had the time, the money and the inclination to
consider trading in commodities as well as in stocks. For
many years I have made it my practice to study all the
markets. The advance in commodity prices over the prewar level ranged from 100 to 400 per cent. There was only
one exception, and that was coffee. Of course there was a
reason for this. The breaking out of the war meant the
closing up of European markets and huge cargoes were
sent to this country, which was the one big market. That
led in time to an enormous surplus of raw coffee here, and
that, in turn, kept the price low. Why, when I first began to
consider its speculative possibilities coffee was actually
selling below pre-war prices. If the reasons for this
anomaly were plain, no less plain was it that the active and
increasingly efficient operation by the German and
Austrian submarines must mean an appalling reduction in
the number of ships available for commercial purposes.
This eventually in turn must lead to dwindling imports of
coffee. With reduced receipts and an unchanged
consumption the surplus stocks must be absorbed, and
when that happened the price of coffee must do what the
prices of all other commodities had done, which was, go
way up.
213

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

It didn't require a Sherlock Holmes to size up the
situation. Why everybody did not buy coffee I cannot tell
you. When I decided to buy it I did not consider it a
speculation. It was much more of an investment. I knew it
would take time to cash in, but I knew also that it was
bound to yield a good profit. That made it a conservative
investment operation—a banker's act rather than a
gambler's play.
I started my buying operations in the winter of 1917. I
took quite a lot of coffee. The market, however, did
nothing to speak of. It continued inactive and as for the
price, it did not go up as I had expected. The outcome of it
all was that I simply carried my line to no purpose for nine
long months. My contracts expired then and I sold out all
my options. I took a whopping big loss on that deal and yet
I was sure my views were sound. I had been clearly wrong
in the matter of time, but I was confident that coffee must
advance as all commodities had done, so that no sooner
had I sold out my line than I started in to buy again. I
bought three times as much coffee as I had so unprofitably
carried during those nine disappointing months. Of course
I bought deferred options for as long a time as I could get.
I was not so wrong now. As soon as I had taken on my
trebled line the market began to go up. People everywhere
seemed to realise all of a sudden what was bound to
happen in the coffee market. It began to look as if my
investment was going to return me a mighty good rate of
interest.
The sellers of the contracts I held were roasters, mostly
of German names and affiliations, who had bought the
coffee in Brazil confidently expecting to bring it to this
country. But there were no ships to bring it, and presently
they found themselves in the uncomfortable position of
having no end of coffee down there and being heavily short
of it to me up here. Please bear in mind that I first became
bullish on coffee while the price was practically at a prewar level, and don't forget that after I bought it I carried it
214

XV

the greater part of a year and then took a big loss on it. The
punishment for being wrong is to lose money. The reward
for being right is to make money. Being clearly right and
carrying a big line, I was justified in expecting to make a
killing. It would not take much of an advance to make my
profit satisfactory to me, for I was carrying several
hundred thousand bags. I don't like to talk about my
operations in figures because sometimes they sound rather
formidable and people might think I was boasting. As a
matter of fact I trade in accordance to my means and
always leave myself an ample margin of safety. In this
instance I was conservative enough. The reason I bought
options so freely was because I couldn't see how I could
lose. Conditions were in my favour. I had been made to
wait a year, but now I was going to be paid both for my
waiting and for being right. I could see the profit coming
fast. There wasn't any cleverness about it. It was simply
that I wasn't blind.
Coming sure and fast, that profit of millions! But it
never reached me. No; it wasn't sidetracked by a sudden
change in conditions. The market did not experience an
abrupt reversal of form. Coffee did not pour into the
country. What happened? The unexpectable! What had
never happened in anybody's experience; what I therefore
had no reason to guard against. I added a new one to the
long list of hazards of speculation that I must always keep
before me. It was simply that the fellows who had sold me
the coffee, the shorts, knew what was in store for them,
and in their efforts to squirm out of the position into which
they had sold themselves, devised a new way of welshing.
They rushed to Washington for help, and got it.
Perhaps you remember that the Government had
evolved various plans for preventing further profiteering
in necessities. You know how most of them worked. Well,
the philanthropic coffee shorts appeared before the Price
Fixing Committee of the War Industries Board I think that
was the official designation and made a patriotic appeal to
215
