
128

IX

twenty million dollars. It saved the stock market. The bank
panic didn't come until the following week. He was a man,
J. P. Morgan was. They don't come much bigger.
That was the day I remember most vividly of all the
days of my life as a stock operator. It was the day when my
winnings exceeded one million dollars. It marked the
successful ending of my first deliberately planned trading
campaign. What I had foreseen had come to pass. But
more than all these things was this: a wild dream of mine
had been realised. I had been king for a day!
I'll explain, of course. After I had been in New York a
couple of years I used to cudgel my brains trying to
determine the exact reason why I couldn't beat in a Stock
Exchange house in New York the game that I had beaten
as a kid of fifteen in a bucket shop in Boston. I knew that
some day I would find out what was wrong and I would
stop being wrong. I would then have not alone the will to
be right but the knowledge to insure my being right. And
that would mean power.
Please do not misunderstand me. It was not a deliberate
dream of grandeur or a futile desire born of overweening
vanity. It was rather a sort of feeling that the same old
stock market that so baffled me in Fullerton's office and in
Hoarding's would one day eat out of my hand. I just felt
that such a day would come. And it did October 24, 1907.
The reason why I say it is this: That morning a broker
who had done a lot of business for my brokers and knew
that I had been plunging on the bear side rode down in the
company of one of the partners of the foremost banking
house in the Street. My friend told the banker how heavily
I had been trading, for I certainly pushed my luck to the
limit. What is the use of being right unless you get all the
good possible out of it?
Perhaps the broker exaggerated to make his story sound
important. Perhaps I had more of a following than I knew.
Perhaps the banker knew far better than I how critical the
situation was. At all events, my friend said to me: "He
129

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

listened with great interest to what I told him you said the
market was going to do when the real selling began, after
another push or two. When I got through he said he might
have something for me to do later in the day."
When the commission houses found out there was not a
cent to be had at any price I knew the time had come. I
sent brokers into the various crowds. Why, at one time
there wasn't a single bid for Union Pacific. Not at any
price! Think of it! And in other stocks the same thing. No
money to hold stocks and nobody to buy them.
I had enormous paper profits and the certainty that all
that I had to do to smash prices still more was to send in
orders to sell ten thousand shares each of Union Pacific
and of a half dozen other good dividend-paying stocks and
what would follow would be simply hell. It seemed to me
that the panic that would be precipitated would be of such
an intensity and character that the board of governors
would deem it advisable to close the Exchange, as was
done in August, 1914, when the World War broke out.
It would mean greatly increased profits on paper. It
might also mean an inability to convert those profits into
actual cash. But there were other things to consider, and
one was that a further break would retard the recovery
that I was beginning to figure on, the compensating
improvement after all that bloodletting. Such a panic
would do much harm to the country generally.
I made up my mind that since it was unwise and
unpleasant to continue actively bearish it was illogical for
me to stay short. So I turned and began to buy.
It wasn't long after my brokers began to buy in for me
and, by the way, I got bottom prices that the banker sent
for my friend.
"I have sent for you," he said, "because I want you to go
instantly to your friend Livingston and say to him mat we
hope he will not sell any more stocks to-day. The market
can't stand much more pressure. As it is, it will be an
immensely difficult task to avert a devastating panic.
130

IX

Appeal to your friend's patriotism. This is a case where a
man has to work for the benefit of all. Let me know at once
what he says."
My friend came right over and told me. He was very
tactful. I suppose he thought that having planned to smash
the market I would consider his request as equivalent to
throwing away the chance to make about ten million
dollars. He knew I was sore on some of the big guns for the
way they had acted trying to land the public with a lot of
stock when they knew as well as I did what was coming.
As a matter of fact, the big men were big sufferers and
lots of the stocks I bought at the very bottom were in
famous financial names. I didn't know it at the time, but it
did not matter. I had practically covered all my shorts and
it seemed to me there was a chance to buy stocks cheap
and help the needed recovery in prices at the same time if
nobody hammered the market.
So I told my friend, "Go back and tell Mr. Blank that I
agree with them and that I fully realised the gravity of the
situation even before he sent for you. I not only will not
sell any more stocks to-day, but I am going in and buy as
much as I can carry." And I kept my word. I bought one
hundred thousand shares that day, for the long account. I
did not sell another stock short for nine months.
That is why I said to friends that my dream had come
true and that I had been king for a moment. The stock
market at one time that day certainly was at the mercy of
anybody who wanted to hammer it. I do not surfer from
delusions of grandeur; in fact you know how I feel about
being accused of raiding the market and about the way my
operations are exaggerated by the gossip of the Street.
I came out of it in fine shape. The newspapers said that
Larry Livingston, the Boy Plunger, had made several
millions. Well, I was worth over one million after the close
of business that day. But my biggest winnings were not in
dollars but in the intangibles: I had been right, I had
looked ahead and followed a clear-cut plan. I had learned
131

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

what a man must do in order to make big money; I was
permanently out of the gambler class; I had at last learned
to trade intelligently in a big way. It was a day of days for
me.

132

X
The recognition of our own mistakes should not benefit us
any more than the study of our successes. But there is a
natural tendency in all men to avoid punishment. When
you associate certain mistakes with a licking, you do not
hanker for a second dose, and, of course, all stock-market
mistakes wound you in two tender spots—your pocketbook
and your vanity. But I will tell you something curious; A
stock speculator sometimes makes mistakes and knows
that he is making them. And after he makes them he will
ask himself why he made them; and after thinking over it
cold-bloodedly a long time after the pain of punishment is
over he may learn how he came to make them, and when,
and at what particular point of his trade; but not why. And
then he simply calls himself names and lets it go at that.
Of course, if a man is both wise and lucky, he will not
make the same mistake twice. But he will make any one of
the ten thousand brothers or cousins of the original. The
133

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

Mistake family is so large that there is always one of them
around when you want to see what you can do in the foolplay line.
To tell you about the first of my million-dollar mistakes
I shall have to go back to this time when I first became a
millionaire, right after the big break of October, 1907. As
far as my trading went, having a million merely meant
more reserves. Money does not give a trader more
comfort, because, rich or poor, he can make mistakes and
it is never comfortable to be wrong. And when a
millionaire is right his money is merely one of his several
servants. Losing money is the least of my troubles. A loss
never bothers me after I take it. I forget it Overnight. But
being wrong—not taking the loss that is what does the
damage to the pocketbook and to the soul. You remember
Dickson G. Watts' story about the man who was so nervous
that a friend asked him what was the matter.
"I can't sleep," answered the nervous one.
"Why not?" asked the friend.
"I am carrying so much cotton that I can't sleep
thinking about it. It is wearing me out.
What can I do?"
"Sell down to the sleeping point," answered the friend.
As a rule a man adapts himself to conditions so quickly
that he loses the perspective. He does not feel the
difference much that is, he does not vividly remember how
it felt not to be a millionaire. He only remembers that
there were things he could not do that he can do now. It
does not take a reasonably young and normal man very
long to lose the habit of being poor. It requires a little
longer to forget that he used to be rich. I suppose that is
because money creates needs or encourages their
multiplication. I mean that after a man makes money in
the stock market he very quickly loses the habit of not
spending. But after he loses his money it takes him a long
time to lose the habit of spending.
134

X

After I took in my shorts and went long in October,
1907, I decided to take it easy for a while. I bought a yacht
and planned to go off on a cruise in Southern waters. I am
crazy about fishing and I was due to have the time of my
life. I looked forward to it and expected to go any day. But
I did not. The market wouldn't let me.
I always have traded in commodities as well as in
stocks. I began as a youngster in the bucket shops. I
studied those markets for years, though perhaps not so
assiduously as the stock market. As a matter of fact, I
would rather play commodities than stocks. There is no
question about their greater legitimacy, as it were. It
partakes more of the nature of a commercial venture than
trading in stocks does. A man can approach it as he might
any mercantile problem. It may be possible to use
fictitious arguments for or against a certain trend in a
commodity market; but success will be only temporary, for
in the end the facts are bound to prevail, so that a trader
gets dividends on study and observation, as he does in a
regular business. He can watch and weigh conditions and
he knows as much about it as anyone else. He need not
guard against inside cliques. Dividends are not
unexpectedly passed or increased overnight in the cotton
market or in wheat or corn. In the long run commodity
prices are governed but by one law—the economic law of
demand and supply. The business of the trader in
commodities is simply to get facts about the demand and
the supply, present and prospective. He does not indulge
in guesses about a dozen things as he does in stocks. It
always appealed to me trading in commodities.
Of course the same things happen in all speculative
markets. The message of the tape is the same. That will be
perfectly plain to anyone who will take the trouble to
think. He will find if he asks himself questions and
considers conditions, that the answers will supply
themselves directly. But people never take the trouble to
ask questions, leave alone seeking answers. The average
135

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

American is from Missouri everywhere and at all times
except when he goes to the brokers' offices and looks at the
tape, whether it is stocks or commodities. The one game of
all games that really requires study before making a play is
the one he goes into without his usual highly intelligent
preliminary and precautionary doubts. He will risk half his
fortune in the stock market with less reflection than he
devotes to the selection of a medium-priced automobile.
This matter of tape reading is not so complicated as it
appears. Of course you need experience. But it is even
more important to keep certain fundamentals in mind. To
read the tape is not to have your fortune told. The tape
does not tell you how much you will surely be worth next
Thursday at 1:35 p.m. The object of reading the tape is to
ascertain, first, how and, next, when to trade—that is,
whether it is wiser to buy than to sell. It works exactly the
same for stocks as for cotton or wheat or corn or oats.
You watch the market—that is, the course of prices as
recorded by the tape with one object: to determine the
direction—that is, the price tendency. Prices, we know, will
move either up or down according to the resistance they
encounter. For purposes of easy explanation we will say
that prices, like everything else, move along the line of
least resistance. They will do whatever comes easiest,
therefore they will go up if there is less resistance to an
advance than to a decline; and vice versa.
Nobody should be puzzled as to whether a market is a
bull or a bear market after it fairly starts. The trend is
evident to a man who has an open mind and reasonably
clear sight, for it is never wise for a speculator to fit his
facts to his theories. Such a man will, or ought to, know
whether it is a bull or a bear market, and if he knows that
he knows whether to buy or to sell. It is therefore at the
very inception of the movement that a man needs to know
whether to buy or to sell.

136

X

Let us say, for example, that the market, as it usually
does in those between-swings times, fluctuates within a
range of ten points; up to $130 and down to $120. It may
look very weak at the bottom; or, on the way up, after a
rise of eight or ten points, it may look as strong as
anything. A man ought not to be led into trading by
tokens. He should wait until the tape tells him that the
time is ripe. As a matter of fact, millions upon millions of
dollars have been lost by men who bought stocks because
they looked cheap or sold them because they looked dear.
The speculator is not an investor. His object is not to
secure a steady return on his money at a good rate of
interest, but to profit by either a rise or a fall in the price of
whatever he may be speculating in. Therefore the thing to
determine is the speculative line of least resistance at the
moment of trading; and what he should wait for is the
moment when that line defines itself, because that is his
signal to get busy.
Reading the tape merely enables him to see that at $130
the selling had been stronger than the buying and a
reaction in the price logically followed. Up to the point
where the selling prevailed over the buying, superficial
students of the tape may conclude that the price is not
going to stop short of $150, and they buy. But after the
reaction begins they hold on, or sell out at a small loss, or
they go short and talk bearish. But at $120 there is
stronger resistance to the decline. The buying prevails over
the selling, there is a rally and the shorts cover. The public
is so often whipsawed that one marvels at their persistence
in not learning their lesson.
Eventually something happens that increases the power
of either the upward or the downward force and the point
of greatest resistance moves up or down—that is, the
buying at $130 will for the first time be stronger than the
selling, or the selling at $120 be stronger than the buying.
The price will break through the old barrier or movementlimit and go on. As a rule, there is always a crowd of
137

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

traders who are short at $120 because it looked so weak, or
long at $130 because it looked so strong, and, when the
market goes against them they are forced, after a while,
either to change their minds and turn or to close out, In
either event they help to define even more clearly the price
line of least resistance. Thus the intelligent trader who has
patiently waited to determine this line will enlist the aid of
fundamental trade conditions and also of the force of the
trading of that part of the community that happened to
guess wrong and must now rectify mistakes. Such
corrections tend to push prices along the line of least
resistance.
And right here I will say that, though I do not give it as a
mathematical certainty or as an axiom of speculation, my
experience has been that accidents—that is, the
unexpected or unforeseen have always helped me in my
market position whenever the latter has been based upon
my determination of the line of least resistance. Do you
remember that Union Pacific episode at Saratoga that I
told you about? Well, I was long because I found out that
the line of least resistance was upward. I should have
stayed long instead of letting my broker tell me that
insiders were selling stocks. It didn't make any difference
what was going on in the directors' minds. That was
something I couldn't possibly know. But I could and did
know that the tape said: "Going up!" And then came the
unexpected raising of the dividend rate and the thirtypoint rise in the stock. At $164 prices looked mighty high,
but as I told you before, stocks are never too high to buy or
too low to sell. The price, per se, has nothing to do with
establishing my line of least resistance.
You will find in actual practice that if you trade as I have
indicated any important piece of news given out between
the closing of one market and the opening of another is
usually in harmony with the line of least resistance. The
trend has been established before the news is published,
and in bull markets bear items are ignored and bull news
138

X

exaggerated, and vice versa. Before the war broke out the
market was in a very weak condition. There came the
proclamation of Germany's submarine policy. I was short
one hundred and fifty thousand shares of stock, not
because I knew the news was coming, but because I was
going along the line of least resistance. What happened
came out of a clear sky, as far as my play was concerned.
Of course I took advantage of the situation and I covered
my shorts that day.
It sounds very easy to say that all you have to do is to
watch the tape, establish your resistance points and be
ready to trade along the line of least resistance as soon as
you have determined it. But in actual practice a man has to
guard against many things, and most of all against himself
—that is, against human nature. That is the reason why I
say that the man who is right always has two forces
working in his favor basic conditions and the men who are
wrong. In a bull market bear factors are ignored. That is
human nature, and yet human beings profess
astonishment at it. People will tell you that the wheat crop
has gone to pot because there has been bad weather in one
or two sections and some farmers have been ruined. When
the entire crop is gathered and all the farmers in all the
wheat-growing sections begin to take their wheat to the
elevators the bulls are surprised at the smallness of the
damage. They discover that they merely have helped the
bears.
When a man makes his play in a commodity market he
must not permit himself set opinions. He must have an
open mind and flexibility. It is not wise to disregard the
message of the tape, no matter what your opinion of crop
conditions or of the probable demand may be. I recall how
I missed a big play just by trying to anticipate the starting
signal. I felt so sure of conditions that I thought it was not
necessary to wait for the line of least resistance to define
itself. I even thought I might help it arrive, because it
looked as if it merely needed a little assistance.
139

Reminiscence of a Stock Operator

I was very bullish on cotton. It was hanging around
twelve cents, running up and down within a moderate
range. It was in one of those in-between places and I could
see it. I knew I really ought to wait. But I got to thinking
that if I gave it a little push it would go beyond the upper
resistance point.
I bought fifty thousand bales. Sure enough, it moved up.
And sure enough, as soon as I stopped buying it stopped
going up. Then it began to settle back to where it was when
I began buying it. I got out and it stopped going down. I
thought I was now much nearer the starting signal, and
presently I thought I'd start it myself again. I did. The
same thing happened. I bid it up, only to see it go down
when I stopped. I did this four or five times until I finally
quit in disgust. It cost me about two hundred thousand
dollars. I was done with it. It wasn't very long after that
when it began to go up and never stopped till it got to a
price that would have meant a killing for me—if I hadn't
been in such a great hurry to start.
This experience has been the experience of so many
traders so many times that I can give this rule: In a narrow
market, when prices are not getting anywhere to speak of
but move within a narrow range, there is no sense in trying
to anticipate what the next big movement is going to be up
or down. The thing to do is to watch the market, read the
tape to determine the limits of the get-nowhere prices, and
make up your mind that you will not take an interest until
the price breaks through the limit in either direction. A
speculator must concern himself with making money out
of the market and not with insisting that the tape must
agree with him. Never argue with it or ask it for reasons or
explanations. Stock-market postmortems don't pay
dividends.
Not so long ago I was with a party of friends. They got to
talking wheat. Some of them were bullish and others
bearish. Finally they asked me what I thought. Well, I had
been studying the market for some time. I knew they did
140

X

not want any statistics or analyses of conditions. So I said:
"If you want to make some money out of wheat I can tell
you how to do it."
They all said they did and I told them, "If you are sure
you wish to make money in wheat just you watch it. Wait.
The moment it crosses $1.20 buy it and you will get a nice
quick play in it!"
"Why not buy it now, at $1.14?" one of the party asked.
"Because I don't know yet that it is going up at all." "Then
why buy it at $1.20? It seems a mighty high price."
"Do you wish to gamble blindly in the hope of getting a
great big profit or do you wish to speculate intelligently
and get a smaller but much more probable profit?"
They all said they wanted the smaller but surer profit,
so I said, "Then do as I tell you. If it crosses $1.20 buy."
As I told you, I had watched it a long time. For months
it sold between $1.10 and $1.20, getting nowhere in
particular. Well, sir, one day it closed at above $1.19. I got
ready for it, Sure enough the next day it opened at
1.20-1/2, and I bought. It went to $1.21, to 1.22, to 1.23, to
1.25, and I went with it.
Now I couldn't have told you at the time just what was
going on. I didn't get any explanations about its behaviour
during the course of the limited fluctuations. I couldn't tell
whether the breaking through the limit would be up
through $1.20 or down through $1.10, though I suspected
it would be up because there was not enough wheat in the
world for a big break in prices.
As a matter of fact, it seems Europe had been buying
quietly and a lot of traders had gone short of it at around
$1.19. Owing to the European purchases and other causes,
a lot of wheat had been taken out of the market, so that
finally the big movement got started. The price went
beyond the 1.20 mark. That was all the point I had and it
was all I needed. I knew that when it crossed $1.20 it
would be because the upward movement at last had
gathered force to push it over the limit and something had
141
