• S&P 500 and Nasdaq-100 index futures up or down more than 2%
No two issues trade alike on the tape, so it’s wise to observe ticker
movement and check out certain risk characteristics before taking a position. Look for depth of participation and which players are spending the
most time at the inside bid-ask. Measure volatility by comparing current
price action against the width of a typical swing in a quiet market. Share
size on the market depth screen is a total lie, due to rules that permit hidden
orders, but the flow of buying and selling pressure might tell the truth, so
average out total shares on one side of the market for several minutes and
compare that number to relative price movement. This simple exercise
could expose a few big whales swimming under the surface.

A Quick Checklist on Tape Reading
1. Memorize key levels on your favorite charts. Then watch the tape
whenever price approaches one of them. See if you can predict
reversals before the crowd does.
2. Look for divergences between sentiment and the tape flow. Are
hidden buyers holding up prices in the middle of a selloff, or do
rallies fizzle out for no apparent reason?
3. Ask if price action matches your expectations. Look for buyers at
breakout levels and sellers at breakdown levels. When they don’t
show up, stand aside or fade the trend.
4. Use the opening price principle. Draw a line across the opening
tick on the S&P 500 and Nasdaq-100 using breakouts, breakdowns,
and reversals as trading signals.

PART FIVE

228

Controlling Exposure

5. Track the relationship between price and the daily range. An
instrument holding high in its daily range has hidden strength,
while one hanging low has hidden weakness.
6. Follow professionals in quiet times and the public in wild times.
Insiders chase volume during periods of conflict but lose control of
the tape when the public enters the market.
7. Liquid stocks move in channeled ranges. Ignore oscillations in
the middle of these zones, but focus undivided attention when
prices reach upper or lower boundaries.
8. Most volume comes from scalping machines pushing prices
around for a few pennies. Find the whales underneath these
minnows to predict the next rally or selloff.

Tape Reading Tells
Experienced tape readers keep a collection of key observations tucked
away in their brains so they can act quickly whenever the tape cycles into
analogous price action. This hodgepodge of personal signals, setups, and
key tells can yield quick profits because the data come through personal
experience instead of from reading a book or attending a seminar.
Mr. Market plays a constant game of misdirection, but our accumulated
tape knowledge lets us see through the veil and decipher key elements
of the daily grind. Let’s look at the most potent of these small portents of
market direction:
• Globex futures. Look at premarket index futures and see where
they’re trading relative to their day-session 15-minute 50-period
moving averages. Expect a positive opening for stocks when index
price sits on top of the average and a negative opening when it lies
below. If the S&P 500 is above but the Nasdaq-100 is below, look
for intraday rotation from tech and small caps, into the blue chips.
Flip over this outlook when Nasdaq-100 is above and S&P 500
is below. On those days in particular, watch for speculative four
letter stocks to take over the leadership mantle.
• Advancers/decliners. Market breadth and up/down volume
offer valuable data on hidden strength or weakness. Buy midday
pullbacks when breadth shows greater than 1,000 advancing to
declining issues. Sell midday bounces when breadth shows less

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

229

than –1,000 advancing to declining issues. Up to down volume in
both exchanges greater than 4:1 points to a trend day that favors the
dominating side of the market. Assume there will be no intraday
turnarounds when you see this type of price action. Instead, stop
fighting the tape and focus intraday capital on 60-minute range
breakouts or breakdowns that follow the prevailing trend.
• Buy/sell flow. The NYSE TICK exposes the peaks and valleys
of intraday swing cycles. Look for large-scale reversals after

F I G U R E

10.2

The experienced tape reader can decipher telltale action that’s been overlooked by the crowd. For example, a
slow creep rally into a resistance level that’s held back price for three to five sessions is an early signal for a
breakout. Brandywine Realty Trust spikes at 8.34 and pulls back. The stock reverses four times at that level in
the next two days and then begins a slow and persistent uptick that gathers steam on the afternoon of August 3.
Momentum escalates the next morning, triggering a vertical breakout.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

230

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

the TICK hits an extreme reading, like plus or minus 1,400, for
the third time in a single session. Use smaller TICK extremes to
pinpoint intraday swings that will carry price the other way in a
60- to 90-minute cycle.
• Stealth breakouts. Watch for a breakout or breakdown when
intraday price creeps toward a support or resistance level that it’s
failed to exceed multiple times in the last three to five sessions.
This slow crawl will print a series of small bars with no pullbacks
on the 15-minute chart. Look for these issues to hit the contested
level and then expand quickly through the barrier.
		  Why does this type of price action predict a big rally or selloff?
It’s a common scenario in which big players have entered the
market and are accumulating or dumping shares under the radar,
trying not to attract attention. They push prices slowly by hitting
the spread with small shares at regular intervals while supporting
their positions with decent size on the other side of the market.
Momentum eventually gathers steam, and the stock cuts through
support or resistance like butter.
• Historic price levels. Stocks respond to every high or low on the
chart, no matter how old or far away. Take profits and cut losses
into big prints from prior years because they can easily stop a
strong trend dead in its tracks. However, be patient because price
often goes vertical into these magic numbers, yielding windfall
gains. Highs and lows set into place five or ten years ago become
excellent pivot points for new entries as well.
•	Algorithm games. Stalk liquid stocks you want to buy on the
pullback. Then watch as program algorithms take price down and
down and down. Sit back and wait for the selloff to cut through
short-term support. That happens because the eggheads writing
these programs know the charts better than many traders and
want to shake out poorly placed stops. Finally, wait for the bottom
to drop out, and then look for the bid to stretch 20, 30, or 40 cents
below the last print while the ask hardly moves. This predicts
the selling frenzy is nearly over, and positions can be taken for a
rebound. You now have to hit the asking price, even though it’s
much higher than the low printed by the falling bid.
Finally, here’s an observation that will add considerable power to
your tape reading expertise. Look for price action to cycle through three
distinct phases when it moves into a key position just above resistance
or just below support. Like so many elements of market dynamics, these

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

231

interrelated impulses track the action-reaction-resolution cycle, discussed
in Chapter 2:
1. Euphoria driven by the breakout or breakdown
2. Fear triggered by a fade against the breakout or breakdown
3.	Intensified euphoria or fear that confirms the breakout, breakdown,
or pattern failure
Most traders focus their full attention on the excitement of the
breakout or breakdown, jumping in when the ticker tape bursts with
buying or selling activity. Of course, as I’ve argued throughout this text,
this is a great way to lose money. In contrast, tape readers step back and
examine the quality of this three-pronged conflict, which ultimately tells
them whether the embryonic move is bona fide—or just a nasty trap
waiting to be sprung.

Pre- and Postmarket
The trading day doesn’t begin at 9:30 a.m. New York time, nor does it
end at 4:00 p.m. In our modern market environment, thousands of shares
pass hands in the pre- and postmarkets, outside of routine business hours.
Seriously, the trading game is hard enough when everyone else is doing
it, so why get up early or stay late? The bottom line is, you’ll make more
money and take smaller losses if you play well through these extended
sessions.
The pre- and postmarkets opened to the public during the height of
the tech bubble. Prior to that, trading outside of the big exchanges was
confined to Instinet, an exclusive club for Wall Street insiders. That exclusivity vanished forever when Island ECN offered the little guy a cheap way
to keep on trading right into the dinner hour. Back then everyone believed
the world markets were headed for 24-hour nirvana, where liquidity would
follow sunrises around the globe. The 2000 to 2002 bear market crushed
that pipe dream, with volume drying up to a trickle in the extended hours
sessions. However, things changed once again with the advent of program
algorithms, exchange mergers, and the growing dominance of Asian and
European markets.
The extended hours offer a crazy quilt of opportunities in which you
can buy and sell at amazing prices if you pay close attention to breaking
news and shifting sentiment. This is especially true after one side gets

232

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

trapped because it failed to buy or sell ahead of the closing bell. The
most obvious danger in pre- and postmarket trading comes from taking a
position at the wrong price despite what should happen the next day. It’s
also risky because the illiquid environment usually translates into wide
bid-ask spreads. This is a huge obstacle that warns us that, in many cases,
it’s better to just sit on our hands and wait for the regular session.
Traders have a tough time interpreting premarket news and its
impact on the upcoming session, but the process of digesting early morning
data isn’t as hard as you might think. Start with a filtering mechanism
that organizes news flow into its natural categories. Obviously, your
initial focus must be on news that affects your open positions. Then look
at upgrades, downgrades, and earnings reports because they’ll all trigger
volatile spikes, hurling prices well above or below closing prices. Fortunately, it isn’t necessary to interpret these events in a vacuum because
you can just watch and see how other market players respond to the
information.
Upgrades and downgrades have a mixed impact on stocks,
depending on market tone, seasonality, and price action leading into the
bullish or bearish call. At a minimum, keep close tabs on ranking calls
by the top tier houses. Simply stated, an event-triggered rally or selloff
will last longer and move faster when Goldman Sachs upgrades Intel or
downgrades Apple than would the same call coming from a Des Moines
boutique. As a general rule, Monday analyst calls have the greatest impact
because big houses use the start of the new week to move entire sectors
rather than individual stocks. These broad brush opinions on popular
sectors, like chip stocks or the financials, expose market segments where
these folks have already positioned themselves and now want the public
to pile in or pile out.
Avoid chasing premarket news, good or bad, into positions before
or just after the opening bell. This is a weak-handed move that will likely
be punished in the early part of the new trading day. A better strategy
is to place the stock on a watch list and stand aside while it establishes
a trading range though the first 45 minutes to two hours of the session.
This morning range will contain most of the warm bodies that failed to sit
on their hands when the news was first released. Stalk price movement
while whipsaws punish these bag holders, and then use their pain to get
on board at better entry levels. Just keep in mind it could be several days
before the best trading opportunity comes along.
Take the time to catch up on overnight news in commodities and
currencies to see how the rest of the world is trading. These are macro
forces that could move broad equities when the U.S. markets finally

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

233

open. Hedge funds and Wall Street institutions often initiate their daily
strategies through buying or selling in the overseas markets. With this in
mind, focus on the reasons given for commodity or currency movement
rather than trying to interpret fundamentals on the other side of the world.
For example, you might find that primary attention is being drawn to an
OPEC statement, a Fed pronouncement, or a Chinese growth forecast. It’s
likely the western financial media will latch onto these themes before the
opening bell, forcing their impact on American traders whether they like
it or not.
Understand the difference between premarket news and no news at
all. Many companies flood the newswires with minor releases designed to
move prices in their favor. These items often detail product sales or general
activity that has little impact on operating results. Reporting outfits get
tricked into publicizing these nonevents because they can’t distinguish
between market moving news and self-serving statements. The endless
iPod and iPhone sales anecdotes, after those legendary products hit the
market, fall into this nonproductive category. Finally, small cap biotech
releases mark a special class of pre- and postmarket news. These companies
lack revenues, so they depend on pipeline development to attract investors.
In turn, the vast majority of biotech news involves study results rather
than FDA approvals or rejections. As a result, it often takes just minutes
for price action to discount the new data. This instant consumption can
set up violent reversals at the open, with price losing part or all of its premarket gains.

Playing the Pre- and Postmarkets
It takes time to learn the difference between hidden size in the extended
hours and nervous amateurs making bad decisions. Here’s an easy way
to find out exactly who’s taking the other side of the trade. Buy a little
stock at the ask, even a hundred shares at a time, and see if your execution reduces the offer on the market depth screen. If it does, you just
bought shares from a straightforward and possibly misinformed seller.
Even better, your orders lift the market, with a healthy bidder stepping in
and giving you a profitable exit if you need one. Alternatively, when the
counterparty posts an even bigger offer to sell at the same price following
your transaction, get out immediately and look for a different opportunity.
In other words, you’re simply attempting to trade with hidden size, and
against the amateurs.

234

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

Take note where an active stock moves in the pre- and postmarkets,
relative to obvious support or resistance levels. Specifically, does good
news lift price above or into obvious resistance? Conversely, does bad
news drop price through or into obvious support? A buying or selling
spike that can’t trade through a big level in the extended session is less
likely to exceed it in the next regular session. Your observations in this
regard will determine the best path of action for affected positions when
the market finally opens. Generally speaking, favorable movement that
stalls at support or resistance denotes an opportunity to take profits, but
the same action against an open position tells us to hang tough, because a
better exit price should show up later in the session.
In Figure 10.3, the all-session chart shows interesting price progression ahead of and after Caterpillar earnings, released two hours
before the New York open on July 21. The stock ticks higher for the entire
day (1) ahead of the news in a typical speculative rally. It ends the session
at high tick (2), with a gambling mentality lifting price into the closing
bell. The premarket earnings release triggers a massive 5-minute bar (3)
that lifts the stock more than three points. It grinds sideways for the next
45 minutes and then surges into the May 7 swing high at 41 (4), which
marks the highest high before a two-month decline to 30. The rally stalls
at 8:45 a.m., or 45 minutes prior to the open, right at May resistance. It
grinds sideways just long enough to suck in overenthusiastic buyers at
the opening bell and then sells off more than three points in the next three
hours (5).
Fast fingers might have caught Caterpillar’s premarket spike,
but, realistically, the earnings news yielded few low-risk opportunities.
Traders already positioned on the long side could have stalked the rally
into resistance and taken profits without hesitation. The same barrier
warned sidelined players to stand aside and avoid the open, because a
fade to lower prices was likely. Contrary traders might have sold short
into the buying spike, but the depth of the morning reversal was difficult
to estimate, so the reward:risk profile was a toss-up.
Barron’s is one of the few financial media outlets to publish over
the weekend. It’s Barron’s style to pick and pan a variety of blue chip and
high beta stocks which, in turn, could respond with a rally or selloff. For
this reason, it makes sense to pull up these issues in Monday’s premarket
and see how the news is affecting them. This “Barron’s Effect,” if any, often
persists through Monday’s session, before a Tuesday reversal tosses cold
water on the short-term trend. The main challenge lies in understanding
whether or not their bullish or bearish outlook really matters. After all,

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

F I G U R E

235

10.3

Caterpillar hits a ceiling.

eSignal © 2009. A division of Interactive Data Corporation. All rights reserved. Used with permission.

everyone has an opinion, and the impact of Saturday’s proclamation is
greatly reduced if it lacks tradable information.
How do you react when Barron’s rips apart a stock you already
own? Generally speaking, the worst thing you can do is to sell it into the
premarket or that day’s open. Instead, be patient, because there’s often a
tradable counterreaction by Tuesday or Wednesday. Admittedly, there’s
added risk in waiting, and you could still exit at an unfavorable price.
Use the premarket futures to establish your first spin on the trading
day. Compare current prices to the prior close of the regular session at 4:15
p.m. New York time, and consider which side might get trapped at the

236

PART FIVE

Controlling Exposure

opening bell. This small-scale analysis can keep you out of a lot of trouble.
Overnight action in the index futures vis-à-vis the prior day’s close predicts
direction with greater precision early in the week. For example, follow the
trend when Monday’s premarket leans in the same direction as Friday’s
close, but fade it when Tuesday’s premarket tracks Monday’s close. In
theory at least, Turnaround Tuesday will reverse the trend sometime that
morning.
Reaction to pre- and postmarket news surprises the most seasoned
traders at times. Quite often, bad news in a rising market will be ignored,
while good news during a correction triggers a selloff. This contrary
behavior offers a valuable lesson for the survivalist trader. In reality, it
doesn’t matter whether the news is good or bad. Rather, we need to know
how the fresh data are shaking up current expectations. This is a tough
chore if you don’t understand the concept of expectations in the first place,
but it’s extremely dangerous to trade without this insight because emotions
and reactivity will guide position management rather than your powers
of observation. At times, premarket news will shock the environment on
a broad scale, placing one side at extreme risk. Take the morning of September 11, 2001, for example. For this reason, keep index futures and a
few exchange-traded funds in a convenient spot on your broker interface
at all times. Should the market suddenly pull hard in one direction in
response to a major shock event, grab a few contracts or shares to hedge
your portfolio. You’ll find the biggest challenge in those chaotic moments
is in matching the countertrades properly to current exposure.
If you take a passive approach to the market each morning, you set
yourself up to get played by more aggressive traders. For this reason,
it’s vital to determine who has the upper hand as soon as possible each
morning, and how aggressively you want to play the regular session when
it finally begins. This premarket evaluation isn’t set in stone, and you can
turn it on a dime if the right data show up, but it’s the most reliable strategy
to get you through the opening bell.

Premarket Checklist
Your premarket routine sets the stage for the rest of the trading day.
Gathering actionable information and picking your fights carefully while
your competition is still in dreamland can mean the difference between
a profitable session and a losing nightmare. Traders have a tough time

CHAPTER 10

Mastering the Intraday Market

237

interpreting the run-up into the opening bell, but it isn’t as hard as it looks
when you organize your efforts into key zones of market action:
1. Check index futures. Pull up the index futures and note current
price levels. Then look at the overnight action, marking out the
highs and lows posted through that period.
2. Review macro forces. Catch up on other world markets. Check
out Asia and Europe to find out what moved their bourses
while you were asleep. These hot spots establish key themes for
American traders when things get cooking in the Big Apple.
3. Filter the news flood. Look first for news that might affect your
positions. Then check out earning reports and broker rating
changes.
4. Watch other players. Many broker interfaces let you follow
transactions three to four hours prior to the New York open. Use
this quiet time to observe how other players are dealing with big
news or overnight shocks.
5. Note levels. Price levels that come into play in the premarket
session can turn into swing highs and lows in the regular session.
These reversal pivots hide big players trying to set boundaries or
getting out of bad positions. Jot down those numbers and keep
them close when the real action gets under way.
6. Watch support-resistance. Note where price moves in the premarket relative to support or resistance. Specifically, does good
