
144

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

enter

randomness

Things can become more interesting when randomness enters the game.
Imagine a waiting room full of actors queuing for an audition. The
number of actors who will win is clearly small, and they are the ones
generally observed by the public as representative of the profession, as
we saw in our discussion on survivorship bias. The winners would move
into Bel Air, feel pressure to acquire some basic training in the
consumption of luxury goods and, perhaps owing to the dissolute and
unrhythmic lifestyle, flirt with substance abuse. As to the others (the
great majority), we can imagine their fate; a lifetime of serving foamed
caffe latte at the neighboring Starbucks, fighting the biological clock
between auditions.
One may argue that the actor who lands the lead role that catapulted
him into fame and expensive swimming pools has some skills others
lack, some charm, or a specific physical trait that was a perfect match
for such a career path. I beg to differ. The winner may have had some
acting skills, but so do all of the others, otherwise they would not have
been in the waiting room.
It is an interesting attribute of fame that it has its own dynamics. An
actor becomes known by some parts of the public because he is known
by other parts of the public. The dynamics of such fame follow a
rotating helix, which may have started at the audition, as the selection
could have been caused by some silly detail that fitted the mood of the
examiner on that day. Had the examiner not fallen in love the previous
day with a person of similar sounding last name, then our selected actor
from that particular sample history would be serving caffe latte in the
intervening sample history.

learning t o

type

Researchers frequently use the example of QWERTY to describe the
vicious dynamics of winning and losing in an economy, and to illustrate
how the final outcome is more than frequently the undeserved one. The
arrangement of the letters on a typewriter is an example of the success of
the least deserving method. For our typewriters have the orders of the

LOSER

TAKES

ALL

-

ON

THE

N ON L I N E A R I T I E S

OF

LIFE

145

letters on their keyboard arranged in a non-optimal manner, as a matter
of fact in such a non-optimal manner as to slow down the typing rather
than make the job easy, in order to avoid jamming the ribbons as they
were designed for less electronic days. Therefore, as we started building
better typewriters and computerized word processors, several attempts
were made to rationalize the computer keyboard, to no avail. People
were trained on a QWERTY keyboard and their habits were too sticky
for change. Just like the helical propulsion of an actor into stardom,
people patronize what other people like to do. Forcing a rational
dynamic on the process would be superfluous, nay, impossible. This is
called a path dependent outcome, and has thwarted many mathematical
attempts at modeling behavior.
It is obvious that the information age, by homogenizing our tastes, is
causing the unfairness to be even more acute - those who win capture
almost all the customers. The example that strikes most as the most
spectacular lucky success is that of the software maker Microsoft and its
moody founder Bill Gates. While it is hard to deny that Gates is a man
of high personal standards, work ethics, and above average intelligence,
is he the best? Does he deserve it? Clearly not. Most people are equipped
with his software (like myself) because other people are equipped with
his software, a purely circular effect (economists call that "network
externalities"). Nobody ever claimed that it was the best software
product. Most of Gates's rivals have an obsessive jealousy of his success.
There are maddened by the fact that he managed to win so big while
many of them are struggling to make their companies survive.
Such ideas go against classical economic models, in which results
either come from a precise reason (there is no account for uncertainty)
or the good guy wins (the good guy is the one who is more skilled and
has some technical superiority). Economists discovered path-dependent
effects late in their game, then tried to publish wholesale on the topic
that otherwise would be bland and obvious. For instance, Brian Arthur,
an economist concerned with nonlinearities at the Santa Fe Institute,
wrote that chance events coupled with positive feedback rather than
technological superiority will determine economic superiority - not
some abstrusely defined edge in a given area of expertise. While early
economic models excluded randomness, Arthur explained how
"unexpected orders, chance meetings with lawyers, managerial whims

146

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

, . . would help determine which ones achieved early sales and, over
time, which firms dominated".

Mathematics Inside and Outside the Real World
A mathematical approach to the problem is in order. While in
conventional models (such as the well-known Brownian random walk
used in finance) the probability of success does not change with every
incremental step, only the accumulated wealth, Arthur suggests models
such as the Polya process, which is mathematically very difficult to work
with, but can be easily understood with the aid of a Monte Carlo
simulator. The Polya process can be presented as follows: assume an urn
initially containing equal quantities of black and red balls. You are to
guess each time which color you will pull out before you make the draw.
Here the game is rigged. Unlike a conventional urn, the probability of
guessing correctly depends on past success, as you get better or worse at
guessing depending on past performance. Thus the probability of
winning increases after past wins, that of losing increases after past
losses. Simulating such a process, one can see a huge variance of
outcomes, with astonishing successes and large number of failures (what
we called skewness).
Compare such a process with those that are more commonly
modeled, that is, an urn from which the player makes guesses with
replacement. Say'you played roulette and won. Would this increase your
chances of winning again? No. In a Polya process case, it does. Why is
this so mathematically hard to work with? Because the notion of
independence (i.e., when the next draw does not depend on past
outcomes) is violated. Independence is a requirement for working with
the (known) math of probability.
What has gone wrong with the development of economics as a
science? Answer: there was a bunch of intelligent people who felt
compelled to use mathematics just to tell themselves that they were
rigorous in their thinking, that theirs was a science. Someone in a great
rush decided to introduce mathematical modeling techniques (culprits:

LOSER

TAKES

ALL

-

ON

THE

N ON L I N E A R I T I E S

OF

LIFE

147

Leon Walras, Gerard Debreu, Paul Samuelson) without considering the
fact that either the class of mathematics they were using was too
restrictive for the class of problems they were dealing with, or that
perhaps they should be aware that the precision of the language of
mathematics could lead people to believe that they had solutions when
in fact they had none (recall Popper and the costs of taking science too
seriously). Indeed the mathematics they dealt with did not work in the
real world, possibly because we needed richer classes of processes - and
they refused to accept the fact that no mathematics at all was probably
better.
The so-called complexity theorists came to the rescue. Much
excitement was generated by the works of scientists who specialized
in nonlinear quantitative methods - the Mecca of those being the Santa
Fe Institute near Santa Fe, New Mexico. Clearly these scientists are
trying hard, and providing us with wonderful solutions in the physical
sciences and better models in the social siblings (though nothing
satisfactory there yet). And if they ultimately do not succeed, it will
simply be because mathematics may be of only secondary help in our
real world. Note another advantage of Monte Carlo simulations is that
we can get results where mathematics fails us and can be of no help. In
freeing us from equations it frees us from the traps of inferior
mathematics. As I said in Chapter 4, mathematics is merely a way of
thinking and meditating, little more, in our world of randomness.

buridan's donkey o r t h e g o o d side o f

randomness

Nonlinearity in random outcomes is sometimes used as a tool to break
stalemates. Consider the problem of the nonlinear nudge. Imagine a
donkey equally hungry and thirsty placed at exactly equal distance from
two sources of food and water. In such a framework, he would die of
both thirst and hunger as he would be unable to decide which one to get
to first. Now inject some randomness in the picture, by randomly
nudging the donkey, causing him to get closer to one source, no matter
which, and accordingly away from the other. The impasse would be
instantly broken and our happy donkey will be either in turn well fed
then well hydrated, or well hydrated then well fed.

148

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

The reader no doubt has played a version of Buridan's donkey, by
"flipping a coin" to break some of the minor stalemates in life where one
lets randomness help with the decision process. Let Lady fortuna make
the decision and gladly submit. I often use Buridan's donkey (under its
mathematical name) when my computer goes into a freeze between two
alternatives (to be technical, these "randomizations" are frequently done
during optimization problems, when one needs to perturbate a
function).
Note that Buridan's donkey was named after the fourteenth-century
philosopher Jean Buridan. Buridan had an interesting death (he was
thrown in the Seine tied in a bag and died drowning). This tale was
considered an example of sophistry by his contemporaries who missed
the import of randomization - Buridan was clearly ahead of his time.

When It Rains, It Pours
As I am writing these lines, I am opening my fund to investors and
exploring how to raise money. I am suddenly realizing that the world's
bi-polarity is hitting me very hard. Either one succeeds wildly, by
attracting all the cash, or fails to draw a single penny. Likewise with
books. Either everyone wants to publish it, or nobody is interested in
returning telephone calls (in the latter case my discipline is to delete the
name from my address book). This is making me, with my profound and
antiquated Mediterranean sense of metrion (measure) extremely
uncomfortable, even queasy. Too much success is the enemy (think of
the punishment meted out on the rich and famous), too much failure is
demoralizing. I would like the option of having neither.

eleven

On the difficulty of thinking of your vacation as a linear
combination of Paris and the Bahamas. Nero Tulip may never
ski in the Alps again. Some discussion of behavioral discoveries.
Some manifestations of probability blindness taken out of a
textbook. A little more on journalistic pollution. Why you may
be dead by now.

Paris or the Bahamas?
ou have two options for your next brief vacation in March. The
first is to fly to Paris; the second is to go to the Caribbean. You
expressed indifference between the two options; your spouse will tip the
decision one way or the other. Two distinct and separate images come
to you when you think of the possibilities. In the first one, you see
yourself standing at the Musee d'Orsay in front of some Pissaro
painting depicting a cloudy sky - the gray Parisian wintry sky. You are
carrying an umbrella under your arm. In the second image, you are
lying on a towel with a stack of books by your favorite authors next to
you (Tom Clancy and Amianus Marcellinus), and an obsequious waiter

150

MONKEYS ON TYPEWRITERS

