
56

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

knowledge, you can begin to see what all the fuss is about, for then you will
graduate and move up to the next floor.

SECOND FLOOR:YOU KNOW THAT YOU DON’T KNOW
You start opening your eyes and look around for answers that will explain to
you the reasons for your recent failures. You become aware that you need
more training and education. After all, you want to make this a full-time professional and stop working that endless low-paying job or retire and control
your own financial destiny, one that will allow you to produce a constant
profit. You start surfing the Internet or the local book store, looking for trading formulas. You want to know more about each and every indicator that is
available on your platform, trying them all at once, transforming your charts
in a Picasso-like spaghetti mix.
Your quest for the FOREX Holy Grail has just begun! You subscribe to
a FOREX forum and jump from thread to thread, looking for the best system that makes the greatest number of pips. If you have enough money to
spend, you believe every snake-oil peddler and buy every automated pip
machine that is advertised on the Web in the hope that next month your
account will finally be approaching the five- or six-figure mark!
Every day you happen to find a new “perfect system” that will only last
until you try the next “Can’t lose! Guaranteed!” one. You don’t have the
patience or discipline to find out if they really work because you expect
them to start producing pips per minute, and because they don’t, you keep
on your endless search. Every new indicator is “the one.”
Every new system is the Aladdin’s lamp that you will rub and rub away
in the hope that cash will start flowing like a river into your bank account.
You will chase the market, pick tops and bottoms, and draw channels,
trendlines, and Fibonacci retracements until price can’t be distinguished
any more on your charts.
Trying and failing one system after the other, frustration will accumulate, and anger will come into the picture. You will ask for advice but will
not listen to it because “you know better.” Overtrading, overleveraging, and
overconfidence will make you risk much more than what prudence dictates. Then you’ll seek again for more signals, automated systems, and
other traders’ calls until you end up exhausted and totally confused because
nothing seems to work. You will start thinking that maybe the FOREX is
not for you, and maybe you give up and quit. But don’t despair, the FOREX
is an exciting market, and many traders profit beyond their dreams. You
simply have to take the bull by the horns and get the education you need to
move up to the next floor.

CHAPTER 4

PREPARING YOURSELF ADEQUATELY BEFORE JUMPING INTO THE MARKET

57

THIRD FLOOR: AWARENESS
All of a sudden, you start realizing that the issue might not be the system,
but you. You understand that each and every trader who is successful may
have different strategies and styles, but there must be something that connects them and represents a common denominator. You can see now that
there just may be a reason all those traders on the fifth floor are driving
fancy cars and living the life they have always wanted. Now it’s your turn.
You start immersing yourself much deeper into money management
and investigate more about trading psychology, identifying the traits that
are slowly producing a global understanding of the whole picture. You
become aware that it is not possible to predict market price moves. You stop
looking outside for the answers and start finding them on the inside.
You begin developing your own personalized system and integrate all
that you have learned before, adapting your trading style to your own personality, time, and needs. You start getting positive results with the change.
Your greater accuracy in money management allows you to have a happier
attitude about losses because now you are confident that it is only a part of
the trading business.
If you get into a bad trade, you will close it and move on. You have
tested your system, and it has proven to work. You know it well, and you
stick to your plan with discipline.
It’s really on the third floor that traders figure it out. I teach lots of
classes all over the country, and my most successful traders are the ones
who travel to my offices to take their classes. Why? Because they have
made it to the third floor. They realize that it is time to invest in their
FOREX trading future. It’s not just a good trading platform; it is the education, training, and support; it is the network of other traders with whom you
can discuss training ideas; and it’s the team that gets it.
Think for a moment: How long does a doctor, lawyer, or engineer have
to go to school to learn his or her trade? And that is just to be an entry-level
person. Think about how long a doctor has to go to school: four years for
college, four years for medical school, a few more years for specific specialty, and then, what, two years of residency, then and only then to be a
full-fledged doctor earning decent money. Well, what happens when the
doctor goes on vacation? Nothing; they don’t get paid. A currency trader
controls his or her own future; a trader can work from anywhere. Traders
can be in a trade making money while at the beach or on a golf course, fishing, whatever. But you will only get out of this what you put into it. You will
have to find a mentor and start learning. Some of you will pick it up faster
than others, but in the end, you can make it to the next floor.

58

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

FOURTH FLOOR: KNOWING THAT YOU KNOW
Now you’re on cruise speed. You follow your system and rules, you have
developed a trading plan, and you take losses and wins without letting emotions run over you. You will get to break even most of the time, having winning periods and then losing periods, but in general, most of your trades
will be good, and you will not be losing money. Gradually, your win-loss
ratio will increase consistently. You put your time in and now have a decision to make. Are you ready to quit your boring job, maybe retire early, and
take on the status of FOREX trader? You are confident that you can make
the money. The next step is yours. See you on the fifth floor.

FIFTH FLOOR: BEING A PROFESSIONAL
You made it—the secret society of professional FOREX traders. You look
around, and it is not so unfamiliar to you. You have seen some of these same
people walking around before. They are people you have passed in the hallways of life, people who have made the same decision you have, people
who have decided to take charge of their financial lifestyles and do something about it. They didn’t give up on floors one and two. They kept going.
Now you find that your skills are totally integrated, and you follow
your trading routine every day on an unconscious level. You watch the
charts, and thanks to the endless hours of screen time, you now “know” and
understand how the market moves.
You start making more profitable trades, and the daily outcome doesn’t
take you out of control, whether you lose or win. Your account starts growing, your emotions are reasonably under your command, and above all, you
are at peace and can trade without stress.
You keep on refining your own trading system so that it evolves with
every market change. You keep an eye on risk and reinforce discipline.
Trading is now just like any other job, sometimes maybe a little boring, but
you have mastered all that it takes to get the profits you have planned on.
You can make money in the FOREX, and you can lose money in the
FOREX. It is not an ATM machine for which someone will send you a PIN
number so that it will start spitting cash out at you. You have to work at it.
I have traders who have been with me for many years who are very successful. Ninety-nine percent of the traders I’ve seen who have lost money
did so because of poor discipline, no patience, and just plain greed, and they
didn’t listen to all the education, training, and support they were getting or
that was available at their fingertips. You have to go out and build your
FOREX knowledge—if not from me, then from someone else—but this is
a real market, and it is wide open for you to make of it what you will.

P

2
A

R

T

MONEY MANAGEMENT

This page intentionally left blank

C

H

5

A

P

T

E

R

THE SECRET TO
MAKING MONEY
ARE YOU REALLY FIT TO TRADE IN THE FOREX MARKET?
FOREX trading is becoming more and more popular among individuals of
all walks of life. In the thoughts of many, it would seem from the outside
that it is an easy option to get easy money, quit your daily job, and start your
path to the rich and famous gallery.
However, this is not true. Although you now can start trading with a
very small amount of money, you also need to possess some basic elements
of personality and character that are paramount for a successful career as a
FOREX trader. FOREX trading should be treated as a business. It is an
investment venture. Unfortunately, most people who throw themselves in
the market without any previous preparation tend to treat it as a lucky gamble and end up with an unpleasant experience.
Before attempting to start trading, especially on a live account with real
money, you should evaluate your motives and capabilities:
●

●
●

●

Are you willing to apply yourself, and do you have some spare time to
learn and prepare yourself thoroughly?
Are you just looking for easy money, thinking that you’ll get rich quick?
Are you capable of following rules and discipline, leaving emotions
out of your decision-making processes?
Are you clear about how much money you will allow yourself to
invest and how much you can afford to lose?
61

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

62

TRADING PLANS
What is a trading plan? A trading plan is a complete set of rules that have
to be defined before starting to operate in the market. It should cover every
aspect of your trading in detail.
Building a trading plan, however, is not an absolute guarantee that you
will succeed, but it has all the elements necessary to prevent things from
going wrong or bring a solution when they do, providing you with the tools
to react in the best possible way to any possible outcome.
Markets can’t be controlled, but you can control yourself. With a trading plan, you are establishing control of the most important part of your
trading—the trader. The number one reason FOREX traders do not succeed
is the fact that they did not build a trading plan.
One of the benefits of a trading plan is that it simplifies your trading
because you will have a defined sequence of rules to follow one after the
other before opening a trade. You will be able to control yourself and establish a discipline, which, in turn, will help you to leave emotions out of the
picture, making it easier to monitor your trades and detect any mistakes
much faster. You can review your plan at any time should it bring about unexpected results, and you can check to see if you are indeed following the plan
based on the rules or if any of the elements of the plan have to be redesigned.

BUILDING THE PLAN
You should adapt your trading plan to your trading style, personality, skill
level, and availability of resources. It is important to be totally honest when
you are defining the plan, including most especially your emotional and
psychological issues.

THE COMPONENTS OF A COMPLETE SYSTEM
A complete trading system covers each of the decisions necessary for successful trading:
Markets: What do you want to buy or sell?
Position sizing: How much do you want to buy or sell?
Risk management: How much can you afford to lose if things
go wrong?
Entries: When do you want to buy or sell? (This would include
market hours and possible news releases.)
Stops: When do you want to get out of a losing position?
Exits: When do you want to get out of a winning position?

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

63

Strategy: How do you want to buy or sell?
Time frames: How much can you expect to win from a particular entry?
In addition to the general plan, you also should elaborate a more detailed
checklist to ensure that all these elements are being taken into account.
Here is an example of a trading checklist that you can use before entering a trade: Before entering a long or a short position:
What is the market (e.g., EUR/USD, GBP/JPY, or gold)?
Strategy: What are the main indicators and secondary indicators?
Risk areas: Are there bars or candlesticks that show risks for
your position?
Breakeven price: Where would your trade be at breakeven, with no
gain and no loss?
1. Identify the actual market position in relationship to previous activity
by checking higher time frames (daily chart).
a. Prices are not near a long-term resistance or support.
b. Prices are not in congestion.
c. Prices are not overextended.
d. Prices are not near the high or the low of the previous day.
e. Check the news and economic reports.
f. Check possible gaps on weekends and holidays.
2. Identify the candlestick or bar in which you will be entering the trade
so that you can confirm a potential future direction of the trend.
Alternatives:
a. Long ⫽ Main trend is rising up with a downward swing on the
main indicator greater than the two previous downswings.
Short ⫽ Main trend is falling down with an upward swing on the
main indicator greater than the two previous upswings.
b. Long ⫽ The secondary trend is going down and comes back up in
the same direction as the main trend.
Short ⫽ The secondary trend is going up and comes back down in
the same direction as the main trend.
c. Long ⫽ The secondary trend is going down and comes back up in
the same direction as the slope of the moving average.
Short ⫽ The secondary trend is going up and comes back down in
the same direction as the slope of the moving average.

64

3.

4.

5.
6.

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Risk management:
Buy entry price:
Buy when the prices are above the high of the signal bar plus 1 tick.
Sell entry price:
Sell when the prices are below the low of the signal bar minus 1 tick.
Initial risk price:
Long ⫽ Risk set to the swing low (minus 1 tick) of the signal bar or
of the last three or four bars depending on the time frame.
Short ⫽ Risk set to the swing high (plus 1 tick) of the signal bar or of
the last three or four bars depending on the time frame.
Long ⫽ Set stop to breakeven (entry price) after a range of four bars
above the entry price.
Short ⫽ Set stop to breakeven (entry price) after a range of four bars
below the entry price.
Never let a positive trade become negative!
Exit strategy: Take profit.
Alternatives:
a. Using one lot (or mini- or microlot) ⫽ Take profit at about
60 percent of the average price range.
b. Using two lots ⫽ Take full profit in one of the lots. Trail the stops
using last short-term supports as a guide.
c. Using three lots ⫽ Take full profit in one of the lots. Trail the
stops using last short-term supports as a guide. Keep the
remaining positions open until a reversal signal shows up or
the end of the trading session.

How many of you really plan your trades by writing all your rules on
paper with so much precision? You have to define what (entries and exits)
you are going to do, when (the signals of your strategy or system) to do it,
and how (risk management rules and other details). If you don’t plan carefully and follow your own fixed rules strictly, the trades you’ll initiate will
be wrong even if their outcomes are positive, and paradoxically, if you follow your rules, they will be correct even if they bring about a loss because
you will have been sticking to your plan.
Another important part of a trading plan is to keep a detailed record of
all your trades (winners and losers): entry price, exit price, date, time, stops
and targets, indicators that you used, signals taken, etc. Why did you take
the trade? What was your emotional state at that moment? What were the

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

65

environmental conditions at that moment, positive or negative? (Also
include interruptions, time of the day, physical condition, etc.)
In this way, you can easily determine the weak spots and correct them
later on, as well as reinforce the strong elements so that they can represent
a greater asset as you go further in your trading career. If you don’t do this,
you will be swinging in the hands of luck, which is the same as saying that
you will be just gambling blindly.
Before taking a trade, evaluate your skills. Have you tested your system,
and are you confident about its results? Are the signals easy to understand
and follow?
Prepare yourself psychologically. How are you feeling? Did you eat
and sleep well? Are you ready to trade?
If you are not totally focused and ready to confront the daily challenge
of the market, it is better not to trade because you will be prone to make
huge mistakes.
If you feel tired or sick or are angry, worried, or distracted by other
personal issues, you will be unable to focus and follow your discipline rule
by rule.
Define your risk level. How much money can you risk on a particular
trade? You shouldn’t risk more than 1 to 3 percent of your equity on each
single trade depending on the situation. Is the trade riskier than average, or
does it have great potential to create greater risk? When should you stop?
What is the total daily maximum risk you can allow? How many losses will
you take before you stop trading for the day?
Define your goals. Establish a realistic ratio between risk and reward,
based on your strategy and risk appetite. Clearly state which is the highest
risk and smallest reward your strategy allows after evaluating your usual
win-loss ratio. Carefully check what the potential profit expectations are
based on the time frame you will be using and the minimum stop loss
required for optimal safety. The risk should be lower than the reward
expected, although this will depend heavily on your particular system. For
example, a scalping strategy with a 90:10 win-loss ratio will allow up to a
3:1 risk ratio and still be very profitable (winning trades being one-third of
losers), whereas a system that yields fewer winners but a potential for much
longer runs would need the ratio to be inverted (usually a 1:1.5 risk ratio is
the smallest that should be allowed).
Investigate the win-loss percentage that you need to break even, and
base your calculations accordingly.
Set your goal in points and also in money to be made (or profit percentages on your equity) daily, weekly, monthly, and annually.

66

FOREX TRADING SECRETS

Evaluate the economic situation that’s going on. Check the financial
news, and be alert about economic news releases. How are the markets
doing? Check also stocks and indexes that offer a good perspective on market mood. Wait for news release figures before placing a trade because they
usually affect the market, causing random and contradictory moves. You
should wait at least a half hour after every market open and not trade a half
hour before any market close, as well as at least an hour later than a significant economic release.
Prevent technical issues. Check that your Internet connection and computer are working properly. Perform routine maintenance daily, clearing
memory and temporary folders. Be sure to have in place the utmost security software (i.e., antivirus, antispyware and anti–key loggers) to protect
your account data. Prepare your trading charts and indicators so that all the
signals and support/resistance levels are seen clearly, and check that the
sound volume is appropriate if you use sound alerts.
Make sure that you will not be interrupted or distracted during your
trading activity either by other people (turn off the phone, TV, or radio if
needed, and close the door of your trading space) or by other activities you
could attempt to do simultaneously (no Web surfing, chatting, or even reading FOREX forums while you are trading).
Have a clear set of rules for entries and exits. Except in the case of
scalping, where entering a trade also has to be very precise, exit rules are
more important than entry rules.
Set the appropriate fixed stops, or get out at the level you have planned
if you happen to be using mental stops. Don’t make the mistake of letting
losses run in the hope that the market will come back. If a trade is wrong,
take the loss, and move on. You will still be making profits if you limit
losses without looking back and manage your risk conservatively, even if
your winning trades are less than your losing ones.
Mental stops have to be written down even if you don’t place them
physically on the platform. You can set a line on the chart at that level to
help you react at the proper moment.
The same goes for target profits. You should know where to lock the
benefits and set a written target price, either on the platform or as a first
goal when using several contracts or trailing the stops thereafter. When you
get there, take a partial profit on your position, move the stops to break
even in the rest, and trail the stops using your preferred method (automated
or manual).
Know your signals and system well. Your strategy should be simple
so that you can make a fast decision and not struggle with a series of

CHAPTER 5

THE SECRET TO MAKING MONEY

67

conflicting signals. Too many conditions to be met will lead to trade
paralysis.
When conditions are met, you enter the trade without any doubt or
hesitation. Since you have already tested your system and know its potential, it doesn’t matter if the trade is going to be right or wrong because you
rely on the probabilities of the strategy and thus are confident about the
overall outcome.
Track your performance. Record your winning and losing trades with
the same detail and care. Go back over past trades, and review what made
them right or wrong. Good decisions will be reinforced, bad decisions will
be analyzed, and the lessons learned will prevent you from making the
same mistakes again.
Try to write down all the details of your trades, along with any comments about what led you to open those specific positions, your mood, the
time of day, other circumstances, and general prevailing conditions.
Keep track of the drawdown (not only the net drawdown, which is the
sum of all lost positions, but also the ongoing floating drawdown while
your trades are still open). Keep a trading journal in which you reference all
those details for further study.
Professional traders treat their trading activity as a business. This is
paramount if you really want to trade full time and be successful at trading
in the currency markets. You also need to know and accept that you can’t
always win, that losing trades are a necessary part of the picture in the
FOREX. It is important to let your profits run and cut your losses short,
and the accuracy of your own money management is what will bring about
success in the end.
