
Figure 6-7:
Bond
yields and
commodity prices
tend to be
positively
correlated.

Commodity price performance relative to bonds can help you pinpoint
market sectors to target for investments. Here are some guidelines:
 If the ratio between commodity prices and bond prices is rising (meaning
that commodity prices are outperforming bond prices), you should look
for investment in sectors that are inflation-sensitive, like basic material
manufacturers (aluminum manufacturers, copper producers, energy
companies, and so on).
 If the ratio between commodity prices and bond prices is falling (meaning that bond prices are outperforming commodity prices), then look for
investment opportunities in interest rate-sensitive sectors such as home
builders, real estate, and utilities.

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both

Watching how bond price and stock price
movements correlate
Stocks and bonds are major investment vehicles for millions of people and
institutions the world over. The interest rates that bonds pay are principal
competitors to stock investments. The higher the interest rate offered, the
less investors will allocate to stocks. The lower the interest rate bonds pay,
the more investors will allocate to stocks.
Bond prices are extremely sensitive to inflation. As inflation rises, the value
of the series of payments that bonds pay decreases. A poor Consumer Price
Index reading from the government will cause bond prices to fall. A low inflation report, on the other hand, tends to push bond prices higher.
Many valuation models of the U.S. stock market compare the yield on government or corporate bonds to the earnings yield of equity securities. For
example, the Fed Model (covered in detail in chapter 8) compares the yield
on the 10-Year Treasury Bond to the earnings yield of the S&P 500 Index. If the
10-Year Treasury Bond currently yields 5 percent and the S&P 500 Index forward P/E ratio is 15 times earnings, investors using this model would conclude
that equity prices are undervalued when compared to bonds. (To get the earnings yield of the S&P 500 Index, you simply calculate 1 divided by the P/E ratio.
In this example, 1 divided by 15 equals 6.67 percent, which is higher than the 5
percent the 10-Year Treasury Bond paid.)
Bond prices tend to lead stock price movements. As bond prices rally, bond
yields fall, making stocks an attractive alternative. Conversely, falling bond
prices (and thus, rising bond yields) tend to lead stock price weakness. This
relationship doesn’t hold in deflationary environments where bond prices
rise while stock prices fall. However, deflationary environments are the
exception in U.S. economic history.
Figure 6-8 highlights an example of the typical relationship between equity
prices and bond prices. The figure compares bond yields for the 30-Year
Treasury Bond (top) and the S&P 500 Index (bottom) in 1996–1997. Notice
that a peak in the yield of the 30-Year Bond in July 1996 corresponds with a
bottom in equity prices. A similar peak/bottom occurs in April 1997. A sustained decline in bond yields corresponds with a rallying equity market. But
correlation doesn’t imply causation. In other words, although there’s a relationship between these markets, you can’t say that the rally in equity prices
was caused by the declining yield of the 30-Year Treasury Bond.
As a swing trader, you should watch the relationship between bond yields
and stock prices. When yields enjoy a sustained rally, be on the lookout for a

133

134 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
pullback in stock prices. You may enter short trades, for example, in securities
breaking down to new 52-week lows. If you see yields falling, it may precede
a rally in stock prices. Be on the lookout for stocks hitting 52-week highs or
exhibiting strength via breakouts from trading ranges.

Figure 6-8:
Equity
prices and
bond yields
tend to be
negatively
correlated.

Putting Securities in a Market Head-toHead: Relative Strength Analysis
A twist on intermarket analysis is intramarket analysis, often called relative
strength analysis. In addition to comparing markets to one another, swing
traders should use intramarket analysis to compare securities within one
market. Relative strength analysis is like having your own pair of X-ray vision
goggles that allow you to see which securities are truly strong and which are
totally faking it.
Relative strength analysis involves charting one security or index relative
to another. The ratio generated from the two can be analyzed like any stock
chart. Most charting programs calculate such ratios for you with the click of
a mouse. You can compare all sorts of things against each other: Apple Inc.
versus Google, or Clorox versus the overall market. You can even compare
markets against each other to get an idea of when leadership switches from
one market to the other.
Suppose you want to buy a strong stock. Should you be focusing on large
cap, mid cap, or small cap stocks? Relative strength analysis can answer
that question. By comparing one group to another, you can detect when one
group is strengthening relative to the other.

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
But be careful — you want to make meaningful comparisons. Comparing
General Motors to Ford or General Motors to the auto industry in general
makes perfect sense, but I’m not sure what you could gain from comparing
General Motors to Google.
I like to begin my analysis with a macro view of the world. I want to know
which equity markets are hot and therefore worthy of my dollars. One
advantage swing traders have these days is the ease of accessing equity
markets from all over the world. Many exchange-traded funds and American
Depository Receipts allow swing traders to gain profits from almost anywhere on earth.

Treating the world as your
oyster: The global scope
Because this book is targeted to swing traders, who frequently trade stocks,
the first step that I address in intramarket analysis is to explore which equity
markets are exhibiting strength globally. If you trade commodities, you
replace this step with an analysis of the major commodities versus each other.
The following are the major equity markets you should be familiar with and
can compare to one another:
 Developed world
• The United States (S&P 500 Index)
• Western Europe (use iShares S&P 350 Index, symbol: IEV)
• Japan (use iShares MSCI Japan Index, symbol: EWJ)
 Emerging markets
• Latin America (use iShares S&P Latin American 40 Index, symbol: ILF)
• China (use iShares FTSE/Xinhua China 25 Index, symbol: FXI)
• Asia (use iShares MSCI Pacific Index, excluding Japan, symbol: EPP)
You can analyze dozens of other individual markets using proxies such as
the iShares mentioned here (you can find proxies for the markets in Austria,
Belgium, Australia, South Africa, Brazil, and so on). But I like to keep things
simple and present only the major developed markets and the key emerging
markets.
The second step in analyzing relative strength between equity markets is to
construct a ratio chart between two different markets. When analyzing ratio

135

136 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
charts, apply the technical tools you pick up in Chapters 4 and 5. Look for
support and resistance ranges. Also, determine whether the ratio is trending (which indicates that one market is dominating the other) or in a trading
range (which indicates that both markets are achieving similar returns).
Make sure you read your ratio chart correctly. The first thing you should do
when you examine a ratio chart is determine whether a rising ratio means
market A or market B is performing well. Most charting programs clearly designate which market is in the numerator of the fraction and which market is in the
denominator of the fraction. (In the example shown in Figure 6-9, the numerator
market is designated by being charted above the denominator market.)
A simple rule of thumb is that a rising ratio means the market index in the
numerator of the fraction is outperforming the market index in the denominator
of the fraction.
Talk of numerators and denominators may bring back unpleasant memories
from grade school, so take a look at an example that helps bring the analysis
home.
Figure 6-9 shows the ratio of the S&P 500 Index to the FTSE/Xinhua China 25
Index as measured by the iShares security. This figure shows three charts.
The first chart is the actual ratio between the two indexes (S&P 500 divided
by the FTSE/Xinhua China 25 Index). The second and third charts are just
plots of the actual indexes used in the computation of the first chart. (Most
charting programs provide the underlying indexes used in the computation
of a ratio chart.)
This chart covers the two equity markets from March 2007 through June
2007. Notice that the ratio chart is declining in March (signaling strength of
China or relative underperformance of the U.S. equity market) but stabilizing
in May and June. However, a break below that support level on June 11 signals the resumed outperformance of the Chinese stock market over the U.S.
equity market. That break is a strong signal to buy the iShares FTSE/Xinhua
China 25 Index.
Intramarket analysis isn’t confined to equities. As a swing trader, you can
compare gold prices to the Commodity Research Bureau Index, for example,
to determine whether gold prices are outperforming other major commodities. Or you can compare the relative strength of the 10-Year Treasury Bond
to the 30-Year Treasury Bond. The combinations are endless.

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
Ratio of S&P 500 Index to China Index

Figure 6-9:
Comparing
markets to
one another
helps you
determine
which
markets
are most
lucrative for
trading.

Holding industry groups
to the market standard
Another application of relative strength analysis is to compare industry
groups to the overall market. According to William J. O’Neil, founder of
Investor’s Business Daily newspaper, industry group performance can explain
between 30 percent and 40 percent of a stock’s performance. When oil service company stocks are hot, for example, shares of companies in the industry will rise together. When Internet retailer stocks are out of favor, look out
below! These stocks will tend to go down together.
Why do stocks sometimes behave like a herd of animals? Well, think of it on
a simple level: If you operate a shoe store in Run of the Mill City, USA, you
probably experience sales increases or decreases in line with other shoe
retailers. If a hot brand comes out one year and propels your sales higher,
don’t you expect other shoe retailers to experience similar success? The
reason stocks in industry groups tend to behave in a similar fashion is they
face many of the same market forces in their industry: both the benefits and
risks. When the U.S. government spends more on defense, all defense companies benefit together. One company may get a bigger slice of the pie than
another, but the entire pie is bigger, so other companies benefit. On the other
hand, when the government tightens its purse strings, expect to see shares of
most defense companies fall on hard times.

137

138 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis
Industry group intramarket analysis (that’s a tongue twister!) compares industry groups to the overall market. When the ratio between the two is rising or
falling, you can expect to find promising long or short opportunities from that
industry group.
You use the normal technical analysis tools from Chapters 4 and 5 on the
ratio. Figure 6-10 highlights an alternative energy index (clean energy) as
compared to the S&P 500 Index in 2007. A rising ratio in this chart means
that the alternative energy index is outperforming the general market. On the
other hand, a declining ratio implies the opposite — that the S&P 500 Index is
outperforming the clean energy index.
From late 2005 through mid-2006, the ratio of the clean energy index to the
S&P 500 Index was steadily rising. However, it experienced a sharp break in
May. This break of the trendline signaled that clean energy was no longer
outperforming the overall market. Instead, the break heralded the beginning
of underperformance relative to the general market that lasted for approximately eight months (not shown on this chart).
After you identify a turning point among an industry group and the market,
you can take advantage of that difference by either trading the index itself
(via a proxy such as an iShare) or drilling down into the industry group to
find trading candidates.
In the case of the example in Figure 6-10, you know that the clean energy sector
is underperforming the market. So now compare each stock in the sector to
the sector itself to find out which stocks are underperforming the sector.
This comparison will uncover a weak stock in a weak group, heavily pushing
the odds into your favor.
Clean Energy Index vs. S&P 500 Index

Figure 6-10:
Comparing
industry
groups to
the broader
market can
help you
identify
promising
industries to
trade.

Chapter 6: Analyzing Char ts to Trade Trends, Ranges, or Both
One company that fits the bill is FuelCell Energy (symbol: FCEL). Figure 6-11
shows a ratio chart of FuelCell Energy compared to the clean energy index.
The breakdown of the ratio in late May signals a period of underperformance
in the stock in relation to the industry. The industry was already beginning
to underperform the market at this point, so FuelCell is a prime candidate to
short: a weak stock in a weak group.

Ratio of FuelCell Energy to Sector

Figure 6-11:
Comparing
an individual
security to
its industry
group can
help you
identify
promising
trading
candidates.

139

140 Part II: Determining Your Entry and Exit Points: Technical Analysis

Part III

Digging Deeper
into the Market:
Fundamental
Analysis

H

In this part . . .

aving another tool at your disposal can increase
your swing trading success rate, so in this part,
I take you up close and personal with fundamental analysis. Then I describe how to gauge a security’s value by
either starting with an examination of its overall industry
or a closer look at the security itself. Finally, I show you
how to pull out useful trading insights by zeroing in on a
target company’s financial statements through the Six
Step Dance. Although some swing traders shy away from
fundamental analysis, practicing it takes you a step ahead
of the competition.

Chapter 7

Understanding a Company,
Inside and Out
In This Chapter
 Conducting fundamental analysis through financial statements
 Breaking down the key elements of financial statements
 Considering qualitative data
 Comparing a company to its peers with relative valuation

T

o begin at the beginning (yes, I like things to be logical), 100 years ago —
if you’re reading this sentence before 2034 — Benjamin Graham and
David Dodd published a seminal work in the development of fundamental
analysis: a book called Security Analysis. It argues for determining the value
of a company by using its financial statements (specifically the balance sheet,
which shows assets and liabilities, and the income statement, which shows
profit and loss over a specified period of time). Later, John Burr Williams
wrote The Theory of Investment Value, which argues for determining a company’s worth by discounting future dividends, or simply putting a future
value in today’s dollars. For example, $200,000 one year from now may be
worth $181,818 today, assuming the “discount rate” is 10 percent (that is,
investing $181,818 today and earning a 10 percent return yields $200,000
after one year).
Today’s investment models incorporate concepts from both these works to
assess corporate value. Valuation nowadays is the process of using data from
financial statements or comparable firms to assign a value for a company.
This chapter introduces you to the important concepts in equity valuation —
namely, what to look for in the companies you buy or short. I strongly believe
that it’s possible to estimate a company’s value within 10 to 15 percent of its
actual value in little time. The extra hours that Wall Street analysts put into
forecasting is largely to improve the precision of their estimates.
Whether you’re analyzing equities or another market, remember that you
don’t need an MBA or CFA designation to intelligently use fundamental analysis. Following some rules of thumb and taking some time to understand a
company can go a long way toward improving your swing trading profits.

144 Part III: Digging Deeper into the Market: Fundamental Analysis
Getting Your Hands on a Company’s
Financial Statements
Financial statements can be pretty daunting documents. They don’t have any
pictures, and they’re written in pretty boring language (not like the hilarity
of this book). Financial statements really should carry some type of warning
label that says, “Do not operate heavy machinery while reading.”
To help you avoid the pain of reading minutiae that you’re unlikely to ever
need, I’ve broken down the financial statement puzzle into three broad
categories:
 What to look for
 When to look
 Where to look

What to look for
Public companies are required by law to file reports with the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) — a government agency that enforces securities laws — at least on a quarterly basis and sometimes more frequently.
The SEC filings you should be aware of, including filings that cover a firm’s
financial statements, are listed here. Even if you never visit the SEC Web site
(www.sec.gov) in your life — and that may not be such a bad thing — you
should be familiar with the nomenclature (fancy word for “words”) of the
industry:
 10K: Yes, at first glance the “10K” sounds like a marathon or perhaps
$10,000. But in fact, the 10K in this context refers to an annual report
companies must file with the SEC that contains a wealth of information.
The 10K contains audited financial statements, information on a
company’s history, lines of business, competitive information, management’s expectations, and more. A company must file its 10K 60 days
after the end of its fiscal year. (A fiscal year usually begins January 1
and ends December 31, but some companies have fiscal years ending in
June, September, or other months.)
 10Q: The 10Q is a quarterly report companies must file with the SEC. It’s
shorter than the 10K and contains, most importantly, a firm’s financial
statements. Firms also may break out details on quarterly performance
and the reasons for an increase or decrease in earnings or sales. A
company is required to file a 10Q 35 days after the end of its quarter.

Chapter 7: Understanding a Company, Inside and Out
 8K: Companies file 8K statements after some material event occurs
in their business that they must alert shareholders to. These events can
be positive or negative, such as being acquired, entering bankruptcy,
acquiring another company, or failing to meet an exchange’s listing
requirements. 8K filings are very timely because public companies must
file them four days after the event occurs.
Concurrent with the release of earnings, companies conduct conference calls
to discuss the prior quarter. These conference calls also provide the opportunity for listeners to ask questions of the CEO, CFO, and other executives. If
you’ve never listened to this kind of conference call, don’t worry. You’re not
missing out on much. It isn’t a party, the jokes are dry, and the executives are
anxious to wrap it up. Listening to these calls is a necessity for long-term
investors, but not for swing traders (though it is useful). The time commitment required to listen to several companies’ conference calls makes doing
so impractical.

