
Edwards and Magee popularized gaps 50 years ago in Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. These
old masters describe three types of trend gaps found in most stock charts. Breakaway gaps appear as
a market breaks out into a new trend move, up or down. Continuation gaps print about halfway
through trends when enthusiasm or fear overpowers reason. Exhaustion gaps burn out trends with
one last surge of emotion.
Breakaway and continuation gaps should print volume that sharply exceeds the 60-bar VMA. Both
events provide excellent trades in the gap direction when the trend first pulls back to test them.
They hold S/R the vast majority of the time and identify low-risk, high-reward entry. Markets retest
most breakouts very quickly after they occur. If successful, price often moves sharply away from
the pullback level. But many bars can pass before price retraces to a continuation gap. Crowd
intensity tends to carry the trend well past the gap before it yields to any substantial test.
FIGURE 5.11
Use candlestick reversals to uncover important gaps that hide in other time frames. A spinning top candle on the Texas
Instruments daily chart hides an exhaustion gap within the 60-minute view. This classic gap appears at the end of fivewave trend movement just as the supply of buyers or sellers runs out. Exhaustion gaps fill more quickly than breakaway
or continuation gaps. Notice how price briefly dips below 85 to fill the continuation gap overnight before springing
back the next morning in a 7-point rally.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Exhaustion gaps print as trends and indicators reach extremes. This last burst may occur on very
high volume, but a lack of participation does not negate the pattern. Exhaustion gaps fill easily and
warn that the trend is over. Price fills the gap and often pulls back to the hole from the other side
before a correction proceeds in the closing direction. Congestion patterns may form through wide
gap ranges before yielding to substantial movement. Keep in mind that an exhaustion gap may turn
out to represent a hidden continuation gap in the next-larger time frame. This odd phenomenon
requires a sharp eye and often does not reveal itself until the larger trend ends. Use the dark cloud
cover or bearish engulfing candlestick patterns to uncover these dual gap candidates.
Gap creation aligns with Elliott’s five-wave trend theory. The breakaway gap corresponds with the
initiation of a dynamic first- or third-wave impulse. Runaway emotions emit the continuation gap at
the center of the third wave. Then the trend sequence ends through the fifth-wave exhaustion gap.
The continuation gap routinely marks a halfway point for the entire trend. Swing traders use this
knowledge to target major reversals. Visualize the gap as soon as possible after a third wave
completes. Draw an extension from the edge of the first wave to the new gap. Then double the
distance and wait for a last thrust to push price into it. Consider fade entry with a tight stop loss
when the target strikes, as long as substantial cross-verification supports the trade.
The first test of a continuation gap often occurs after the closure of an exhaustion gap. Markets
retrace five-wave trends according to Fibonacci proportion. Pullbacks often fill the primary fifth
wave completely through a first rise/first failure pattern. Without strong support, the countertrend
thrust then continues until supply-demand equalizes and reawakens the underlying trend. The
continuation gap marks the natural 50% retracement, providing the support needed to force a
reversal.
Watch for false gap fills. Modern market action closes many continuation gaps for a bar or two
before price thrusts sharply back in the direction of support. This likely reflects growing common
knowledge of this fascinating S/R point. Don’t let this whipsaw phenomenon negate these
profitable trade setups. Entry at the far side of the gap offers very low risk as long as volume
remains flat. Less aggressive traders can wait for price to remount the hole and then execute as the
gap reopens.
Continuation gap trades provide high probability entry, but keep in mind that the subsequent swing
will likely fail before it again tests the exhaustion gap. Deep pullbacks face an extended period of
price discovery as trend volatility dissipates. Longer-term positions can survive this process, but
swing trades may not. Use trend mirrors to target an acceptable reward before choosing to execute a
gap trade. Exit quickly on the first reversal thrust unless patience allows an extended position.
Always distinguish between gaps in the direction of the prevailing trend and those going against it.
Countertrend gaps often flag major reversals without a long series of price bars. The most important
shock events occur right near major highs or lows. A sudden break in the wrong direction after a
strong rally generates fear among the crowd and may ignite herd behavior that leads to considerably
lower prices. This hole-in-the-wall gap has many swing trading applications, which are discussed in
detail in Chapter 11.
Opening gaps fascinate participants but require solid execution skills. Market insiders know that
fresh cash seeks opportunity at the start of the day and paint the tape to encourage execution. This
premarket manipulation encourages supply-demand imbalance because many traders see these
numbers and place ill-advised orders well above or below the market. The resulting friction sets the
stage for a violent reversal just minutes into the new session.

Most morning gaps face a testing period before filling or yielding to a trend thrust. Fades can begin
as early as the opening bell. But price often moves first in the direction of the gap to gather volume
before it reverses by the third 5-minute bar. This classic reversal zone originates from the era when
most public participants had to view the markets through a 15-minute delay. Insiders held opening
price firm to give this retail crowd a chance to act before fading them.
FIGURE 5.12
Atmel returns to test a continuation gap several weeks after filling a small exhaustion gap at 54. Price first dips sharply
through 44 to take out weak hands and then snaps back strongly in a rally that quickly heads for new highs. 3× crossverification signals a very profitable trade setup right at this bottom. In addition to the gap itself, price turns right at the
62% retracement, where it also prints a long-legged hammer reversal.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Gaps encourage execution tactics that favor or fade the open. The highest-risk tactics enter a new
position at the open in the direction of the break. As with other momentum plays, price can fade
sharply without a clear signal that the trade should be terminated. Execution against the gap after a
two-bar thrust offers lower risk but more anxiety. This countertrend tactic requires defensive
management after execution and a very quick exit or tight stop as price moves into a profit. The
setup also demands cross-verification with central tendency tools. The opening bars must thrust
well outside short-term Bollinger Band extremes before consideration of a fade position.
Look for a bounce at the prior closing bar if price breaks opening congestion and reverses to fill the
gap. As the market pulls back, the opposite end of the hole now presents a new barrier. A reversal

off this level sets the stage for price to fail and thrust well back into the prior closing range. Gaps
that stay unfilled signal powerful support or resistance. Price should eventually push out of the
morning range into higher or lower levels when this occurs.
FIGURE 5.13
Two ferocious morning gaps defy prediction on Lycos. On the morning that the stock opens in the low 70s, only the
fourth intraday bar offers a low-risk profit. Short sellers have more luck the next day as a declining wedge telegraphs
lower prices for most of the afternoon. Notice how LCOS reverses right at the third 5-minute bar after each gap. This
typical morning action tests the supply-demand waters.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Early congestion identifies signposts for safe gap entry. These range extremes provide important
information on the strength or weakness of the morning move. Gaps that fill quickly should be
avoided in the direction of the trend. Use classic swing strategies to prepare execution after they test
and hold. In other words, buy pullbacks in up gaps and sell bear rallies in down gaps. Also consider
breakout strategies at the high or low for the session. For example, look for a second test of a shortterm top and enter in expectation of a breakout.
Long entry into a big market gap down terrifies many swing traders. But this profitable opportunity
must be mastered to achieve consistent performance. Learn to set aside fear and stand against the
crowd when the right conditions present themselves. Reprogram your natural reaction to stomach-

churning down gaps by stepping in the shoes of those trapped on the other side of these shock
events.
Imagine taking a questionable long position into a volatile close and spending the night wondering
how the next morning will affect profit or loss. Many participants with large positions cannot sleep
when they carry that much risk. Images of lottery jackpots and painful losses both creep into the
irrational mind. Then the next day finally arrives and the worst-case scenario occurs. The early
spread shows the position many points into the hole. The resulting pain quickly drives out rational
thought, and fear-driven instinct takes over. In total shock, you sell into the open, happy to be
relieved of the heavy burden.
Immediately the stock reverses and rockets above your entry price.
Market professionals use fear to generate profits. Many opening gaps allow large players to benefit
their own accounts by fading the crowd. When overall conditions favor strong buying interest, these
shock gaps actually represent low-risk entry for the swing trader. Learn to interpret this market
sentiment correctly and capitalize on misinformed sellers.
But extreme caution is advised. Only an experienced swing trader with a solid history of risk
management should execute a long position into a down gap. Poorly timed gap entry can be very
deadly to an equity account. Avoid execution right at the open whenever possible. Instead, watch
for cross-verification near the third-bar reversal and find a small pullback for immediate entry. Also
check the news first to evaluate the severity of the shock event. The best opportunities come when
no obvious reason drives the selloff.
Important news events don’t always eliminate gap-down opportunities. Bad news offers insiders a
chance to enter ongoing rallies at a bargain price. When everyone expects a selloff, insiders play on
their fears and knock down opening bids sharply. These mechanics often produce a significant
bounce after the open in strong markets. But swing traders should never expect a complete gap fill
in these volatile conditions; they take whatever profits the market gives them and move on to the
next setup.
Risk-averse traders can also find profitable opportunities on these fearful mornings. Watch for a
first rise pattern back to the closing hour high of the prior session. This price action signifies a filled
gap and the first stage of a reversal that should carry higher. Treat this simple price test as a double
top and watch for a long opportunity on the next pullback or third rise into the extreme.
Countertrend gap entry requires solid interpretation of the numbers, skilled reading of the emotional
crowd, and excellent timing. Seasoned swing traders recognize many redundant features in these
morning setups. Neither market makers nor specialists rely on original strategies most of the time.
They will play the same classic price games as often as they can get away with them. Experience
with their tactics over time builds confidence when warning signs of their activity start to appear.
TRIANGLES
Triangles present a major class of patterns that don’t fit easily into continuation or reversal
categories. Their eventual outcomes depend on their unique characteristics and positions within
larger trends. Each triangle begins with a natural tendency that the swing trader must evaluate in
context with the charting landscape. Ascending triangles print the most bullish patterns, while
descending triangles form the most bearish ones. Symmetrical triangles display a zero bias for
either outcome: the formation suggests a state of perfect balance.

FIGURE 5.14
Oracle gaps down as a volatile session begins. The opening turns out to be the low for the day as the stock heads
vertical for a 6-½ point gain in under 1 hour. Focus attention on the gap itself during these events. Watch how quickly
it fills and whether it offers a pullback opportunity after it closes. Notice how ORCL mounts the broken hammer from
the prior afternoon, which also marks the gap’s extension. After it completes a first rise, it pulls back 38% into a cup
and handle pattern that ejects through the top.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Well-formed triangles gather tremendous predictive power because they point directly at negativepositive feedback interfaces. A powerful vertical thrust often develops when congested price finally
exits a triangle and surges into trend. While false moves occur near these apex points, breakouts
tend to print with a higher degree of reliability than many other patterns. However, the
dependability of all patterns mutates with the crowd’s participation. The most perfect and widely
recognized triangles will cause the most grief for those trading in the direction of the common
knowledge.
Angle and location define the pattern’s identity. Ascending triangles rise again and again toward a
ceiling resistance level. Symmetrical triangles surge rhythmically across both sides of a horizontal
axis that divides the formation right through the middle. The bearish descending triangle bounces
weakly off bottom support. All three variations can occur at bottoms, tops, or in the middle of
ongoing trends. Unfortunately, this relative location does not reveal itself until the pattern
completes and price ejects out of one side or the other.

FIGURE 5.15
TALE OF THREE TRIANGLES

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

Triangles give birth in a state of high volatility. This agitation decreases sharply as they approach
their termination points. This poses one of the risks inherent in trading these patterns. Volatility
may flatline if no ignition sparks a breakout. This forces price to meander endlessly in sideways
motion and lose its potential. Close out positions without hesitation when caught in this
phenomenon.
Buying pressure builds in ascending triangles as price tests upper boundaries. The setup normally
triggers on the third rise to the top. A sharp expansion through this horizontal zone signals the
breakout. Watch for a failure at the third high that may print a triple-top reversal. The best patterns
show precise horizontal resistance. This builds strong demand just above that level. Slowly
ascending highs do not characterize these bullish triangles. They represent bearish rising wedges.
The difference lies in the loss of buying power as each nominal high fails to produce a significant
profit.
Ascending triangles commonly appear as continuation patterns in the middle of trend development.
When they emerge near potential bottoms, upside breakouts often print parabolic rallies. Many miss
this outstanding opportunity because the event tends to occur within a countertrend (bear market)
environment. Regardless of location, the pattern fails if the trendline of the rising lows breaks to the
downside.
Symmetrical triangles form the most common congestion patterns seen on price charts. Formations
that persist for years can be found on monthly bars, while day traders note their repeated appearance
on 5-minute Nasdaq stock charts. These triangles form a central pivot axis that can yield powerful
moves on price ejection. The challenge is to predict which way that price will break. While popular
tutorials describe a bullish tendency, the pattern really has no inherent bias and can go either way
with ease. Watch for a directional signal when the pattern nears two-thirds of the distance from its
inception to the apex point where the triangle lines converge.
Examine the symmetrical triangle within the context of an ongoing trend. Those that appear early in
a move support that trend more consistently. General trading tactics use the lines that form the
upper and lower boundaries to target breakout points. Regardless of direction, expanding price faces
an additional test at the initial pattern high or low before it can thrust into a new trend leg. This last
barrier often forces a final pullback to the breakout line that swing traders can use for late entry. Pay

special attention to rare double symmetrical triangles in which one pattern prints right after the
other. The center point between the two formations marks the halfway point of a major trend in the
same manner as a continuation gap.
Study the symmetrical triangle up close to uncover its secrets. Examine price action and volume at
the second and third bottoms. Look for long bullish candle reversals that suggest bargain hunting.
Examine the pattern’s ability to hold well above the first low on good accumulation. This stokes the
breakout fires when the new trend finally begins. Beware of flatline bars beyond the two-thirds
point that continue for more than a few prints. Many swing traders will be watching this same dead
action and go elsewhere if nothing happens.
FIGURE 5.16
CNET Networks prints a double symmetrical triangle during this strong 1999 rally. The twin triangles have a similar
appearance and take almost the same number of bars to complete before ejecting higher. The continuation gap at the
halfway point between the two patterns also marks the middle of the entire 6-month move. Right on schedule, a sharp
decline to 42 carries price into a successful test of the gap after the final top prints.

RealTick® ©1986–2000. All rights reserved. Used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd.

The triangle’s apex point marks important S/R for price pullbacks and future trend mirror passages.
These common patterns fail when they break one way but fall back through the apex in the opposite
direction. Once this type of failure prints, price should continue to fade for some time as the false
breakout relieves substantial pressure in the opposite direction.

Many participants associate descending triangles with topping formations, but they can appear
anywhere. These bearish patterns sap buying power through three declining highs that lead to an
eventual breakdown. A horizontal bottom builds selling pressure that triggers many stops on a first
violation. This triangle fails when price rises above the trendline formed by the descending highs.
Price expansion through that violation will often be more dynamic than the expected breakdown
move. When price pierces the horizontal bottom for a few ticks and pops back above, look for an
immediate test of the declining high trendline. Any break through that point represents a buy signal.
All types of triangles turn into something else with great frequency. No guarantees exist that any
pattern will act according to textbook rules. Growing knowledge of triangle formations increases
the frequency of this mutation into other forms of congestion. For this reason, trade these patterns
according to strict planning that encompasses both breakout and failure strategies. Demand price
bar and volume cross-verification or exit the position quickly. Intraday traders must also consider
time-of-day bias when patterns hit execution targets. Look for clear signals or let other participants
risk their capital first.

FLAGS
Flag patterns appear as countertrend parallelograms between waves of strong trend movement.
These continuation patterns exhibit characteristic behavior and provide dependable trade setups. In
less dynamic markets, this common formation will often mirror the same angle as the prior trend
but in the opposite direction. Flags appear equally in bull and bear markets. Bull flags decline
against the rally in uptrends, and bear flags rise against the selloff in downtrends.
Vertical price movement precedes the most reliable flag patterns. Strong volume from the prior
trend should drop off sharply as the range evolves. Expect price bars to narrow as volatility and
interest flatline, as with other negative feedback events. Near pattern completion, volume should
increase in the direction of the eventual breakout and spike just as a new trend leg begins. Flags
should yield to new trends in no more than 15–20 bars. Bear flags tend to take less time to conclude
than bull ones. When this pattern persists longer than expected, it may evolve into a long sideways
market with little profit potential.
Flags print a minimum of four relative extensions: two highs and two lows that form parallel
trendlines. S/R may also generate a price axis through the center of the formation. Expect a
breakout from the pattern after a pullback from the third strike at each extreme. But watch for an
early move after price touches only one line for the third time, reverses, and then drifts back toward
it. The eventual breakout mimics the action of better-known parallel channels. Price bars expand
sharply away from the broken line on increased volume.
Flag retracement follows classic Fibonacci proportion. The second low or high against the primary
trend often strikes right at the 50% pullback, while the third hits the 62% level. If this second strike
occurs closer to 38%, the third may go no further than 50% before the underlying trend reasserts
itself. Fib grids provide an excellent cross-verification source for impending flag breakouts. For
example, the third small rally in a descending bull flag may push upward into the bottom of a 38%
retracement that also marks the location of an important moving average. This convergence of S/R
increases odds that the upside price break will be dynamic.
Common trading wisdom dictates that flags fly at half-mast. This suggests that these patterns print
about halfway through trends. Use this anecdotal information for general price targeting. Measure
the length of the sharp price move that precedes the pattern. Add that to the flag low that initiates
the new trend and look for another reversal when price approaches the target.
