
The Psychology of Money

179

the stock market, but themselves. They may well have superior abilities
in mathematics, finance, and accounting, but if they cannot master
their emotions, they are ill suited to profit from the investment process.
Graham understood the emotional quicksand of the market as well
as any modern psychologist, maybe better. His notion that true investors can be recognized by their temperament as well as by their skills
holds as true today as when first expressed.
Investors have the following characteristics:
• True investors are calm. They know that stock prices, inf luenced
by all manner of forces both reasonable and unreasonable, will fall as
well as rise, and that includes stocks they own. When that happens, they
react with equanimity; they know that as long as the company retains
the qualities that attracted them as investors in the first place, the price
will come back up. In the meantime, they do not panic.
On this point, Buffett is blunt: Unless you can watch your stock
holdings decline by 50 percent without becoming panic-stricken, you
should not be in the stock market. In fact, he adds, as long as you feel
good about the businesses you own, you should welcome lower prices as
a way to profitably increase your holdings.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, true investors also remain
calm in the face of what we might call the mob inf luence. When one
stock or one industry or one mutual fund suddenly lands in the spotlight, the mob rushes in that direction. The trouble is, when everyone is
making the same choices because “everyone” knows it’s the thing to
do, then no one is in a position to profit. In remarks reported in Fortune at the end of 1999, Buffett talked about the “can’t-miss-the-party”
factor that has infected so many bull-market investors.2 His caution
seems to be this: True investors don’t worry about missing the party;
they worry about coming to the party unprepared.
• True investors are patient. Instead of being swept along in the enthusiasm of the crowd, true investors wait for the right opportunity.
They say no more often than yes. Buffett recalls that when he worked for
Graham-Newman, analyzing stocks for possible purchase, Ben Graham
turned down his recommendations most of the time. Graham, Buffett
says, was never willing to purchase a stock unless all the facts were in his
favor. From this experience, Buffett learned that the ability to say no is a
tremendous advantage for an investor.

180

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

We don’t have to be smarter than the rest; we have to be more
disciplined than the rest.3
WARREN BUFFETT, 2002

Buffett believes that too many of today’s investors feel a need to purchase too many stocks, most of which are certain to be mediocre, instead
of waiting for the few exceptional companies. To reinforce Graham’s lesson, Buffett often uses the analogy of a punch card. “An investor,” he
says, “should act as though he had a lifetime decision card with just
twenty punches on it. With every investment decision his card is
punched, and he has one fewer available for the rest of his life.”4 If investors were restrained in this way, Buffett figures that they would be
forced to wait patiently until a great investment opportunity surfaced.
• True investors are rational. They approach the market, and the
world, from a base of clear thinking. They are neither unduly pessimistic
nor irrationally optimistic; they are, instead, logical and rational.
Buffett finds it odd that so many people habitually dislike markets
that are in their best interests and favor those markets that continually
put them at a disadvantage. They feel optimistic when market prices are
rising, pessimistic when prices are going down. If they go the next step
and put those feelings into action, what do they do? Sell at lower prices
and buy at higher prices—not the most profitable strategy.
Undue optimism rears its head when investors blithely assume that
somehow the fates will smile on them and their stock choice will be the
one in a hundred that really takes off. It is especially prevalent in bull
markets, when high expectations are commonplace. Optimists see no
need to do the fundamental research and analysis that would illuminate
the real long-term winners (e.g., finding the few keepers among all the
look-alike dot-coms) because the short-term numbers are so seductive.
Undue pessimism, whether directed at one company or the market
in general, motivates investors to sell at exactly the wrong time. In
Buffett’s view, true investors are pleased when the rest of the world turns
pessimistic, because they see it for what it really is: a perfect time to buy

The Psychology of Money

181

good companies at bargain prices. Pessimism, he says, is “the most common cause of low prices. . . . We want to do business in such an environment, not because we like pessimism but because we like the prices it
produces. It’s optimism that is the enemy of the rational buyer.”5
Whether an investor feels optimistic or pessimistic is a statement of
what that investor thinks about the future. Forecasting what is going to
happen next is tricky at best, and downright foolish when optimism (or
pessimism) is based more on emotion than on research. Buffett, who once
remarked that “the only value of stock forecasters is to make fortune
tellers look good,” makes no attempt to anticipate the periods in which
the market is likely to go up or down.6 Instead, he keeps an eye on the
general emotional tenor of the overall market, and acts accordingly. “We
simply attempt,” he explains, “to be fearful when others are greedy and to
be greedy only when others are fearful.”7

INTRODUCING MR. MARKET
To show his students how powerfully emotions are tied to stock market f luctuations, and to help them recognize the folly of succumbing
to emotion, Graham created an allegorical character he named “Mr.
Market.” Buffett has frequently shared the story of Mr. Market with
Berkshire’s shareholders.
Imagine that you and Mr. Market are partners in a private business.
Each day without fail, Mr. Market quotes a price at which he is willing
to either buy your interest or sell you his. The business that you both
own is fortunate to have stable economic characteristics, but Mr. Market’s quotes are anything but. For you see, Mr. Market is emotionally
unstable. Some days, he is cheerful and enormously optimistic, and can
only see brighter days ahead. On these days, he offers a very high price
for shares in your business. At other times, Mr. Market is discouraged
and terribly pessimistic; seeing nothing but trouble ahead, he quotes a
very low price for your shares in the business.
Mr. Market has another endearing characteristic, Graham said: He
does not mind being snubbed. If Mr. Market’s quotes are ignored, he
will be back again tomorrow with a new quote. Graham warned his
students that it is Mr. Market’s pocketbook, not his wisdom, that is useful. If Mr. Market shows up in a foolish mood, you are free to ignore

182

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

him or take advantage of him, but it will be disastrous if you fall under
his inf luence.
“The investor who permits himself to be stampeded or unduly worried by unjustified market declines in his holdings is perversely transforming his basic advantage into a basic disadvantage,” Graham wrote.
“That man would be better off if his stocks had no market quotation at
all, for he would then be spared the mental anguish caused him by other
persons’ mistakes of judgment.”8
To be successful, investors need good business judgment and the
ability to protect themselves from the emotional whirlwind that Mr.
Market unleashes. One is insufficient without the other. An important
factor in Buffett’s success is that he has always been able to disengage
himself from the emotional forces of the stock market. He credits Ben
Graham and Mr. Market with teaching him how to remain insulated
from the silliness of the market.

M R . M A R K E T, M E E T C H A R L I E M U N G E R
It was more than sixty years ago that Ben Graham introduced Mr.
Market, sixty years since he began writing about the irrationality that
exists in the market. Yet in all the years since, there has been little apparent change in investor behavior. Investors still act irrationally. Foolish
mistakes are still the order of the day. Fear and greed still permeate the
marketplace.
We can, through numerous academic studies and surveys, track investor foolishness. We can, if we follow Warren Buffett’s lead, turn
other people’s fear or greed to our advantage. But to fully understand
the dynamics of emotion in investing, we turn to another individual:
Charlie Munger.
Munger’s understanding of how psychology affects investors, and
his insistence on taking it into account, have greatly inf luenced the
operations of Berkshire Hathaway. It is one of his most profound contributions. In particular, he stresses what he calls the psychology of
misjudgment: What is it in human nature that draws people to mistakes of judgment?
Munger believes a key problem is that our brain takes shortcuts in
analysis. We jump too quickly to conclusions. We are easily misled and
are prone to manipulation. To compensate, Munger has developed a

The Psychology of Money

183

I came to the psychology of misjudgment almost against my
will; I rejected it until I realized my attitude was costing me a
lot of money.9
CHARLIE MUNGER, 1995

mental habit that has served him well. “Personally, I’ve gotten so that I
now use a kind of two-track analysis,” he said in a 1994 speech reprinted
in Outstanding Investor Digest. “First, what are the factors that really
govern the interests involved, rationally considered. And second, what
are the subconscious inf luences where the brain at a subconscious level is
automatically doing these things—which by and large are useful, but
which often misfunction.”10

B E H AV I O R A L F I N A N C E
In many ways, Charlie Munger is a genuine pioneer. He was thinking
about, and talking about, the psychological aspects of market behavior
long before other investment professionals gave it serious attention. But
that is beginning to change. Behavioral finance is now an accepted area
of study in the economics department at major universities, including
the work done by Richard Thaler at the University of Chicago.
Observing that people often make foolish mistakes and illogical assumptions when dealing with their own financial affairs, academics, including Thaler, began to dig deeper into psychological concepts to explain
the irrationalities in people’s thinking. It is a relatively new field of study,
but what we are learning is fascinating, as well as eminently useful to
smart investors.

Overconfidence
Several psychological studies have pointed out that errors in judgment
occur because people in general are overconfident. Ask a large sample
of people how many believe their skills at driving a car are above average, and an overwhelming majority will say they are excellent drivers. Another example: When asked, doctors believe they can diagnose

184

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

pneumonia with 90 percent confidence when in fact they are right only
50 percent of the time.
Confidence per se is not a bad thing. But overconfidence is another matter, and it can be particularly damaging when we are dealing
with our financial affairs. Overconfident investors not only make silly
decisions for themselves but also have a powerful effect on the market
as a whole.
Overconfidence explains why so many investors make wrong calls.
They have too much confidence in the information they gather and
think they are more right than they actually are. If all the players think
that their information is correct and they know something that others
do not, the result is a great deal of trading.

Overreaction Bias
Thaler points to several studies that demonstrate people put too much
emphasis on a few chance events, thinking they spot a trend. In particular, investors tend to fix on the most recent information they received
and extrapolate from it; the last earnings report thus becomes in their
mind a signal of future earnings. Then, believing that they see what
others do not, they make quick decisions from superficial reasoning.
Overconfidence is at work here; people believe they understand the
data more clearly than others do and interpret it better. But there is more
to it. Overreaction exacerbates overconfidence. The behaviorists have
learned that people tend to overreact to bad news and react slowly to good
news. Psychologists call this overreaction bias. Thus if the short-term
earnings report is not good, the typical investor response is an abrupt, illconsidered overreaction, with its inevitable effect on stock prices.
Thaler describes this overemphasis on the short term as investor
“myopia” (the medical term for nearsightedness) and believes most investors would be better off if they didn’t receive monthly statements. In
a study conducted with other behavioral economists, he proved his idea
in dramatic fashion.
Thaler and colleagues asked a group of students to divide a hypothetical portfolio between stocks and Treasury bills. But first, they sat
the students in front of a computer and simulated the returns of the
portfolio over a trailing twenty-five-year period. Half the students
were given mountains of information, representing the market’s
volatile nature with ever-changing prices. The other group was only

The Psychology of Money

185

given periodic performance measured in five-year time periods. Thaler
then asked each group to allocate their portfolio for the next forty years.
The group that had been bombarded by lots of information, some of
which inevitably pointed to losses, allocated only 40 percent of its
money to the stock market; the group that received only periodic information allocated almost 70 percent of its portfolio to stocks. Thaler,
who lectures each year at the Behavioral Conference sponsored by the
National Bureau of Economic Research and the John F. Kennedy School
of Government at Harvard, told the group, “My advice to you is to invest in equities and then don’t open the mail.”11
This experiment, as well as others, neatly underscores Thaler’s notion of investor myopia—shortsightedness leading to foolish decisions.
Part of the reason myopia provokes such an irrational response is another bit of psychology: our innate desire to avoid loss.

Loss Aversion
According to behaviorists, the pain of a loss is far greater than the enjoyment of a gain. Many experiments, by Thaler and others, have demonstrated that people need twice as much positive to overcome a negative.
On a 50/50 bet, with precisely even odds, most people will not risk anything unless the potential gain is twice as high as the potential loss.
This is known as asymmetrical loss aversion: The downside has
a greater impact than the upside, and it is a fundamental aspect of
human psychology. Applied to the stock market, it means that investors
feel twice as bad about losing money as they feel good about picking
a winner.
This aversion to loss makes investors unduly conservative, at great
cost. We all want to believe we made good decisions, so we hold onto
bad choices far too long in the vague hope that things will turn around.
By not selling our losers, we never have to confront our failures. But if
you don’t sell a mistake, you are potentially giving up a gain that you
could earn by reinvesting smartly.

Mental Accounting
A final aspect of behavioral finance that deserves our attention is what
psychologists have come to call mental accounting. It refers to our habit
of shifting our perspective on money as surrounding circumstances

186

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

change. We tend to mentally put money into different “accounts,” and
that determines how we think about using it.
A simple situation will illustrate. Let us imagine that you have just
returned home from an evening out with your spouse. You reach for
your wallet to pay the babysitter, but discover that the $20 bill you
thought was there, is not. So, when you drive the sitter home, you stop
by an ATM and get another $20. Then the next day, you discover the
original $20 bill in your jacket pocket.
If you’re like most people, you react with something like glee. The
$20 in the jacket is “found” money. Even though the first $20 and the
second $20 both came from your checking account, and both represent
money you worked hard for, the $20 bill you hold in your hand is money
you didn’t expect to have, and you feel free to spend it frivolously.
Once again, Richard Thaler provides an interesting academic experiment to demonstrate this concept. In his study, he started with two
groups of people. People in the first group were given $30 in cash and
told they had two choices: (1) They could pocket the money and walk
away, or (2) they could gamble on a coin f lip. If they won they would
get $9 extra and if they lost they would have $9 deducted. Most (70
percent) took the gamble because they figured at the very least they
would end up with $21 of found money. Those in the second group
were offered a different choice: (1) They could gamble on a coin toss—
if they won, they would get $39 and if they lost they would get $21; or
(2) they could get an even $30 with no coin toss. More than half (57
percent) decided to take the sure money. Both groups of people stood
to win the exact same amount of money with the exact same odds, but
they perceived the situation differently.12

Risk Tolerance
In the same way that a strong magnet pulls together all the nearby
pieces of metal, your level of risk tolerance pulls together all the elements of the psychology of finance. The psychological concepts are abstract; where they get real is in the day-to-day decisions that you make
about buying and selling. And the common thread in all those decisions
is how you feel about risk.
In the last dozen or so years, investment professionals have devoted
considerable energy to helping people assess their risk tolerance. At first,

The Psychology of Money

187

it seemed like a simple task. By using interviews and questionnaires, they
could construct a risk profile for each investor. The trouble is, people’s
tolerance for risk is founded in emotion, and that means it changes with
changing circumstances. When the market declines drastically, even
those with an aggressive profile will become very cautious. In a booming
market, supposedly conservative investors add more stocks just as quickly
as aggressive investors do.
A true picture of risk tolerance requires digging below the surface
of the standard assessment questions and investigating issues driven by
psychology. A few years ago, in collaboration with Dr. Justin Green of
Villanova University, I developed a risk analysis tool that focuses on
personality as much as on the more obvious and direct risk factors.
Summarizing our research, we found that propensity for risk taking
is connected to two demographic factors: gender and age. Women are
typically more cautious than men, and older people are less willing to
assume risk than younger people. Looking at personality factors, we
learned that the investor with a high degree of risk tolerance will be
someone who sets goals and believes he or she has control of the environment and can affect its outcome. This person sees the stock market
as a contingency dilemma in which information combined with rational choices will produce winning results.
For investors, the implications of behavioral finance are clear: How
we decide to invest, and how we choose to manage those investments,
has a great deal to do with how we think about money. Mental accounting has been suggested as a further reason people don’t sell stocks
that are doing badly: In their minds, the loss doesn’t become real until
they act on it. Another powerful connection has to do with risk. We are
far more likely to take risks with found money. On a broader scale,
mental accounting emphasizes one weakness of the efficient market hypothesis: It demonstrates that market values are determined not solely
by the aggregated information but also by how human beings process
that information.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF FOCUS INVESTING
Everything we have learned about psychology and investing comes
together in the person of Warren Buffett. He puts his faith in his

188

T H E W A R R E N B U F F E T T W AY

own research, rather than in luck. His actions derive from carefully
thought-out goals, and he is not swept off course by short-term events.
He understands the true elements of risk and accepts the consequences
with confidence.
Long before behavioral finance had a name, it was understood and
accepted by a few renegades like Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger.
Charlie points out that when he and Buffett left graduate school, they
“entered the business world to find huge, predictable patterns of extreme irrationality.”13 He is not talking about predicting the timing,
but rather the idea that when irrationality does occur it leads to predictable patterns of subsequent behavior.
When it comes to investing, emotions are very real, in the sense
that they affect people’s behavior and thus ultimately affect market
prices. You have already sensed, I am sure, two reasons understanding
the human dynamic is so valuable in your own investing:
1. You will have guidelines to help you avoid the most common
mistakes.
2. You will be able to recognize other people’s mistakes in time to
profit from them.
All of us are vulnerable to individual errors of judgment that can
affect our personal success. When a thousand or a million people make
errors of judgment, the collective impact is to push the market in a
destructive direction. Then, so strong is the temptation to follow the
crowd, accumulated bad judgment only compounds itself. In a turbulent sea of irrational behavior, the few who act rationally may well be
the only survivors.
Successful focus investors need a certain kind of temperament. The
road is always bumpy, and knowing the right path to take is often counterintuitive. The stock market’s constant gyrations can be unsettling to
investors and make them act in irrational ways. You need to be on the
lookout for these emotions and be prepared to act sensibly even when
your instincts may strongly call for the opposite behavior. But as we have
learned, the future rewards focus investing significantly enough to warrant our strong effort.
