
36

receive payment. The cheaper currency makes the nation's exports less expensive
abroad, which in turn fuels exports and brings the currency into balance.
What is the Balance of Payments? The balance of payments account is divided
into two parts: the current account and the capital account. The current account
measures trade in tangible, visible items such as cars and manufactured goods; the
surplus or deficit between exports and imports is called the trade balance. The capital
account measures flows of money, such as investments for stocks or bonds. Balance
of payments data can be found on the web site of the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(www.bea.gov).
Trade Flows. The trade balance of a country shows the net difference over a
period of time between a nations exports and imports. When a country imports more
then it exports the trade balance is negative or is in a deficit. If the country exports
more than it imports the trade balance is positive or is in a surplus. The trade balance
indicates the redistribution of wealth among countries and is a major channel through
which the macro-economic policies of a country may affect another country.
In general, it is considered to be unfavorable for a country to have a trade deficit,
in that it negatively impacts the value of the nations currency. For example, if U.S.
trade figures show greater imports than exports, more dollars flow out of the United
States and the value of the U.S. currency depreciates. A positive trade balance, in
comparison, will affect the dollar by causing it to appreciate against the other
currencies.
Capital Flows. In addition to trade flows, there are also capital flows that occur
among countries. They record a nation's incoming and outgoing investment flows
such as payments for entire (or for parts of) companies, stocks, bonds, bank accounts,
real estate, and factories. The capital flows are influenced by many factors, including
the financial and economic climate of other countries. Capital flows can be in the
form of physical or portfolio investments. In general, in developing countries, the
composition of capital flows tends to be skewed toward foreign direct investment
(FDI) and bank loans. For developed countries, due to the strength of the equity and
fixed income markets, stocks and bonds appear to be more important than bank loans
and FDI.
Equity Markets Equity markets have a significant impact on exchange rate
movements because they are a major place for high-volume currency movements.
Their importance is considerable for the currencies of countries with developed
capital markets where great amounts of capital inflows and outflows occur, and
where foreign investors are major participants. The amount of the foreign investment
flows in the equity markets is dependent on the general health and growth of the
market, reflecting the well-being of companies and particular sectors. Movements of
currencies occur when foreign investors move their money to a particular equity
market. Thus they convert their capital in a domestic currency and push the demand
for it higher, making the currency appreciate. When the equity markets are
experiencing recessions, however, foreign investors tend to flee, thus converting back
to their home currency and pushing the domestic currency down.
Fixed Income (Bond) Markets The effect the fixed income markets have on
currencies is similar to that of the equity markets and is a result of capital
movements. The investor's interest in the fixed income market depends on the
37

company's specifics and credit rating, as well as on the general health of the economy
and the country's interest rates. The movement of foreign capital into and out of fixed
income markets leads to change in the demand and supply for currencies, hence
impacting the currencies' exchange rates.
Summary of Trade and Capital Flows Determining and understanding a
country's balance of payments is perhaps the most important and useful fool for those
interested in fundamental analysis. Any international transaction gives rise to two
offsetting entries, trade flow balance (current account) and capital flow balance
(capital account). If the trade flow balance is a negative outflow, the country is
buying more from foreigners than it sells (imports exceed exports). When it is a
positive inflow, the country is selling more than it buys (exports exceed imports).
The capital flow balance is positive when foreign inflows of physical or portfolio
investments into a country exceed that country's outflows. A capital flow is negative
when a country buys more physical or portfolio investments than are sold to foreign
investors.
These two entries, trade and capital flow, when added together signify a
country's balance of payments. In theory, the two entries should balance and add up
to zero in order to provide for the maintenance of the status quo in a nation's
economy and currency rail's.
In general, countries might experience positive or negative trade, as well as
positive or negative capital flow balances. In order to minimize the net effect of the
two on the exchange rates, a country should try to maintain a balance between the
two. For example, in the United Slates there is a substantial trade deficit, as more is
imported than is exported. When the trade balance is negative, the country is buying
more from foreigners than it sells and therefore it needs to finance its deficit. This
negative trade flow might be offset by a positive capital flow into the country, as
foreigners buy either physical or portfolio investments. Therefore, the United States
seeks to minimize its trade deficit and maximize, its capital inflows to the extent that
the two balance out.
A change in this balance is extremely significant and carries ramifications that
run deep into economic policy and currency exchange levels. The net result of the
difference between the trade and capital flows, positive or negative, will impact the
direction in which the nation's currency will move. If the overall trade and capital
balance is negative it will result in a depreciation of the nation's currency, and if
positive it will lead to an appreciation of the currency.
Clearly a change in the balance of payments carries a direct effort for currency
levels. It is therefore possible for any investor to observe economic data relating to
this balance and interpret the results that will occur. Data relating to capital and trade
flows should be followed most closely. For instance, if an analyst observes an
increase in the U.S. trade deficit and a decrease in the capital flows, a balance of
payments deficit would occur and as a result an investor may anticipate a
depreciation of the dollar.
Limitations of Balance or Payments Model The BOP model focuses on traded
goods and services while ignoring international capital flows. Indeed, international
capital flows often dwarfed trade flows in the currency markets toward the end of the

38

1990s, though, and this often balanced the current accounts of debtor nations like the
United Slates.
For example, in 1999, 2000 and 2001 the United States maintained a large
current account deficit while the Japanese ran a large current account surplus.
However, during ibis same period the U.S. dollar rose against the yen even though
trade flows were running against the dollar.
The reason was that capital flows balanced trade flows, thus defying the BOP’s
forecasting model for a period of time. Indeed, the increase in capital flows has given
rise to the asset market model.
Note: It is probably a misnomer to call this approach the balance of payments
theory since it takes into account only the current account balance, not the actual
balance of payments. However, until the 1990s capital flows played a very small role
in the world economy so the trade balance made up the bulk of the balance of
payments for most nations.

Purchasing Power Parity
The purchasing power parity theory is based on the belief that foreign exchange
rates should be determined by the relative prices of a similar basket of goods between
two countries. Any change in a nation's inflation rate should be balanced by an
opposite change in that nation's exchange rate. Therefore, according to this theory,
when a country's prices are rising due to inflation, that country's exchange rate should
depreciate in order to return to parity.
PPP’s Basket of Goods The basket of goods and services priced for the PPP
exercise is a sample of all goods and services covered by gross domestic product
(GDP). It includes consumer goods and services, government services, equipment
goods, and construction projects. More specifically, consumer items include food,
beverages, tobacco, clothing, footwear, rents, water supply, gas, electricity, medical
goods and services, furniture and furnishings, household appliances, personal
transport equipment, fuel, transport services, recreational equipment, recreational and
cultural services, telephone services, education services, goods and services for
personal care and household operation, and repair and maintenance services.
Big Mac Index One of the most famous examples of PPP is the Economist's Big
Mac Index. The Big Mac PPP is the exchange rate that would leave hamburgers
costing the same in the United States as elsewhere, comparing these with actual rates
signals if a currency is under- or overvalued. For example, in April 2002 the
exchange rate between the United States and Canada was 1.57. In the United States a
Big Mac cost $2.49. In Canada, a Big Mac cost $3.33 in local Canadian dollars
(CAD), which works out to only $2.12 in U.S. dollars. Therefore, the exchange rate
for USD/CAD is overvalued by 15 percent using this theory and should be only 1.34.
OECD Purchasing Power Parity Index A more formal index is put out by the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Under a joint OECDEurostat PPP program, the OECD and Eurostat share the responsibility for
calculating PPP’s. This latest information on which currencies are under- or
overvalued against the U.S. dollar can be found on the OECD’s web site at
www.oecd.org. The OECD publishes a table that shows the price levels for the major
39

industrialized countries. Each column states the number of specified monetary units
needed in each of the countries listed to buy the same representative basket of
consumer goods and services. In each case the representative basket costs 100 units
in the country whose currency is specified. The chart that is then created compares
the PPP of a currency with its actual exchange rate. The chart is updated weekly to
reflect the current exchange rate. It is also updated about twice a year to reflect new
estimates of PPP. The PPP estimates are taken from studies carried out by the OECD
however, they should not be taken as definitive. Different methods of calculation will
arrive at different PPP rates. According to the OECD information for September
2002, the exchange rate between the United States and Canada was 1.58 while the
price level for the United States versus Canada was 122, which translates to an
exchange rate of 1.22. Using this PPP model, the USD/CAD is once again greatly
overvalued (by over 25 percent, not that far away from the Big Mac Index after all).
Limitation to using Purchasing Power Parity PPP theory should be used only
for long-term fundamental analysis. The economic forces behind PPP will eventually
equalize the purchasing power of currencies. However, this can take many years. A
time horizon of 5 to 10 years is typical.
PPP's major weakness is that it assumes goods can be traded easily, without
regard to such things as tariffs, quotas, or taxes. For example, when the United States
announces new tariffs on imports the cost of domestic, manufactured goods goes up;
but those increases will not be reflected in the U.S. PPP tables.
There are other factors that must also be considered when weighing PPP:
inflation, interest rate differentials, economic releases/reports, asset markets, trade
flows, and political developments. Indeed, PPP is just one of several theories traders
should use when determining exchange rates.
Interest Rate Parity
The interest rate parity theory states that if two different currencies have
different interest rates then that difference will be reflected in the premium or
discount for the forward exchange rate in order to prevent riskless arbitrage.
For example, if U.S. interest rates are 3 percent and Japanese Interest rates are 1
percent, then the U.S. dollar should depreciate against the Japanese yen by 2 percent
in order to prevent riskless arbitrage. This future exchange rate is reflected into the
forward exchange rate stated today. In our example, the forward exchange rate of the
dollar is said to be at discount because it buys fewer Japanese yen in the forward rate
than it does in the spot rate. The yen is said to be at a premium.
Interest rate parity has shown very little proof of working in recent years. Often
currencies with higher interest rates rise due to the determination of central bankers
trying to slow down a booming economy by hiking rates and have nothing to do with
riskless arbitrage.
Monetary Model
The monetary model holds that exchange rates are determined by a nation's
monetary policy. Countries that follow a stable monetary policy over time usually
have appreciating currencies according to the monetary model. Countries that have

40

erratic monetary policies or excessively expansionist policies should see the value of
their currency depreciate.
How to use the Monetary Model There are several factors that influence
exchange rates under this theory:
1. A nation's money supply.
2. Expected future levels of a nation's money supply.
3. The growth rate of a nation's money supply.
All of these factors are key to understanding and spoiling a monetary trend that
may force a change in exchange rates. For example, the Japanese economy has been
slipping in and out of recession for over a decade. Interest rates are near zero, and
annual budget deficits prevent the Japanese from spending their way out of recession,
which leaves only one tool left at the disposal of Japanese officials determined to
revive their economy: printing more money. By buying stocks and bonds, the Bank
of Japan is increasing the nation's money supply, which produces inflation, which
forces a change in the exchange rate. The example in Figure 3.5 illustrates the effect
of money supply changes using the monetary model.
Indeed, it is in the area of excessive expansionary monetary policy that the
monetary model is most successful. One of the few ways a country can keep its
currency from sharply devaluing is by pursuing a tight monetary policy. For example,
during the Asian currency crisis the Hong Kong dollar came under attack from
speculators. Hong Kong officials raised interest rates to 300 percent to halt the Hong
Kong dollar from being dislodged from its peg to the U.S. dollar. The tactic worked
perfectly as speculators were cleared out by such sky-high interest rates. The
downside was the danger that, the Hong Kong economy would slide into recession.
But in the end the peg held and the monetary model worked.
CHANGE IN
MONEY
SUPPLY
Yen is printed

CHANGE IN PRICE
LEVEL

CHANGE IN
EXCHANGE RATE

Increase in Yen
Creates Inflation

Yen Depreciates
in Value

Figure 3.5 Monetary Model
Limitations of Monetary Model Very few economists solely stand by this
model anymore since it does not take into account trade flows and capital flows. For
example, throughout 2002 the United Kingdom had higher interest rates, growth
rates, and inflation rates than both the United States and the European Union, yet the
pound appreciated in value against both the dollar and the euro. Indeed, the monetary
model has greatly struggled since the dawn of freely floating currencies. The model
holds that, high interest rates signal growing inflation, which they often do, followed
by a depreciating currency. But this does not take into account the capital inflows
that would take effect as a result of higher interest yields or of an equity market that
may be thriving in a booming economy—thus causing the currency to possibly
appreciate.
In any case, the monetary model is one of several useful fundamental tools that
can be employed in tandem with other models to determine the direction an exchange
rate is heading.
41

Real Interest Rate Differential Model
The real interest rate differential theory states that exchange rate movements are
determined by a nation's interest rate level. Countries that have high interest rates
should see their currencies appreciate in value, while countries with low interest rates
should see their currencies depreciate in value.
Basics of the Model Once a nation raises its interest rates, international
investors will discover that the yield for that nation's currency is more attractive and
hence buy up that nation's currency. Figure 3.6 shows how well this theory held up in
2003 when interest rate spreads were near their widest levels in recent years.
The data from this graph shows a mixed result. The Australian dollar had the
largest basis point spread and also had the highest return against the U.S. dollar,
which seems to vindicate the model as investors bought up higher-yielding Aussie
currency. The same can be said for the New Zealand dollar, which also had a higher
yield than the U.S. dollar and gained 27 percent against USD. Yet the model
becomes less convincing when comparing the euro, which gained 20 percent against
the dollar (more than every currency except NZD) even though its basis point differential was only 100 points. The model then comes under serious question when
comparing the British pound and the Japanese yen. The yen differential is -100 and
yet it appreciates almost 12 percent against the dollar. Meanwhile, the British pound
gained only 11 percent against the dollar even though it had a whopping 275-point
interest rate differential.
Interest Rates vs. U.S.
Central Bank Rate End
of 2003
% Change 2003 vs.
USD

Eurozone Japan

U.K.

100

-100

Canad Australia
a
275
175
425

20%

12%

11%

Figure 3.6 Real Interest Rate Model
42

21%

34%

New Zealand
400
27%

This model also stresses that one of the key factors in determining the severity
of an exchange rate's response to a shift in interest rates is the exported persistence of
that shift. Simply put, a rise in interest rates that is expected to last for five years will
have a much larger impact on the exchange rate than if that rise were expected to last
for only one year.
Limitations to Interest Rate Model There is a great deal of debate among
international economists over whether there is a strong and statistically significant
link between changes in a nation's interest rate and currency price. The main
weakness of this model is dial it does not take into account a nation's current account
balance, relying on capital flows instead. Indeed, the model tends to overemphasize
capital flows al the expense of numerous other factors: political stability, inflation,
economic growth, and so on. Absent these types of factors, the model can be very
useful since it is quite logical to conclude that an investor will naturally gravitate
toward the investment vehicle that pays a higher reward.

Asset Market Model
The basic premise of this theory is that the flow of funds into other financial
assets of a country such as equities and bonds increases the demand for that country's
currency (and vice versa). As proof, advocates point out dial the amount of funds that
are placed in investment products such as stocks and bonds now dwarf the amount of
funds that are exchanged as a result of the transactions in goods and services for
import and export purposes. The asset market theory is basically the opposite of the
balance of payments theory since it takes into account a nation's capital account instead of its current account.
A Dollar-Driven Theory Throughout 1999, many experts argued that the dollar
would fall against the euro on the grounds of the expanding U.S. current account
deficit and an overvalued Wall Street. That was based on the rationale that non-U.S.
investors would begin withdrawing their funds from U.S. stocks and bonds into more
economically sound markets, which would weigh significantly on the dollar. Yet
such fears have lingered since the early I980s when the U.S. current account soared
to a record high at the time of 3.5 percent of GDP.
Throughout the past two decades, the balance of payments approach in assessing
the dollars behavior has given way to the asset market approach. This theory
continues to hold the most sway over pundits due to the enormity of U.S. capital
markets. In May and June of 2002 the dollar plummeted more titan a thousand points
versus the yen at the same time equity investors fled U.S. equity markets due to the
accounting scandals that were plaguing Wall Street. As the scandals subsided toward
the end of 2002 the dollar rose 500 basis points from a low of 115.43 to close at
120.00 against the yen even though the current account, balance remained in massive
deficit the entire time.
Limitations to Asset Market Theory The main limitation of the asset market
theory is that it is untested and fairly new. It is frequently argued that over the long
run there is no relationship between a nation's equity market performance and the
performance of its currency. See Figure 3.7 for a comparison. Between 1986 and
43

2004, the S&P 500 index and the U.S. Dollar Index had a correlation of only 39
percent.
Also, what happens to a nation's currency when the stock market is trading
sideways, stuck between bullish and bearish sentiments? That was the scenario in the
United States for much of 2002, and currency traders found themselves going back to
older moneymaking models, such as interest rate arbitrage, as a result. Only time will
tell whether the asset market model will hold on or merely be a short-term blip on the
currency forecasting radar.

Figure 3.7 Dollar Index and S&P 500.

Currency Substitution Model
This currency substitution model is a continuation of the monetary model since
it takes into account a nation's investor flows. It posits that the shifting of private and
public portfolios from one nation to another can have a significant effect on exchange
rates. The ability of individuals to change their assets from domestic and foreign
currencies is known as currency substitution. When this model is added to the
monetary model, evidence shows that shifts in expectations of a nation's money
supply can have a decided impact on that nation's exchange rates. Investors are
looking at monetary model data and coming to the conclusion that a change in money
flow is about to occur, thus changing the exchange rate, so they are investing
accordingly, which turns the monetary model into a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Investors who subscribe to this theory are merely jumping on the currency
substitution model bandwagon on the way to the monetary model party.
Yen Example In the monetary model example we showed that by buying stocks
and bonds in the market place the Japanese government was basically printing yen
(increasing the money supply). Monetary model theorists would conclude this
monetary growth would in fact spark inflation (more yen chasing fewer products),
44
