
Summary

Let’s summarize the more important points of both patterns.


Continuation Patterns 145

04/08/97 (CAT) Caterpillar Inc 12/31/97
Daily Bar Chart | | | leo
ity ft

ri my wt .

sy Hl il Pennant *
i} Ny ii il i" lo

Bae e | Kyl

i Pennant , ! ly hiaas

J i .
-
| \*

un i Tg Sep Tat ‘Nov Dee

‘SRET Taba Pind aig Vincataan © Orage Resew, re 107

Figure 6.7b A couple of pennants are flying on this Caterpillar chart.
Pennants are short term continuation patterns that look like small symmetri-
cal triangles. The pennant to the left continued the uptrend, while the one to
the right continued the downtrend.

1.

2.

They are both preceded by an almost straight line move
(called a flagpole) on heavy volume.

Prices then pause for about one to three weeks on very light
volume.

. The trend resumes on a burst of trading activity.
. Both patterns occur at about the midpoint of the market

move.

. The pennant resembles a small horizontal symmetrical tri-

angle.

. The flag resembles a small parallelogram that slopes against

the prevailing trend.
Both patterns take less time to develop in downtrends.
Both patterns are very common in the financial markets.


146 Chapter 6

THE WEDGE FORMATION

The wedge formation is similar to a symmetrical triangle both in
terms of its shape and the amount of time it takes to form. Like
the symmetrical triangle, it is identified by two converging trend-
lines that come together at an apex. In terms of the amount of
time it takes to form, the wedge usually lasts more than one
month but not more than three months, putting it into the inter-
mediate category.

What distinguishes the wedge is its noticeable slant. The
wedge pattern has a noticeable slant either to the upside or the
downside. As a rule, like the flag pattern, the wedge slants against
the prevailing trend. Therefore, a falling wedge is considered bullish
and a rising wedge is bearish. Notice in Figure 6.8a that the bullish
wedge slants downward between two converging trendlines, In
the downtrend in Figure 6.8b, the converging trendlines have an
unmistakable upward slant.

Figure 6.8a
Example of a bullish
falling wedge. The
wedge pattern has
two converging
trendlines, but
slopes against the
prevailing trend. A
falling wedge is usu-
ally bullish.



Continuation Patterns 147

Figure 6.8b
Example of a bearish
wedge. A bearish
wedge should slope
upward against the
prevailing down-
trend.

Wedges as Tops and Bottom
Reversal Patterns

Wedges show up most often within the existing trend and usually
constitute continuation patterns. The wedge can appear at tops or
bottoms and signal a trend reversal. But that type of situation is
much less common. Near the end of an uptrend, the chartist may
observe a clearcut rising wedge. Because a continuation wedge in
an uptrend should slope downward against the prevailing trend,
the rising wedge is a clue to the chartist that this is a bearish and
not a bullish pattern. At bottoms, a falling wedge would be a tip-
off of a possible end of a bear trend.

Whether the wedge appears in the middle or the end of a
market move, the market analyst should always be guided by the
general maxim that a rising wedge is bearish and a falling wedge is
bullish. (See Figure 6.8c.)

THE RECTANGLE FORMATION

The rectangle formation often goes by other names, but is usually
easy to spot on a price chart. It represents a pause in the trend dur-
ing which prices move sideways between two parallel horizontal
lines. (See Figures 6.9a-c.)

The rectangle is sometimes referred to as a trading range or
a congestion area. In Dow Theory parlance, it is referred to as a line.
Whatever it is called, it usually represents just a consolidation
period in the existing trend, and is usually resolved in the direc-


148 Chapter 6
2/18/97 (*CRB) Commodity Research Bureau omnes
Daity Bar Chart hy Commodity Research Bureau index
! \ “
A thy H -
} 1 i i f
voy Nh | -

he |
A |

|

ww "A ¥

3 i A s D be

im
TET a Para Soman

Figure 6.8c Example of a bearish rising wedge. The two converging trend-
lines have a definite upward slant. The wedge slants against the prevailing
trend. Therefore, a rising wedge is bearish, and a falling wedge is bullish.

Figure 6.9a

Example of a bull-
ish rectangle in an
uptrend. This pat-

tern is also called
a trading range,
and shows prices
trading between
two horizontal
trendlines. It is
also called a con-

gestion area.



Continuation Patterns

149

\

Figure 6.9b Example
of a bearish rectangle.
While rectangles are usu-
ally considered continua-
tion patterns, the trader
must always be alert for
signs that it may turn
into a reversal pattern.
such as a triple bottom.

Daily Bar Chart | ;

ii

MN i tay Mi N i .
f i Bullish Rectangle “

Stem Pirie oar

Figure 6.9c A bullish rectangle. Compagq’s uptrend was interrupted for
four months while it traded sideways. The break above the upper line in early
May completed the pattern and resumed the uptrend. Rectangles are usually

continuation patterns.


150 Chapter 6

tion of the market trend that preceded its occurrence. In terms of
forecasting value, it can be viewed as being similar to the sym-
metrical triangle but with flat instead of converging trendlines.

A decisive close outside either the upper or lower bound-
ary signals completion of the rectangle and points the direction of
the trend. The market analyst must always be on the alert, how-
ever, that the rectangular consolidation does not turn into a rever-
sal pattern. In the uptrend shown in Figure 6.9a, for example,
notice that the three peaks might initially be viewed as a possible
triple top reversal pattern.

The Importance of the Volume Pattern

One important clue to watch for is the volume pattern. Because
the price swings in both directions are fairly broad, the analyst
should keep a close eye on which moves have the heavier volume.
If the rallies are on heavier and the setbacks on lighter volume,
then the formation is probably a continuation in the uptrend. If
the heavier volume is on the downside, then it can be considered
a warning of a possible trend reversal in the works.

Swings Within the Range Can Be Traded

Some chartists trade the swings within such a pattern by buying
dips near the bottom and selling rallies near the top of the Tange.
This technique enables the short term trader to take advantage of
the well defined price boundaries, and profit from an otherwise
trendless market. Because the positions are being taken at the
extremes of the range, the risks are relatively small and well
defined. If the trading range remains intact, this countertrend
trading approach works quite well. When a breakout does occur,
the trader not only exits the last losing trade immediately, but can
reverse the previous position by initiating a new trade in the
direction of the new trend. Oscillators are especially useful in side-
ways trading markets, but less useful once the breakout has
occurred for reasons discussed in Chapter 10.

Other traders assume the rectangle is a continuation pat-
tern and take long positions near the lower end of the price band


Continuation Patterns 151

in an uptrend, or initiate short positions near the top of the range
in downtrends. Others avoid such trendless markets altogether
and await a clearcut breakout before committing their funds.
Most trend-following systems perform very poorly during these
periods of sideways and trendless market action.

Other Similarities and Differences

In terms of duration, the rectangle usually falls into the one to
three month category, similar to triangles and wedges. The vol-
ume pattern differs from other continuation patterns in the sense
that the broad price swings prevent the usual dropoff in activity
seen in other such patterns.

The most common measuring technique applied to the
rectangle is based on the height of the price range. Measure the
height of the trading range, from top to bottom, and then project
that vertical distance from the breakout point. This method is
similar to the other vertical measuring techniques already men-
tioned, and is based on the volatility of the market. When we
cover the count in point and figure charting, we'll say more on
the question of horizontal price measurements.

Everything mentioned so far concerning volume on break-
outs and the probability of return moves applies here as well.
Because the upper and lower boundaries are horizontal and so
well defined in the rectangle, support and resistance levels are
more clearly evident. This means that, on upside breakouts, the
top of the former price band should now provide solid support on
any selloffs. After a downside breakout in downtrends, the bot-
tom of the trading range (the previous support area) should now
provide a solid ceiling over the market on any rally attempts.

THE MEASURED MOVE

The measured move, or the swing measurement as it is sometimes
called, describes the phenomenon where a major market advance
or decline is divided into two equal and parallel moves, as shown
in Figure 6.10a. For this approach to work, the market moves


Figure 6.10a

Example of a measured
move (or the swing mea-
surement) in an uptrend.
This theory holds that the
second leg in the advance
(CD) duplicates the size
and slope of the first
upleg (AB). The corrective
wave (BC) often retraces
@ third to a half of AB
before the uptrend is

resumed.
03/17/97 (PG) Procter & Gamble Co 02/12/98
Daily Bar Chart D
peo
B
TING
75
\ 70
I He7A4
a
p82
c
f eo
\ Measured Move Lene
A
55
‘A Wi J ry 8 0 N D be id
~ SREY Printed using Tredetestan © Onnage Resaarch, fic 1607

Figure 6.10b A measured move takes the Prior upleg (AB) and adds that
value to the bottom of the correction at C. On this chart, the prior uptrend
(AB) was 20 points. Adding that to the lowpoint at C (62) yielded a price

target to 82 (D).


Continuation Patterns 153

should be fairly orderly and well defined. The measured move is
really just a variation of some of the techniques we've already
touched on. We've seen that some of the consolidation patterns,
such as flags and pennants, usually occur at about the halfway
point of a market move. We've also mentioned the tendency of
markets to retrace about a third to a half of a prior trend before
resuming that trend.

In the measured move, when the chartist sees a well-
defined situation, such as in Figure 6.10a, with a rally from point
A to point B followed by a countertrend swing from point B to
point C (which retraces a third to a half of wave AB), it is
assumed that the next leg in the uptrend (CD) will come close to
duplicating the first leg (AB). The height of wave (AB), therefore,
is simply measured upward from the bottom of the correction at
point C.

THE CONTINUATION HEAD AND
SHOULDERS PATTERN

In the previous chapter, we treated the head and shoulders pat-
tern at some length and described it as the best known and most
trustworthy of all reversal patterns. The head and shoulders pat-
tern can sometimes appear as a continuation instead of a reversal
pattern.

In the continuation head and shoulders variety, prices
trace out a pattern that looks very similar to a sideways rectangu-
lar pattern except that the middle trough in an uptrend (see
Figure 6.11a) tends to be lower than either of the two shoulders.
In a downtrend (see Figure 6.11b), the middle peak in the consol-
idation exceeds the other two peaks. The result in both cases is a
head and shoulders pattern turned upside down. Because it is
turned upside down, there is no chance of confusing it with the
reversal pattern.


154

Chapter 6

Neckline

Left

Right
Shoulder

Shoulder

Head

Figure 6.11a Example of a bullish continuation head and shoulders

pattern,

left Head Right
Shoulder Shoulder

Figure 6.11b Example of a bearish continuation head and shoulders

pattern.


Continuation Patterns 155

(10/17/96 (GM) General Mtrs Corp 09/16/97

Daily Bar Chart

——

Continuation Head and Shoulders

&
8

ae we

Neckline

i

Nh
i \ hvhathie |

NN D Ww i M aT w I % uN s

Shoulder

PEt eT Ee

Figure 6.11¢ General Motors formed a continuation head and shoulders
pattern during the first half of 1997. The pattern is very clear but shows up
in an unusual place. The pattern was completed and the uptrend resumed
with the close above the neckline at 60.

CONFIRMATION AND
DIVERGENCE

The principle of confirmation is one of the common themes run-
ning throughout the entire subject of market analysis, and is used
in conjunction with its counterpart—divergence. We'll introduce
both concepts here and explain their meaning, but we'll return to
them again and again throughout the book because their impact is
so important. We’re discussing confirmation here in the context of
chart patterns, but it applies to virtually every aspect of technical
analysis. Confirmation refers to the comparison of all technical sig-
nals and indicators to ensure that most of those indicators are
pointing in the same direction and are confirming one another.


156 Chapter 6

Divergence is the opposite of confirmation and refers to a
situation where different technical indicators fail to confirm one
another. While it is being used here in a negative sense, diver-
gence is a valuable concept in market analysis, and one of the best
early warning signals of impending trend reversals. We’ll discuss
the principle of divergence at greater length in Chapter 10,
“Oscillators and Contrary Opinion.”

CONCLUSION

This concludes our treatment of price patterns. We stated earlier
that the three pieces of raw data used by the technical analyst
were price, volume, and open interest. Most of what we've said so far
has focused on price. Let’s take a closer look now at volume and
open interest and how they are incorporated into the analytical
process.


Volume and Open
Interest

INTRODUCTION

Most technicians in the financial markets use a multidimension-
al approach to market analysis by tracking the movement of three
sets of figures—price, volume, and open interest. Volume analysis
applies to all markets. Open interest applies primarily to futures
markets. Chapter 3 discussed the construction of the daily bar
chart and showed how the three figures were plotted on that type
of chart. It was stated then that even though volume and open
interest figures are available for each delivery month in futures
markets, the total figures are the ones generally used for forecast-
ing purposes. Stock chartists simply plot total volume along with
the accompanying price.

Most of the discussion of charting theory to this point has
concentrated mainly on price action with some mention of vol-
ume. In this chapter, we'll round out the three dimensional
approach by taking a closer look at the role played by volume and
open interest in the forecasting process.

157


158 Chapter 7

VOLUME AND OPEN INTEREST AS
SECONDARY INDICATORS

Let’s begin by placing volume and open interest in their proper
perspective. Price is by far the most important. Volume and open
interest are secondary in importance and are used primarily as con-
firming indicators. Of those two, volume is the more important.

Volume

Volume is the number of entities traded during the time period
under study. Because we'll be dealing primarily with daily bar
charts, our main concern is with daily volume. That daily volume
is plotted by a vertical bar at the bottom of the chart under the
day’s price action. (See Figure 7.1.)

19/45/97 (BDK) Black & Decker Corp 02/27/98

Honea
Daily Bar Chart liye Weyl

‘ =

| fh ty] st
Hh! ih Mel EH .

SESE EE

i
i
oy ae
4

Daily Volume Bars -180000q

lg a (eu lita

|
~__—~*«CUE aes Wd ning rain © Orage Rsanarch, a. TORY
Figure 7.1 Notice that the volume bars are noticeably larger as prices are
rallying (see circles). That means that volume is confirming the price rise and
is bullish.



Volume and Open Interest 159

Volume can be plotted for weekly bar charts as well. In that
case, total volume for the week would simply be plotted under the
bar representing that week’s price action. Volume is usually not
used, however, on monthly bar charts.

Open Interest in Futures

The total number of outstanding or unliquidated contracts at the
end of the day is open interest. In Figure 7.2, open interest is the
solid line plotted on the chart under its corresponding price data
for the day, but above the volume bars. Remember that official
volume and open interest figures are reported a day late in the
futures markets and are, therefore, plotted with a one day lag.
(Only estimated volume figures are available for the last trading
day.) That means that each day the chartist plots the high, low,
and closing price bar for the last day of trading, but plots the offi-
cial volume and open interest figures for the previous day.

Open interest represents the total number of outstanding
longs or shorts in the market, not the sum of both. Open interest is
the number of contracts. A contract must have both a buyer and a
seller. Therefore, two market participants—a buyer and a seller—
combine to create only one contract. The open interest figure
reported each day is followed by either a positive or negative
number showing the increase or decrease in the number of con-
tracts for that day. It is those changes in the open interest levels,
either up or down, that give the chartist clues as to the changing
character of market participation and give open interest its fore-
casting value.

How Changes in Open Interest Occur. In order to grasp the signifi-
cance of how changes in the open interest numbers are interpret-
ed, the reader must first understand how each trade produces a
change in those numbers.

Every time a trade is completed on the floor of the
exchange, the open interest is affected in one of three ways—it
increases, decreases, or stays unchanged. Let’s see how those
changes occur.


160 Chapter 7

Change in
Buyer Seller Open Interest
1. Buys new long Sells new short Increases
2. Buys new long Sells old long No change
3. Buys old short Sells new short No change
4. Buys old short Sells old long Decreases

In the first case, both the buyer and seller are initiating a
new position and a new contract is established. In case 2, the
buyer is initiating a new long position, but the seller is merely liq-
uidating an old long. One is entering and the other exiting a
trade. The result is a standoff and no change takes place in the
number of contracts. In case 3, the same thing happens except
this time it is the seller who is initiating a new short and the buyer
who is only covering an old short. Because one of the traders is
entering and the other exiting a trade, again no change is pro-
duced. In case 4, both traders are liquidating an old position and
the open interest decreases accordingly.

To sum up, if both participants in a trade are initiating a
new position, the open interest will increase. If both are liquidat-
ing an old position, the open interest will decline. If, however,
one is initiating a new trade while the other is liquidating an old
trade, open interest will remain unchanged. By looking at the net
change in the total open interest at the end of the day, the chartist
is able to determine whether money is flowing into or out of the
market. This information enables the analyst to draw some con-
clusions about the strength or weakness of the current price trend.

General Rules for Interpreting Volume and
Open Interest

The futures technician incorporates volume and open interest
information into market analysis. The rules for the interpretation
of volume and open interest are generally combined because they
are so similar. There are, however, some distinctions between the
two that should be addressed. We'll begin here with a statement
of the general rules for both. Having done that, we’ll then treat
each one separately before combining them again at the end.


Volume and Open Interest 161

Price Volume Open Interest Market
Rising Up Up Strong
Rising Down Down Weak
Declining Up Up Weak
Declining Down Down Strong

If volume and open interest are both increasing, then the
current price trend will probably continue in its present direction
(either up or down). If, however, volume and open interest are
declining, the action can be viewed as a warning that the current
price trend may be nearing an end. Having said that, let’s now
take a look at volume and open interest separately. (See Figure
7.2.)

12/26/97 (410598) Crude Oil, Light 05/98 02/27/98

18.5
| 1} 1 Daily Futures

Nay

|
Hleyidy Nite -

1} r 188
| 1 Lyilee

Open Interest

'-410000

lilly hill

Treat © Orage Rasa eT?

Volume

|

[20 bes

Figure 7.2 A daily chart of crude oil futures shows volume and open
interest (solid line). The open interest line is rising as prices are falling,
which is bearish.


162 Chapter 7

INTERPRETATION OF VOLUME
FOR ALL MARKETS

The level of volume measures the intensity or urgency behind the
price move. Heavier volume reflects a higher degree of intensity
or pressure. By monitoring the level of volume along with price
action, the technician is better able to gauge the buying or selling
pressure behind market moves. This information can then be used
to confirm price movement or warn that a price move is not to be
trusted. (See Figures 7.3 and 7.4.)

To state the rule more concisely, volume should increase or
expand in the direction of the existing price trend. In an uptrend, vol-
ume should be heavier as the price moves higher, and should
decrease or contract on price dips. As long as this pattern contin-
ues, volume is said to be confirming the price trend.

0/27/97 (MCD) Mcdonaids Corp 02/18/98
Daily Bar Chart } | song
Price Breakout lt | x
bhuyy jl is
hl Mh | i
Volume Increasing Volume /\ on
olay a, li nl =

Figure 7.3 The upside price breakout by McDonalds through the
Novernber 1997 peak was accompanied by a noticeable burst of trading
activity. That’s bullish.


Volume and Open Interest 163

12/23/97 (INTC) Intel Corp 02/24/98
Fes

Daily Bar Chart

Veo
lle
alts ™
LY
rill | ™

‘ilo
| ily |

nmi illu

@
THB in Princ ag TindeSiaton © Orage Wana, ie 1057

1000000

Figure 7.4 The volume bars are following Intel’s price uptrend. Volume is
heavier as prices are rising, and drops off as prices weaken. Notice the burst
of trading activity during the last three days’ price jump.

The chartist is also watching for signs of divergence (there’s
that word again). Divergence occurs if the penetration of a previ-
ous high by the price trend takes place on declining volume. This
action alerts the chartist to diminishing buying pressure. If the
volume also shows a tendency to pick up on price dips, the ana-
lyst begins to worry that the uptrend is in trouble.
