
Social Psychology
Free will makes individual behavior hard to predict. Group behavior is more primitive and easier to track. When you analyze markets, you analyze group behavior.

46

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

You need to identify the direction in which groups are running and their changes
of speed.
Groups suck us in and cloud our judgment. The problem for most analysts is that
they get caught in the emotional pull of the groups they try to analyze.
The longer a rally continues, the more analysts get caught up in mass bullishness,
ignore danger signs, and miss the eventual reversal. The longer a decline goes on, the
more analysts get caught up in bearish gloom and ignore bullish signs. This is why it
helps to have a written plan for analyzing markets.We have to decide in advance what
indicators we will watch, how we will interpret them, and how we’ll act.
Professionals use several tools for tracking the intensity of the crowd’s feelings.
They watch the crowd’s ability to break through recent support and resistance levels.
Floor traders used to listen to the changes in pitch and volume of the roar on the
exchange floor. With floor trading rapidly receding into history, you’ll need special
tools for analyzing crowd behavior. Fortunately, your charts and indicators reflect
mass psychology in action. A technical analyst is an applied social psychologist, usually
armed with a computer.

■■16. Managing versus Forecasting
I once ran into a very fat surgeon at a seminar. He told me that he had lost a quarter
of a million dollars in three years trading stocks and options. When I asked him how
he made his trading decisions, he sheepishly pointed to his ample gut. He gambled
on hunches and used his professional income to support his habit. There are two alternatives to “gut feel”: One is fundamental analysis; the other is technical analysis.
Fundamental analysts study the actions of the Federal Reserve, follow earnings
reports, examine crop reports, and so on. Major bull and bear markets reflect fundamental changes in supply and demand. Still, even if you know those factors, you
can lose money trading if you are out of touch with intermediate- and short-term
trends, which depend on the crowd’s emotions.
Technical analysts believe that prices reflect everything known about the market,
including fundamental factors. Each price represents the consensus of value of all
market participants—large commercial interests and small speculators, fundamental researchers and technicians, insiders and gamblers.
Technical analysis is a study of mass psychology. It is partly a science and partly
an art. Technicians use many scientific methods, including mathematical concepts of
game theory, probabilities, and so on. They use computers to track indicators.
Technical analysis is also an art. The bars or candles on our charts coalesce into
patterns and formations. The movement of prices and indicators produces a sense of
flow and rhythm, a feeling of tension and beauty that helps us sense what is happening and how to trade.
Individual behavior is complex, diverse, and difficult to predict. Group behavior
is primitive. Technicians study the behavior patterns of market crowds. They trade
when they recognize patterns that preceded previous market moves.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

16. MANAGING VERSUS FORECASTING

47

Poll-Taking
Politicians want to know their chances of being elected or re-elected. They make
promises to voters and have poll-takers measure a crowd’s response. Technical analysis is similar to political poll-taking, as both aim to read the intentions of masses.
Poll-takers do it to help their clients win elections, while technicians do it for
financial gain.
Poll-takers use scientific methods: statistics, sampling procedures, and so on.They
also need a flair for interviewing and phrasing questions; they have to be plugged into
the emotional undercurrents of their party. Poll-taking is a combination of science
and art. If a poll-taker says he is a scientist, ask him why every major political polltaker in the United States is affiliated with either the Democratic or Republican
party. True science knows no party.
A market technician must rise above party affiliation. Be neither a bull nor a bear,
but only seek the truth. A biased bull looks at a chart and says, “Where can I buy?” A
biased bear looks at the same chart and tries to find where he can go short. A topflight analyst is free of bullish or bearish biases.
There is a trick to help you detect your bias. If you want to buy, turn your chart
upside down and see whether it looks like a sell. If it still looks like a buy after you
flip it, then you have to work on getting a bullish bias out of your system. If both
charts look like a sell, then you have to work on purging a bearish bias.

A Crystal Ball
Many traders believe that their aim is to forecast future prices. The amateurs in most
fields ask for forecasts, while professionals simply manage information and make
decisions based on probabilities. Take medicine, for example. A patient is brought
to an emergency room with a knife wound—and the anxious family members have
only two questions: “will he survive?” and “when can he go home?” â•›They ask the doctor for a forecast.
But the doctor isn’t forecasting—he is managing problems as they emerge. His
first job is to prevent the patient from dying from shock, and so he gives him painkillers and starts an intravenous drip to replace lost blood. Then he sutures damaged organs. After that, he has to watch against infection. He monitors the trend
of the patient’s health and takes measures to prevent complications. He is managing—not forecasting. When a family begs for a forecast, he may give it to them, but
its practical value is low.
To make money trading, you don’t need to forecast the future.You have to extract
information from the market and find out whether bulls or bears are in control.You
need to measure the strength of the dominant market group and decide how likely
the current trend is to continue. You need to practice conservative money management aimed at long-term survival and profit accumulation. You must observe how
your mind works and avoid slipping into greed or fear. A trader who does all of this
will succeed ahead of any forecaster.

48

MASS PSYCHOLOGY

Read the Market, Manage Yourself
A tremendous volume of information pours out of the markets during trading hours.
Changing prices reflect the battles of bulls and bears.Your job is to analyze this information and bet on the dominant market group.
Whenever I hear a dramatic forecast, my first thought is “a marketing gimmick.”
Advisors issue them to attract attention in order to raise money or sell services.
Good calls attract paying customers, while bad calls are quickly forgotten. My
phone rang while I was writing the first draft of this chapter. A famous guru, down
on his luck, told me that he had identified a “once-in-a-lifetime buying opportunity”
in corn. He asked me to raise money for him and promised to multiply it a hundredfold in six months! I do not know how many fools he hooked, but dramatic forecasts
have always been good for fleecing the public. Most people do not change. While
working on this update 21 years later, I read in The Wall Street Journal that this same
“guru” was recently punished for professional misconduct by the National Futures
Association.
Use common sense in analyzing markets. When some new development puzzles
you, compare it to life outside the markets. For example, indicators may give you
buy signals in two markets. Should you buy the one that declined a lot before the buy
signal or the one that declined a little? Compare this to what happens to a man after
a fall. If he falls down a few steps, he may dust himself off and run up again. But if
he falls out of a second-story window, he’s not going to run anytime soon; he needs
time to recover.
Successful trading stands on three pillars.You
â•› need to analyze the balance of power between
â•› need to practice good money management. You
â•› need personal discipline to
bulls and bears. You
follow your trading plan and avoid getting high or depressed in the markets.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

PA R T 3

Classical Chart Analysis

W

hen I bought my first stock, classical charting was the only game in town.
I use quad-ruled paper and a sharp pencil to update my charts by hand. A few
years later, pocket calculators became available, and I added simple moving averages.
Later, a TI programmable calculator made it possible to insert tiny magnetic strips
into its slit to perform more complex calculations, such as exponential moving averages and the Directional system.
Finally, an Apple personal computer appeared on the scene; you could use its joystick to move a cursor to draw trendlines. In contrast, today’s traders have access to
immense analytic power at a very low cost.
While the key concepts of classical charting remain valid, many of its tools have
been eclipsed by much more powerful computerized methods. The best quality of
computerized technical analysis is its objectivity. A moving average or any other indicator is either rising or falling, and there can be no argument about its direction.
You may puzzle over how to interpret its signals, but the signals themselves are clear
as day.
Classical charting, on the other hand, is quite subjective, and invites wishful thinking and self-deception.You can draw a trendline across the extreme prices or across
the edges of congestion zones, which will change its angle as well as its message. If
you’re in a mood to buy, you can draw your trendline a little steeper. If you feel like
shorting and squint at a chart, you’ll “recognize” a head-and-shoulders top. None
of those patterns are objective. Because of their subjectivity, I’ve grown increasingly skeptical of claims regarding classical formations, such as pennants, head-andshoulders, etc.
49

50

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

After having looked at hundreds of thousands of charts, I’ve concluded that the
market doesn’t know diagonals. It remembers price levels, which is why horizontal
support and resistance lines make sense, but diagonal trendlines are subjective and
open to self-deception.
In my own trading, I use only a small number of chart patterns that are objective
enough to trust. I pay attention to support and resistance zones, based on horizontal
price levels. The relationship between the opening and closing prices and between
the high and the low points of a price bar or a candle are also objective. I recognize
“fingers,” also called “kangaroo tails”— very long bars that protrude from a tight
weave of prices. We’ll explore these and a few other patterns in this section.

■■17. Charting
Chartists study market data to identify price patterns and profit from them. Most
chartists work with bar or candlestick graphs that show open, high, low, and closing
prices and volume. Futures traders also watch open interest. Point-and-figure chartists track only price changes and ignore time, volume, and open interest.
Classical charting requires only a pencil and paper. It appeals to visually oriented
people. Those who plot data by hand can develop a physical feel for prices. One of
the costs of switching to computerized charting is losing some of that feel.
The biggest problem with classical charting is wishful thinking. Traders seem
to identify bullish or bearish patterns, depending on whether they’re in a mood to
buy or sell.
Early in the twentieth century, Herman Rorschach, a Swiss psychiatrist, designed
a test for exploring a person’s mind. He dropped ink on 10 sheets of paper and
folded each in half, creating symmetrical inkblots. Most people who peer at these
sheets describe what they see: parts of the anatomy, animals, buildings, and so on. In
reality, there are only inkblots! Each person sees what’s on his mind. Most traders
use charts as a giant Rorschach test. They project their hopes, fears, and fantasies
onto the charts.

Brief History
The first chartists in the United States appeared at the turn of the twentieth century.
They included Charles Dow (1851–1902), the author of a famous stock market theory,
and William Hamilton, who succeeded Dow as the editor of The Wall Street Journal.
Dow’s famous maxim was “The averages discount everything,” by which he meant
that the Industrial and Rail Averages reflected all knowledge about the economy.
Dow never wrote a book, only his Wall Street Journal editorials. Hamilton took
over the job after Dow died and laid out the principles of Dow theory in his book,
The Stock Market Barometer. He wrote a famous “The Turn of the Tide” editorial following the 1929 crash. Robert Rhea, a newsletter publisher, brought the theory to
its pinnacle in his 1932 book, The Dow Theory.
Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

17. CHARTING

51

The decade of the 1930s was the Golden Age of charting. Many innovators
found themselves with time on their hands after the crash of 1929. Schabacker, Rhea,
Elliott, Wyckoff, Gann, and others published their books during that decade. They
went in two distinct directions. Some, such as Wyckoff and Schabacker, saw charts as
a graphic record of supply and demand. Others, such as Elliott and Gann, searched
for a perfect order in the markets—a fascinating but ultimately futile undertaking
(see Chapter 5).
In 1948, Edwards (a son-in-law of Schabacker) and Magee published Technical
Analysis of Stock Trends, in which they popularized such concepts as triangles, rectangles, head-and-shoulders, and other chart formations, as well as support, resistance,
and trendlines. Other chartists applied these concepts to commodities.
Markets have changed a great deal since the days of Edwards and Magee. In the
1940s, the daily volume of an active stock on the NewYork Stock Exchange was only
several hundred shares, while now it is measured in millions.The balance of power in
the stock market has shifted in favor of bulls. Early chartists wrote that stock market
tops were sharp and fast, while bottoms took a long time to develop.That was true in
their deflationary era, but the opposite has been true since the 1950s. Now bottoms
tend to form quickly, while tops tend to take longer.

The Meaning of a Bar Chart
Chart patterns reflect the sum of buying and selling, greed and fear among investors
and traders. Many charts in this book are daily, with each bar representing one trading day, but the rules for understanding weekly, daily, or intraday charts are remarkably similar.
Remember this key principle: “Each price is a momentary consensus of value of all market
participants expressed in action.” Based on it, each price bar provides several important
pieces of information about the tug-of-war between bulls and bears (Figure 17.1).
The opening price of a daily bar tends to reflect the amateurs’ opinion of value.
They read morning papers, find out what happened the day before, perhaps ask for
a wife’s approval to buy or sell, and place their orders before driving to work. Amateurs are especially active early in the day and early in the week.
Traders who researched the relationship between opening and closing prices
found that opening prices most often occur near the high or the low of the daily bar.
Buying or selling by amateurs early in the day creates an emotional extreme from
which prices tend to recoil later in the day.
In bull markets, prices often make their low for the week on Monday or Tuesday,
when amateurs take profits from the previous week, then rally to a new high on
Thursday or Friday. In bear markets, the high for the week is often set on Monday or
Tuesday, with a new low toward the end of the week.
The closing prices of daily and weekly bars tend to reflect the actions of professional traders. They watch the markets throughout the day, respond to changes, and
tend to dominate the last hour of trading. Many of them take profits at that time to
avoid carrying trades overnight.

52

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

FIGURE 17.1â•… TSLA daily. (Chart by Stockcharts.com)

The Meaning of a Bar Chart
Opening prices are set by amateurs, whose orders accumulate overnight and hit the
market in the morning. Closing prices are largely set by market professionals who trade
throughout the day. You can see a reflection of their conflict in how often opening and closing prices occur at the opposite ends of price bars.
The high of each bar marks the maximum power of bulls during that bar. The low of
each bar marks the maximum power of bears during that bar. Slippage tends to be less
when you enter or exit positions during short bars.

Professionals as a group usually trade against the amateurs. They tend to buy lower openings, sell short higher openings, and unwind their positions as the day goes
on. Traders need to pay attention to the relationship between opening and closing
prices. If prices closed higher than they opened, then market professionals were probably more
bullish than amateurs. If prices closed lower than they opened, then market professionals were
probably more bearish than amateurs. It pays to trade with the professionals and against
the amateurs. Candlestick charting is based, to a large extent, on the relationship
between the opening and closing prices of each bar. If the close is higher, the candle
is white, but if it is lower, the candle is black.
The high of each bar represents the maximum power of bulls during that bar.
Bulls make money when prices go up. Their buying pushes prices higher, and every
uptick adds to their profits. Finally, bulls reach a point where they cannot lift prices—
not even by one more tick.1 The high of a daily bar represents the maximum power
of bulls during the day, while the high of a weekly bar marks the maximum power of
bulls during the week.
The highest point of a bar represents the maximum power of bulls during that bar.

1

A tick is the smallest price change allowed for any given trading vehicle. It may be one cent or even
one hundredth of a cent (depending on the stock), a quarter point for S&P e-minis, 10 cents for
gold futures, etc.

Get More Forex Books + Secrets at http://forexfinest.com

17. CHARTING

53

The low of each bar represents the maximum power of bears during that bar.
Bears make money when prices decline. They keep selling short, their selling pushes
prices lower, and every downtick adds to their profits. At some point they run out of
either capital or enthusiasm, and prices stop falling. The low of a daily bar marks the
maximum power of bears during that day, and the low of a weekly bar identifies
the maximum power of bears during that week.
The low of each bar shows the maximum power of bears during that bar.
The closing price of each bar reveals the outcome of the battle between bulls
and bears during that bar. If prices close near the high of the daily bar, it shows that
bulls won the day’s battle. If prices close near the low of the day, it shows that bears
won the day. Closing prices on the daily charts of futures are especially important
because your account equity is “marked to market” each night.
The distance between the high and the low of any bar reflects the intensity
of conflict between bulls and bears. An average bar marks a relatively cool market. A
bar that’s only half as tall as average reveals a sleepy, disinterested market. A bar that’s
two times taller than average shows a boiling market where bulls and bears battle all
over the field.
Slippage (see the Introduction) tends to be less in quiet markets. It pays to enter
trades during short or normal bars. Tall bars are good for taking profits. Trying to
enter a position when the market is running is like jumping onto a moving train. It
would be safer to wait for the next one.

Japanese Candlesticks
Japanese rice traders began using candlestick charts some two centuries before the
first chartists appeared in America. Instead of bars, their charts had rows of candles
with wicks at both ends. The body of each candle represents the distance between
the opening and closing prices. If the closing price is higher than the opening, the
body is white, but if the closing price is lower, the body is black.
The tip of the upper wick represents the high of the day, while the bottom of the
lower wick represents the low of the day. The Japanese consider highs and lows relatively unimportant, according to Steve Nison, author of Japanese Candlestick Charting
Techniques. They focus on the relationship between opening and closing prices and on
patterns that include several candles.
The main advantage of a candlestick chart is its focus on the struggle between
amateurs who control openings and professionals who control closings. Unfortunately, many candlestick chartists neglect Western tools, such as volume and technical indicators.
Candlesticks have become quite popular worldwide, and some traders ask me
why I continue to use bar charts. I am familiar with candlesticks, but I’ve learned to
trade using bar charts, and I believe that using open-high-low-close bars plus technical indicators gives me more information.
Your choice of a bar or a candlestick chart is a matter of personal preference. All
concepts expressed in this book can be used with candlestick as well as bar charts.

54

CLASSICAL CHART ANALYSIS

Efficient Markets, Random Walk, Chaos Theory,
and “Nature’s Law”
Efficient Market theory is an academic notion that nobody can outperform the mar-

ket because any price at any given moment incorporates all available information.
Warren Buffett, one of the most successful investors of the century, commented:
“I think it’s fascinating how the ruling orthodoxy can cause a lot of people to think
the earth is flat. Investing in a market where people believe in efficiency is like playing bridge with someone who’s been told it doesn’t do any good to look at the cards.”
The logical flaw of Efficient Market theory is that it equates knowledge with action. People may have knowledge, but the emotional pull of the crowd often leads
them to trade irrationally. A good analyst can detect repetitive patterns of crowd
behavior on his charts and exploit them.
Random Walk theorists claim that market prices change at random. Sure, there is
a fair bit of randomness or “noise” in the markets, just as there is randomness in any
crowd. Still, an intelligent observer can identify repetitive behavior patterns of
a crowd and make sensible bets on their continuation or reversal.
People have memories; they remember past prices, and their memories influence
their decisions to buy or sell. Memories help create support under the market and
resistance above it. Random Walkers deny that memories influence our behavior.
As Milton Friedman pointed out, prices carry information about the availability
of supply and the intensity of demand. Market participants use that information
when deciding to buy or sell. For example, consumers buy more merchandise when
it is on sale and less when prices are high. Financial traders are just as capable of logical behavior as homemakers. When prices are low, bargain hunters step in. A shortage can lead to a buying panic, but high prices choke off demand.
Chaos Theory has achieved prominence in the recent decades. Markets are largely
chaotic, and the only time you can have an edge is during orderly periods.
In my view, markets are chaotic much of the time, but out of that chaos, islands of
order and structure keep emerging and disappearing. The essence of market analysis
is recognizing the emergence of orderly patterns and having enough courage and
conviction to trade them.
If you trade during chaotic periods, the only ones to benefit will be your broker,
who’ll collect his commission, and a professional day-trader, who’ll scalp you. The
key point to keep in mind is that once in a while a pattern emerges from chaos.Your
system should recognize this transition, and that’s when you should put on a trade!
Earlier we spoke about the one great advantage of a private trader over professionals—he may wait for a good trade instead of having to be active each day. The chaos
theory confirms that message.
The chaos theory also teaches us that orderly structures that emerge from chaos
are fractal. The sea coast appears equally jagged whether you look down on it from
space or an airplane, from a standing position or on your knees through a magnifying glass. Market patterns are fractal as well. If I show you a set of charts of the same
