
Introducing the income statement
Want to know how much a company made or lost during a year or a quarter?
The income statement is for you. This financial statement steps you through
all the money a company brought in and how much it spent to make that
money. If you’ve ever read news stories about how much a company earned
during a quarter, for instance, the information was taken off the company’s
income statement.
The income statement is the financial statement containing data you probably
hear the most about, including revenue, net income, and earnings per share.
You can find out more about reading this important document in Chapter 5.

Balance-sheet basics
Want to know how much money a company has or how much it owes to
others? That’s where the balance sheet comes in. This financial statement
spells out all the cash a company has in addition to its debt. The difference
between what a company owns (its assets) and what it owes (its liabilities) is
its equity. Expressed slightly differently, the basic formula that applies to the
balance sheet is:
Assets = Liabilities + Equity
Sometimes it’s helpful to understand corporate-finance jargon by putting it in
personal-finance terms. If you’ve ever calculated your personal net worth by
subtracting all your loans from all your savings, you’ve essentially created a
balance sheet.

06 506455-ch02.indd 34

9/24/09 10:06:03 PM

Chapter 2: Getting up to Speed with Fundamental Analysis

35

Getting the mojo of cash flows
One of the first things fundamental analysts need to understand is that earnings aren’t necessarily cash. Accounting rules, for instance, allow companies
to include in their earnings sales from products they haven’t actually collected from customers yet. Yes, you read that right. A company might say it
earned $100 million, even though it hasn’t collected a dime from customers.
This method of accounting, called accrual accounting, is done for a good
reason. Accrual accounting lets analysts see more accurately how much it
cost a company to generate sales.
But accrual accounting makes it critical for investors to monitor not just a
company’s earnings, but how much cash it brings in. The statement of cash
flows holds a company’s feet to the fire and requires it to disclose how much
cold hard cash is coming into the company. The statement of cash flows lets
you see how much cash a company generated from its primary business
operations. The statement, though, also lets you see how much cash a company brought in from lenders and investors.

Familiarizing yourself with financial
ratios (including the P-E)
While the financial statements are enormously valuable to financial analysts,
they only go so far. Not only do companies tend to only give the information
they’re required to, the data can only tell you so much. You didn’t expect
companies to do everything for you, right? That’s how financial ratios can be
very important.
Financial ratios take different numbers from the income statement, balance
sheet and statement of cash flows, and compare them with each other. You’ll
be amazed at what you can find out about a company by mixing numbers
from different statements. Financial ratios can provide great insight when
applied to analysis.
There are dozens of helpful financial ratios, which you can read about in
more detail in Chapter 8. But at this point, you’ll just want to know the basic
flavors and ratios and what they tell you, including:
✓ Valuation: If you’ve ever heard of the price-to-earnings ratio, or P-E,
you’ve used a financial ratio. The P-E is one of many valuation ratios.
Valuation ratios help fundamental analysts find out if a stock is cheap or
expensive by comparing the stock price to a basic piece of data about a
company. For instance, the P-E ratio compares a stock’s price to its earnings. The higher the P-E, the more richly valued a stock is.

06 506455-ch02.indd 35

9/24/09 10:06:03 PM

36

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
✓ Financial health: If a company is no longer a going concern and isn’t
functioning, it’s not a great idea to invest in it. Some ratios, called liquidity ratios, measure how easily a company is able to keep up with its bills.
Fundamental analysts will look for red flags that a company might be
about to face some tough times.
✓ Return on investment: If you’re going to give your money to a company,
either as a loan or investment, you want to make sure you’re getting
something in return. Return on investment ratios help you determine
how well the company is putting your money to work.
✓ Operating performance: The more a company can increase its sales,
while at the same time lower costs, the more profitable it is. This balancing act is the essence of business. And the stakes for investors are huge,
since the more profit a company generates, the bigger piece of the pie
that’s left for investors. Operating performance ratios let you quickly see
how well a company is managing its costs and increasing sales.

06 506455-ch02.indd 36

9/24/09 10:06:03 PM

Chapter 3

Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall
Street: Why Fundamental Analysis
Gives Investors an Edge
In This Chapter
▶ Finding out how fundamental analysis can turn you into a better investor
▶ Discovering how some of the best investors put fundamental analysis to use
▶ Uncovering clues on when to buy or sell a stock
▶ Applying fundamental analysis to buy-and-hold investment strategies

F

undamental analysis isn’t the easiest way to invest. There’s a bit of math
involved. You’ll need to learn some terms. And to perform fundamental
analysis, you need to ferret out and analyze somewhat arcane pieces of financial information.
Why go to all this trouble? That’s the question you’ll find the answer to in
this chapter. You’ll discover why the rigors of fundamental analysis, and the
ultimate goal of not overpaying for stocks and finding cheap stocks to buy,
can help you obtain better long-term success in investing. Meanwhile, you’ll
see how some basic fundamental analysis can help you avoid making mistakes that will be difficult to recover from.
Of course, no discussion of fundamental analysis is complete without exploring its best-known master: Warren Buffett. Buffett is a hero in investing,
thanks to his discipline and long-term ability to find and hold companies with
attractive fundamental characteristics.
Finally, in this chapter, you get a general taste of how fundamental analysis
can give you cues on when you might consider buying or selling stocks. No
method will work 100 percent all the time, but fundamental analysis can at
least provide a guide and keep you from getting caught up in stock manias
and bubbles.

07 506455-ch03.indd 37

9/24/09 10:06:41 PM

38

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

Better Investing with Fundamentals
One of the biggest strengths of fundamental analysis is the fact it attempts to
help you keep the emotion out of investing. While momentum investors chase
after the hottest stocks hoping they’ll go higher, and day traders buy and sell
every few minutes looking for a quick buck, fundamental analysis is more of a
data-driven discipline.
Fundamental analysts analyze investments by examining the business that’s
behind a stock or bond. Even if you’re just looking to buy a few shares of a
company, you approach the analysis with the same level of research, or due
diligence, as if you’re thinking about buying the whole company. Fundamental
analysis lets you approach a stock as an investor, not a speculator.
Investors look to buy a stock because they believe the underlying company will generate profits in the future that exceed the price they’re paying.
Speculators look to make money on an investment by simply finding someone
else to sell it to for a higher price.
The careful consideration of a company’s fundamentals, such as revenue and
earnings, is a key distinction of this approach from other methods of choosing investments. The name fundamental analysis really says it all, as the
approach gets down to the most basic aspects of a business, including the
trade cycle, which is discussed in Chapter 2.
Fundamental analysis is generally connected with value investors. Value
investors tend to buy stocks they think are undervalued, or have stock prices
below what they think the company is actually worth. But fundamental
analysis can help you no matter how you invest. Perhaps you’re a technical
analyst, who studies stock charts to find stocks to buy. Maybe you’re an index
investor, who buys all the stocks in a broad stock market index, such as the
Standard & Poor’s 500. No matter what kind of investing you prefer, fundamental analysis can help you find suitable stocks and investments.

Picking stocks for fundamental reasons
Value investors are often drawn to the idea that they can get an edge on other
investors by doing their homework and studying a company’s financial statements. These investors believe if they put in the time to understand a company’s business, accurately forecast its future, and pay the right price, they can
achieve greater upside and less downside than the market as a whole.

07 506455-ch03.indd 38

9/24/09 10:06:41 PM

Chapter 3: Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall Street

39

There’s some truth to this. Academic studies have shown that stocks that are
cheap, or value priced, tend to have strong long-term performance.
Fundamental analysis can also help you protect yourself from your own speculative juices. By studying the cold hard numbers of a company’s business, you
can get a strong dose of reality while other investors get caught up in the hype
surrounding a particular stock. Since fundamental analysis is based in the laws
of business, it can give you a greater perspective on how much an investment
is worth.
Many investors puzzle over how the price of a stock is determined. Knowing
this is a key to seeing how fundamental analysis can help you.
A stock’s price is determined by an auction, very similar to how the price on
a Pez dispenser is set on eBay. Investors buy and sell stocks every trading
day, pushing the price up and down based on how optimistic or pessimistic
they are about a company’s future potential. Just as you can see a bidding
war erupt over a Pez dispenser and push its value to extreme highs, the same
can occur for a stock if many investors are willing to buy it.
A great example of how fundamental analysis can help you spot a frenzy over
a stock, causing its price to get out of line, occurred in March 2000. Shares of
Palm Computing, a maker of the popular Palm electronic organizer (remember those?), soared 150% in their first day of trading to more than $95 a share.
At that price, investors put a total price tag of $54.3 billion on the company
and its 23 million shares.
Just a little bit of fundamental sleuthing could have protected investors from
the coming brutal collapse in the stock. Here’s how. Palm Computing was 95%
owned by its parent company, 3Com, at the time. And the entire value of 3Com,
including its 95% stock in Palm Computing, was just $28 billion. So why would
investors be willing to pay nearly twice as much for a piece of 3Com? It’s kind
of like paying $20 for a slice of pie when you can buy the whole pie for $10.
Fundamental analysts knew something was a little off. And they were right.
The stock lost more than 70% of its value in just seven months.

Uses for the index investor
Index investors don’t try to pick individual stocks or time the market. Index
investors buy a broad basket of investments and hold it for a long period of
time (see Chapter 2 for more on index investors). Many index investors think
trying to choose stocks that will outperform the broad market is extremely
difficult, if not impossible. As a result, index investors buy small stakes of
hundreds of companies, so that trouble at any one firm won’t hurt much.

07 506455-ch03.indd 39

9/24/09 10:06:41 PM

40

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It

Why the “three factors” matter
It’s rare that academic research can make you
money. But one of the most influential pieces of
academic research ever written about investing is certainly worth your time.
Professors Eugene Fama and Kenneth French
found that nearly 95 percent of stock price
movements are explained by just three things,
two of which are determined by a company’s
fundamentals. The three factors that move
stocks are:
✓ Market risk: Movements of the broad economy have a large sway on how individual
stocks perform.

✓ Size: Shares of smaller companies measured by market value tend to beat the stock
market, in part, because they are riskier and
less established. Market value, also called
market capitalization or market cap, measures the total price Wall Street assigns to
a company by multiplying a stock price by
the total number of its shares outstanding.
You can find out more about market capitalization later in this chapter.
✓ Price or value: The lower a stock’s price,
relative to its book value, the better it tends
to do relative to the rest of the stock market.
Book value is a key aspect of fundamental
analysis, as you’ll read about in Chapter 8.

Index investors may often say fundamental analysis is a waste of time. Even
so, many index investors apply some aspects of fundamental analysis. For
instance, index investors routinely choose to invest in baskets of either value
stocks or growth stocks. Value stocks are those that are largely ignored by
investors and command low stock prices relative to their fundamentals, such
as profits or asset values. Growth stocks, on the other hand, are the darlings
of Wall Street and demand huge stock prices compared to their fundamentals.
In addition, index investors regularly parcel money between shares of large
companies and small companies. These measures of size, again, are rooted in
fundamental analysis.
You’ll notice that even an index investor might boost returns by paying attention to fundamental factors. If you want to measure a company’s market
value, you’ll need its number of shares outstanding, which comes from the
balance sheet. Likewise, a stock’s book value comes from its balance sheet.

Assisting technical analysts
Like fundamental analysts, technical analysts think they can beat the stock
market by picking the right stocks at the right time. But unlike fundamental
analysis, technical analysis calls for a close study of stock price movements
over time.

07 506455-ch03.indd 40

9/24/09 10:06:41 PM

Chapter 3: Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall Street

41

Still, technical analysts can benefit from fundamental analysis, too. For instance,
some technical analysts might look for companies that are increasing their
revenue or earnings growth each quarter. This information is found on a company’s income statement. Similarly, technical analysts might look for the best
company in an industry by looking for companies with the most attractive
financial ratios.

Dooming your portfolio by
paying too much
No matter what type of investor you are, there are several absolutes. Here’s
one of them: If you overpay for a stock, you’re accepting a sentence of poor
returns in the future. Your return on a stock is a function of how much you
pay for it. By definition, the more you pay for an investment, the lower your
return will be.
Imagine you have the opportunity to buy a Laundromat. The Laundromat has
been open for 30 years, and in each of those years, it generates a profit of
$100,000. Since the Laundromat is in a strip mall that will close in five years,
you figure the business will generate $500,000 in profit over the years and
then will be shut down.
To keep this example simple, forget about the role of inflation, or the decreasing value of money each year, at this point. Also assume that your estimate
was correct, and the Laundromat generated $100,000 a year in profit.
Just imagine what would happen if you offered to buy this Laundromat
for $200,000. Your gain would be 150%. You know this because your profit
is $300,000 because that’s the difference between the Laundromat’s earnings ($500,000) and what you paid ($200,000). Your return is your profit of
$300,000 divided by the price you paid, $200,000.
Now, what if you got into a bidding war with another person interested in
buying the Laundromat? In the heat of the moment, you offered to buy the
business for $400,000 instead of $200,000. Your return will take a big hit,
now equaling 50%. Nothing changed with the Laundromat. It will function
the same whether you paid $400,000 or $200,000. But your return is now the
same profit of $300,000 divided by your purchase price of $400,000.
The same goes for investments, including stocks and bonds. If you increase the
amount you pay for a share of stock, for instance, you eat into your return.

07 506455-ch03.indd 41

9/24/09 10:06:41 PM

42

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
Overpaying for a stock is even more dangerous than increasing your offer for
the Laundromat. If a company you invest in suffers a slowdown and its earnings are smaller than expected, you’ll find your return to be very small, or you
may not get back what you invested.

Sitting through short-term volatility
Sometimes the excitement of daily market activity can get intoxicating. Ticker
symbols scrolling at the bottom of the TV screen during financial shows can
make you feel as if the markets are constantly moving and changing. And
that’s true; markets are constantly moving as investors trade shares back and
forth and push stock prices up and down.
But a fundamental analysis can help you block out a great deal of this noise
and be a better investor as a result. An example is perhaps with your house.
Imagine buying a home for $200,000, which you know is worth that much.
After having an appraiser look at the condition of the roof, remodeled kitchen
and bath as well as looking at the prices of identical homes in the area, you
have a pretty good idea of what the house is worth.
With this in mind, would you panic if you were sitting on the patio while a
person walking by randomly offered you $100,000 for the home? Probably
not. After all, you know the home is worth more than $100,000. Besides,
you’re not in the market to sell anyway.
Still, that’s what stock investors commonly do when they pay too much attention to day-to-day movements in stock prices. They may have felt great about
buying a stock for $10 a share, but if the stock falls to $8 a month later, they
panic and wonder if they should sell.
One of the mantras of fundamental analysis comes from Benjamin Graham, the
pioneer of the methods and mentor to Warren Buffett. Fundamental analysts
will often say the market is a voting machine in the short term, but a weighing
machine in the long run. In other words, stock prices can be kicked dramatically higher or lower in the short term. But over the longer term, the underlying value of a company will prevail, and its true heft will be recognized.
Fundamental analysis helps you focus on a investment’s true value, or weight,
using Benjamin Graham’s analogy. If you know you correctly analyzed a
company and assigned the correct value to it, then you don’t need to be as
concerned about whether or not a company is popular or not in any given
day, month, or year. Having a fundamental grasp of a company gives you the
peace of mind to hold an investment for a long period of time and resist the
urge to sell at the wrong time.

07 506455-ch03.indd 42

9/24/09 10:06:41 PM

Chapter 3: Gaining an Upper Hand on Wall Street

43

Relying on the Basic Info the Pros Use
It’s natural to think successful fundamental analysts have some kind of secret
that’s beyond the reach of regular investors. Looking at the long-term success of Warren Buffett, for instance, makes you think perhaps he has a supercomputer that’s able to forecast the future. Similarly, many analysts who
study companies have deep insights about their businesses, which might
lead you to think they have access to data you don’t.
But here’s the truth. Fundamental analysts, with a few exceptions, are using
all the same financial statements you have access to. Even the professionals
are looking at all the same things I’ll show you in this book such as:
✓ The financial statements: The income statement, balance sheet, statement of cash flows and ratios are the cornerstone of the analysis done
by most fundamental analysts.
✓ The financial ratios: These seemingly simple calculations put the numbers in the financial statements into perspective. That perspective helps
you determine if stocks are cheap or expensive.
✓ Industry analysis: Understanding the dynamics of the industry a company is in can help you do a better job investing.
✓ Economic analysis: Investments can swing in value based largely on
how the broad economy is doing. The influence of the economy became
clear in 2008, when shares of companies having nothing to do with subprime loans were dragged down with the financial debacle.
Clearly, the pros do have distinct advantages. The large firms may employ
armies of research experts to pore over the financial statements, allowing
them to trade while you’re still downloading the results. And some of the professional systems make fundamental analysis easier by automatically calculating growth trends and the financial ratios. Finally, experience can be a big help
in helping a fundamental analyst spot things that a beginner might miss.

What is the “Warren Buffett Way”?
For many fundamental analysts, Warren Buffett is the ultimate role model.
And there’s no denying his success. For instance, shares of Buffett’s Berkshire
Hathaway rose from $70,000 a share to $96,600 in the ten years ending
December 2008 — an impressive 38% gain. During that same time period, the
Russell 3000 index, which measures the performance of the stock market

07 506455-ch03.indd 43

9/24/09 10:06:41 PM

44

Part I: What Fundamental Analysis Is and Why You Should Use It
in general, lost 0.8% in value including dividends, according to Russell
Investments. His longer-term record is strong, too. No wonder Buffett is
called the Oracle of Omaha.
Trying to figure out Buffett’s secret is the investment world’s equivalent of
the search for the Holy Grail. Scores of investors make the pilgrimage to
Berkshire Hathaway shareholder meetings in Omaha each year, trying to
figure out how Buffett does it. Hour-long lunches with Buffett auction off on
eBay for hundreds of thousands of dollars. And there are countless books on
Buffett, most notably The Warren Buffett Way (Wiley).
Interestingly, though, Buffett doesn’t make much of a secret of his techniques.
Every year, in his letter to shareholders and also in Berkshire Hathaway’s
“Owner’s Manual” he paints a picture of his approach. And much of his
approach is based in key elements of fundamental analysis, including:
✓ Invest as an owner, not a trader. Buffett is very clear that he looks at
an investment not as a short-term trade, but a long-term relationship.
Berkshire Hathaway will often invest in a company and hold it for a
very long time, perhaps never selling the position. “Regardless of price,
we have no interest at all in selling any good businesses that Berkshire
owns,” according to Berkshire’s Owner’s Manual.
✓ Consider carefully a company’s intrinsic value. Buffet repeatedly discusses intrinsic value, which is a measure of what a company is truly
worth. Intrinsic value is how much cash a company is expected to
generate over its lifetime, which is a good measure of what it’s worth.
Buying a stock for less than its intrinsic value gives you a bit of a margin
of safety. You’ll find out how to calculate a company’s intrinsic value in
Chapter 11.
✓ Analyze management. Buffett routinely says even a seemingly ho-hum
company can generate dazzling returns with a good management team
at the helm. For that reason, Buffett will often leave the top officers and
directors of a company in place, even after buying a company.
✓ Stick with businesses you understand. The better you grasp how a company makes its money and operates, the more informed you’ll be after
reviewing its financial statements. You’ll also know better what to look
for, since every industry and company has unique financial traits.
✓ Find businesses that have a real advantage. In capitalism, if a company
has a good idea, other firms will try to copy it and steal away market
share. Buffett combats that by investing in businesses with a strong
brand or unique product, such as Coca-Cola.
